1 | 2 2 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

PATHAPATI SUBBA REDDY (DIED) 
BY L.Rs. & ORS. 

 …PETITIONER(S) 

VERSUS 

THE SPECIAL DEPUTY COLLECTOR (LA) 

JUDGMENT 

PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
Some land in village Gandluru, District Guntur, Andhra 
Pradesh was acquired some time in 1989 for Telugu Ganga 
Project. Not satisfied by the compensation offered under the 
award, the claimants (16 in number) preferred a reference 
under Section 18 of Land Acquisition Act (hereinafter for 
short the ‘Act’) i.e., L.A.O.P. No. 38 of 1990 titled Juvvala 
Gunta China Chinnaiah (dead) and Ors. vs. Special Deputy 
Collector (Land Acquisition) Telugu Ganga Project, Podalakur 

2 | 2 2 
 
at Nellore. Out of the 16 claimants in the above reference, 
claimants No. 1, 3 and 11 died during the pendency of the 
reference before the Court of Addl. Senior Civil Judge, Gudur. 
No steps were taken to substitute the heirs and legal 
representatives of the above deceased persons. The said 
reference was dismissed on merits along with some other 
references vide common judgment and order dated 
24.09.1999 upholding the award of the collector. 
2. 
After the lapse of more than 5/6 years, an appeal was 
proposed to be filed in the High Court Under Section 54 of 
the Act challenging the dismissal of the reference. The said 
appeal was proposed to be filed only by some of the heirs and 
legal representatives of the deceased claimant No. 11 in the 
reference i.e., Pathapati Subba Reddy. No other claimant or 
their legal heirs from amongst the other 15 who were parties 
in the reference joined the heirs and legal representatives of 
claimant No. 11 in filing the appeal. They did not even prefer 
any separate or independent appeal of their own. In other 
words, out of the 16 claimants, 15 of them impliedly accepted 
the judgment and order of the reference court and it is only 

3 | 2 2 
 
the heirs and legal representatives of claimant No. 11, who 
feel aggrieved and have proposed to file the appeal. 
3. 
The above appeal, as stated earlier, was preferred with the 
delay of 5659 days. Accordingly, an application supported by 
an affidavit of the surviving daughter of the deceased 
claimant No. 11 was filed for condoning the delay in filing the 
proposed appeal. It was averred in the said application that 
the 
proposed 
appellants 
are 
the 
heirs 
and 
legal 
representatives of the deceased claimant No. 11 i.e. Pathapati 
Subba Reddy, who died on 15.05.1995 during the pendency 
of the reference but they were not brought on record before 
the decision of the reference. The said deceased claimant 
No.11 was survived by his two daughters. The elder one died 
and that the proposed appellants are the surviving second 
daughter and her descendants. Since she was living in her 
matrimonial house, she had no knowledge of the above 
reference. It was only on 28.05.2015 when one of the 
grandsons of the said daughter of the deceased claimant 
visited the office of the L.A.O. for the purpose of obtaining 
submersion certificate to secure a job that he came to know 

4 | 2 2 
 
that there was a reference which was dismissed on 
24.09.1999, 
whereupon 
the 
proposed 
appeal 
was 
immediately filed along with an application to condone the 
delay in its filing. 
4. 
There is no dispute to the fact that in L.A.O.P. No. 38 of 1990 
there were 16 claimants in all. During the pendency of the 
aforesaid reference, claimants No. 1, 3 and 11 were dead but 
the heirs and legal representatives of none of them were 
brought on record. None of the other claimants or their heirs 
and legal representatives made any effort to challenge the 
order of the dismissal of the reference except the proposed 
appellants which indicates that the others have accepted the 
same. It is only one of the surviving daughters of the 
deceased claimant No. 11 and her descendants who have 
sought to prefer the proposed appeal against the judgment 
and order dated 24.09.1999 with an inordinate delay of 5659 
days. The High Court not being satisfied by the explanation 
furnished in preferring the proposed appeal beyond 
limitation, refused to condone the delay in filing the proposed 

5 | 2 2 
 
appeal and consequently dismissed it as barred by time by 
the order impugned dated 18.01.2017. 
5. 
The present Special Leave Petition has been filed challenging 
the judgment and order dated 18.01.2017 of the High Court 
passed in L.A.A.S.M.P. No. 714 of 2016 in L.A.A.S. (SR) No. 
6950 of 2015 whereby the High Court has dismissed the 
application of the petitioners herein for condoning the delay 
of 5659 days in filing the proposed appeal. 
6. 
The moot question before us is whether in the facts and 
circumstances of the case, the High Court was justified in 
refusing to condone the delay in filing the proposed appeal 
and to dismiss it as barred by limitation. 
7. 
The law of limitation is founded on public policy. It is 
enshrined in the legal maxim “interest reipublicae ut sit finis 
litium” i.e. it is for the general welfare that a period of 
limitation be put to litigation. The object is to put an end to 
every legal remedy and to have a fixed period of life for every 
litigation as it is futile to keep any litigation or dispute 
pending indefinitely. Even public policy requires that there 
should be an end to the litigation otherwise it would be a 

6 | 2 2 
 
dichotomy if the litigation is made immortal vis-a-vis the 
litigating parties i.e. human beings, who are mortals. 
8. 
The courts have always treated the statutes of limitation and 
prescription as statutes of peace and repose. They envisage 
that a right not exercised or the remedy not availed for a long 
time ceases to exist. This is one way of putting to an end to a 
litigation by barring the remedy rather than the right with the 
passage of time. 
9. 
Section 3 of the Limitation Act in no uncertain terms lays 
down that no suit, appeal or application instituted, preferred 
or made after the period prescribed shall be entertained 
rather dismissed even though limitation has not been set up 
as a defence subject to the exceptions contained in Sections 
4 to 24 (inclusive) of the Limitation Act. 
10. Section 3(1) of the Limitation Act, for the sake of convenience, 
is reproduced hereinbelow: 
“3. Bar of limitation.- (1) Subject to the 
provisions 
contained 
in 
sections 

to 

(inclusive), every suit instituted, appeal preferred, 
and application made after the prescribed period 
shall be dismissed, although limitation has not 
been set up as a defence.” 

7 | 2 2 
 
11. Though Section 3 of the Act mentions about suit, appeal and 
application but since in this case we are concerned with 
appeal, we would hereinafter be mentioning about the appeal 
only in context with the limitation, it being barred by time, if 
at all, and if the delay in its filing is liable to be condoned. 
12. In view of the above provision, the appeal which is preferred 
after the expiry of the limitation is liable to be dismissed. The 
use of the word ‘shall’ in the aforesaid provision connotes 
that the dismissal is mandatory subject to the exceptions. 
Section 3 of the Act is peremptory and had to be given effect 
to even though no objection regarding limitation is taken by 
the other side or referred to in the pleadings. In other words, 
it casts an obligation upon the court to dismiss an appeal 
which is presented beyond limitation. This is the general law 
of limitation. The exceptions are carved out under Sections 4 
to 24 (inclusive) of the Limitation Act but we are concerned 
only with the exception contained in Section 5 which 
empowers the courts to admit an appeal even if it is preferred 
after the prescribed period provided the proposed appellant 
gives ‘sufficient cause’ for not preferring the appeal within the 

8 | 2 2 
 
period prescribed. In other words, the courts are conferred 
with discretionary powers to admit an appeal even after the 
expiry of the prescribed period provided the proposed 
appellant is able to establish ‘sufficient cause’ for not filing it 
within time. The said power to condone the delay or to admit 
the appeal preferred after the expiry of time is discretionary 
in nature and may not be exercised even if sufficient cause is 
shown based upon host of other factors such as negligence, 
failure to exercise due diligence etc. 
13. It is very elementary and well understood that courts should 
not adopt an injustice-oriented approach in dealing with the 
applications for condonation of the delay in filing appeals and 
rather follow a pragmatic line to advance substantial justice. 
14. It may also be important to point out that though on one 
hand, Section 5 of the Limitation Act is to be construed 
liberally, but on the other hand, Section 3 of the Limitation 
Act, being a substantive law of mandatory nature has to be 
interpreted in a strict sense. In Bhag Mal alias Ram Bux 

9 | 2 2 
 
and Ors. vs. Munshi (Dead) by LRs. and Ors.1, it has been 
observed that different provisions of Limitation Act may 
require different construction, as for example, the court 
exercises its power in a given case liberally in condoning the 
delay in filing the appeal under Section 5 of the Limitation 
Act, however, the same may not be true while construing 
Section 3 of the Limitation Act. It, therefore, follows that 
though liberal interpretation has to be given in construing 
Section 5 of the Limitation Act but not in applying Section 3 
of the Limitation Act, which has to be construed strictly. 
15. It is in the light of the public policy upon which law of 
limitation is based, the object behind the law of limitation 
and the mandatory and the directory nature of Section 3 and 
Section 5 of the Limitation Act that we have to examine and 
strike a balance between Section 3 and Section 5 of the 
Limitation Act in the matters of condoning the delay. 
16. Generally, the courts have adopted a very liberal approach in 
construing the phrase ‘sufficient cause’ used in Section 5 of 
 
1 (2007) 

10 | 2 2 
 
the Limitation Act in order to condone the delay to enable the 
courts to do substantial justice and to apply law in a 
meaningful manner which subserves the ends of justice. In 
Collector, Land Acquisition, Anantnag and Ors. vs. 
Katiji and Ors.2, this Court in advocating the liberal 
approach in condoning the delay for ‘sufficient cause’ held 
that ordinarily a litigant does not stand to benefit by lodging 
an appeal late; it is not necessary to explain every day’s delay 
in filing the appeal; and since sometimes refusal to condone 
delay may result in throwing out a meritorious matter, it is 
necessary in the interest of justice that cause of substantial 
justice should be allowed to prevail upon technical 
considerations and if the delay is not deliberate, it ought to 
be condoned. Notwithstanding the above, howsoever, liberal 
approach is adopted in condoning the delay, existence of 
‘sufficient cause’ for not filing the appeal in time, is a 
condition precedent for exercising the discretionary power to 
condone the delay. The phrases ‘liberal approach’, ‘justice-
 
2 (1987) = AIR 1987 SC 1353 

11 | 2 2 
 
oriented approach’ and cause for the advancement of 
‘substantial justice’ cannot be employed to defeat the law of 
limitation so as to allow stale matters or as a matter of fact 
dead matters to be revived and re-opened by taking aid of 
Section 5 of the Limitation Act. 
17. It must always be borne in mind that while construing 
‘sufficient cause’ in deciding application under Section 5 of 
the Act, that on the expiry of the period of limitation 
prescribed for filing an appeal, substantive right in favour of 
a decree-holder accrues and this right ought not to be lightly 
disturbed. The decree-holder treats the decree to be binding 
with the lapse of time and may proceed on such assumption 
creating new rights. 
18. This Court as far back in 1962 in the case of Ramlal, Motilal 
And Chhotelal vs. Rewa Coalfields Ltd3 has emphasized 
that even after sufficient cause has been shown by a party 
for not filing an appeal within time, the said party is not 
entitled to the condonation of delay as excusing the delay is 
 
3 A.I.R. 1962 SC 361 

12 | 2 2 
 
the discretionary jurisdiction vested with the court. The 
court, despite establishment of a ‘sufficient cause’ for various 
reasons, may refuse to condone the delay depending upon 
the bona fides of the party. 
19. In Maqbul Ahmad and Ors. vs. Onkar Pratap Narain 
Singh and Ors.4, it had been held that the court cannot 
grant 
an 
exemption 
from 
limitation 
on 
equitable 
consideration or on the ground of hardship. The court has 
time and again repeated that when mandatory provision is 
not complied with and delay is not properly, satisfactorily and 
convincingly explained, it ought not to condone the delay on 
sympathetic grounds alone. 
20. In this connection, a reference may be made to Brijesh 
Kumar and Ors. vs. State of Haryana and Ors.5 wherein 
while observing, as above, this Court further laid down that 
if some person has obtained a relief approaching the court 
just or immediately when the cause of action had arisen, 
other persons cannot take the benefit of the same by 
 
4 A.I.R. 1935 PC 85 
5 2014 (4) SCALE 50 

13 | 2 2 
 
approaching the court at a belated stage simply on the 
ground of parity, equity, sympathy and compassion. 
21. In Lanka Venkateswarlu vs. State of Andhra Pradesh & 
Ors.6, where the High Court, despite unsatisfactory 
explanation for the delay of 3703 days, had allowed the 
applications for condonation of delay, this Court held that 
the High Court failed to exercise its discretion in a reasonable 
and objective manner. High Court should have exercised the 
discretion in a systematic and an informed manner. The 
liberal approach in considering sufficiency of cause for delay 
should not be allowed to override substantial law of 
limitation. The Court observed that the concepts such as 
‘liberal 
approach’, 
‘justice-oriented 
approach’ 
and 
‘substantial justice’ cannot be employed to jettison the 
substantial law of limitation. 
22. It has also been settled vide State of Jharkhand & Ors. vs. 
Ashok Kumar Chokhani & Ors.7, that the merits of the 
 
6 (2011) 
 SC 1927 

14 | 2 2 
 
case cannot be considered while dealing with the application 
for condonation of delay in filing the appeal. 
23. In Basawaraj and Anr. vs. Special Land Acquisition 
Officer8, this Court held that the discretion to condone the 
delay has to be exercised judiciously based upon the facts 
and circumstances of each case. The expression ‘sufficient 
cause’ as occurring in Section 5 of the Limitation Act cannot 
be liberally interpreted if negligence, inaction or lack of bona 
fide is writ large. It was also observed that even though 
limitation may harshly affect rights of the parties but it has 
to be applied with all its rigour as prescribed under the 
statute as the courts have no choice but to apply the law as 
it stands and they have no power to condone the delay on 
equitable grounds. 
24. It would be beneficial to quote paragraph 12 of the aforesaid 
decision which clinches the issue of the manner in which 
equilibrium has to be maintained between adopting liberal 
 
8 (2013) 

15 | 2 2 
 
approach and in implementing the statute as it stands. 
Paragraph 12 reads as under: 
“12. It is a settled legal proposition that law of 
limitation may harshly affect a particular party 
but it has to be applied with all its rigour when the 
statute so prescribes. The Court has no power to 
extend the period of limitation on equitable 
grounds. “A result flowing from a statutory 
provision is never an evil. A Court has no power to 
ignore that provision to relieve what it considers a 
distress 
resulting 
from 
its 
operation." 
The 
statutory provision may cause hardship or 
inconvenience to a particular party but the court 
has no choice but to enforce it giving full effect to 
the same. The legal maxim dura lex sed lex which 
means "the law is hard but it is the law", stands 
attracted in such a situation. It has consistently 
been held that, “inconvenience is not” a decisive 
factor to be considered while interpreting a 
statute.” 
 
25. This Court in the same breath in the same very decision vide 
paragraph 15 went on to observe as under: 
“15. The law on the issue can be summarised to 
the effect that where a case has been presented in 
the court beyond limitation, the applicant has to 
explain the court as to what was the “sufficient 
cause” which means an adequate and enough 
reason which prevented him to approach the court 
within limitation. In case a party is found to be 
negligent, or for want of bona fide on his part in 
the facts and circumstances of the case, or found 
to have not acted diligently or remained inactive, 
there cannot be a justified ground to condone the 
delay. No court could be justified in condoning 

16 | 2 2 
 
such an inordinate delay by imposing any 
condition whatsoever. The application is to be 
decided only within the parameters laid down by 
this Court in regard to the condonation of delay. 
In case there was no sufficient cause to prevent a 
litigant to approach the court on time condoning 
the delay without any justification, putting any 
condition whatsoever, amounts to passing an 
order in violation of the statutory provisions and it 
tantamounts to showing utter disregard to the 
legislature.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
26. On a harmonious consideration of the provisions of the law, 
as aforesaid, and the law laid down by this Court, it is evident 
that: 

Law of limitation is based upon public policy that there 
should be an end to litigation by forfeiting the right to 
remedy rather than the right itself; 

A right or the remedy that has not been exercised or 
availed of for a long time must come to an end or cease 
to exist after a fixed period of time; 
(iii) The provisions of the Limitation Act have to be 
construed differently, such as Section 3 has to be 
construed in a strict sense whereas Section 5 has to be 
construed liberally; 

17 | 2 2 

In order to advance substantial justice, though liberal 
approach, justice-oriented approach or cause of 
substantial justice may be kept in mind but the same 
cannot be used to defeat the substantial law of 
limitation contained in Section 3 of the Limitation Act; 

Courts are empowered to exercise discretion to 
condone the delay if sufficient cause had been 
explained, but that exercise of power is discretionary in 
nature and may not be exercised even if sufficient 
cause is established for various factors such as, where 
there is inordinate delay, negligence and want of due 
diligence; 

Merely some persons obtained relief in similar matter, 
it does not mean that others are also entitled to the 
same benefit if the court is not satisfied with the cause 
shown for the delay in filing the appeal; 
(vii) Merits of the case are not required to be considered in 
condoning the delay; and 
(viii) Delay condonation application has to be decided on the 
parameters laid down for condoning the delay and 

18 | 2 2 
 
condoning the delay for the reason that the conditions 
have been imposed, tantamounts to disregarding the 
statutory provision. 
27. It is in the light of the above legal position that now we have 
to test whether the inordinate delay in filing the proposed 
appeal ought to be condoned or not in this case. 
28. The submission of learned counsel for the petitioners is that 
in somewhat similar situation, delay in filing appeal for the 
enhancement of compensation had been condoned by this 
Court. He placed reliance upon the case of Dhiraj Singh 
(Dead) through Legal Representatives & Ors. vs. State of 
Haryana & Ors.9. In this case, delay in filing appeal was 
condoned as in other appeals compensation awarded at the 
rate of Rs.200/- per sq. yd. was upheld and the proposed 
appellants were also held entitled to the same benefit of 
compensation at the rate of Rs.200/- per sq. yd. instead of 
Rs.101/- per sq. yd. as awarded but with the rider that they 
 
9 (2014) 

19 | 2 2 
 
will not be entitled for interest for the period of delay in 
approaching the High Court. 
29. The other decision relied upon in this regard is the case of 
Imrat Lal & Ors. vs. Land Acquisition Collector & Ors.10. 
In this case also the matter was regarding determination of 
compensation for the acquired land and there was a delay of 
1110 days in filing the appeal for enhancement of 
compensation. Despite findings that no sufficient cause was 
shown in the application for condoning the delay, this Court 
condoned the delay in filing the appeal as a large number of 
similarly situate persons have been granted relief by this 
Court. 
30. The aforesaid decisions would not cut any ice as imposition 
of conditions are not warranted when sufficient cause has 
not been shown for condoning the delay. Secondly, delay is 
not liable to be condoned merely because some persons have 
been granted relief on the facts of their own case. 
Condonation of delay in such circumstances is in violation of 
 
10 (2014) 

20 | 2 2 
 
the legislative intent or the express provision of the statute. 
Condoning of the delay merely for the reason that the 
claimants have been deprived of the interest for the delay 
without holding that they had made out a case for condoning 
the delay is not a correct approach, particularly when both 
the above decisions have been rendered in ignorance of the 
earlier pronouncement in the case of Basawaraj (supra). 
31. Learned counsel for the petitioners next submitted on the 
basis of additional documents that in connection with the 
land acquisition in some other Special Leave Petitions, delay 
was condoned taking a lenient view and the compensation 
was enhanced with the rider that the claimants shall not be 
entitled for statutory benefits for the period of delay in 
approaching this Court or the High Court. The said orders do 
not clearly spell out the facts and the reasons explaining the 
delay in filing the appeal(s) but the fact remains that the 
delay was condoned by taking too liberal an approach and 
putting conditions which have not been approved of by this 
Court itself. In the absence of the facts for getting the delay 
condoned in the referred cases, vis-à-vis, the facts of this 

21 | 2 2 
 
case, it cannot be said that the facts or the reasons of getting 
the delay condoned are identical or similar. Therefore, we are 
unable to exercise our discretionary power of condoning the 
delay in filing the appeal on parity with the above order(s). 
32. Moreover, the High Court, in the facts of this case, has not 
found it fit to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction of 
condoning the delay. There is no occasion for us to interfere 
with the discretion so exercised by the High Court for the 
reasons recorded. First, the claimants were negligent in 
pursuing the reference and then in filing the proposed 
appeal. Secondly, most of the claimants have accepted the 
decision of the reference court. Thirdly, in the event the 
petitioners have not been substituted and made party to the 
reference before its decision, they could have applied for 
procedural review which they never did. Thus, there is 
apparently no due diligence on their part in pursuing the 
matter. Accordingly, in our opinion, High Court is justified in 
refusing to condone the delay in filing the appeal. 
33. In the above situation, we do not deem it proper and 
necessary to interfere with the decision of the High Court 

22 | 2 2 
 
refusing to condone the inordinate delay in filing the 
proposed appeal. 
34. The Special Leave Petition, as such, lacks merit and is 
dismissed. 

……………………………….. J. 
(BELA M. TRIVEDI) 

……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL)