IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

YASH TUTEJA & ANR. PETITIONER(S) 

VERSUS 

UNION OF INDIA & ORS. RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 

AND 

JUDGMENT 
ABHAY S.OKA, J 
1. 
Taken up for final hearing as notice has already been 
issued on the petitions. In substance, in these Writ Petitions, 
the only challenge that survives is to the complaint filed by 
the Directorate of Enforcement under Section 44(1)(b) of the 
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 (for short, “the 
PMLA”) concerning ECIR/RPZO/11/2022. 
2. 
It is not in dispute that the alleged scheduled offences 
on which the complaint is based are under various sections of 
the Income-tax Act, 1961, read with Sections 120B, 191, 199, 
200 and 204 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, “the 

IPC”). It is also not in dispute that except for Section 120B of 
the IPC, none of the offences are scheduled offences within 
the meaning of clause (y) of sub-Section (1) of Section 2 of the 
PMLA. This Court, in the decision in the case of Pavana 
Dibbur v. Directorate of Enforcement1, recorded its 
conclusions in paragraph 31, which reads thus: 
“CONCLUSIONS 
31. 
While we reject the first and second 
submissions canvassed by the learned 
senior counsel appearing for the appellant, 
the third submission must be upheld. Our 
conclusions are: 
a. It is not necessary that a person 
against whom the offence under Section 
3 of the PMLA is alleged, must have been 
shown as the accused in the scheduled 
offence; 
b. Even if an accused shown in the 
complaint under the PMLA is not an 
accused in the scheduled offence, he will 
benefit from the acquittal of all the 
accused in the scheduled offence or 
discharge of all the accused in the 
scheduled offence. Similarly, he will get 
the benefit of the order of quashing the 
proceedings of the scheduled offence; 
c. The first property cannot be said to 
have any connection with the proceeds of 
the crime as the acts constituting 
scheduled offence were committed after 
the property was acquired; 
d. The issue of whether the appellant 
has used tainted money forming part of 
the proceeds of crime for acquiring the 

second property can be decided only at 
the time of trial; and 
e. The offence punishable under Section 
120-B 
of 
the 
IPC 
will 
become 
a 
scheduled offence only if the conspiracy 
alleged is of committing an offence which 
is specifically included in the Schedule.” 
 (underline supplied) 
3. 
Hence, the offence punishable under Section 120B of 
the IPC could become a scheduled offence only if the 
conspiracy alleged is of committing an offence which is 
specifically included in the Schedule to the PMLA. In this 
case, admittedly, the offences alleged in the complaint except 
Section 120-B of IPC are not the scheduled offences. 
Conspiracy to commit any of the offences included in the 
Schedule 
has 
not 
been 
alleged 
in 
the 
complaint. 
ECIR/RPZO/11/2022, which is the subject matter of the 
complaint, is based on the offences relied upon in the 
complaint. As the conspiracy alleged is of the commission of 
offences which are not the scheduled offences, the offences 
mentioned in the complaint are not scheduled offences within 
the meaning of clause (y) of sub-Section (1) of Section 2 of the 
PMLA. 
4. 
In paragraph 15 of the decision in the case of Pavana 
Dibbur1, this Court held that: 
“The condition precedent for the existence 
of proceeds of crime is the existence of a 
scheduled offence.” 
Therefore, in the absence of the scheduled offence, as held in 
the decision mentioned above of this Court, there cannot be 

any proceeds of crime within the meaning of clause (u) of sub-
Section (1) of Section 2 of the PMLA. If there are no proceeds 
of crime, the offence under Section 3 of the PMLA is not made 
out. The reason is that existence of the proceeds of crime is a 
condition precedent for the applicability of Section 3 of the 
PMLA. 
5. 
There is some controversy about whether the Special 
Court has taken cognizance on the basis of the complaint. 
The learned ASG, on instructions, states that cognizance has 
not been taken. The learned ASG submits that as the 
cognizance is not taken, this Court should not entertain the 
prayer for quashing the complaint. 
6. 
The only mode by which the cognizance of the offence 
under Section 3, punishable under Section 4 of the PMLA, 
can be taken by the Special Court is upon a complaint filed by 
the Authority authorized on this behalf. Section 46 of PMLA 
provides that the provisions of the Cr.PC (including the 
provisions as to bails or bonds) shall apply to proceedings 
before a Special Court and for the purposes of the Cr.PC 
provisions, the Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of 
Sessions. However, sub-section (1) of Section 46 starts with 
the words “save as otherwise provided in this Act.” 
Considering the provisions of Section 46(1) of the PMLA, save 
as otherwise provided in the PMLA, the provisions of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, Cr. PC) shall apply to 
the proceedings before a Special Court. Therefore, once a 
complaint is filed before the Special Court, the provisions of 

Sections 200 to 204 of the Cr.PC will apply to the Complaint. 
There is no provision in the PMLA which overrides the 
provisions of Sections 200 to Sections 204 of Cr.PC. Hence, 
the Special Court will have to apply its mind to the question 
of whether a prima facie case of a commission of an offence 
under Section 3 of the PMLA is made out in a complaint 
under Section 44(1)(b) of the PMLA. If the Special Court is of 
the view that no prima facie case of an offence under Section 
3 of the PMLA is made out, it must exercise the power under 
Section 203 of the Cr.PC to dismiss the complaint. If a prima 
facie case is made out, the Special Court can take recourse to 
Section 204 of the Cr. PC. 
7. 
In this case, no scheduled offence is made out the basis 
of the complaint as the offences relied upon therein are not 
scheduled offences. Therefore, there cannot be any proceeds 
of crime. Hence, there cannot be an offence under Section 3 
of the PMLA. Therefore, no purpose will be served by directing 
the Special Court to apply its mind in accordance with 
Section 203 read with Section 204 of the Cr.PC. That will only 
be an empty formality. 
8. 
We may note that the petitioners in Writ Petition (Crl.) 
No.153/2023 and the petitioner in Writ Petition (Crl.) 
No.217/2023 have not been shown as accused in the 
complaint. Only the second petitioner in Writ Petition (Crl.) 
No.208/2023 and the petitioner in 
have been shown as accused in the complaint. In the case of 
those petitioners who are not shown as accused in the 

complaint, it is unnecessary to entertain the Writ Petitions 
since the complaint itself is being quashed. 
9. 
Hence, we pass the following order: 

Writ Petition (Crl.) Nos.153/2023 and 217/2023 
are disposed of; 

The complaint based on ECIR/RPZO/11/2022, as 
far as the second petitioner (Anwar Dhebar) in Writ 
Petition (Crl.) No.208/2023 is concerned, is hereby 
quashed. The Writ Petition is, accordingly, partly 
allowed; 

The complaint based on ECIR/RPZO/11/2022, as 
far as the petitioner (Arun Pati Tripathi) in Writ Petition 
(Crl.) No.216/2023 is concerned, is hereby quashed. 
The Writ Petition is, accordingly, allowed; 
(iv) There will be no order as to costs; and 

Pending applications, including those seeking 
impleadment, are disposed of accordingly. 
10. 
At this stage, the learned ASG stated that, based on 
another First Information Report, which, according to him, 
involves a scheduled offence, criminal proceedings under the 
PMLA are likely to be initiated against the petitioners. It is not 
necessary for us to go into the issue of the legality and validity 
of the proceedings that are likely to be initiated at this stage. 
Therefore, all the contentions in that regard are left open to be 
decided in appropriate proceedings. 

11. 
The learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners 
in Writ Petition (Crl.) Nos.153/2023 and 208/2023 seeks 
continuation of the interim order dated 7th August 2023 
passed by this Court in these two Writ Petitions to enable the 
petitioners to take recourse to appropriate proceedings before 
the appropriate Court. 
12. 
By keeping the rights and contention of the parties 
open, we direct that the interim order dated 7th August 2023 
passed in Writ Petition (Crl.) Nos.153/2023 and 208/2023 
shall continue to operate for three weeks from today. 

New Delhi; 
April 8, 2024.