IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
PETITION FOR SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) 
NO.5583 OF 2022 
 
M/S RAJCO STEEL ENTERPRISES 
 …PETITIONER(S) 
VERSUS 
KAVITA SARAFF AND ANOTHER 
 …RESPONDENTS(S) 
WITH 

AND 

JUDGMENT 
 
 ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J. 
The common petitioner in these four petitions for special 
leave to appeal is a partnership firm dealing in iron and steel 
products. The petitioner has assailed a common judgment of the 
High Court of Judicature at Calcutta, by which the petitioner’s 
appeal against acquittal of the first respondent in respect of 

offences under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 
1881 (“1881 Act”) has been dismissed. The petitioner, through 
its partner, Ramesh Kumar Gupta, had lodged four complaint 
cases under the aforesaid provision, after four cheques, alleged to 
have been issued by the accused/respondent no.1, were 
dishonoured on the ground of insufficiency of funds. The 
petitioner claims that these cheques were issued between 
07.11.2008 and 24.11.2008, drawn on the Axis Bank Limited, 
Burra Bazar in Kolkata. The relevant particulars regarding these 
four cheques, as per the petitioner’s case, are reproduced in the 
following table:- 
Cheque 
No. 
Cheque Date 
Amount 
Date on which 
cheque was 
presented for 
encashment & was 
returned as 
dishonoured 
Notice 
Date 

07.11.2008 
2 Crore 
04.05.2009 
19.05.2009 

12.11.2008 
2 Crore 
04.05.2009 
19.05.2009 

17.11.2008 
2 Crore 
 
04.05.2009 
19.05.2009 

24.11.2008 
1.75 Crore 
 
04.05.2009 
19.05.2009 
 
2. 
Four independent complaint cases were lodged in the Court 
of the Metropolitan Magistrate, Kolkata by the petitioner and 
were registered as CC Nos.34905, 34906, 34907 and 34908 of 

2009 respectively. The petitioner contended before the Trial 
Court 
that 
it 
had 
granted 
financial 
assistance 
to 
the 
accused/respondent no.1 and the said cheques were issued by 
the accused/respondent no.1 in discharge of her liability towards 
the petitioner. The petitioner/complainant had issued a statutory 
demand notice dated 04.05.2009, which was duly served upon 
the accused/respondent no. 1 on 20.05.2009, but the accused 
neither complied with the requisition as contained therein, nor 
gave any reply thereto. To further substantiate its case, the 
petitioner/complainant also relied upon the testimony of its 
partner, Ramesh Kumar Gupta. 
3. The accused/respondent no.1 had taken the defence that the 
petitioner had not provided any financial assistance, but money 
was advanced to the accused/respondent no.1 for undertaking 
stock market related transactions through her account. She 
deposed as a defence witness and her specific stand in her 
examination-in-chief was that the complainant wanted to trade in 
the futures and options segment of the stock market and since 
the complainant did not want his family members to know about 
it, he had chosen to speculate through her account. Though the 
complainant was a partnership firm, by referring to the 
complainant using the pronoun “he” or “him”, she alluded to 

Ramesh Kumar Gupta only, with whom, the arrangements were 
given effect to. According to her, in this process, many cheques 
were exchanged to settle profit and loss and on good faith, 
according to her, the complainant also used to keep certain blank 
cheques signed by her which were to be deposited as and when 
the complainant had profit. It also transpired in course of hearing 
before the Trial Court that there was an investigation by the 
Central Bureau of Investigation (“CBI”), in relation to which 
respondent no.1 had been chargesheeted and in a search and 
seizure action, some cheque-books of the respondent no.1 were 
also seized. As an explanation to her non-reply to the petitioner’s 
demand notice, the respondent no.1 had submitted that she was 
expecting a child during that period and the child was born on 
27.05.2009. 
4. The defence case, in essence, was that the cheques, the 
dishonour of which is the subject of this proceeding, were neither 
issued nor handed over to the complainant, but these were 
illegally procured by the complainant/petitioner from the custody 
of the investigating agency i.e., CBI and were subsequently 
presented for encashment intentionally. The main case of the 
accused/respondent thus, was that there was no debt as such 
because the cheques were never issued in the first place. The 

Trial Court, by its judgment dated 29.06.2016 found that the 
impugned cheques were not part of the cheque book seized by 
CBI and these were issued in discharge of a legally enforceable 
debt. The accused/respondent no.1 came to be convicted by the 
Trial Court for commission of offence under Section 138 of the 
1881 Act. The Trial Court found that she had failed to rebut the 
presumption contained in Section 118 read with Section 139 of 
the 1881 Act. 
5. The First Appellate Court set aside this finding and acquitted 
the 
accused/respondent 
no.1. 
It 
found 
that 
the 
complainant/petitioner had failed to produce any document 
showing any loan transaction. In the opinion of the First 
Appellate Court, there was no proof of any loan transaction and 
the complainant/petitioner had also failed to prove handing over 
the cheques to it by the accused/respondent no.1. The First 
Appellate Court also took note of the fact that the signature of 
the accused/respondent and the figures showing the amount in 
the respective cheques were in different inks and held that the 
accused/respondent 
no.1 
had 
successfully 
rebutted 
the 
presumption of guilt contained in aforesaid Sections of the 1881 
Act. 

6. The petitioner’s appeal before the High Court against the 
judgment of acquittal was also dismissed. The High Court found 
that no valid documentary evidence could be produced by the 
complainant and the prosecution, for substantiating the 
existence of any enforceable debt or other liability on the part of 
the accused. The High Court, on applying the principle of balance 
of probabilities, found that a plausible case had been made out 
by the defence, as regards non-existence of any legally 
enforceable debt or liability. The High Court observed in the 
judgment impugned herein that the balance-sheet and the 
accounts statement of the accused reflected a sorry state of 
affairs for the finances and thus, it concluded that the accused, 
within the prudence of a normal person, could not have 
undertaken such transactions for the petitioner/complainant 
without any consideration whatsoever. 
7. 
On 
behalf 
of 
the 
complainant/petitioner, 
Mr. 
Raju 
Ramchandran, learned Senior Counsel appeared and argued 
before us that all the ingredients of Section 138 of the 1881 Act 
stood satisfied because signature of the accused, as also the 
receipt of money by the accused/respondent no.1 in her bank 
account remained undisputed. Further submission of Mr. 
Ramchandran was that once the aforesaid factors were 

established, the complainant was not required to prove its debt, 
in the manner it is required to be proved in a civil suit and that 
in a situation of this nature, the burden of proof shifted to the 
respondent/accused. It was for the accused to show the 
preponderance of probabilities that the cheque was not issued in 
discharge of a valid debt and mere denial of existence of debt 
would not be sufficient to rebut the presumption of guilt cast 
upon the accused. The authorities relied on for these 
propositions were:- 
i. Oriental Bank of Commerce -vs- Prabodh Kumar 
Tewari [2022 INSC 832] 
ii. Kalamani Tex and Another -vs- P. Balasubramanian 
[(2021) ] 
iii. Shree Daneshwari Traders -vs- Sanjay Jain and 
Another [(2019) ] 
iv. Uttam Ram -vs- Devinder Singh Hudan and Another 
[(2019) ] 
v. 
Rahul Sudhakar Anantwar -vs- Shivkumar Kanhiyalal 
Shrivastav [(2019) ] 
vi. Kishan Rao -vs- Shankargouda [(2018) ]. 
8. 
Mr. Ramchandran has taken us through the judgment of 
conviction by the Trial Court and submitted that the issue 
regarding the said cheques being procured from the custody of 

CBI, had not been dealt with extensively by the Appellate Courts 
and 
according 
to 
the 
cross-examination 
of 
the 
accused/respondent no.1, she had encashed several cheques 
falling within the sub-series of the cheque-book seized by the 
CBI. 
In 
view 
of 
this, 
the 
part 
of 
defence 
of 
the 
accused/respondent no.1 had failed. Referring to the judgment in 
the case of D.K. Chandel -vs- Wockhardt Limited [(2020) ], he has further submitted that once the main 
ingredients of the offence are established, production of the 
books of accounts is not strictly necessary in a proceeding under 
the 1881 Act relating to dishonour of cheques. He has cited the 
case of Rohitbhai Jivanlal Patel -vs- State of Gujarat and 
Another [(2019) ] to contend that factors relating to 
source of funds and other documentary evidence for advancing 
money are not relevant for consideration on the question of 
rebuttal of presumption by the accused. 
9. Mr. S. Nagamuthu, learned Senior Counsel, appearing on 
behalf of the accused/respondent no.1, defended the judgment of 
the First Appellate Court, as also of the High Court. His 
submission was that the complainant/petitioner did not fulfil the 
requirement of being “a holder in due course”, as no evidence was 
produced by the petitioner to show that the said cheques were 

issued in discharge of a legally enforceable debt and hence, he 
could not be a person who had, for due consideration, become 
the possessor of the cheques. He referred to the depositions made 
before the Trial Court, in support of his submission that the 
presumption under Section 139 read with Section 118 of the 

Act 
was 
not 
applicable 
in 
the 
case 
of 
the 
complainant/petitioner 
because 
such 
presumption 
stood 
effectively rebutted. He relied on the judgment of this Court in 
the cases:- 
(i) Basalingappa -vs- Mudibasappa [(2019) ], 
(ii) K. Subramani -vs- K. Damodara Naidu [(2015) ], 
(iii) Reverend Mother Marykutty -vs- Reni C. Kottaram and 
Another [(2013) ] and 
(iv) Krishna Janardhan Bhat v. Dattatraya G. Hegde [(2008) ]. 
10. He further argued that, in order to invoke the presumption 
under the aforesaid two provisions of 1881 Act, the jurisdictional 
facts had to be established by complainant/petitioner and any 
lacuna in the evidence of the complainant would strike at the 
root of the complaint of this nature. He relied on the judgment in 

the case of John K. Abraham -vs- Simon C. Abraham and 
Another [(2014) ]. 
11. We are dealing with a case where the First Appellate Court 
exercising its jurisdiction under Section 374(3) of Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, ongoing through the analysis of 
evidence, acquitted the accused/respondent no.1. The acquittal 
was further upheld by the High Court in an appeal against 
acquittal under Section 378 of the 1973 Code. The whole 
question involved in this proceeding is as to whether the cheques 
were issued in discharge of a debt and if it was so, then whether 
the accused/respondent no.1 was able to rebut the presumption 
in terms of Section 118 read with Section 139 of the 1881 Act. In 
the light of the judgment of this Court in the case of Narendra 
Pratap Narain Singh -vs- State of U.P. [(1991) ] the 
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution of 
India to interfere with concurrent findings of fact is not in 
question, when such findings are based on no evidence or are 
perverse. The question, we have to address thus, is as to whether 
the findings of the First Appellate Court and the High Court are 
on no evidence or perverse. Both these Courts have examined the 
evidence threadbare and in the opinion of these two fora, go 
against the complainant/petitioner. On the question as to 

whether the sum involved in the cheques was advanced in 
discharge of a legally enforceable debt or not, the petitioner has 
failed to show if any sum was advanced towards financial 
assistance. The High Court found that the debt/liability, in 
discharge of which, according to the petitioner, the cheques were 
issued, did not reflect in the petitioner’s balance-sheet. The other 
partners of the firm did not depose as prosecution witnesses to 
establish that the cheque-amounts were advanced to the accused 
as financial assistance. The respondent no.1/accused has put up 
a plausible defence as regards the reason for which the 
petitioner’s funds had come to her account. Both the appellate 
fora, on going through the evidence did not find existence of any 
“enforceable debt or other liability”. This strikes at the root of the 
petitioner’s case. 
12. As the impugned decision is primarily based on considering 
the evidences produced by the respective parties, we do not 
consider it necessary to individually deal with the ratio of the 
respective decisions relied on by the learned senior counsel 
representing the parties. The principles emerging from these 
authorities have been applied in the judgment of the High Court. 
In this judgment also, we have taken into consideration the 
positions of law reflected in these authorities. We are of the 

opinion that there is no perversity in the finding of the High 
Court, and prior to that, in the finding of the First Appellate 
Court, that went against the complainant/petitioner. It cannot 
be held that these findings were perverse, or based on no 
evidence. No point of law is involved in this set of cases, that 
would warrant our interference. We accordingly dismiss these 
petitions. 
13. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
14. There shall be no order as to costs. 
 
…………………………J. 
(ANIRUDDHA BOSE).………………………..J. 
(SANJAY KUMAR) 
NEW DELHI 
April 9, 2024