IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

SUBHASH & ORS. 
 Appellant(s)…… 
 VERSUS 
 
STATE OF KARNATAKA 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS Respondent(s)……. 

JUDGMENT 

PRASANNA B. VARALE, J. 
 
1. 
By way of present appeal, the appellants challenged the 
judgment and order dated 20th April, 2011 passed by the High 
Court of Karnataka in, thereby 
confirming the conviction and sentence of the Trial Court in 
Sessions Case No.213/2009 which had convicted appellants 
(accused Nos. 1, 2 and 4) under Section 302 of IPC and sentenced 

them to life imprisonment. Additionally the High Court also upheld 
the conviction and sentence of appellant Nos.1 and 3 (accused Nos 
2 & 4) under Sections 324 and 326 of IPC as awarded by Trial 
Court. 
 
2. 
The First Information Report No.18/2009 was lodged at 
Kamalpur Police Station, Gulbarga against the accused persons 
for commission of offences under Section 143, 147, 148, 504, 323, 
324 and 302 r/w Section 149 of Indian Penal Code, on the basis 
of complaint submitted by Kumari Sangeeta D/o Mahadevappa 
Natikar. The Complaint refers to the incident occurred on 18th 
February, 2009 at 7.00 a.m. (we may refer to this incident as a 
prequel to the fateful incident which occurred on the same day in 
the evening). It was submitted in the report that a day earlier i.e., 
on 17th February, 2009, uncle of the complainant brought fire 
wood which was dumped on the way, blocking the path of the 
complainant. Thus, Sangeeta tried to reach the said path to throw 
dust, at that time she found that her pathway was covered with 
the fire wood. As such, she demanded an explanation from her 
uncle Subhash. She raised question as to why the way is blocked, 
to which her uncle Subhash, his wife and his children responded 
by abusing Sangeeta. Sangeeta then returned to her house. Her 

father, mother and brothers by that time had already left for the 
fields. In the evening, her father and brothers i.e. Mahadevappa, 
Hanumantha and Sharanappa, respectively were apprised about 
the incident which took place in the morning. Her father 
Mahadevappa then proceeded towards the house of uncle – 
Subhash and made an enquiry as to why the way was blocked. 
Subhash and the other family members started abusing 
Mahadevappa and then they assaulted Mahadevappa with a stick 
on his forehead and face, causing grievous injuries to 
Mahadevappa. 
 
3. 
Dattatrey (appellant No.2), who was carrying chopper laid an 
assault on the forehead and head of Mahadevappa, causing 
grievous injuries to Mahadevappa. Digambar (appellant No.3) 
threw a big stone below the right knee of Mahadevappa, resulting 
in grievous blood injuries. Then Digambar picked up a stone in his 
hand and hit Mahadevappa on his face causing injury. 
 
4. 
Sangeeta, her brother Sharanappa and mother who had 
followed Mahadevappa, saw the attack on Mahadevappa and 
younger brother of Sangeeta made an attempt to intervene in the 
attack, who was in turn attacked by Digambar, receiving injuries 

on his hand and palm. On hearing hue and cry, residents of the 
area namely; Parameshwar S/o Ningappa Pujari and other 
neighbours rushed to the spot. When Mahadevappa was brought 
to his house, he was unconscious as he had received grievous 
injuries. Uncle of Sangeeta, Shivasharanappa along with other 
persons namely; Sharanappa and Parameshwar Poojari arranged 
for a jeep and Mahadevappa was admitted in the Government 
Hospital, Gulbarga. The Doctors of the Gulbarga Hospital declared 
Mahadevappa dead and his body was sent for autopsy. 
 
5. 
On lodging of the First Information report, the Investigating 
Agency was set in motion. By completing the necessary formalities 
of the investigation, such as recording the statement of witnesses, 
drawing “panchanama”; spot mahazar, seizure mahazars etc. and 
by collecting the medical evidence in the form of post mortem 
report issued by the concerned medical officer, charge sheet came 
to be filed against the accused persons. 
 
6. 
Accused persons pleaded not guilty and were subjected to 
trial. 
 
7. 
On appreciation of the evidence, the learned Sessions Judge 
convicted the appellants and sentenced them for the offence 

punishable under Section 302 to undergo life imprisonment and 
also pay fine of Rs. 10,000/- each (in default S.I. for two years 
each). Accused nos. 2 and 4 were also convicted for offence 
punishable under Section 324 of Indian Penal Code and sentenced 
to undergo R.I. for one year and to pay fine of Rs. 1,000/- each (in 
default S.I. for six months each). Accused 2 and 4 were also 
convicted for offence punishable under Section 326 of Indian Penal 
Code and were sentenced to undergo R.I. for three years each and 
to pay fine of Rs. 2,000/- each (in default S.I. for one year each). 
Whereas accused No.3, 5 and 6 were found guilty for the offences 
punishable under Section 323 of Indian Penal Code and sentence 
to pay fine of Rs. 500/- each (in default S.I. for two months each). 
The entire sentence imposed against accused 2 and 4 was directed 
to run concurrently. 
 
8. 
 Accused Nos. 3, 5 and 6 accepted the judgment and order of 
the Sessions Court as they have not filed any appeal to the High 
Court against the judgment and order of Sessions Court, whereas 
accused Nos.1, 2 and 4 filed their appeal to the High Court of 
Karnataka. As stated above, the High Court of Karnataka upheld 
and confirmed the order of the Trial Court. 

9. 
The learned counsel for the appellants submitted that 
assuming that the prosecution was successful in establishing the 
death of the deceased and the presence of the appellants on the 
spot, as well as the active role played by the appellants; the entire 
material collected by the prosecution shows that it was the 
deceased who came to the house of the accused and then there 
was a quarrel and verbal exchange between them. The act of the 
accused persons, the verbal exchange and the provocation by the 
deceased and his family members prompted the appellants to 
exercise the right of their private defence. 
 
10. Learned counsel for the appellants further submits that the 
evidence collected by the prosecution also shows that the incident 
was a reaction of the appellants to a provocation by the deceased 
and his family members. The element of intention of the appellants 
is not established by the prosecution. Thus, the submission of the 
learned counsel for the appellants was that the act of the 
appellants would not attract Section 302 of Indian Penal Code 
against them and the offences would be at the most, an offence 
under Section 304 part 2 of Indian Penal Code. 

11., learned counsel representing the State of 
Karnataka supported the judgment and order passed by the High 
Court of Karnataka, upholding the judgment and order of the 
Sessions Court. 
 
12. We have gone through the record. The prosecution in 
support of its case, examined as many as 31 witnesses and is 
supported by P.W.18 Ramalingappa, P.W.19 Smt. Mallamma, 
P.W.20 Shobhavati, P.W.21 Sangeeta, P.W.22 Sharanappa, P.W.23 
Hanmanth, P.W.24 – Prameshwar, P.W.25 Shivasharanappa and 
P.W.12 Dr. Balachandra Joshi. The majority of other witnesses, 
who are neighbours of the deceased Mahadevappa, have turned 
hostile. 
 
13. P.W.17 Sareppa, turned hostile and he has not supported the 
prosecution on the aspect of dispute between the complainant’s 
family and the accused family. He supports the case of prosecution 
that land of deceased and accused are abutting to each other. 
 
14. P.W.18 Ramalingappa supports the version of complainant – 
Sangeeta, that to reach the land of deceased Mahadevappa, they 
have to pass through the land of the accused and there was a 

dispute between Mahadevappa and appellant No.1 on the issue of 
way. 
 
15. Now, to establish the death of Mahadevappa being a 
homicidal one, the prosecution mainly draws support from the 
testimony of P.W.12 Dr. Balachandra Joshi who in his testimony 
before the Trial Court states that he was working as Senior 
specialist since June, 2006 in Government Hospital, Gulbarga. On 
19.02.2009 he had conducted post mortem on the dead body of 
Mahadevappa in between 12.30 p.m., to 2.00 p.m., and he noticed 
the following external injuries: 
1. “Cut Lacerated wound on the forehead 
between the eye brows measuring 6 x 2 x 
bone deep underlying major bones fractured. 
2. Lacerated wound on the face left side at the 
angle of the mouth, margins irregular 
underlying upper jaw bone fracture and 
loosening of teeths left side cheek bone also 
fractured. 
3. Cut lacerated wound on chin measuring 5 x 
3 cm x bone deep, evidence of bleeding was 
present, underlying mandible bone was 
fractured. 
4. Cut lacerated wound on the frontal region of 
the scalp and forehead in the middle 

measuring 10 x 3 cm x bone deep clot 
formation present. 
5. Cut lacerated wound scalp on left side frontal 
region measuring 10 cm x 4 cm x bone deep 
clot formation present. 
6. Cut lacerated wound on scalp on the top 
slightly to the right side 12 cm x 4 cm x bone 
deep, evidence of haemorrhage or bleeding 
present clot formation present. 
7. Punctual wound on the right side of leg below 
the right knee measuring 6 x 5 x 3 cm 
underlying leg bone fracture. 
8. Fracture of 3rd, 4th, 5th ribs on the anterior 
side on right side of chest wall. All the above 
injuries are ante mortem in nature.” 
 
16. He further states that, in his opinion cause of death is shock 
and haemorrhage to the brain due to injury and multiple fracture 
injuries. 
 
17. Nothing could be elicited in his cross-examination and 
P.W.12 Dr Balachandra Joshi stood firm on the aspect of the 
homicidal death of Mahadevappa. 
 
18. As stated above, even the appellants are not seriously 
disputing the homicidal death of Mahadevappa. Insofar as their 

presence and active role played by them is concerned, P.W.21 
Sangeeta provides all the necessary details in her testimony about 
the morning incident i.e., prequel and about the actual incident 
which took place in the evening. Though she was subjected to a 
detailed cross-examination, her version remains to be unshaken 
and appears to be a truthful version of the incident. 
 
19. Similarly, P.W.19 Smt. Mallamma, who is the daughter of the 
deceased Mahadevappa (elder sister of Sangeeta), P.W.22 
Sharanappa (s/o Mahadevappa and brother of Sangeeta), P.W.23 
Hanumanth (brother of Sangeeta, Mallamma and Sharanappa), 
also supported the case of prosecution on the aspect of the 
presence and active role played by the appellants causing the 
homicidal death of Mahadevappa. 
 
20. P.W.29 – Dr. Basawaswamy, supported the case of the 
prosecution on the aspect of Sharanappa and Sangeeta receiving 
the injuries. 
 
21. Dr. Basawaswamy in his testimony states that on 18.02.2009 
he examined Sharanappa s/o Mahadevappa who was injured. He 

came to the hospital with a history of assault and on his 
examination Dr. Basawswamy noticed the following injuries: 
 
1. “2 x 1 cm incised wound over the dorsal 
aspect of right little finger bleeding present, 
margins are clean cut. 
2. Swelling present over the dorsa aspect of 
the right hand. 
3. Abrasion over the dorsal aspect of right 
forearm size 3 x 3 cm. 
Taken X ray of right hand, crack fracture of 
5th metacarpal bone. 
Wound No.2 is pre4vious in nature, other 
wounds are simple in nature might have 
been cause by sharp and blunt object. Age 
of the injury about less than 4 hours.” 
 
22. Similarly, on the very same day, he examined another injured 
by name Sangeeta D/o Mahadevapa and noticed the following 
injuries: 
1. “Tenderness present over the left elbow. 
2. Contusion over the posterior aspect of lower 
1/3rd of left arm measuring 3 x 2 cm. 
3. Tenderness present over the left palm. 
4. Tenderness present over the posterior aspect of 
left shoulder. 

23. Thus, version of Dr. Basawaswamy supports the case of the 
prosecution on the aspects i.e., the presence of the prosecution 
witnesses Sharanappa and Sangeeta on the spot and their attempt 
to interfere to save their father Mahadevappa from the attack of 
the accused/appellants, and receiving injuries in that process. 
 
24. Now, although the learned counsel for the appellants 
vehemently submitted before us that the act of the appellants was 
in exercise of the right of private defence and as such, offence 
under Section 302 of Indian Penal code is not attracted against 
them, we are, however, unable to accept this submission on 
appreciation of the evidence. 
 
25. P.W.21 the star witness of the prosecution i.e., Kumari 
Sangeeta – the complainant and injured eyewitness, clearly states 
about the incident (prequel) which took place in the morning i.e., 
a quarrel between herself and accused No.2 initially and then 
abuses by accused Nos.1 and 3 to her. Then she states that on 
return of her father Mahadevappa to their home in the evening, 
she apprised him about the morning incident, after which 
Mahadevappa then proceeded to house of the accused to make 
inquiry about the incident and that he was immediately followed 

by her and her younger brother after which she speaks about the 
role played by each of the accused–appellants. 
 
26. She states that appellant No.1 thrashed her father with stick 
on his head, appellant No.2 assaulted her father with chopper 
(koita) on his head and forehead, then accused No.4 threw a stone 
on his right knee and he picked up another stone and punched it 
on the mouth of her father. Her mother Shobhavati and her 
brothers also stated about the active role played by the accused–
appellants. 
 
27. P.W.25 Shivasharanappa though he had not witnessed the 
evening incident, but he stated about the morning incident i.e., the 
quarrel between the complainant and accused on account of 
blocking the way. 
 
28. As stated above, on careful scrutiny of the version of the 
witnesses, it clearly shows that though it was the submission of 
the counsel for the appellants that the deceased himself went to 
the house of the accused and picked up a quarrel with the accused 
persons upon provocation by the deceased, the appellants 
exercised their right of private defence, yet on the assessment of 

the evidence of the prosecution, we were unable to find any such 
provocation by the deceased Mahadevappa. 
 
29. The evidence clearly show that Mahadevappa was alone, he 
went to the house of appellants to make an inquiry, but he had not 
entered in his house and on the contrary, accused No.1 Subhash 
s/o Shivaray Natikar thrashed the deceased using stick on the 
head of Mahadevappa. Accused No. 2 – Dattatrey s/o Subhash 
Natikar thrashed the head of Mahadevappa using chopper. Using 
a 
dangerous 
weapon 
like 
chopper 
(koita), 
he 
assaulted 
Mahadevappa on his head and forehead. As if this was not 
sufficient enough, accused No.4 –Digambar threw a stone on the 
right knee of Mahadevappa and then picking up another stone hit 
it on the face of deceased. 
 
30. The prosecution evidence further reveals that neither 
Sharanappa nor Sangeeta were carrying any weapon. Even though 
the evidence further reveals that there was a verbal exchange, but 
there is nothing to show that this verbal exchange was in the form 
of a provocation by the deceased to the appellants. 
 
31. Though the learned counsel for the appellants raised this 
ground before this Court, no such ground is raised either at the 

time of examination of the witnesses or even in 313 statements of 
the appellants, i.e. at the trial stage. 
 
32. The learned counsel for the appellants also made an attempt 
to submit before us that the prosecution failed to show that the 
appellants were carrying any intention to lay an assault on the 
deceased Mahadevappa as Mahadevappa himself went to the 
house of appellants. 
 
33. We are unable to accept even this submission. The evidence 
clearly shows that there was a dispute on account of the way on 
18.02.2009 leading to quarrel between P.W.21-Sangeeta and 
accused No.2 initially and then accused No.1 and 3 abused 
Sangeeta. Mahadevappa proceeded to the house of accused 
persons for making an enquiry, as he was appraised by Sangeeta 
when he returned to their home. The evidence also shows that 
accused no.1 was armed with stick, accused no.2 was armed with 
chopper and accused no.4 picked up the stones lying on the spot. 
 
34. P.W.22 Sharanappa clearly states in his deposition before the 
Court that the appellant no.2 who was armed with chopper 
threatened his father by uttering the words “I shall finish you” and 
then assaulted his father with the chopper. Thus, the evidence of 

these injured eyewitnesses clearly shows that the intention of the 
accused person was to do away with Mahadevappa. It may not be 
out of place to state here that the High Court while considering the 
submission on this aspect of exercising their right of private 
defence referred to the judgement in the case of Darshan Singh 
v. State of Punjab and Another1 relied on by the learned counsel 
for the appellant. The apex Court in this judgment observed in 
para 33 as follows: 
“The basic principle underlying the doctrine of right 
of private defence is that when an individual or his 
property is faced with a danger and immediate aid 
from the State machinery is not readily available, 
that individual is entitled to protect himself and his 
property. The right of private defence is available 
only to one who is suddenly confronted with the 
necessity of averting an impending anger not of self-
creation. That being so, the necessary corollary is 
that the violence which the citizen defending himself 
or his property is entitled to use must not be unduly 
disproportionate to the injury which is sought to be 
averted or which is reasonably apprehended and 
should not exceed its legitimate purpose.” 
 
Now, if this principle is applied and the facts of the present 
case are appreciated, it is clear that the victim Mahadevappa was 
unarmed, whereas the accused persons who were armed led a 
 
 SC 1212 

brutal attack on the victim Mahadevappa by stick, by koita and 
stone. 
35. The learned advocate for the State was justified in placing 
reliance on the judgment of this Court in the matter of Virsa Singh 
v. State of Punjab.2 The relevant paras are as follows: 
“13. In considering whether the intention was to 
inflict the injury found to have been inflicted, the 
enquiry necessarily proceeds on broad lines as, 
for example, whether there was an intention to 
strike at a vital or a dangerous spot, and whether 
with sufficient force to cause the kind of injury 
found to have been inflicted. It is, or course, not 
necessary to enquire into every last detail as, for 
instance, whether the prisoner intended to have 
the bowels fall out, or whether he intended to 
penetrate the liver or the kidneys or the heart. 
Otherwise, a man who has no knowledge of 
anatomy could never be convicted, for, if he does 
not know that there is a heart or a kidney or 
bowels, he cannot be said to have intended to 
injure them. Of course, that is not the kind of 
enquiry. It is broad-based and simple and based 
on common sense: the kind of enquiry that 
“twelve good men and true” could readily 
appreciate and understand. 
 
14. To put it shortly, the prosecution must prove 
the following facts before it can bring a case under 
Section 300 “thirdly”. 
 
15. First, it must establish, quite objectively, that 
a bodily injury is present. 
 
16. Secondly, the nature of the injury must be 
proved; These are purely objective investigations. 

 SC 465 

17. Thirdly, it must be proved that there was an 
intention to inflict that particular bodily injury, 
that is to say, that it was not accidental or 
unintentional, or that some other kind of injury 
was intended. 
 
18. Once these three elements are proved to be 
present, the enquiry proceeds further and. 
 
19. Fourthly, it must be proved that the injury of 
the type just described made up of the three 
elements set out above is sufficient to cause death 
in the ordinary course of nature. This part of the 
enquiry is purely objective and inferential and 
has nothing to do with the intention of the 
offender. 
 
20. Once these four elements are established by 
the prosecution (and, of course, the burden is on 
the prosecution throughout) the offence is 
murder under Section 300 “thirdly”. It does not 
matter that there was no intention to cause 
death. It does not matter that there was no 
intention even to cause an injury of a kind that is 
sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of 
nature (not that there is any real distinction 
between the two). It does not even mater that 
there is no knowledge that an act of that kind will 
be likely to cause death. Once the intention to 
cause the bodily injury actually found to be 
present is proved, the rest of the enquiry is purely 
objective and the only question is whether, as a 
matter of purely objective inference, the injury is 
sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to 
cause death. No one has a licence to run around 
inflicting injuries that are sufficient to cause 
death in the ordinary course of nature and claim 
that they are not guilty of murder. If they inflict 
injuries of that kind, they must face the 
consequences: and they can only escape if it can 
be shown, or reasonably deduced, that the injury 
was 
accidental 
or 
otherwise 
unintentional 
(emphasis supplied).” 

36. Accordingly, considering all the aspects, we are of the opinion 
that the High Court of Karnataka committed no error in upholding 
and confirming the judgment and order of Trial Court/Sessions 
Court, we see no ground to interfere, the appeal thus fails and is 
dismissed. 
 
37. The order dated 31.07.2018 of this Court by which bail was 
granted to the appellants is hereby recalled. The appellants are 
directed to surrender before the Trial Court within a period of four 
weeks from today. 

 [SUDHANSHU DHULIA] 

 [PRASANNA B. VARALE]