IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4886-4888 OF 2023 

ASSOCIATION OF ENGINEERS 
AND OTHERS ETC....APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU 
AND OTHERS ETC....RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4891-4892 OF 2023 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4889-4890 OF 2023 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 5747-5750 OF 2023 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
Civil Appeal Nos. 4886 to 4889, 4892 and 5748 to 5750 of 

1. 
The present set of appeals challenge the judgment 
dated 3rd August 2022, passed by the Division Bench of the 
High Court of Judicature at Madras (‘Madras High Court’ for 
short), whereby the writ appeals being W.A. Nos. 82 and 95 of 
2015 and 5251 of 2022 filed by the respondents herein were 

allowed and the order dated 23rd December 2014 passed by the 
learned Single Judge of the Madras High Court in Writ Petition 
No. 11148 of 2017 was quashed and set aside. 
2. 
The facts giving rise to present appeals are as under: 
2.1 
The employees are governed by Tamil Nadu State and 
Subordinate Service Rules and also Special Rules to govern 
different services in the State. The engineering staff comes 
under the Tamil Nadu Engineering Service and Tamil Nadu 
Engineering Subordinate Service. 
2.2 
On 2nd January 1990, Public Works Department, 
Government of Tamil Nadu (hereinafter referred to as ‘PWD’) 
issued an order being G.O. Ms. No. 1 (hereinafter referred to as 
‘G.O. No. 1) accepting the recommendations of Chief Engineer, 
PWD (General) and the Tamil Nadu Public Service Commission 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘TNPSC’) and directed that from the 
date of this order, Junior Draughting Officers, Draughting 
Officers, Overseers and Technical Assistants, who have 
completed 5 years of service and acquired B.E./A.M.I.E. qualification, will be entitled to be appointed as Assistant 
Engineers on transfer of service. 

2.3 
On 22nd January 1991, Government Order being G.O. 
Ms. No. 88 of 1991 (hereinafter referred to as “G.O. No. 88”) 
came to be issued wherein it was clarified that TNPSC need not 
be consulted for appointment of Junior Draughting Officers, 
Draughting Officers, Overseers and Technical Assistants, who 
have completed 5 years of service and acquired B.E./A.M.I.E. qualification, as Assistant Engineers. 
2.4 
 came to be filed before 
the Madras High Court by Engineering Graduates challenging 
G.O. No.1 on the ground that part-time B.E. Degrees were 
inferior to regular B.E. Degrees. The same were dismissed vide 
order dated 8th March 1991. 
2.5 
On 31st May 1994, an advertisement being No. 9/94 
was issued by the TNPSC for direct recruitment of Assistant 
Engineers. This advertisement was challenged by several 
Junior Draughting Officers, Draughting Officers and Technical 
Assistants before the Tamil Nadu Administrative Tribunal, 
Chennai (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Tribunal) on the ground 
that their appointment should also be considered in the 
advertised posts in terms of abovementioned G.O. Nos. 1 and 
88. 

2.6 
The Tribunal, vide order dated 17th April 1997, allowed 
the applications filed by Junior Draughting Officers and 
Draughting Officers, however, dismissed the applications filed 
by Technical Assistants. The Tribunal observed that the 
Technical Assistants are not part of feeder category from which 
recruitment by transfer can be made for the post of Assistant 
Engineers. 
2.7 
Thereafter, Association of Engineers, one of the 
appellants herein filed before 
the Madras High Court challenging the above finding of the 
Tribunal qua the Junior Draughting Officers and Draughting 
Officers. The Technical Assistants never challenged the 
dismissal of their applications by the Tribunal. The High Court, 
vide order dated 6th November 2006, dismissed the said writ 
petition. In the year 2009, the said order of the High Court was 
challenged before this Court in. 
This Court, vide order dated 14th September 2017, dismissed 
the said appeal. 
2.8 
From 1999 till 2002, a total number of 491 vacancies 
in the post of Assistant Engineers were notified to be filled up. 
Out of the same, 369 vacancies were to be filled up by direct 

recruitment and the remaining 122 vacancies were to be filled 
up by recruitment by transfer. Out of the said 122 vacancies 
referable to the feeder categories for appointment by 
recruitment by transfer, 29 vacancies alone had been filled up 
so far. 
2.9 
The State Government, due to dearth of eligible 
candidates to fill the remaining 93 vacancies by transfer, 
issued 
directions 
dated 
24th February 

directing 
appointment of persons in the category of Technical Assistant, 
who possessed B.E./A.M.I.E. qualification in Civil Engineering 
and have rendered 5 years of service on temporary basis. 
2.10 
Vide Proceedings No. S2(2)/29148/2004-24 dated 27th 
February 2006, 21 Technical Assistants were appointed as 
Assistant Engineers on temporary basis. 
2.11 
The Association of Engineers, one of the appellants 
herein, filed before 
the Madras High Court challenging the abovementioned 
appointment order dated 27th February 2006 on the ground 
that the same was violative of the order dated 17th April 1997 
passed by the Tribunal in O.A. No. 3348 of 1994 and also the 
order dated 6th November 2006 passed by the Madras High 

Court in WP No. 7523 of 1997. Further, the appointments are 
against the statutory rules prescribed. 
2.12 
Vide order dated 23rd December 2014, the learned 
Single Judge of the High Court allowed the said writ petition 
being WP No. 11148 of 2007 and restrained the official 
respondents from appointing Technical Assistants as Assistant 
Engineers by recruitment by transfer unless and until the 
statutory rules were amended making Technical Assistants as 
feeder category. The services of respondents herein were to be 
continued for a period of 3 months and in case the rules are 
amended by inclusion of Technical Assistants as feeder 
category within three months, they would not suffer reversion. 
However, if the rules are not amended, then they will be 
reverted to their original post. 
2.13 
In 2016, the unemployed engineering graduates had 
filed a before the 
Madras High Court challenging the validity of G.O. No. 1. The 
matter is still pending adjudication. 
2.14 
Being aggrieved by the order of the learned Single 
Judge dated 23rd December 2014, writ appeals being W.A. Nos. 
82 and 95 of 2015 were filed before the learned Division Bench 

of the Madras High Court by the respondents herein. The 
learned Division Bench of the Madras High Court, vide 
impugned judgment dated 3rd August 2022, quashed and set 
aside the order of the learned Single Judge and allowed the writ 
appeals filed by the respondents herein. 
2.15 
Aggrieved thereby, the present set of appeals came to 
be filed. 
3. 
We have heard Smt. Madhavi Divan, learned Senior 
Counsel, Shri N. Subramaniyan and Shri Pranav Sachdeva, 
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants. We have 
also heard Shri V. Prakash and Shri Senthil Jagadeesan, 
learned Senior Counsel, and Shri P. Rajendran, learned 
counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents. We have also 
heard Shri Sanjay Hegde, learned Senior Counsel appearing on 
behalf of the State of Tamil Nadu. 
4. 
Smt. 
Madhavi 
Divan, 
learned 
Senior 
Counsel 
appearing on behalf of the appellants submitted that in the 
absence of amendment to the Rules, Technical Assistants 
cannot be permitted to be in the feeder cadre for promotion to 
the post of Assistant Engineers. She submitted that, in spite 
of several chances, the State has failed to carry out amendment 

to the Rules and in the absence of Rules, they are not entitled 
to be promoted to the post of Assistant Engineers. Smt. Divan, 
relying on Section 10 of the Tamil Nadu Engineering Services 
submitted that the entry into the Assistant Engineers’ Cadre, 
is either by direct recruitment or recruitment by transfer from 
Junior Engineers, Overseers, Special Grade Draughting 
Officers or Civil Draughtsmen of Tamil Nadu Engineering 
Subordinate Service. It is submitted that the appointment to 
the post of Technical Assistants has been provided under G.O. 
MS. No. 1972 dated 18th November 1985. The said G.O. provided that the general and special rules applicable to the 
holders of the permanent posts in the Tamil Nadu Engineering 
Subordinate Service shall apply to the holders of the temporary 
posts of Technical Assistants Civil, Electrical and Mechanical. 
However, that was subject to the modifications specified 
therein. The appointing authority to the said posts was the 
Superintending Engineer of PWD. 
5. 
Smt. Divan submitted that by G.O. MS. No. 1356 dated 
2nd August 1980, the State provided for appointment to the post 
of Junior Engineers (now Assistant Engineers) from the cadre 
of Draughtsman Grade III, Overseers and Technical Assistants, 

who, on acquiring degree qualification in Engineering have 
rendered 5 years of service as Draughtsmen, Overseers, 
Technical Assistants. 
6. 
Smt. Divan submitted that the appointment of 
Technical Assistants as Assistant Engineers is totally illegal, 
violative of Right to Equality under Article 14 of the 
Constitution of India and also violative of Article 335 of the 
Constitution of India which mandates efficiency in public 
administration. It is further submitted that the entry of 
Assistant Engineers is through competitive examination on the 
basis of merit whereas the entry of Technical Assistants is 
through 
a 
backdoor 
entry 
i.e. appointment 
by 
the 
Superintending Engineer. It is therefore submitted that, 
permitting the Technical Assistants to march ahead of the 
Assistant Engineers would, apart from being anti-meritian, 
would also promote the persons who have entered through 
backdoor. 
7. 
Smt. Divan further submitted that the temporary 
appointments of Technical Assistants have neither been 
regularized nor has their probation commenced. It is therefore 
submitted that without regularization and declaration of 

probation in the category of Assistant Engineers as mandated 
by Rule 7 of Special Rules to Tamil Nadu Engineering Service, 
they cannot be made as Assistant Engineers. 
8. 
Reliance is placed on the judgment of this Court in the 
case of Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers’ 
Association v. State of Maharashtra and Others1 in 
support of the proposition that unless the appointment is in 
accordance with the rules, the same is not valid. Reliance is 
also placed on the judgment of this Court in the case of A.K. 
Bhatnagar and Others v. Union of India and Others2 
contending that this Court has categorically rejected the 
argument to consider the appointment of ad-hoc appointees 
without regularization. 
9. 
Shri N. Subramaniyan, learned counsel appearing on 
behalf of the appellants supplemented the arguments advanced 
by Smt. Divan. He submitted that sub-rule (1) of Rule 2 of 
Tamil Nadu State and Subordinate Services Rules postulates 
that a person is said to be ‘appointed to a service’ when in 
accordance with the said Rules or in accordance with the Rules 
 
1 (1990): 1990 INSC 169 
2 (1991): 1990 INSC 344 

applicable at the time, he discharges, for the first time the 
duties of a post borne on the cadre of such service or 
commences the probation, instruction or training prescribed 
for members thereof. It is submitted that the Technical 
Assistants neither commenced their duties on the posts borne 
on the cadre of such service nor commenced their probation. 
He further submitted that, in accordance with Rule 4 of the 
said Rules, all appointments to a service whether by direct 
recruitment or by recruitment by transfer or by promotion, can 
be made by the appointing authority from a list of approved 
candidates. It is submitted that, since the Technical Assistants 
are not approved candidates, they cannot be appointed to the 
post of Assistant Engineers. He further submitted that the 
temporary appointments in accordance with Rule 10 of the said 
Rules could be made only for a temporary period only when 
there is likelihood of delay in making the appointments in 
accordance with the said Rules. He further submitted that, in 
accordance with Rule 36A of the said Rules, the appointments 
by recruitment by transfer can be made only on the ground of 
merit and ability, seniority being considered only where merit 
and ability are approximately equal. He submitted that, 

amendment to Rule 4A specifically prohibits promotion or 
appointment on the basis of executive orders seeking to modify 
the Rules. He therefore submitted that, on several grounds, 
the appointments of Technical Assistants are liable to be set 
aside. 
10. 
It is further submitted that the appointments so made 
are contrary to the judgment of this Court in the case of B. 
Thirumal v. Ananda Sivakumar and Others3. 
11., Shri V. Prakash, learned Senior Counsel 
appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that a 
perusal of G.O. Ms. No. 3037 dated 22nd December 1986 issued 
by the PWD would reveal that the pay-scales of Overseers and 
Technical Assistants are the same. It is submitted that the said 
G.O. Ms. No. 3037 specifically provides that 75% of the 
vacancies in the post of Junior Engineer (formerly Supervisor) 
shall be filled up by Engineering degree holders while 
remaining 25% vacancies shall be filled up by the candidates 
possessing Engineering Diploma or equivalent certificates. It 
further provides for promotion from Overseers, Head 
Draughtsman and Civil Draughtsman (Grad I, II and III). It is 
 
3 (2014): 2013 INSC 787 

submitted that, though the pay-scales of the Overseers are 
same as that of Technical Assistants and that of Draughtsman 
Grade III, inadvertently, the cadre of Technical Assistants was 
not mentioned therein. It is submitted that, in order to rectify 
this omission, the G.O. No. 1 came to be issued. It provided 
that, 
Junior 
Draughting 
Officers, 
Draughting 
Officers, 
Overseers and Technical Assistants in PWD, who have put in 
five years service would be eligible to be appointed as Assistant 
Engineers on transfer of service on acquiring B.E./A.M.I.E. qualification. Shri Prakash submitted that challenge to the said 
G.O. No. 1 was negatived by the Madras High Court vide order 
dated 8th March 1991 in in the 
case of R. Murali and Others v. The State of Tamil Nadu 
and Another4. The High Court held that the executive 
instructions can be issued to fill up the gap till rules are framed 
under Article 309 of the Constitution of India. 
12. 
Shri Prakash further submitted that, out of 36 
Technical Assistants promoted as Assistant Engineers in the 
years 2006 and 2008, only a few would be remaining in service 
as most of them have been retired or would be retiring in near 
 
4 Order dated 8th March 1991 in 

future. He therefore submitted that this is a fit case wherein 
this Court should not exercise its jurisdiction under Article 136 
of the Constitution of India. 
13. 
Shri Senthil Jagadeesan, learned Senior Counsel 
appearing on behalf of the respondents, relying on the 
judgment of this Court in the case of Sant Ram Sharma v. 
State of Rajasthan and Others5, submitted that where the 
rules are silent, the said gap can be filled up by the executive 
instructions. He further relies on the order of the Division 
Bench of the Madras High Court dated 6th November 2006 in 
 in the case of Association of 
Engineers’ v. The Tamil Nadu Administrative Tribunal 
and Others6. 
14. 
We find that, on account of various facts as emerging 
from the record, it will not be necessary for us to go into the 
wider issues as canvassed by the parties. 
15. 
G.O. No. 1 which includes Technical Assistants for 
being appointed as the Assistant Engineers on transfer of 
service on acquiring B.E./A.M.I.E. qualification, came to be 
 
5: 1967 INSC 167 
6 Order dated 6th November 2006 in 

challenged by Engineering Graduates who had obtained the 
degree by joining regular courses, before the High Court of 
Judicature at Madras. The same was negatived by the Madras 
High Court by order dated 8th March 1991. It is further 
pertinent to note that the Association of Engineers, who is one 
of the lead appellants herein, had filed a petition challenging 
the order dated 17th April 1997 passed by the Tribunal in O.A. 
No. 3348 of 1994. 
16. 
The said O.A No. 3348 of 1994 was filed challenging 
the Advertisement No.9/94 issued by the TNPSC for the post of 
Assistant Engineer and for consequentially considering the 
claim of Junior Draughting Officers, Draughting Officers and 
Technical Assistants for appointment as Assistant Engineers 
on the basis of G.O. Ms. Nos. 1 of 1990 and 88 of 1991. The 
Tribunal, vide order dated 17th April 1997, allowed the 
applications filed by the Junior Draughting Officers and 
Draughting Officers, however, dismissed the applications filed 
by Technical Assistants. The Tribunal observed that the 
Technical Assistants are not part of feeder category from which 
recruitment by transfer can be made for the post of Assistant 
Engineers. The order of the learned Tribunal was challenged 

by the appellants herein by filing a writ petition being Writ 
Petition No. 7523 of 1997 titled Association of Engineers’ v. 
The Tamil Nadu Administrative Tribunal and Others 
(supra) before the Madras High Court. The Division Bench of 
the said High Court rejected the claim of the appellants herein 
and upheld the order of the Tribunal. It will be relevant to refer 
to para (13) of the said order, which reads thus: 
“13. It is also brought to our notice that the Special 
Rules were amended by G.O.Ms.No.1745 dated 
10.10.1972, which were subsequently modified by 
G.O.Ms.No.1356 dated 02.08.1980 and on the basis 
of representation, the Government reconsidered 
those executive orders and issued G.O.Ms.No.1 PWD 
dated 02.01.1990, stating that with effect from the 
date of the said order, Junior Drafting Officer, 
Drafting 
Officer, 
Overseers 
and 
Technical 
Assistants, who have put in five years of service 
will be eligible to be appointed as Assistant 
Engineers by transfer of service on acquiring 
B.E./A.M.E.E. degree 
qualification. 
We 
are 
satisfied that Rule 5 of the Special Rules in no 
way affects the implementation of the decision of 
the Tribunal in view of Rule 2(a)(5) of the Special 
Rules. As observed earlier, it is our duty to 
mention that in order to implement the orders 
passed in G.O.Ms.No.1 PWD dated 02.01.1990, 
the Government have conducted meeting with 
various Engineering Associations, including the 
petitioner 
Association 
on 
10.12.1996 
and 
03.06.1997 and took a decision to maintain 3:1 
ratio 
between 
the 
direct 
recruitment 
and 
recruitment by transfer. As rightly pointed out, 
members of the petitioner Association are being 
considered for the number of vacancies apportioned 
as per the ratio out of total estimated vacancies. We 

have already referred to the order of this Court 
dated 08.03.1991 in W.P.No.3309 of 1991, 
upholding 
the 
G.O.Ms.No.1 
PWD 
dated 
02.01.1990. It is also not in dispute that executive 
instructions can be issued to fill up the gap till 
necessary Rules are framed under Article 309 of the 
Constitution. All these and other materials have been 
correctly considered by the Tribunal; and we are in 
agreement with the conclusion arrived at by it.” 
 
17. 
It can thus clearly be seen that the Division Bench of 
the Madras High Court held that G.O. No. 1 provided that from 
the date of the said order, Junior Drafting Officer, Drafting 
Officer, Overseers and Technical Assistants, who have put in 
five years of service will be eligible to be appointed as Assistant 
Engineers by transfer of service on acquiring B.E./A.M.I.E. degree qualification. 
18. 
It is sought to be urged that, before the Tribunal, the 
Technical Assistants had failed and that they had not 
challenged the said order of the Tribunal. 
19. 
However, we find that the Division Bench of the Madras 
High Court clearly referred to G.O. No. 1 and approved it. It is 
further to be noted that the appeal challenging the aforesaid 
order of the Madras High Court dated 6th November 2006 has 
also been dismissed by this Court vide order dated 14th 

September 2017 in the case of Association of Engineers v. 
Government of Tamil Nadu and Others7. 
20. 
Insofar as the issue in the case of B. Thirumal (supra) 
is concerned, the same would not be applicable to the facts of 
the present case. In the said case, the appellant was working 
as a Junior Engineer (Electrical). He was appointed to the said 
post by direct recruitment. Aggrieved by the prevalent practice 
of Assistant Engineers (Electrical) being empanelled for 
promotion to the post of Assistant Executive Engineer 
(Electrical) only against 25% quota apportioned for members of 
the Subordinate Engineering Service, he had filed a 
representation. The said representation came to be rejected. It 
was sought to be contended in the said case that an Assistant 
Engineer promoted from Junior Engineer cadre and having 
obtained a degree in engineering was also entitled to compete 
with the Assistant Engineers directly recruited for 75% of the 
quota earmarked for the direct recruits. The Court found that 
the degree holder Junior Engineers continue to be members of 
the Subordinate Engineering Service even after they are 
redesignated as Assistant Engineers upon getting a degree 
 
7 2017 INSC 906 

qualification. Upon their getting degree qualification, they 
could be considered only against the 25% quota apportioned 
for the Subordinate Service and not against 75% apportioned 
for the State Service members directly recruited to that service 
or appointed by transfer in terms of the Rules. 
21. 
Such is not the situation here. The Technical 
Assistants are not claiming against the 75% posts available for 
direct recruits. Their claim is only towards 25% posts which 
are required to be filled in from Junior Draughting Officers, 
Overseers and Technical Assistants who have put five years 
service and have acquired B.E./A.M.I.E. qualification. It is 
thus clear that the Technical Assistants are, in no way, 
encroaching upon the quota apportioned for directly recruited 
Assistant Engineers. Even if their contention is accepted that 
once they are brought in the cadre of Assistant Engineers, they 
would lose their birthmark, in view of the judgment of this 
Court in the case of B. Thirumal (supra), for the higher post, 
and there will be no competition amongst direct recruits and 
promotees. Whereas the direct recruits would be entitled to get 
promotional posts from 75% quota apportioned for them, the 
Technical Assistants along with other placed amongst them 

would be entitled to promotional posts only from 25% posts 
apportioned for them. 
22. 
It is further to be noted that the contention of the 
appellants that, the services of the Technical Assistants are not 
regularized, is also contrary to record. It will be relevant to 
refer to Clause 4 of G.O. Ms. No. 155 dated 13th August 2015, 
issued by the Government of Tamil Nadu, which reads thus: 
“4. In accordance with the powers delegated under 
the general rule 48 of the Tamil Nadu State and 
Subordinate Services Rules Volume II, the Governor 
of Tamil Nadu orders relaxing the rule 2(a) and rule 
(5) of the Tamil Nadu Engineering Service (Category-
1, Public Works) the so as to regularize the 72 
Assistant Engineers (Civil) as per the Annexure of 
this order who were appointed retrospectively from 
the category of Junior Engineers and promoted from 
the category of Technical Assistants who acquired 
B.E., Civil Degree before promotion as Junior 
Engineers so as to enable them for regularization of 
the services in the category of Assistant Engineers 
(Civil). 
Further, 
the 
Government 
also 
order 
exempting them from the purview of the G.O.(Ms).No. 
1, Public Works Department dated 02.01.1990 for 
regularization of the personnel stated in the 
Annexure to this order.” 
 
23. 
It is thus clear that the contention of the appellants 
that the services of the Technical Assistants have not been 
regularized is contrary to record. In any case, the State 
Government, in its affidavit dated 10th March 2023, has 

categorically reaffirmed this position. 
24. 
It is further relevant to note the relevant extract from 
the Proceedings No. S2(2)/2918/2004-24 dated 27th February 
2006 conducted before the Engineer-in-Chief, W.R.D and Chief 
Engineer (General), PWD, which reads thus: 
“During the year from 1999-2000 to 2001-2002 the 
number of 369 vacancies have been apportioned to 
the post of Assistant Engineer to be filled up by direct 
recruitment and the number of 122 vacancies have 
been apportioned to the post Asst. Engineer to be 
filled up by recruitment by transfer. 
Out of 122 vacancies apportioned to the post of 
Assistant Engineer to be filled up by recruitment by 
transfer, only 29 vacancies have been filled up so far, 
from the Junior Draughting Officers, Draughting 
Officers and Overseers. The remaining number of 93 
vacancies are still vacant due to dearth of eligible 
candidates. 
Under these circumstances and also pursuant to the 
directions of the Government, PWD issued in the 
letter fourth cited the personnels in the category of 
Technical Assistant, who possessed B.E/A.M.I.E 
qualification in civil Engineering and rendered 5 
years of service, furnished to this proceedings are 
appointed as Asst. Engineer(civil) in the time scale of 
pay of Rs.65-00-200-11, 100 on temporary basis 
under rule 10(a)(i) of the General Rules for the Tamil 
Nadu State and Subordinate Service, subject to the 
outcome of W.P.No.7523/97 pending in the High 
Court of Madras in this matter.” 
 
25. 
It can thus clearly be seen that the State Government 
was required to take a decision to appoint Technical Assistants 

as Assistant Engineers on temporary basis as it was found that 
out of 122 vacancies apportioned to the post of Assistant 
Engineer to be filled up by recruitment by transfer, only 29 
vacancies had been filled so far. It appears that the attempt of 
the appellant association is to grab all the posts available even 
those 
apportioned 
for 
the 
candidates 
promoted 
from 
subordinate services. In our view, the said attitude is totally 
unequitable. 
26. 
In any case, any interference at this stage is likely to 
undo the settled position which has been prevalent almost for 
a period of last 18 years. As already held hereinabove, the 
continuation of the appellants as Assistant Engineers would 
not amount to encroaching upon the 75% posts apportioned 
for the members of the appellants’ association. We may 
gainfully refer to the following observations of this Court in the 
case of Narpat Singh and Others v. Jaipur Development 
Authority and Another8: 
“10. ….The exercise of jurisdiction conferred by 
Article 136 of the Constitution on this Court is 
discretionary. It does not confer a right to appeal on 
a party to litigation; it only confers a discretionary 
power of widest amplitude on this Court to be 
exercised for satisfying the demands of justice. On 
 
8 (2002): 2002 INSC 222 

one hand, it is an exceptional power to be exercised 
sparingly, with caution and care and to remedy 
extraordinary situations or situations occasioning 
gross failure of justice; on the other hand, it is an 
overriding power whereunder the Court may 
generously step in to impart justice and remedy 
injustice. The facts and circumstances of this case as 
have already been set out do not inspire the 
conscience of this Court to act in the aid of the 
appellants. …..” 
 
27. 
Following the aforesaid, we find that equity demands 
no interference to be warranted in the impugned judgment in 
the facts and circumstances of the case. 
28. 
In the result, the appeals are dismissed. 
29. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

Civil Appeal Nos. 4372, 4890, 4891 and 5747 of 2023 
30. 
Learned counsel for the parties agree that the writ 
petitions being WP No. 3617 of 2017 and 35161 of 2019 filed 
before the Madras High Court were decided by it without even 
adverting to the facts and the rival submissions and they 
therefore made a request for remanding the matter to the High 
Court for consideration afresh. 
31. 
In the result, the appeals are allowed. The impugned 
orders dated 3rd August 2022 in WP No. 3617 of 2017 and 
dated 17th March 2022 in WP No. 35161 of 2019 are quashed 

and set aside and the matters are remanded back to the 
Madras High Court for consideration afresh in accordance with 
law. 
32. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
No costs. 
 
…… 
[B.R. GAVAI] 

 …… 
 [SANDEEP MEHTA]