IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

DHARAMBIR.….Appellant(s) 

VERSUS 

STATE OF HARYANA 

 ….Respondent(s) 
 
JUDGMENT 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Vide judgment and order dated 3rd May, 1999, learned 
Sessions Judge, Bhiwani convicted the appellant for the offence 
punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘IPC’) and by an order of sentencing 
dated 10th May, 1999 awarded sentence of life imprisonment and 
fine of Rs.500/-, in default of payment of fine, to further undergo 
rigorous imprisonment of six months to the appellant. 

2. 
The appellant challenged the said judgment by filing Criminal 
Appeal No. 259-DB of 1999 in the High Court of Punjab and 
Haryana at Chandigarh. The Division Bench rejected the appeal 
vide judgment dated 21st April, 2008 and affirmed the judgment 
and order of conviction and sentence passed by the trial Court. 
Brief Facts: - 
3. 
The prosecution case in nutshell is that on 5th June, 1998, at 
around 08:30 a.m., deceased Karambir, his brother Krishan 
Kumar (PW-5), Ravinder (PW-6) and Mahender (PW-7) along with 
two acquaintances (Mahender and Suresh) had gone to Prabhat 
Cinema, Bhiwani. At about 11:30 a.m., the accused appellant who 
was also present there, thrust a knife in the chest of Karambir 
causing his instantaneous death and escaped leaving the knife 
behind. The motive attributed to the accused appellant for 
committing the offence was that he bore a suspicion in his mind 
that deceased Karambir was involved in illicit relations with his 
wife. 
4. 
Rohtas Singh (PW-11) posted as Inspector/SHO, Police 
Station City Bhiwani, received a telephonic message from Raj 
Kumar (PW-9), Manager of Prabhat Cinema, regarding the incident 
and acting in furtherance thereof, he along with other police 

personnel reached the place of occurrence and recorded the 
statement of first informant-Krishan Kumar (Exhibit-PF) at 01:30 
p.m., which led to the registration of FIR No. 309 of 1998 at Police 
Station City Bhiwani for the offence punishable under Section 302 
IPC. 
5. 
The requisite investigation was undertaken by Rohtas Singh 
(PW-11) Investigating Officer, who inspected the place of 
occurrence; prepared the inquest report; seized a knife lying near 
the dead body; prepared the site plan; recorded the statements of 
witnesses and forwarded the dead body of Karambir to the Medical 
Jurist for conducting the post mortem. The Medical Jurist-Dr. 
Hemant Singh (PW-1) carried out autopsy upon the dead body of 
Karambir taking note of two incised wounds, one in the epigastric 
region of the upper abdomen and other on the left forearm of the 
deceased. The Medical Jurist (PW-1) issued a Post Mortem Report 
(Ex.-PA) opining that the cause of death of the deceased was shock 
and haemorrhage, as a result of injury No.1 inflicted to the vital 
organs which was sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course 
of nature. 
6. 
The accused appellant was arrested on 7th June, 1998 and 
chargesheet was filed against him for the offence punishable under 

Section 302 IPC in the Court of the concerned Magistrate. The case 
being exclusively triable by the Sessions Court was committed to 
the Court of Sessions Judge, Bhiwani where charge was framed 
against the accused appellant for the offence punishable under 
Section 302 IPC, who denied the same and claimed trial. 
7. 
The prosecution examined 11 witnesses so as to prove its 
case. The prosecution case was primarily based on the testimonies 
of Krishan Kumar (PW-5), the first informant, being the brother of 
the deceased and Ram Kumar (PW-8) who claimed that the 
accused had made an extra judicial confession before him. 
8. 
The accused was questioned under Section 313 of Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter being referred to as ‘CrPC’) 
and upon being confronted with the circumstances appearing in 
the prosecution evidence, he denied the same and claimed to be 
innocent. One Piare Lal was examined as DW-1. 
9. 
Vide judgment dated 3rd May, 1999, the trial Court proceeded 
to convict the accused appellant and sentenced him as above. The 
appeal preferred by the appellant against the judgment and order 
of conviction and sentence was rejected by Division Bench of High 
Court vide judgment dated 21st April, 2008, which is subject to 
challenge in the present appeal. 

Submissions on behalf of the appellant:- 
10. Shri Rishi Malhotra, learned counsel representing the 
appellant vehemently contended that the evidence of the star 
prosecution witness Krishan Kumar (PW-5) is not reliable. The 
witness made gross improvements from his earlier statement 
(Exhibit-PF) based upon which, the FIR came to be registered. The 
time of incident narrated by Krishan Kumar (PW-5) in his 
testimony does not match with the time of incident as stated by 
Raj Kumar (PW-9), Manager of Prabhat Cinema. He further 
submitted that the very presence of Krishan Kumar (PW-5) at the 
crime scene is belied by the circumstance that he did not receive 
any blood stains either on his person or on his clothes, which was 
bound to happen if the witness was present at the crime scene 
because his natural reaction on seeing his own brother being 
stabbed would have been to make an attempt to save the victim 
and in this process, his hands and clothes would certainly get 
smeared with the blood oozing out from the wounds received by 
the victim. However, the witness admitted that he did not get any 
blood stains on his clothes and hands which makes his presence 
at the crime scene doubtful. 

11. Shri Malhotra further pointed out that there is grave 
contradiction in the evidence of Krishan Kumar (PW-5) and Raj 
Kumar (PW-9), regarding the row of seats, where the witnesses and 
the deceased were seated and the row where the accused was 
seated. He further submitted that in the statement(Exhibit-PF) of 
first informant-Krishan Kumar, based whereupon the FIR came to 
be registered, it was recorded that after about 5 to 7 minutes from 
the interval, deceased Karambir cried ‘aah’ and fell down from the 
chair. The first informant(PW-5) asked Mahender(PW-7), Ravinder 
(PW-6), the other two acquaintances (Mahender and Suresh) as to 
what happened to his brother. All of them were checking Karambir 
and during the intervening period, the accused escaped from the 
crime scene. The witness(PW-5) ran towards the gatekeeper and 
asked him to switch on the lights and in illumination, it was seen 
that a knife had been thrust into the chest of Karambir. 
12. Referring to the deposition of Krishan Kumar (PW-5), Shri 
Malhotra submitted that the witness stated that he himself saw 
accused-Dharambir harma running away from the crime scene 
which is an improvement from what he had stated in the FIR. It 
was contended that two companions of the informant, namely, 
Ravinder (PW-6) and Mahender (PW-7) did not support the 

prosecution case and were declared hostile. Krishan Kumar (PW-
5) did not produce the ticket which he had purportedly purchased 
for watching the movie in Prabhat Cinema. The witness further 
stated that he and deceased Karambir were sitting in the first row 
which was reserved for women. However, Rohtas Singh (PW-11) 
Investigating Officer upon conducting the spot inspection, found 
that the eye witnesses were sitting on the back row, whereas 
deceased Karambir was sitting ahead of them. 
13. The attention of the Court was drawn to the statement of Raj 
Kumar (PW-9), Manager of Prabhat Cinema who deposed that the 
gatekeeper approached him at around 11:30 a.m. to 11:45 a.m. and informed that one person was lying in the cinema hall. When 
he went there, he saw the victim lying between the seats of the first 
and second rows. 
14. As per Shri Malhotra, there are grave contradictions, in the 
first version of the first informant-Krishan Kumar i.e Exhibit-PF 
and his sworn statement as PW-5. His testimony is also 
contradicted in material particulars by the testimony of Raj Kumar 
(PW-9), Manager of Prabhat Cinema and Rohtas Singh (PW-11) 
Investigating Officer. He also submitted that the gatekeeper of 
Prabhat Cinema who was the first person to be informed after the 

incident, was not examined in evidence and thus, adverse 
inference deserves to be drawn against the prosecution because 
material evidence was withheld. 
15. Regarding the allegation that the accused made an extra 
judicial confession before Ram Kumar (PW-8), ex-Sarpanch, Shri 
Malhotra submitted that there was no occasion for the accused to 
have made a confession before the witness who was closely related 
to the deceased. He also urged that as per Ram Kumar (PW-8), 
when the accused made the extra judicial confession, Piare Lal, 
s/o Jagmal was also present with him. The said Piare Lal was not 
examined by the prosecution, rather, he was examined as DW-1 
and he emphatically denied that the accused had made any 
confession of guilt in his presence before Ram Kumar (PW-8), ex-
Sarpanch and also denied that he and Ram Kumar (PW-8) had 
produced the accused before the police. 
16. Shri Malhotra concluded his submissions urging that the star 
prosecution witness Krishan Kumar (PW-5) falls in the category of 
a wholly unreliable witness and thus, his evidence cannot be relied 
upon so as to uphold the conviction of the appellant. He placed 
reliance on the judgment rendered by this Court in the case of 

Pritinder Singh Alias Lovely v. State of Punjab 1 and contended 
that an extra judicial confession is a very weak piece of evidence 
and since the testimony of the witness, Ram Kumar (PW-8), before 
whom the accused allegedly made the extra judicial confession, 
has been contradicted by evidence of Piare Lal (DW-1), there 
cannot be any justification to rely upon his evidence as well. 
17. As per Shri Malhotra, once the testimony of Krishan Kumar 
(PW-5) and Ram Kumar (PW-8) is discarded, there remains no 
evidence on record so as to uphold the conviction of the appellant 
as recorded by the trial Court and affirmed by the High Court. He 
implored the Court to accept the appeal and set aside the 
impugned judgments and acquit the appellant of the charge. 
Submissions on behalf of the State: - 
18., Shri Deepak Thukral, learned Additional Advocate 
General representing the State vehemently and fervently opposed 
the submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the 
appellant. He urged that the evidence of Krishan Kumar (PW-5), 
being real brother of the deceased, is natural and trustworthy. The 
accused is also closely related to the witness (PW-5) and the 
 
1 (2023) 

deceased and hence, there could not have been any reason for 
Krishan Kumar (PW-5) to falsely implicate the accused for the 
murder of his own brother. He further submitted that Ram Kumar 
(PW-8), ex-Sarpanch has also given convincing evidence to prove 
the factum of extra judicial confession made by the accused before 
him and hence, the testimony of the said witness lends 
corroboration to the evidence of Krishan Kumar (PW-5). He 
submitted that the judgments rendered by the trial Court and the 
High Court recording concurrent findings of facts do not suffer 
from any infirmity warranting inference and sought dismissal of 
the appeal. 
19. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have minutely appreciated the 
evidence available on record. We have also gone through the 
impugned judgments. 
Consideration of evidence and submissions:- 
20. There is no dispute on the aspect that the death of Karambir 
was homicidal as proved by the Medical Jurist-Dr. Hemant Singh 
(PW-1) in his testimony and thus no discussion is required on this 
aspect of the case. 

21. The core issue, which requires consideration of this Court is 
as to whether the testimonies of the two star prosecution 
witnesses, namely, Krishan Kumar (PW-5) and Ram Kumar (PW-
8) is reliable enough so as to affirm the guilt of the accused. 
22. The motive for the incident as set out in the testimony of 
Krishan Kumar (PW-5) was that the accused who was closely 
related to the informant and deceased Karambir, was bearing a 
grudge in his mind that Karambir had developed illicit relations 
with his wife. As per the witness, the accused had threatened to 
take revenge upon Karambir, who was sent away from Bhiwani to 
live at Pali Gothra, Rewari, the village of his maternal uncle for 
further studies. Karambir returned to village Pehladgarh from his 
maternal uncle’s home on 4th June, 1998. On 5th June, 1998, both 
the brothers, i.e., deceased Karambir and Krishan Kumar (PW-5) 
went to see their maternal aunt who was admitted in a hospital at 
Bhiwani for treatment. After meeting their maternal aunt, the 
brothers went to see a movie in Prabhat Cinema, Bhiwani. They 
were accompanied by four other persons, namely Ravinder, Suresh 
and two by the name of Mahender. 
23. As per the FIR (Exhibit-PF/2), these six persons entered 
Prabhat Cinema at about 08:30 a.m. in the morning and occupied 

the first row which was reserved for women. The witness Krishan 
Kumar (PW-5) stated on oath that he was sitting besides his 
brother Karambir who was occupying the last chair in the same 
row i.e. the first row. The accused Dharambir harma was 
allegedly sitting in the next row in front of the chairs occupied by 
the witness and the deceased which by itself is a contradiction 
because if the witness (PW-5) and deceased were occupying the 
first row, there could not have existed another row in front of the 
same. 
24. Be that as it may, nothing transpired till the interval of the 
movie. After the interval, the movie resumed and within five 
minutes, Karambir made a sound of ‘aah’ on which, Krishan 
Kumar (PW-5) tried to enquire as to what had happened but by 
that time, Karambir had taken his last breath. Krishan Kumar 
(PW-5) claims to have seen Dharambir harma (accused) 
running away. He further stated that he ran towards the 
gatekeeper and asked him to switch on the lights and in the 
illumination thereof, he saw his brother lying dead with his face 
upwards. We find that there are inherent flaws in this version of 
Krishan Kumar (PW-5). The deceased Karambir, Krishan Kumar 
(PW-5) and the accused appellant were closely related and were 

residents of village Pehladgarh. The accused appellant allegedly 
bore a grudge against the deceased and due to which, he had been 
sent away to a different village, namely, Pali Gothra, Rewari for 
pursuing further studies. From the deposition of Krishan Kumar 
(PW-5), it emerges that it was purely a chance visit of him and his 
deceased brother to Bhiwani in order to see their maternal aunt 
who was admitted in a hospital at Bhiwani. Thus, the accused 
who resides at village Pehladgarh, could not have had the faintest 
idea that the deceased would be visiting Bhiwani on that particular 
day or that he would be going to Prabhat Cinema to watch the first 
show. 
25. The prosecution tried to prove through Jai Kishan (PW-10) 
that the accused had purchased a knife from him. However, the 
said witness did not oblige the prosecution and was declared 
hostile. Thus, the very probability of the accused having reached 
Prabhat Cinema at Bhiwani simultaneously with Krishan Kumar 
(PW-5) and the deceased Karambir and that too after making the 
preparation to kill the deceased by purchasing a knife is absolutely 
negligible and the prosecution story does not inspire confidence. 
26. Out of the four persons who accompanied the deceased 
Karambir and the first informant-Krishan Kumar (PW-5) to 

Prabhat Cinema, only two, i.e., Ravinder (PW-6) and Mahender 
(PW-7) were examined in evidence. They did not support the 
prosecution case and were declared hostile. Thus, there is no 
independent corroboration to the testimony of Krishan Kumar 
(PW-5). 
27. As has been noted above, Krishan Kumar (PW-5) stated that 
he along with the deceased was sitting in the first row which was 
reserved for women. The accused was sitting in the next row in 
front of chairs occupied by Krishan Kumar (PW-5) and deceased 
Karambir. Contrary thereto, Rohtas Singh (PW-11) Investigating 
Officer stated that as per the spot inspection plan, there were two 
rows of chairs ahead of the point ‘A’ where the prosecution 
witnesses were sitting, whereas the deceased was sitting in the row 
in front of the prosecution witnesses. It may be stated that the 
version of Rohtas Singh, Investigating Officer(PW-11) regarding the 
row where the witnesses and deceased were sitting may not be 
strictly admissible in evidence, but it definitely creates a doubt on 
the prosecution story. This doubt is further fortified upon 
considering the evidence of Raj Kumar (PW-9), Manager of Prabhat 
Cinema who stated that the deceased was lying in between the 
seats of the first and second rows. 

28. As per the first informant Krishan Kumar (PW-5), he along 
with other witnesses and the deceased was sitting in the first row 
of chairs. Thus, there was hardly any possibility that deceased 
Karambir after being stabbed with a knife would fall in between 
the seats of the first and second row. It is also highly improbable 
that the first informant-Krishan Kumar (PW-5) who was sitting on 
the seat adjacent to the one occupied by the deceased, would have 
failed to notice the commotion preceding the assault. 
29. Raj Kumar (PW-9), Manager of Prabhat Cinema stated in his 
cross-examination that when he reached the crime scene, 3 to 4 
persons of village Pehladgarh were present there and they told the 
police that the deceased hails from village Pehladgarh. If at all, 
there is an iota of truth in the claim of Krishan Kumar (PW-5) that 
he was present in Prabhat Cinema with his deceased brother, this 
vague information would not have been provided to the police 
officials because Krishan Kumar (PW-5) would have immediately 
disclosed his brother’s identity. Krishan Kumar (PW-5) admitted in 
his cross-examination, that the dead body of his brother was lifted 
from the spot at about 04:00 p.m. The incident had taken place at 
around 11:30 a.m. and thus it is indeed surprising as to why the 
dead body was lying in Prabhat Cinema till 04:00 p.m. Krishan 

Kumar (PW-5) did not hand over the ticket of the cinema hall to 
the police. As per memo (Exhibit P-22), when the body of the 
deceased was searched, only one ticket was found in his pocket. 
Krishan Kumar (PW-5) admitted that he did not get blood stains 
on his hands and clothes when he touched the body of his brother. 
30. There cannot be any doubt that witness-Krishan Kumar (PW-
5) could not have decided at the first blush that his brother had 
expired as a result of the knife blow. The natural reaction expected 
from a brother in such a situation would have been to take 
immediate steps for taking the victim to the hospital so as to save 
his life. However, Krishan Kumar (PW-5) did not make any such 
attempt. In this background, we are of the view that the very 
presence of Krishan Kumar (PW-5) at the crime scene is doubtful 
and his testimony is not trustworthy. 
31. Another significant contradiction regarding the sequence of 
events is noticeable in the evidence of Krishan Kumar (PW-5). In 
his statement (Exhibit-PF) based on which FIR was lodged, he 
narrated that he saw that the accused was missing from the seat 
but in the sworn testimony as PW-5, he tried to improve the version 
and stated that he saw the accused while he was fleeing away. This 
improvement made by the witness-Krishan Kumar (PW-5) again 

creates a doubt on his presence at Prabhat Cinema at the time of 
the incident. 
32. We, therefore, feel that it would not be safe to place reliance 
on the evidence of Krishan Kumar (PW-5) as he clearly falls within 
the category of a wholly unreliable witness. 
33. Ram Kumar (PW-8) stated that he and Piare Lal (DW-1) were 
sitting at his house on 7th June, 1998 and at about 12:00 noon, 
the accused appellant approached them and confessed that he had 
killed his father’s elder brother’s son Karambir at Prabhat Cinema. 
34. Ram Kumar (PW-8) also stated that he and Piare Lal took the 
accused to Bhiwani and produced him before the police. 
35. However, Piare Lal was not examined by the prosecution and 
rather he was examined in defence. In his testimony, Piare Lal 
(DW-1) emphatically denied that any extra judicial confession was 
made by the accused in the presence of Ram Kumar (PW-8). Thus, 
the evidence of Ram Kumar (PW-8) regarding the extra judicial 
confession made by the accused is contradicted by the evidence of 
Piare Lal (DW-1). Even otherwise, extra judicial confession by its 
very nature is a weak piece of evidence. It may be used as a 

corroborative piece of evidence in tandem with substantive 
evidence. 
36. We are, therefore, convinced that both the star prosecution 
witnesses i.e. Krishan Kumar (PW-5) and Ram Kumar (PW-8) fall 
within the category of wholly unreliable witnesses and thus, in 
light of the law laid down by this Court in the case of Pritinder 
Singh Alias Lovely (supra), it would be unsafe to place reliance 
on their evidence so as to affirm the guilt of the accused appellant. 
No other evidence was led by the prosecution for bringing home 
the charge. 
Conclusion: - 
37. In wake of the discussion made above, we have no hesitation 
in holding that the prosecution failed to bring home the charge and 
establish the guilt of the accused appellant beyond reasonable 
doubt. 
38. As a consequence, the conviction of the appellant as recorded 
by the trial Court vide judgment and order dated 03rd May, 1999 
and affirmed by the High Court vide judgment dated 21st April, 
2008 cannot be sustained and the appellant deserves to be 
acquitted by giving him the benefit of doubt. 

39. Resultantly, the appeal merits acceptance and is hereby 
allowed. The impugned judgments passed by the High Court and 
trial Court are quashed and set aside. 
40. The appellant is acquitted of the charge. 
41. The appellant is on bail and need not surrender. His bail 
bonds stand discharged. 
42. Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of. 
 
… 

New Delhi; 
April 16, 2024