IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
( SLP (C) No(s). 8788-8789 of 2023) 

SANDEEP KUMAR. 

VERSUS 

GB PANT INSTITUTE OF ENGINEERING 
AND TECHNOLOGY GHURDAURI 
& ORS. ….RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 

1. Leave granted. 
2. The instant appeals are directed against the judgments dated 
4th August, 2022 and 21st February, 2023 passed by the learned 
Division Bench of Uttarakhand High Court in Writ Petition(S/B) 
No. 395 of 2022 and MCC in Writ 
Petition(S/B) No. 395 of 2022, respectively. 
3. 
The learned Division Bench of Uttarakhand High Court, vide 
judgment dated 4th August, 2022 dismissed the Writ Petition(S/B) 
No. 395 of 2022 filed by the appellant herein under Article 226 of 

the Constitution of India for assailing the order dated 19th May, 
2022 passed by respondent No.2 terminating the services of the 
appellant on the post of Registrar of respondent No.1- G.B. Pant 
Institute of Engineering and Technology (hereinafter being referred 
as ‘Institute’). 
4. 
Being aggrieved by the judgment dated 4th August, 2022, the 
appellant filed a review application being MCC Review Application 
No. 4 of 2022 in which too was 
dismissed by the learned Division Bench of the Uttarakhand High 
Court vide its judgment dated 21st February, 2023. These two 
judgments are assailed in the present set of appeals. 
5. 
Learned Division Bench of High Court held that the appellant 
herein did not place on record the minutes of the 26th meeting of 
the Board of Governors held on 16th June, 2018 which were 
referred to in the termination letter dated 19th May, 2022 and that 
this non disclosure tantamounted to suppression of material facts 
warranting dismissal of the writ petition solely on that ground. 
6. 
Shri Gautam Narayan, learned counsel representing the 
appellant urged that the failure of the petitioner (appellant herein) 
to place on record the aforesaid minutes was neither intentional 
nor malafide. He referred to the minutes of the meeting dated 16th 

June, 2018 placed on record of the instant appeals as Annexure 
P-8 and urged that as a matter of fact, these minutes support the 
case of the appellant because the Board of Governors of the 
Institute approved the recommendations of the Selection 
Committee, and thereby, selected the appellant as the Registrar of 
the Institute. 
7. 
He further drew the Court’s attention to the appointment 
letter (Annexure P-10) dated 2nd December, 2019 wherein, it is 
indicated that the appellant was being appointed on the post of the 
Registrar on probation for a period of one year. He urged that the 
appellant continued to satisfactorily serve as the Registrar of the 
Institute for a period of nearly two years and hence, his services 
were deemed to have been automatically regularized in terms of 
clauses (a) and (b) of the appointment letter, which are reproduced 
hereinbelow for the sake of ready reference: - 
“(a) You will be on probation for a period of one year; however it 
may be extended for another year in case performance is not 
found to be satisfactory. No further extension on probation will 
be given. 
 
(b) During probation your service may be terminated without 
assigning any reason by giving one month notice or pay in lieu 
thereof. Similarly, you may give one month notice period or pay 
salary equivalent to one month notice to be relieved from 
institute.” 
 
8. 
Learned counsel urged that before taking the action of 
terminating the services of the appellant, neither any enquiry was 

conducted nor any opportunity to show cause was given to the 
appellant and merely on the ipse dixit of respondent No.2, the 
services of the appellant were terminated. He urged that the 
impugned order, whereby the learned Division Bench of High 
Court dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellant on a purely 
technical ground i.e. non-placing of relevant document on record, 
is totally unsustainable in the eyes of law. He thus, implored the 
Court to accept the appeals and set aside the impugned orders and 
direct reinstatement of the appellant on the post of Registrar. 
9., Shri Amit Anand Tiwari, learned Senior counsel 
representing the respondents, vehemently and fervently opposed 
the submissions advanced by the appellant’s counsel. He urged 
that the very appointment of the appellant on the post of Registrar 
was illegal because he did not possess the requisite qualifications 
as per the rules. He thus, urged that there was no requirement to 
hold a regular enquiry before terminating the services of the 
appellant. His contention was that the appellant concealed a vital 
document in the writ petition filed before the High Court and thus, 
he was not entitled to equitable relief in the extraordinary writ 
jurisdiction. 

10. However, Shri Tiwari was not in a position to dispute the fact 
that before imposing the major penalty of termination of service 
upon the appellant, no disciplinary enquiry was conducted by the 
authorities. 
11. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the 
impugned judgments. 
12. The impugned judgment rejecting the writ petition of the 
appellant is premised purely on the fact that the appellant failed 
to place on record the minutes of the 26th meeting of the Board of 
Governors dated 16th June, 2018, which are referred to in the 
termination letter dated 19th May, 2022. The Division Bench of 
High Court held that these minutes would have shown that the 
appointment of the petitioner (appellant herein) to the post of 
Registrar was made contrary to the rules. We are afraid that these 
observations of the Division Bench are not fortified from the 
minutes of the meeting dated 16th June, 2018 which have been 
placed on record by the appellant in these appeals. 
13. For the sake of ready reference, the relevant excerpts of the 
minutes of meeting dated 16th June, 2018 (Annexure P-8) are 
reproduced hereinbelow: - 

“26.08: Approval of the recommendations/minutes of various 
Selection 
Committee 
regarding 
the 
Advertisement 
No. 
01/Admn/ 2017 dated 03.01.2017 on the nonteaching posts 
and the advertisement no. 01 / faculty /2013 – 14 dated 
08.06.2013 of the teaching staff in reference to 25th meeting of 
the Administrative Council and the Hon’ble High Court. 

As per rule of the College Byelaws, the envelopes of the 
recommendations/minutes of the Selection Committee was 
opened 
by 
the 
Administrative 
Council 
and 
the 
recommendations and the minutes of the Selection Committee 
were approved as per below: - 
 
S. No. 
Name 
of 
the 
Candidate 
Name 
of 
the 
Department 
Name of the 
Post 
Category 
1. 
Dr 
Mahipal 
Singh Chauhan 
Civil Engineering 
Professor 
General 
2. 
Dr 
Harvendra 
Singh Bhadoria 
Computer 
Science 
and Engineering 
Associate 
Professor 
General 
3. 
Mr. Vivek Kumar 
Tamta 
-do- 
Assistant 
Professor 
SC 
4. 
Mr. 
Papendra 
Kumar 
-do- 
-do- 
SC 
5. 
Dr. 
Sachin 
Tejyan 
Mechanical 
Engineering 
-do- 
General 
6. 
Mr. 
Sunil 
Chamoli 
-do- 
-do- 
General 
7. 
Mr. 
Ravikant 
Ravi 
-do- 
-do- 
SC 
8. 
Mr. Chandraveer -do- 
-do- 
SC 
9. 
Mr. 
Suresh 
Chandra 
Phulera 
Biotechnology 
-do- 
General 
10. 
Mr. 
Divyesh 
Sharma 
Civil Engineering 
-do- 
General 
11. 
Mr. Siddharatha 
Chansela 
MCA 
-do- 
General 
12. 
Mr. 
Sandeep 
Kumar 
Administration 
Registrar 
General 

*As a result of the selection of Shri Lalta Prasad, Assistant 
Professor (Scheduled Caste) in NIT Shri Nagar, if he 
resigns/gives VRS from the post joining there, the appointment 
letter may be issued to Shri Chandraveer against this post. 

A number of complaints have been received regarding the 
candidate selected for the post of Registrar. Their inquiry must 

be carried out. How the norms of selection have been fixed, the 
detailed report be submitted. The proceedings of the 
appointment be stayed until the next order.” 
 
14. A bare perusal of the aforesaid minutes clearly indicates that 
the recommendations of the Selection Committee, whereby, the 
appellant herein was selected on the post of Registrar were 
approved by the Board of Governors. However, a caveat was 
marked to the effect that the appointment order of the appellant 
would be kept in abeyance on account of the fact that some 
complaints were received regarding the candidature of the 
appellant on the post of Registrar. 
15. In pursuance of the so called complaint(s), a three member 
committee was constituted to scrutinize the documents and 
qualifications/testimonials of the appellant vide order dated 26th 
June, 2019 (Annexure P-36). The committee submitted its report 
(Annexure P-37) on 11th July, 2019 finding all the documents of 
the appellant to be genuine and in order. It also opined that the 
appellant fulfilled the eligibility criterion for being appointed on the 
post of Registrar. 
16. A letter dated 10th November, 2019 (Annexure P-9) was 
issued by the Member Secretary, Board of Governors of the 
Institute addressed to the members of the Board of Governors 

including the Hon’ble Chief Minister, Minister of Technical 
Education (Chairman of the Institution) and the Additional Chief 
Secretary (Vice Chairman of the Institution) seeking perusal and 
approval of the recommendations of the Selection Committee and 
to direct the Member Secretary, Board of Governors to issue the 
appointment letter in favour of appellant. 
17. Acting in furtherance of the said letter and the approval 
granted by the competent authorities, an appointment letter dated 
2nd December, 2019(Annexure P-10) was issued and the appellant 
joined services on the post of Registrar. As per the extracted 
portion of the appointment letter (supra), the appellant was placed 
on probation for a period of one year which was extendable for 
another year in case, the performance during the first year was 
found to be unsatisfactory. Clause (b) further provided that during 
probation, services of the incumbent may be terminated without 
assigning any reason by giving one month’s notice or pay in lieu 
thereof. There is no dispute on the aspect that the appellant had 
satisfactorily worked on the post of Registrar in the Institute for 
nearly two years and thus, apparently he completed the probation 
period without demur. 

18. On a bare perusal of the termination letter dated 19th May, 
2022, it becomes apparent that the decision to terminate the 
services of the appellant from the post of Registrar was not 
preceded by an opportunity to show cause or any sort of 
disciplinary proceedings. The enquiry as referred to in the 
termination letter was in relation to the qualifications of the 
appellant for being appointed on the post of Registrar. The letter 
further indicates that the selection to the post of Registrar was not 
approved by the Board of Governors in its 26th meeting dated 16th 
June, 2018. The said observation in the letter dated 19th May, 
2022 is totally erroneous and contradicted by the minutes of the 
meeting dated 16th June, 2018.(reproduced supra) 
19. In this background, we are of the firm view that the 
termination of the services of the appellant without holding 
disciplinary enquiry was totally unjustified and dehors the 
requirements of law and in gross violation of principles of natural 
justice. Hence, the learned Division Bench of the High Court fell 
in grave error in dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant 
on the hypertechnical ground that the minutes of 26th meeting of 
the Board of Governors dated 16th June, 2018 had not been placed 
on record. 

20. As a consequence, we pass the following directions: - 

The impugned judgments dated 4th August, 2022 and 21st 
February, 2023 passed by the High Court are quashed and set 
aside. 

The order dated 19th May, 2022 whereby, the services of the 
appellant on the post of Registrar of the Institute were terminated 
is also declared to be illegal and as a consequence, the same is 
quashed and set aside. 
(iii) That the appellant shall forthwith be reinstated on the post 
of Registrar of G.B. Pant Institute of Engineering and Technology, 
Ghurdauri. He shall be entitled to all consequential benefits. 

The respondent-Institute is left at liberty to conduct 
disciplinary proceedings against the appellant as per law, if so 
desired. 
21. The appeals are allowed in the above terms. No order as to 
costs. 
22. Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
April 16, 2024.