IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 1052 OF 2009 

KIRPAL SINGH 

 VERSUS 

STATE OF PUNJAB...RESPONDENT(S) 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 

1. 
The instant appeal has been preferred on behalf of the 
appellant for assailing the judgment dated 28th February, 2008 
passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at 
Chandigarh in, whereby 
the appeal preferred by the appellant was dismissed, thereby 
affirming the judgment and order dated 26th July, 2003 
rendered by the learned Additional Sessions Judge (Adhoc), 
Hoshiarpur, vide which the appellant was convicted and 
sentenced as below:- 

(i). 
Under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter 
being referred to as ‘IPC’) - Imprisonment for life and to pay a 
fine of Rs.2,000/-, in default of payment of fine, to undergo 
further rigorous imprisonment for a period of one month. 
(ii). Under Section 307 IPC – Rigorous imprisonment for a 
period of five years and a fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default of 
payment of fine, to undergo further rigorous imprisonment for 
a period of 15 days. 
 
Both the sentences were ordered to run concurrently. 
Brief facts: - 
2. 
Sharan Kaur, the first informant(PW-5), wife of Balwinder 
Singh (deceased) used to reside along with her family members 
in the house which was situated on the backside of the grocery 
and halwai shops owned by her husband Balwinder Singh 
(deceased) at bus stop, Khudda. In the intervening night of 
12th/13th November, 1997, Balwinder Singh (deceased) went to 
sleep in chaubara of the house which was not having any 
shutter, whereas Sharan Kaur (PW-5) along with the other 
family members slept in a room on the ground floor. It is 
alleged that Sharan Kaur (PW-5) heard a knock on the door of 
the room in which she was sleeping at about 2.30 a.m. She 

thought that it was her husband who had knocked the door 
and thus she opened the door. In the illumination of light 
placed in the courtyard, she saw the accused appellant-Kirpal 
Singh standing there armed with a knife like chura. The 
appellant inflicted an injury with the weapon on the abdomen 
of Sharan Kaur (PW-5). Another assailant who was 
accompanying appellant Kirpal Singh caught hold of her arm. 
She raised an alarm shouting ‘killed killed’ (‘maar ditta maar 
ditta’), on which her sons Goldy and Sonu woke up. None of 
these three persons could identify the other assailant. Both 
the assailants fled away by opening the main gate, in between 
the two shops. Sharan Kaur (PW-5) went upstairs to have a 
look at her husband and found him lying severely injured on 
the cot with blood oozing out of his mouth and head. Blood 
pooled on the ground below. He was unable to speak. She 
called her two sons and sent them to call her brother-in-law 
Gurnam Singh with a vehicle. Sharan Kaur (PW-5) and 
Balwinder Singh were taken to the Civil Hospital, Tanda but 
on the way to the hospital, Balwinder Singh expired. First aid 
was provided to Sharan Kaur (PW-5), thereafter, she as well as 
the dead body of Balwinder Singh (deceased) was brought back 

to their home in the same vehicle and by that time the police 
had arrived. The prosecution alleges that the motive behind 
the occurrence was that the appellant and his associate were 
bearing jealousy on account of the roaring business being 
done at the halwai shop of Balwinder Singh (deceased), which 
was doing much better as compared to the halwai shop run by 
the accused appellant. Swaran Dass(PW-9), SHO, Police 
Station Dasuya recorded the statement of Sharan Kaur (PW-5) 
wherein, the above allegations were incorporated and based 
thereupon, FIR No.126 of 1997 dated 13th November, 1997 
came to be registered at Police Station, Dasuya, District 
Hoshiarpur for the offences punishable under Sections 302, 
307 IPC read with Section 34 of IPC. The said FIR was marked 
as Exhibit-PG/2, during the course of trial. The Investigating 
Officer prepared inquest report on the dead body of Balwinder 
Singh(deceased) and forwarded the dead body to the Civil 
Hospital, Dasuya for post mortem examination; rough site 
plan of the crime scene was prepared; bloodstained earth was 
collected from the spot and was sealed into a parcel. A spade 
lying at the crime scene was seized, the blade whereof was 
bloodstained. A ladder was also seized from the crime scene. 

3. 
The dead body of Balwinder Singh was subjected to 
autopsy at the hands of Dr. Naresh Kumar (PW-4), Medical 
Officer, Civil Hospital, Dasuya on 13th November, 1997, who 
examined the same and took note of the following injuries on 
the body of the deceased:- 
“i. 
Lacerated wound 1.5 cm bone deep on left side of forehead. 
Placed transversely 2 cm above and lateral to outer end of left 
eyebrow medical to this wound these was red coloured contusion 
with depressed surface 3 x 4 cm in size 1.5 cm above and parallel to 
left eye brow. 

On dissection there was subaponeurotic hematoma in both 
front regions. The frontal bone was found fractured into multiple 
pieces were impacted into the underlying brain tissue, semi clotted 
blood was present between membrane between and brain tissue and 
within the brain tissue. ii. Lacerated wound 1.5 cm x l cm bone deep on left side of head 
posterior to left pinna. It was transversally placed 2.5 cm below the 
upper end of left pinna. iii. Lacerated wound 2 cm x l cm on upper part of left pinna splitting 
the pinna into two parts. It was transversally placed in lines with 
injury No.2.” 
 
4. 
The injuries were stated to be caused by blunt weapon 
and the cause of death was opined to be the head injury, 
which was sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of 
nature. 
5. 
Dr. Didar Singh (PW-1), Medical Officer, Civil Hospital, 
Dasuya conducted medical examination of Sharan Kaur (PW-
5), the first informant, and took note of an incised wound 

admeasuring 2½ x ½ cm elipitcal in shape present on the left 
side of the abdomen 2 cms above the umblicus and 6 cms 
lateral to the mid line. However, the wound was not probed for 
finding of the depth and the case was referred to the Surgical 
Specialist for opinion and treatment. 
6. 
The case took a different turn, when the first informant 
Sharan Kaur (PW-5) started raising allegations against the 
Investigating Officer of conducting partisan and tainted 
investigation in order to favour the police. 
7. 
Sharan Kaur (PW-5) filed two petitions in the High Court 
of Punjab and Haryana seeking transfer of investigation to the 
CBI or some other independent agency. In both these 
petitions, her allegation was that the second accused named 
Kulwinder Singh had been left out of the case for oblique 
reasons. 
8. 
 Be that as it may, two different police officials, conducted 
the investigation and filed closure reports alleging that the first 
informant-Sharan Kaur(PW-5) had falsely implicated the 
accused. However, the Magistrate did not agree with the 
opinion. The accused appellant-Kirpal Singh ucky was 
arrested on 21st November, 1997 and charge sheet was filed 

against him for the offences punishable under Section 302 IPC 
and Section 307 IPC. Since both the offences were exclusively 
triable by the Court of Sessions, the case was committed to the 
Court of Additional Sessions Judge(Adhoc), Hoshiarpur 
(hereinafter being referred to as ‘trial Court’) for trial. 
9. 
Learned trial Court framed charges against the accused 
appellant, who abjured his guilt and claimed trial. An 
application came to be filed by the prosecution under Section 
319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter being 
referred to as ‘CrPC’) which was allowed and the accused 
Kulwinder Singh was summoned to face trial along with the 
charge sheeted accused, i.e., the appellant herein. Fresh 
charge for the offences punishable under Sections 302, 307 
read with Section 34 IPC were framed against both the 
accused to which they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 
The prosecution examined ten witnesses to support its case. 
10. The incriminating circumstances appearing in the 
prosecution evidence were put to the accused while recording 
their statements under Section 313 CrPC. The accused denied 
those allegations and claimed to be innocent. Total four (04) 
witnesses were examined in defence. After hearing the 

arguments advanced by the learned Additional Public 
Prosecutor and the defence counsel, and upon appreciating 
the evidence available on record, the learned trial Court vide 
judgment dated 26th July, 2003 proceeded to convict the 
accused appellant-Kirpal Singh and sentenced him as noted 
hereinabove. However, by the very same judgment, the co-
accused Kulwinder Singh was acquitted of the charges. The 
accused appellant-Kirpal Singh preferred Criminal Appeal 
No.662-DB of 2003 challenging his conviction and sentence, 
whereas the State preferred Criminal Appeal No.535-DBA of 
2004 and the complainant preferred Criminal Revision 
No.2259-DB of 2003 challenging the acquittal of Kulwinder 
Singh before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana. 
11. The learned Division Bench of the High Court of Punjab 
and Haryana proceeded to dismiss both the appeals, one filed 
by the State, and the other by the accused-appellant as well as 
the revision filed by the complainant by a common judgment 
and order dated 28.02.2008, which is assailed in this appeal 
filed at the instance of the accused appellant-Kirpal Singh. 

Submissions on behalf of the appellant: - 
12. Shri Vineet Jhanji, learned counsel appearing for the 
accused appellant vehemently contended that the findings 
recorded in the impugned judgment are perverse and self-
contradictory and hence, the same are liable to be set aside. 
He advanced the following pertinent submissions seeking 
acquittal of accused appellant: 
(i) The evidence of Sharan Kaur (PW-5), the first informant, 
being the wife of the deceased and Daljit Singh oldy(PW-6), 
son of the deceased, is highly self-contradictory, vacillating 
and unconvincing. 
(ii) That the prosecution witnesses have tried to improve upon 
the story put forth in the FIR at every stage of the proceedings 
and hence, their evidence deserves to be discarded. The trial 
Court as well as the High Court have found that the witnesses, 
Sharan Kaur (PW-5) and Daljit Singh oldy(PW-6) are not 
wholly reliable witnesses and their allegations qua the co-
accused-Kulwinder Singh have been found to be unacceptable, 
thereby recording his acquittal. Thus, the accused-appellant 
(Kirpal Singh) also deserves the same treatment. 
(iii) That the motive attributed to the accused appellant by 

Sharan Kaur (PW-5) is absolutely cooked up and unbelievable. 
Her bald allegation that the accused bore jealousy on account 
of the booming halwai business of Balwinder Singh (deceased), 
is just a figment of imagination and has not been corroborated 
by any independent source. Rather the prosecution did not 
even lead any evidence to show that the accused appellant is 
involved in halwai business. 
(iv) The accused appellant was admittedly closely related to 
the deceased, but this fact was concealed in the FIR as well as 
in the testimony of the material prosecution witnesses. 
(v) That the story put forth by Sharan Kaur (PW-5) in her 
evidence is totally unworthy of reliance because even as per 
her own assertion, the accused appellant was bearing a grudge 
against the deceased. In that event, once the accused had 
succeeded 
in 
belaboring 
and 
killing 
Balwinder 
Singh 
(deceased), by entering into the chaubara in a clandestine 
manner using a ladder, there was no reason as to why the 
accused would come down the stairs, knock the door and 
alarm the other family members so as to expose himself. 
(vi) That the conduct of the first informant-Sharan Kaur(PW-
5) and her family members in bringing back body of Balwinder 

Singh to their house even after the doctor at Civil Hospital, 
Tanda had declared him to be dead, brings the credibility of 
these witnesses under a grave shadow of doubt. He urged that 
admittedly, while coming back from Tanda, the Police Station 
at Dasuya falls on the way and thus, if at all, there was any 
truth in this version, the witnesses would have stopped at the 
police station to report the matter. Furthermore, the doctor at 
Civil Hospital would definitely have taken steps to report the 
matter to the police since it was a clear case of homicide. 
(vii) That the defence witnesses have categorically stated that 
after thorough investigation, the allegations set out by the first 
informant-Sharan Kaur(PW-5) were found to be false and 
hence, closure reports were submitted by the police in the 
concerned Court. 
(viii) That it is an admitted case as elicited in the testimony of 
Daljit Singh oldy (PW-6), son of Balwinder Singh(deceased) 
and first informant-Sharan Kaur(PW-5), that four servants 
were sleeping with Balwinder Singh(deceased) in the chaubara 
of the house but they were not examined in evidence. 
Likewise, Gurmit Singh, the other son of deceased and the first 
informant, was also not examined by the prosecution for the 

reasons best known to them and hence, it is a fit case 
warranting/drawing 
of 
adverse 
inference 
against 
the 
prosecution. 
 
On these grounds, learned counsel implored the Court to 
accept the appeal and acquit the accused appellant. 
Submissions on behalf of the State: - 
13., Mr. Siddhant Sharma, learned counsel 
appearing for the State, vehemently and fervently opposed the 
submissions advanced by the counsel for the appellant. He 
conceded that the story of the prosecution qua involvement of 
accused-Kulwinder Singh has not found favour with the trial 
Court and the High Court but as per him, that by itself cannot 
be a valid reason so as to discard the entire prosecution case, 
qua the accused appellant as well who was named in the FIR 
and in the testimony of the material prosecution witness. He 
fervently contended that trivial contradictions in the evidence 
of the prosecution witnesses lend assurance that they are 
truthful witnesses and are not created witnesses. He 
submitted that the principle ‘falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus’ 
does not apply to the Indian criminal jurisprudence system 
and thus, merely because one of the two accused named by 

the prosecution witnesses has been acquitted by the trial 
Court, the accused appellant cannot get the advantage thereof. 
14. He further submitted that the trial Court as well as the 
High Court, after appreciation and re-appreciation of the 
evidence have separated the chaff from the grain and have 
held the accused appellant guilty of the charges and thus, this 
Court should be loath to interfere in such concurrent findings 
of facts recorded by the trial Court and the High Court. On 
these submissions, learned counsel appearing for the State, 
urged that the appeal lacks merit and is fit to be dismissed. 
15. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at the bar and have carefully perused 
the judgments rendered by the High Court and the trial Court 
and analysed the evidence available on record. 
Consideration of evidence and submissions: - 
16. The prosecution case as unfolded, in the evidence of the 
first informant, Sharan Kaur (PW-5) (the star prosecution 
witness who herself received an injury in the same incident), is 
that she along with her two sons Daljit Singh oldy (PW-6) 
and Gurmit Singh was sleeping in the room on the ground 
floor 
of 
the 
house, 
whereas, 
her 
husband[Balwinder 

Singh(deceased)] was sleeping in chaubara, which has no gate. 
The prosecution tried to canvass that the accused put up a 
ladder on the wall of the house, climbed into the chaubara 
with the aid thereof and hit Balwinder Singh(deceased) with a 
spade, which resulted into grave injuries. The motive for the 
incident, as is projected in the evidence of Sharan Kaur (PW.5), 
was that the accused was bearing a jealousy on account of 
flourishing halwai business of her husband whereas, the 
business of the accused was not thriving. However, we may 
state that other than this bald averment made by Sharan Kaur 
(PW-5) attributing motive for the incident to the accused, no 
corroborative material was collected by the Investigating 
Officers to lend credence to this theory of motive. The 
statement of Sharan Kaur (PW-5) on this aspect is also very 
vague. There is nothing in her deposition, which can satisfy 
the Court that merely on account of this so called jealousy, the 
accused would go to the painstaking length of putting up a 
ladder against the wall of the house, where Balwinder Singh 
(deceased) used to reside with his family and then climb up 
and murder him, that too in the presence of his family 
members. 

17. If the prosecution case is to be accepted, it is apparent 
that the accused had painstakingly, planned out the murder of 
Balwinder Singh (deceased), inasmuch as they put up a ladder 
against the outer wall of the house, climbed into the house by 
using the said ladder and attacked the deceased by spade. 
Thus, the moment Balwinder Singh (deceased) had been 
belaboured, the purpose of the accused was served and hence, 
there was no rhyme or reason as to why the accused would 
take the risk of being exposed to the other family members. 
This precisely is the story portrayed in the evidence of Sharan 
Kaur (PW-5) who stated that while she was sleeping in the 
room on the ground floor with her two sons, she heard some 
noise and opened the door of the flight of stairs connecting the 
chaubara and saw the accused appellant-Kirpal Singh and his 
companion standing therein. The accused appellant-Kirpal 
Singh who was armed with a knife, stabbed her on the 
abdomen whereas the other accused appellant caught her by 
the arm. As per the prosecution, the accused appellant had 
assaulted Balwinder Singh (deceased) with a spade which was 
abandoned at the spot and then the accused came down with 
a knife. 

18. The story so set up by the prosecution, does not inspire 
confidence for more than one reasons. As discussed above, 
once the accused had achieved the objective of eliminating 
Balwinder Singh(deceased) without being discovered, they had 
all the opportunity in the world to escape from the spot by 
using the very same ladder, which had been used to climb up 
the chaubara. Thus, there was no reason for the accused to 
risk discovery by coming down and alarming the family 
members. Furthermore, as per the prosecution case, two 
accused were involved in the incident. If at all the prosecution 
case is to be believed, the accused after killing Balwinder 
Singh(deceased), must have gone down to eliminate the other 
family members and in that background, there was no reason 
as to why the person accompanying the accused appellant was 
unarmed. This again creates a doubt on the truthfulness of 
the prosecution story. The first informant-Sharan Kaur (PW-5) 
made a big issue regarding the conduct of the investigating 
agency alleging that the investigation being conducted was 
partisan and tainted. She filed petitions before different 
forums including the Chief Minister and the High Court. She 
was confronted with these applications extensively in her cross 

examination and she virtually resiled from the averments 
made therein. For illustration, we would like to reproduce 
some excerpts from the cross examination of Sharan Kaur 
(PW-5):- 
“...We approached the Hon'ble High Court as my statement was 
not being correctly recorded by the Police. On the directions of 
the Hon'ble High Court my statement was recorded by the 
Crime Branch.” 
 
 xxx 
 
xxx 
 
“...I have seen the carbon copy of the application Addressed to 
CM Punjab Chandigarh. It bears my signature and is Ex.DB. 
My father used to get my signature on the Blank papers so I 
can not say whether the application of Ex.DA was moved by me 
on 15.12.97 after the completion of investigation by DSP Ajaib 
Singh. The witness is not ready to answer the question whether 
the application EX.DA bear the name of accused Kulwinder 
Singh eeta. In the application the name of Kulwinder Singh 
eeta is not written but some unidentified person has been 
written. The witness has explained that she used to disclose the 
name of Kulwinder Singh eeta but the police was not 
recording his name and the application Ex.DA might have been 
drafted by his counsel at his own. The witness is not ready to 
answer the question that the copy of the FIR was attached with 
the writ petition/Crl. Misc application or that the name of 
Kulwinder Singh eeta was not mentioned in the said 
petition or that in the petition also the name of unidentified 
person was mentioned. The witness is also not ready to answer 
the question whether there was some ommision in the petition 
and that an application was moved for the correction of those 
ommissions. The witness is also not ready to answer the 
question that by way of amendment the name of Kulwinder 
Singh eeta was not incorporated in the amended 
application. The witness is not ready to answer the question 
whether the petition was withdrawn on 6.8.98.” 
 
19. In her examination in chief, the first informant-Sharan 
Kaur(PW-5) categorically stated that her statement was 

recorded at the Civil Hospital, Dasuya on 13th November, 1997 
at about 7:30 a.m. It was read over and explained to her, and 
she signed it admitting it to be correct. 
20. If that be so, the subsequent conduct of Sharan Kaur 
(PW-5) in raising a hue and cry that investigation being 
conducted was tainted and the police had intentionally 
favoured the co-accused Kulwinder Singh by leaving out his 
name from the array of offenders creates a great doubt on her 
credibility. 
21. Neither in the FIR (Exhibit-PG/2) nor in the application 
(Exhibit-DA) signed by the first informant-Sharan Kaur(PW-5) 
and addressed to the Chief Minister, Punjab, the name of the 
second accused Kulwinder Singh is mentioned as one of the 
assailants. There is no dispute that the acquitted accused 
Kulwinder Singh and appellant Kirpal Singh, are closely 
related to the family of the deceased and the first informant. 
In that event, if the first informant had identified the offenders 
at the time of the incident, there was no reason as to why she 
would leave out the name of Kulwinder Singh while giving the 
statement to the police officer, who recorded FIR (Exhibit-
PG/2). The witness was extensively confronted with the other 

applications/petitions filed by her questioning the bonafides of 
investigation being carried out by the Investigating Agencies 
being Exhibit-DB, Exhibit-DG, etc., and she refused to stand 
by the versions set out in these applications/petitions filed by 
herself. Not only this, a statement (Exhibit-DL) of the first 
informant was recorded by DSP, Rajender Singh, wherein it is 
stated that some unknown person entered into their house 
and caused injuries to the witness and her husband, who 
expired in the incident. Though, the first informant denied 
having given this statement but this fact definitely creates a 
doubt on the truthfulness of her story. A serious doubt is 
created on the credibility of the deposition made by the first 
informant, when we consider the fact that she claimed in her 
examination in chief that a van was brought by her son 
wherein, she and her husband were taken to the Civil 
Hospital, Tanda, where the medical officers opined that her 
husband had expired and she was medically examined. 
However, they did not believe in this opinion and took the 
victim to Bhogpur where again the doctors reiterated that her 
husband had expired. Only after this confirmation, the dead 
body of Balwinder Singh was brought back to the house where 

police was already present. This version, as set out in the 
testimony 
of 
the 
first 
informant, 
Sharan 
Kaur(PW-5), 
completely destroys her credibility. There cannot be two views 
on the aspect that if a case of homicidal death is reported at a 
Government hospital the doctors would immediately inform 
the police and there is no chance that the dead body would be 
allowed to be carried away by the family members. 
22. It may be stated that the medical records of the Civil 
Hospitals at Tanda and Bhogpur were not collected by the 
investigating agency nor were the same brought on record by 
the prosecution in its evidence. Dr. Didar Singh (PW-1) 
Medical Officer, Civil Hospital, Dasuya examined the first 
informant-Sharan Kaur (PW-5) on 13th January, 1997 at about 
07:05 a.m. In his cross examination, the doctor (PW-1) made 
the following admissions:- 
“...As per the record brought by me she has not given any 
history of assault. It is correct that as stated by Sharan Kaur 
that she has not been examined medico legally by any other 
doctor. No opinion regarding the weapon used was sought from 
me till today nor has any surgical opinion been received by me 
till today. As per my record she was admitted in hospital 
immediately after the medical examination.” 
 
23. This version of Dr. Didar Singh, (PW-1) completely 
destroys the story put forth by Sharan Kaur (PW-5) that she 

and her family members had taken the victim to the 
Government hospitals referred to above or that the body was 
brought back to their home after such medical examination 
was conducted. Apparently, the dead body was just lying in 
the house till the police arrived who took both the victims to 
the hospital. 
24. This fact is firmly cemented when we consider the 
deposition of Dr. Didar Singh (PW-1), who has stated that 
Sharan Kaur (PW-5) told him that she had not been examined 
medico legally by any other doctor and that she had been 
admitted in the hospital immediately after the medical 
examination. These inherent infirmities in the testimony of 
Sharan Kaur (PW-5) completely destroys her evidentiary worth 
and we have no hesitation in holding that she is a totally 
unreliable partisan witness. 
25. Daljit Singh (PW-6), being the son of the deceased 
Balwinder Singh and the first informant-Sharan Kaur (PW-5), 
stated that he woke up on hearing the cries of his mother and 
saw that Kulwinder Singh had caught hold of his mother from 
her arm and both the assailants ran away on seeing him. He 
and his elder brother Gurmit Singh tried to pursue the 

offenders. Thereafter they climbed up the stairs and saw that 
their father was lying in a pool of blood. This witness (PW-6) 
also stated that he along with his mother took his father in a 
van to the Civil Hospital, Tanda where he was declared dead, 
however they did not believe the opinion so given and hence, 
they proceeded to Bhogpur and consulted Dr. Arora, who also 
confirmed the fact regarding the death of Balwinder Singh. 
Then they proceeded back to their house, where the police had 
reached before their arrival. This witness (PW-6) was also 
confronted with his previous statement (Exhibit-DB) wherein, 
the name of Kulwinder Singh was not mentioned. Many 
contradictions have been elicited in the cross examination of 
this witness(PW-6) with reference to his previous versions, as 
recorded by different investigating officers. In his cross 
examination, the witness(PW-6) even admitted that he did not 
remember the name of her mother’s brother, who met them on 
that day. He further stated that he and his mother took 
Balwinder Singh (deceased) to Civil Hospital, Dasuya. The 
Police Station, Dasuya falls in the way to the Civil Hospital, 
Dasuya but they did not go to the police station for lodging the 
report. This fact again indicates that the conduct of PW-5 and 

PW-6 was totally unnatural. Gurmeet Singh, elder brother of 
Daljit Singh(PW-6), was not examined by the prosecution. We 
find that Daljit Singh (PW-6) did not even utter a word that 
appellant was having a weapon with him when he saw him 
fleeing 
away 
from 
the 
crime 
scene. 
These 
inherent 
improbabilities and loopholes in the evidence completely 
destroy the fabric of the prosecution case which is full of holes 
and holes which are impossible to be stitched together. 
26. This Court in the celebrated case of Vadivelu Thevar v. 
State of Madras1, has observed as follows:- 
“11.…Hence, in our opinion, it is a sound and well- established 
rule of law that the court is concerned with the quality and not 
with the quantity of the evidence necessary for, proving or 
disproving a fact. Generally speaking, oral testimony in this 
context may be classified into three categories, namely: 
(1) wholly reliable. 
(2) Wholly unreliable. 
(3) Neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable. 
12. 
In the first category of proof, the court should have no 
difficulty in coming to its conclusion either way - it may convict 
or may acquit on the testimony of a single witness, if it is found 
to 
be 
above 
reproach 
or 
suspicion 
of 
interestedness, 
incompetence or subornation. In the second category, the 
court, equally has no difficulty in coming to its conclusion. It is 
in the third category of cases, that the court has to be 
circumspect and has to look for corroboration in material 
particulars by reliable testimony, direct or circumstantial...”. 
 
27. On going through the evidence of Sharan Kaur (PW-5) 
 
 SC 614 

and Daljit Singh (PW-6), with reference to other evidence 
available on record, we are of the firm opinion that both these 
witnesses fall in the second category, i.e., wholly unreliable. 
No other tangible evidence was led by the prosecution to 
connect the accused appellant with the crime. 
28. As we have noted above, the prosecution’s story of motive 
is very weak and rather far fetched so as to place implicit 
reliance thereupon. Two investigating officers conducted 
thorough investigation and found the entire case set up by the 
first informant-Sharan Kaur(PW-5) to be false. The conduct of 
the first informant is unworthy of reliance, when we consider 
the fact that she tried to implicate Kulwinder Singh by filing 
various petitions while the investigation was still ongoing and 
even in her testimony during the trial. However, even in the 
FIR (Exhibit-PG/2), which was admittedly registered on the 
basis of her own statement, the first informant-Sharan 
Kaur(PW-5) did not name the said Kulwinder Singh, as co-
assailant with the accused appellant herein. Even in the 
petition i.e. Crl. Misc. Petition No. 2053-M-1998 filed before 
the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, the name of the said 
Kulwinder Singh was not mentioned. 

29. The spade allegedly used to assault the deceased was 
found lying at the crime scene. On going through the entire set 
of prosecution witnesses, we find that no weapon of crime was 
recovered at the instance of the accused appellant and thus, 
there is no corroborative evidence so as to lend credence to the 
wavering and unreliable testimony of Sharan Kaur (PW-5) and 
Daljit Singh (PW-6). 
30. Lajpal 
Singh(DW-3), 
DIG 
(Operation), 
Punjab 
was 
examined by the defence, who in his cross examination stated 
that in his investigation, he found the accused to be innocent. 
31. Having given our thoughtful consideration to the entirety 
of the material available on record, we are of the firm view that 
evidence of Sharan Kaur (PW-5) and Daljit Singh (PW-6) is 
wholly unreliable, does not inspire confidence in the Court so 
as to affirm the conviction of the appellant. It may be 
reiterated that no corroborative evidence was led by the 
prosecution so as to lend credence to the testimony of these 
two witnesses. 
32. Consequently, the appellant deserves to be acquitted by 
giving him the benefit of doubt. Resultantly, the judgments of 
the trial Court and the High Court dated 26th July, 2003 and 

28th February, 2008 respectively are hereby quashed and set 
aside. The appellant is acquitted of the charges. The sentence 
awarded to the appellant was directed to be suspended by this 
Court on 12th August, 2011, during the pendency of this 
appeal and he is on bail. He need not surrender and the bail 
bonds are discharged. 
33. The appeal is accordingly, allowed. 
34. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

NEW DELHI; 

April 18, 2024