IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 5027 of 2024 
(@ )
MRINMOY MAITY

VERSUS

CHHANDA KOLEY AND OTHERS
 
 J U D G E M E N T
Aravind Kumar, J. 
1.
Leave granted.
2.
The short point that arises for consideration in this appeal is:
“Whether the writ court was justified in entertaining the writ
petition filed by the respondent No.1 herein challenging the
approval dated 03.06.2014 granted in favour of the appellant
herein for starting LPG distributorship at Jamalpur, District
Burdwan?”

3.
The facts in brief which has led to filing of the present appeal
are as under:
4.
An advertisement came to be issued on 09.09.2012 calling for
application for distributors to grant LPG distributorship under GP
Category at Jamalpur, District Burdwan. From amongst the
applications so received, the application submitted by the appellant as
well as respondent No.1 were found to be in order. Since both the
appellant and the respondent No.1 were held to be eligible from
amongst the six (6) candidates, draw of lots was held on 11.05.2013
and appellant was found successful candidate and was selected for
verification of the documents. A letter of intent was issued to the
appellant on 24.02.2014 and on 03.06.2014 the approval was granted
by the BPCL in favour of the appellant for starting LPG
distributorship at the notified place.
5.
After a lapse of 4 years, the respondent No.1 filed a complaint
with the BPCL alleging that land offered by the appellant was a Barga
land and same cannot be considered. Subsequently application having
been filed by the appellant offering an alternate land, the Corporation

allowed the prayer of the appellant to construct the godown and
showroom on the alternate land offered by the appellant.
6.
The respondent No.1 being a rival applicant for grant of
distributorship, having participated in submitting the application and
being unsuccessful in the draw of lots held way back in the year 2013
and being aggrieved by the decision of the Corporation to permit the
appellant to commence the construction of godown and showroom on
the alternate land offered, filed a writ petition in the year 2017 i.e., on
10.04.2017. Initially, there was an order of status quo passed by the
Learned Single Judge and on receiving the report from the
Corporation the writ petition came to be dismissed vide order dated
18.01.2018 on the ground that the writ petitioner (respondent No.1
herein) had no locus standi since she had participated in the selection
process. Being aggrieved by the same the intra-court appeal came to
be filed and the appellate court by the impugned judgment allowed
the appeal on the ground (a) that the successful applicant had not
offered unencumbered land for construction of godown and
showroom; (b) the land offered by the appellant was in contravention
of clause 7.1(vi) and (vii) of the guidelines for selection of regular

LPG Distributors; (c) the amendment of the said guidelines brought
about subsequently, cannot be made applicable retrospectively. The
allotment made in favour of the (appellant herein) was set aside by the
impugned order and as a consequence of it, the letter of intent, the
letter of approval accepting the alternate land offered by the (appellant
herein) and all subsequent permissions, licences and no objections
issued in his favour were held to be of no effect. Hence, this appeal.
7.
We have heard Shri Pijush K. Roy, learned Senior Counsel
appearing for the appellant and Shri Zoheb Hossain, learned counsel
appearing for respondent No.1 and Shri Shekhar Naphade, learned
Senior Counsel for the Corporation. Learned counsel for the appellant
would vehemently contend that Learned Single Judge had rightly
dismissed the writ petition on the ground of lack of locus standi of the
writ petitioner and had dissolved the interim order granted earlier. It is
also contended that by the time the interim order of status quo came to
be passed by the Learned Single Judge on 20.07.2017, the appellant
herein had already submitted an application for accepting the alternate
land offered and which request came to be processed and the
applicant (appellant herein) had been allowed to construct the godown
and showroom on the alternate land so offered. These facts though

being available, the Division Bench ignoring the same had proceeded
on tangent in accepting the plea of the writ petitioner without
examining the aspect of delay and giving a complete go by for laches
exhibited on the part of the writ petitioner and extended the olive
branch on surmises and conjectures and as such the impugned order is
liable to be set-aside and consequently, writ petition which came to be
dismissed by the Learned Single Judge has to be upheld. Shri Shekhar
Naphade, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
Corporation has fairly submitted that in the light of the appellant
herein being successful in the allotment by draw of lots, had been
issued with the letter of intent and the prayer for offering the alternate
land was also accepted and having regard to the subsequent
development namely the subsequent notification dated 30.04.2015
issued by the appropriate government directing the Oil Marketing
Companies to provide flexibility in the selection guidelines by
providing an “opportunity to offer alternate land in response to the
advertisement” which clarified the position with regard to alternative
land offered had been acted upon by the Corporation in the instant
case and being satisfied with the bona fides of the applicant/appellant,
the Corporation had permitted the construction, and accordingly the

construction has been put up along with building, the godown and the
showroom and as such he has prayed for suitable orders being passed.
8.
On the contrary, Shri Zoheb Hossain, learned counsel
appearing for the respondent No.1 vehemently opposed the prayer of
the appellant herein and supported the order passed by the Division
Bench. He would contend that issue of delay in filing the Writ Petition
has been rightly ignored by the Division Bench and same has to
recede to background in the facts obtained in the present case, in as
much as the blatant violation of the guidelines would go to the root of
the matter and the inherent defect cannot be allowed to be rectified,
that too by relying upon an amendment to the guidelines which has
come into force subsequent to the advertisement in question or in
other words rules of the game could not have been changed after the
commencement of the game which was exactly the exercise
undertaken by the Learned Single Judge and rightly found to be
improper by the Division Bench. Hence, he prays for dismissal of the
appeal. 
9.
Having heard rival contentions raised and on perusal of the
facts obtained in the present case, we are of the considered view that

writ petitioner ought to have been non-suited or in other words writ
petition ought to have been dismissed on the ground of delay and
laches itself. An applicant who approaches the court belatedly or in
other words sleeps over his rights for a considerable period of time,
wakes up from his deep slumber ought not to be granted the
extraordinary relief by the writ courts. This Court time and again has
held that delay defeats equity. Delay or laches is one of the factors
which should be born in mind by the High Court while exercising
discretionary powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. In
a given case, the High Court may refuse to invoke its extraordinary
powers if laxity on the part of the applicant to assert his right has
allowed the cause of action to drift away and attempts are made
subsequently to rekindle the lapsed cause of action.
10.
The discretion to be exercised would be with care and caution.
If the delay which has occasioned in approaching the writ court is
explained which would appeal to the conscience of the court, in such
circumstances it cannot be gainsaid by the contesting party that for all
times to come the delay is not to be condoned. There may be myriad
circumstances which gives rise to the invoking of the extraordinary
jurisdiction and it all depends on facts and circumstances of each

case, same cannot be described in a straight jacket formula with
mathematical precision. The ultimate discretion to be exercised by the
writ court depends upon the facts that it has to travel or the terrain in
which the facts have travelled.
11.
For filing of a writ petition, there is no doubt that no fixed
period of limitation is prescribed. However, when the extraordinary
jurisdiction of the writ court is invoked, it has to be seen as to whether
within a reasonable time same has been invoked and even submitting
of memorials would not revive the dead cause of action or resurrect
the cause of action which has had a natural death. In such
circumstances on the ground of delay and laches alone, the appeal
ought to be dismissed or the applicant ought to be non-suited. If it is
found that the writ petitioner is guilty of delay and laches, the High
Court ought to dismiss the petition on that sole ground itself, in as
much as the writ courts are not to indulge in permitting such indolent
litigant to take advantage of his own wrong. It is true that there cannot
be any waiver of fundamental right but while exercising discretionary
jurisdiction under Article 226, the High Court will have to necessarily
take into consideration the delay and laches on the part of the
applicant in approaching a writ court. This Court in the case of Tridip

Kumar Dingal and others v. State of W.B and others., (2009) has held to the following effect:
“56. We are unable to uphold the contention. It is no doubt
true that there can be no waiver of fundamental right. But
while exercising discretionary jurisdiction under Articles
32, 226, 227 or 136 of the Constitution, this Court takes
into account certain factors and one of such considerations
is delay and laches on the part of the applicant in
approaching a writ court. It is well settled that power to
issue a writ is discretionary. One of the grounds for
refusing reliefs under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution
is that the petitioner is guilty of delay and laches.
57. If the petitioner wants to invoke jurisdiction of a writ
court, he should come to the Court at the earliest
reasonably possible opportunity. Inordinate delay in
making the motion for a writ will indeed be a good ground
for refusing to exercise such discretionary jurisdiction. The
underlying object of this principle is not to encourage
agitation of stale claims and exhume matters which have
already been disposed of or settled or where the rights of
third parties have accrued in the meantime (vide State of
M.P. v. Bhailal Bhai [AIR 1964 SC 1006: (1964) ], Moon Mills Ltd. v. Industrial Court [AIR 1967 SC
1450] and Bhoop Singh v. Union of India [(1992): (1992) 21 ATC 675: (1992) ] ). This
principle applies even in case of an infringement of
fundamental right (vide Tilokchand Motichand v. H.B.
Munshi [(1969) ], Durga Prashad v. Chief
Controller of Imports & Exports [(1969) ]
and Rabindranath Bose v. Union of India [(1970) ] ).
58. There is no upper limit and there is no lower limit as
to when a person can approach a court. The question is one
of discretion and has to be decided on the basis of facts
before the court depending on and varying from case to
case. It will depend upon what the breach of fundamental
right and the remedy claimed are and when and how the
delay arose.”

12.
It is apposite to take note of the dicta laid down by this Court
in Karnataka Power Corportion Ltd. and another v. K.
Thangappan and another, (2006) whereunder it has
been held that the High Court may refuse to exercise extraordinary
jurisdiction if there is negligence or omissions on the part of the
applicant to assert his right. It has been further held thereunder: 
“6. Delay or laches is one of the factors which is to be
borne in mind by the High Court when they exercise their
discretionary powers under Article 226 of the Constitution.
In an appropriate case the High Court may refuse to invoke
its extraordinary powers if there is such negligence or
omission on the part of the applicant to assert his right as
taken in conjunction with the lapse of time and other
circumstances, causes prejudice to the opposite party. Even
where fundamental right is involved the matter is still
within the discretion of the Court as pointed out in Durga
Prashad v. Chief Controller of Imports and Exports [(1969): AIR 1970 SC 769]. Of course, the discretion
has to be exercised judicially and reasonably.
7. What was stated in this regard by Sir Barnes Peacock
in Lindsay
 
Petroleum 
Co. v. Prosper
 Armstrong
Hurd [(1874) 5 PC 221: 22 WR 492] (PC at p. 239) was
approved by this Court in Moon Mills Ltd. v. M.R.
Meher [AIR 1967 SC 1450] and Maharashtra SRTC v. Shri
Balwant Regular Motor Service [(1969): AIR
1969 SC 329]. Sir Barnes had stated:
“Now, the doctrine of laches in courts of equity is not an
arbitrary or a technical doctrine. Where it would be
practically unjust to give a remedy either because the party
has, by his conduct done that which might fairly be
regarded as equivalent to a waiver of it, or where by his
conduct and neglect he has though perhaps not waiving that
remedy, yet put the other party in a situation in which it
would not be reasonable to place him if the remedy were
afterwards to be asserted, in either of these cases, lapse of
time and delay are most material. But in every case, if an

argument against relief, which otherwise would be just, is
founded upon mere delay, that delay of course not
amounting to a bar by any statute of limitation, the validity
of that defence must be tried upon principles substantially
equitable. Two circumstances always important in such
cases are, the length of the delay and the nature of the acts
done during the interval which might affect either party and
cause a balance of justice or injustice in taking the one
course or the other, so far as it relates to the remedy.”
8. It would be appropriate to note certain decisions of this
Court in which this aspect has been dealt with in relation to
Article 32 of the Constitution. It is apparent that what has
been stated as regards that article would apply, a fortiori, to
Article 226. It was observed in Rabindranath
Bose v. Union of India [(1970): AIR 1970 SC
470] that no relief can be given to the petitioner who
without any reasonable explanation approaches this Court
under Article 32 after inordinate delay. It was stated that
though Article 32 is itself a guaranteed right, it does not
follow from this that it was the intention of the
Constitution-makers that this Court should disregard all
principles and grant relief in petitions filed after inordinate
delay.
9. It was stated in State of M.P. v. Nandlal Jaiswal [(1986): AIR 1987 SC 251] that the High Court in
exercise of its discretion does not ordinarily assist the tardy
and the indolent or the acquiescent and the lethargic. If
there is inordinate delay on the part of the petitioner and
such delay is not satisfactorily explained, the High Court
may decline to intervene and grant relief in exercise of its
writ jurisdiction. It was stated that this rule is premised on a
number of factors. The High Court does not ordinarily
permit a belated resort to the extraordinary remedy because
it is likely to cause confusion and public inconvenience and
bring, in its train new injustices, and if writ jurisdiction is
exercised after unreasonable delay, it may have the effect of
inflicting not only hardship and inconvenience but also
injustice on third parties. It was pointed out that when writ
jurisdiction is invoked, unexplained delay coupled with the
creation of third-party rights in the meantime is an
important factor which also weighs with the High Court in
deciding whether or not to exercise such jurisdiction.”

13.
Reiterating the aspect of delay and laches would disentitle the
discretionary relief being granted, this Court in the case of Chennai
Metropolitan Water Supply & Sewerage Board and others v. T.T.
Murali Babu, (2014) has held:
“16. Thus, the doctrine of delay and laches should not be
lightly brushed aside. A writ court is required to weigh the
explanation offered and the acceptability of the same. The
court should bear in mind that it is exercising an
extraordinary and equitable jurisdiction. As a constitutional
court it has a duty to protect the rights of the citizens but
simultaneously it is to keep itself alive to the primary
principle that when an aggrieved person, without adequate
reason, approaches the court at his own leisure or pleasure,
the court would be under legal obligation to scrutinise
whether the lis at a belated stage should be entertained or
not. Be it noted, delay comes in the way of equity. In
certain circumstances delay and laches may not be fatal but
in most circumstances inordinate delay would only invite
disaster for the litigant who knocks at the doors of the
court. Delay reflects inactivity and inaction on the part of a
litigant — a litigant who has forgotten the basic norms,
namely, “procrastination is the greatest thief of time” and
second, law does not permit one to sleep and rise like a
phoenix. Delay does bring in hazard and causes injury to
the lis.”
14.
Having regard to the afore-stated principles of law enunciated
herein above, when we turn our attention to facts on hand, it would
not detain us for too long for accepting the plea of the appellant in
affirming the order of the Learned Single Judge and dismissing the
writ petition on the ground of delay and laches. We say so for reasons
more than one, firstly, it requires to be noticed that the writ petitioner

was a rival applicant along with the appellant herein for grant of LPG
distributorship and she along with the appellant herein, were found to
be eligible and the appellant herein was held to be successful by
virtue of draw of lots. This factual aspect would reflect that the writ
petitioner was aware of all the developments including that of the
allotment of distributorship having been made in favour of the
appellant herein way back in 2014, yet did not challenge and only on
acceptance of the alternate land offered by the appellant in March,
2017 and permitting him to construct the godown and the showroom.
Same was challenged in the year 2017 and thereby the writ petitioner
had allowed his right if at all if any to be drifted away or in other
words acquiesced in the acts of the Corporation and as such on this
short ground itself the appellant has to succeed. Secondly, another fact
which has swayed in our mind to accept the plea of the appellant
herein is that, undisputedly the appropriate government had felt the
need of permitting the Oil Marketing Companies to be more flexible
and as such modification to the guidelines had been brought about on
15.04.2015 whereby the applicants were permitted to offer alternate
land where the land initially offered by them was found deficient or
not suitable or change of the land, subject to specifications as laid

down in the advertisement being met. There being no stiff opposition
or strong resistance to the alternate land offered by the appellant
herein not being as per the specifications indicated in the
advertisement, we see no reason to substitute the court’s view to that
of the experts namely, the Corporation which has in its wisdom has
exercised its discretion as is evident from the report filed in the form
of affidavit by the territory manager (LPG)/ BPCL whereunder it has
been stated:
“13. On the basis of xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx to non-
agricultural. In his application form the said Respondent
no. 9 had provided the Land for godown at Plot No 3732,
Khatian No LR 2585, 2586, 2587 JL No 34, Mouza Kolera,
Jamalpur, Distt Burdwan admeasuring 33 decimal. The
same was cleared based on Registered Lease Deed, which
was found to have been genuine in all respects as
confirmed by the ADSR Jamalpur. 
16. The land offered by the successful candidate, namely
the Respondent no.9 was found to be eligible by relying on
the abovementioned clauses, which determine eligibility of
the land based on the status of ownership. The fact that the
said land was a "Barga" land is not a material condition on
the basis of which the Respondent no. 9's candidature could
be cancelled. 
24. Subsequently, FVC of the said newly offered land by
the LOI holder, Respondent no. 9 was conducted and the
same was found suitable for construction of LPG Godown.
A letter being DGP:LPG OMP: Jamalpur dated 21.03.2017
was provided to the said LOI holder informing him that the
alternate land provided is found suitable and therefore his
request to construct LPG Godown in the said alternate land
has been approved. A copy of the said letter dated
21.03.2017 is annexed hereto and is marked as "R-5". 

25. It is therefore submitted that the steps taken by the
Respondent no. 3 in allowing the LOI holder, Respondent
no. 9, to provide alternate land for construction of godown,
have been in consonance. with the change in policies and
no favoritism or nepotism, as suggested by the petitioner
has been in play. 
32. It is further clarified that the FVC conducted on the
original land offered by the Respondent no. 9 was found to
be satisfactory on all counts, and only on the basis of this,
his request for provision of alternate land wall accepted.” 
15.
 Hence, we are of the considered view that the order of the
Learned Division Bench is liable to be set aside and accordingly, it is
set aside. The order of the Learned Single Judge stands restored for
the reasons indicated herein above and the appeal is allowed
accordingly with no order as to costs.
…...….………………….J.
 (Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha)
…...….………………….J.
 (Aravind Kumar)
New Delhi,
April 18, 2024