IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL Nos. 5062-5099 of 2024 
 SLP (C) Nos. 26571-26608 of 2017 
 
PERNOD RICARD INDIA (P) LTD....APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS. 
 
JUDGMENT 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
Leave Granted. 
2. 
The short question for our consideration is the applicability of 
the relevant rule for imposition of penalty; whether it is the rule 
that existed when the violation occurred during the license 
period of 2009-10 or the rule that was substituted in 2011 when 
proceedings for penalty were initiated. As the substituted rule 
reduced the quantum of penalty, the appellant insists on its 
application but the statutory authorities as well as the Division 

Bench of the High Court rejected his case and imposed higher 
penalty under the old rule. 
2.1 For the reasons to follow, we have accepted the contention of 
the appellant and, in allowing the appeal, determined that the 
purpose of the amendment is to achieve a proper balance 
between crime and punishment or the offence and penalty. In 
light of this, and recognizing that classifying offenders into 
before or after the amendment for imposing higher and lower 
penalties does not serve any public interest, we have directed 
that the substituted Rule alone will apply to pending 
proceedings. 
3. 
Facts:- The appellant is a sub-licensee under the M.P. Excise 
Act, 19151 for manufacture, import and sale of Foreign Liquor, 
regulated under the Madhya Pradesh Foreign Liquor Rules, 
19962. 
3.1 Sub-licensees importing Foreign Liquor are granted transit 
permits in which the origin, quality, quantity and point of 
delivery of the imported liquor are recorded. At the point of 
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as “the Act”. 
2 Hereinafter referred to as “the 1996 Rules”. destination, the consignment is verified for quality and 
quantity, and a certificate under Rule 13 is granted. Rule 16 
prescribes the permissible limits of loss of liquor in transit due 
to leakage, evaporation, wastage etc. The purpose and object of 
this Rule is to prevent illegal diversion of liquor for unlawful sale 
and also to prevent evasion of excise duty. Relevant portion of 
Rule 16 is as follows:- 
“Rule 16. Permissible limits of losses.- 
(1) An allowance shall be made for the actual loss of spirit 
by leakage, evaporation etc., and of bottled foreign liquor by 
breakage caused by loading, unloading, handling etc. in 
transit, at the rate mentioned hereinafter. The total quantity 
of bottled foreign liquor transported or exported shall be the 
basis for computation of permissible losses. 
(2) Wastage allowances on the spirit transported to the 
premises of FL 9 or FL 9-A licensee shall be the same as 
given in sub-rule (4) of Rule 6 of the Distillery Rules, 1995. 
(3) Maximum wastage allowance for all exports of bottled 
foreign liquor shall be 0.25% irrespective of distance. 
(4) Maximum wastage allowance for all transports of 
bottled foreign liquor shall be 0.1% if the selling licensee and 
the purchasing licensee belong to the same district. It shall 
be 0.25% if they belong to different districts. 
(5) If wastages/losses during the export or transport of 
bottled foreign liquor exceed the permissible limit prescribed 
in sub-rule (3) or (4), the prescribed duty on such excess 
wastage of bottled foreign liquor shall be recovered from the 
licensee.” 
 
3.2 If the permissible limits of loss of liquor are exceeded, the 1996 
Rules prescribe imposition of penalty. Rule 19 providing for 
penalty that could be imposed during the relevant license period 

of 2009-2010 was about four times the maximum duty payable 
on foreign liquor. The relevant portion of Rule 19 is as follows: - 
“Rule 19. Penalties3. – 
(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Act, or 
condition No. 4 of license in Form F.L. 1, condition No. 7 of 
license in Form F.L 2, condition No. 4 of license in Form F.L 
3, the Excise Commissioner or the Collector may impose a 
penalty not exceeding Rs. 50,000 for contravention of any 
of these rules or the provisions of the Act or any other rules 
made under the Act or the order issued by the Excise 
Commissioner. 
(2) On all deficiencies in excess of the limits allowed under 
Rule 16 and Rule 17, the F.L. 9 or FL 9-A, F.L. 10-A or F.L. 
10-B licensee shall be liable to pay penalty at a rate 
exceeding three times but not exceeding four times the 
maximum duty payable on foreign liquor at that time, as 
may be imposed by the Excise Commissioner or any officer 
authorized by him: 
Provided that if it be proved to the satisfaction of the Excise 
Commissioner or the authorized officer that such excess 
deficiency or loss was due to some unavoidable cause, like 
fire or accident and its first information report was lodged 
in Police Station, he may waive the penalty imposable under 
this sub-rule. 
(3) The Excise Commissioner or the Collector may suspend 
or cancel the license under Section 31 of the Act upon a 
contravention of any of these rules or provisions of the Act, 
or any other rules made under the Act, or the orders issued 
by the Excise Commissioner.” 

4. 
Facts reveal that no action was initiated during the license year 
of 2009-2010. 
5. 
On 29.03.2011, Rule 19 was substituted by an amendment. The 
relevant portion of substituted provision is as follows: 
 
3 Hereinafter “the old Rule”. 

“Rule 19. Penalties4 
(1)… 
(2) On all deficiencies in excess of the limits allowed under 
rule 16 and rule 17, the F.L.-9, F.L-9-A, F.L.-10-B Licensee 
shall be liable to pay penalty at a rate not exceeding the 
duty payable on foreign liquor at that time, as may be 
imposed by the Excise Commissioner or any officer 
authorized by him: 
Provided that if it be proved to the satisfaction of the Excise 
Commissioner or the authorized officer that such excess 
deficiency or loss was due to some unavoidable causes like 
fire or accident and its First Information Report was lodged 
in concerned Police Station, he may waive the penalty 
imposable under this sub-rule.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
6. 
As is evident, the above referred substituted Rule 19 reduces 
penalty from four times the maximum duty payable to an 
amount not exceeding the duty payable on foreign liquor. 
7. 
Eight months after the amendment, a demand notice dated 
22.11.2011 was issued directing payment of penalty for 
exceeding the permissible limits during the license year 2009-
2010. The notice demanded penalty of four times the duty as 
per the old Rule 19. The appellant replied, inter alia contending 
that penalty, if any, can only be under the substituted Rule 19 
as the old rule stood repealed, and in fact, the demand is raised 
after the substituted Rule came into force. 
 
4 Hereinafter, “the substituted Rule”. 

8. 
The Deputy Commissioner5 rejected the objections raised by the 
appellant and confirmed the demand for payment of penalty at 
four times the duty payable. The Deputy Commissioner’s order 
was upheld by the Excise Commissioner6, and thereafter by the 
Revenue Board Gwalior7. 
9. 
Questioning the decisions of the statutory authorities, the 
appellant filed a writ petition before the High Court which was 
heard and disposed of with 40 other petitions raising a similar 
issue. The Single Judge of the High Court was of the view that 
the new Rule was introduced by way of a substitution and 
following the principles in State of Rajasthan v. Mangilal 
Pindwal8, West U.P. Sugar Mills Association v. State of U.P.9, Zile 
Singh, Government of India v. Indian Tobacco Association10, he 
held that the old Rule stood repealed from the statute book and 
only the substituted Rule applies to all pending and future 
proceedings. He, therefore, set aside the orders of the statutory 
 
5 By order dated 18.04.2012. 
6 By order dated 02.05.2013. 
7 By order dated 10.12.2013. 
8 (1996). 
9 (2002). 
10 (2005). authorities and remanded the matter back to them for 
determining the penalty as per the substituted Rule. 
10. The Division Bench of the High Court, by the order impugned 
herein, reversed the decision of the Single Judge on the simple 
ground that as the license was granted for one year, the Rule 
that existed during that license year must apply. The reason for 
not applying the substituted Rule according to the Division 
Bench is also that determination of penalty being substantive 
law, cannot operate retrospectively. 
11. Questioning the legality and validity of the decision of the 
Division Bench of the High Court, the present appeals are filed. 
Mr. Pratap Venugopal, Ld. Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf 
of the appellant argued that the effect of substitution is to repeal 
the existing provision from the statute book in its entirety and 
to enforce the newly substituted provision. He would further 
submit that even for incidents which took place when the old 
Rule was in force, it is the substituted Rule that would be 
applicable, and therefore, the demand notice dated 22.11.2011 
seeking payment of penalties under old Rule is illegal. 

12. There is no difficulty in accepting the argument of Mr. Pratap 
Venugopal on principle. In Koteswar Vittal Kamath v. K. 
Rangappa Baliga & Co.11, this Court brought out the distinction 
between supersession of a rule and substitution of a rule, and 
held that the process of substitution consists of two steps – first, 
the old rule is repealed, and next, a new rule is brought into 
existence in its place: 
“8. On that analogy, it was argued that, if we hold that the 
Prohibition Order of 1950, was invalid, the previous 
Prohibition Order of 1119, cannot be held to be revived. This 
argument ignores the distinction between supersession of a 
rule, and substitution of a rule. In the case of Firm A.T.B. 
Mehtab Majid & Co., the new Rule 16 was substituted for 
the old Rule 16. The process of substitution consists of two 
steps. First, the old rule it made to cease to exist and, next, 
the new rule is brought into existence in its place. Even if 
the new rule be invalid, the first step of the old rule ceasing 
to exist comes into effect, and it was for this reason that the 
court held that, on declaration of the new rule as invalid, the 
old rule could not be held to be revived.” 
 
12.1. In Zile Singh v. State of Haryana12, this Court referred to the 
legislative practice of an amendment by substitution and held 
that substitution would have the effect of amending the 
operation of law during the period in which it was in force. 
“24. The substitution of one text for the other pre-existing 
text is one of the known and well-recognised practices 
employed in legislative drafting. “Substitution” has to be 
 
11 (1969). 
12 (2004). distinguished from “supersession” or a mere repeal of an 
existing provision. 
25. Substitution of a provision results in repeal of the earlier 
provision and its replacement by the new provision 
(see Principles of Statutory Interpretation, ibid., p. 565). If 
any authority is needed in support of the proposition, it is to 
be found in West U.P. Sugar Mills Assn. v. State of 
U.P13., State of Rajasthan v. Mangilal Pindwal14, Koteswar 
Vittal 
Kamath v. K. 
Rangappa 
Baliga 
and 
Co.15 and A.L.V.R.S.T. Veerappa Chettiar v. I.S. Michael16. 
In West U.P. Sugar Mills Assn.17 case a three-Judge Bench 
of this Court held that the State Government by substituting 
the new rule in place of the old one never intended to keep 
alive the old rule. Having regard to the totality of the 
circumstances centring around the issue the Court held that 
the substitution had the effect of just deleting the old rule 
and making the new rule operative. In Mangilal Pindwal18 
case this Court upheld the legislative practice of an 
amendment by substitution being incorporated in the text of 
a statute which had ceased to exist and held that the 
substitution would have the effect of amending the 
operation of law during the period in which it was in force. 
In Koteswar case19 a three-Judge Bench of this Court 
emphasised the distinction between “supersession” of a 
rule and “substitution” of a rule and held that the process 
of substitution consists of two steps: first, the old rule is 
made to cease to exist and, next, the new rule is brought 
into existence in its place.” 
 
12.2. A slight variation is noticed in a recent decision in 
Gottumukkala Venkata Krishamraju v. Union of India,20 where 
this Court held that: 
 
13 (2002). 
14 (1996). 
15 (1969). 
16 1963 Supp (2) SCR 244. 
17 (2002). 
18 (1996). 
19 (1969). 
20 (2019). 

“18. Ordinarily 
wherever 
the 
word 
“substitute” 
or 
“substitution” is used by the legislature, it has the effect of 
deleting the old provision and make the new provision 
operative. The process of substitution consists of two steps: first, the old rule is made to cease to exist and, next, the 
new rule is brought into existence in its place. The rule is 
that when a subsequent Act amends an earlier one in such 
a way as to incorporate itself, or a part of itself, into the 
earlier, then the earlier Act must thereafter be read and 
construed as if the altered words had been written into the 
earlier Act with pen and ink and the old words scored out 
so that thereafter there is no need to refer to the amending 
Act at all. No doubt, in certain situations, the Court having 
regard to the purport and object sought to be achieved by 
the legislature may construe the word “substitution” as an 
“amendment” having a prospective effect. Therefore, we do 
not think that it is a universal rule that the word 
“substitution” 
necessarily 
or 
always 
connotes 
two 
severable steps, that is to say, one of repeal and another of 
a fresh enactment even if it implies two steps. However, the 
aforesaid general meaning is to be given effect to, unless it 
is found that the legislature intended otherwise. Insofar as 
present case is concerned, as discussed hereinafter, the 
legislative intent was also to give effect to the amended 
provision even in respect of those incumbents who were in 
service as on 1-9-2016.” 
 
13. The operation of repeal or substitution of a statutory provision 
is thus clear, a repealed provision will cease to operate from the 
date of repeal and the substituted provision will commence to 
operate from the date of its substitution. This principle is 
subject to specific statutory prescription. Statute can enable 
the repealed provision to continue to apply to transactions that 
have commenced before the repeal. Similarly, a substituted 
provision which operates prospectively, if it affects vested 

rights, subject to statutory prescriptions, can also operate 
retrospectively. 
14. The principle governing subordinate legislation is slightly 
different in as much as the operation of a subordinate 
legislation is determined by the empowerment of the parent act. 
The legislative authorization enabling the executive to make 
rules prospectively or retrospectively is crucial. Without a 
statutory empowerment, subordinate legislation will always 
commence to operate only from the date of its issuance and at 
the same time, cease to exist from the date of its deletion or 
withdrawal. The reason for this distinction is in the supremacy 
of the Parliament and its control of executive action, being an 
important subject of administrative law. 
15. We will now refer to the rule making power under the M.P. 
Excise Act, 1915. Section 62 of the Act empowers the State to 
make rules. Relevant portion of Section 62 is as follows: – 
“62. Power to make rules.— (1) The State Government 
may make rules for the purpose of carrying out the 
provisions of this Act. 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing provision, the State Government may make 
rules— 
 (a) prescribing the powers and duties of Excise Officers; 

 (b) to (n) … 
 
(3) The power conferred by this section of making rules is 
subject to the condition that the rules made under sub-
section (2) (a), (b), (c), (e), (f), (i), (l) and (m) shall be made 
after previous publication: 
Provided that any such rules may be made without previous 
publication if the State Government considers that they 
should be brought into force at once.” 
 
16. 
Section 62 does not enable the executive to continue the 
application of a repealed rule to events that have commenced 
during the subsistence of the Rule. However, Section 63 is of 
some importance. It enables the executive to operate the Rule 
from a date as may be specified in that behalf. Section 63 is 
reproduced as below:- 
“63. Publication of rules and notifications.— All rules 
made and notifications issued under this Act shall be 
published in the Official Gazette, and shall have effect from 
the date of such publication or from such other date as may 
be specified in that behalf.” 
 
17. It is clear that even Section 63 of the Act does not provide 
continuation of a repealed provision to rights and liabilities 
accrued during its subsistence. At the most, Section 63 of the 
M.P. Excise Act, 1915, only enables the government to issue 
subordinate legislation with effect from such a date as may be 
specified. We may mention at this very stage that Rule 19 which 

has been substituted on 29.03.2011 has not been notified to 
operate from any other date by the Government. 
18. Faced with this situation, Mr. Saurabh Mishra, learned A.A.G. for the State, came up with an attractive argument that the 
State of M.P. can continue to apply the repealed Rule for the 
transaction of 2009-2010 by virtue of specific provisions under 
the Madhya Pradesh General Clauses Act, 1957. He brought to 
our notice Section 10 of the Act which is as follows:- 
“10. Effect of Repeal. Where any Madhya Pradesh Act 
repeals any enactment then, unless a different intention 
appears, the repeal shall not- 
(a) revive anything not in force or existing at the time at 
which the repeal takes effect; or 
(b) affect the previous operation of any enactment so 
repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or 
(c) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability, acquired, 
accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed; or 
(d) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in 
respect of any offence committed against any enactment so 
repealed; or 
(e) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in 
respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, 
penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; 
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may 
be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty, 
forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as if the repealing 
Madhya Pradesh Act had not been passed.” 
 
19. The above-referred Section of the MP General Clauses Act by 
itself would not make any difference as the Section is applicable 
only to enactments, i.e. when any M.P. Act repeals any 

enactment and not a subordinate legislation. Interpreting an 
identical provision of the General Clauses Act, 1897, i.e. 
Section 6, this Court has consistently held that Section 6 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897, has no application to subordinate 
legislation.21 
20. Mr. Saurabh Mishra then referred to Section 31 of Madhya 
Pradesh General Clauses Act, 1957, which is as under: 
“31. 
Application 
of 
Act 
to 
Ordinances 
and 
Regulations.- 
The provisions of this Act shall apply, unless there is 
anything repugnant in the subject or context- 
 
(a) to any Ordinance or Regulation as they apply in relation 
to Madhya Pradesh Acts: 
 
Provided that sub-section (1) of section 3 of this Act shall 
apply to any Ordinance or Regulation as if for the reference 
in the said sub-section (1) to the day of the first publication 
of the assent to an Act in the Official Gazette there were 
substituted a reference to the day of the first publication of 
the Ordinance or the Regulation, as the case may be, in that 
Gazette; 
 
(b) to the construction of rules, regulations, bye-laws, 
orders, notifications, schemes or forms made or issued 
under a Madhya Pradesh Act.” 
 
21. By virtue of Section 31, the provisions of the Madhya Pradesh 
General Clauses Act, 1957 are made applicable to the 
construction of rules. By such application, the principle of a 
 
21 Rayala Corp. v. Director of Enforcement, (1969); Kolhapur Canesugar Works Ltd. v. 
Union of India, (2000). repeal of a provision not affecting any liability incurred 
thereunder is also extended to the operation of the subordinate 
legislations under the Act. It is, therefore, submitted that 
having incurred the liability of exceeding the prescribed limits 
of losses of liquor for the license period 2009-10, the liability is 
not affected by the subsequent substitution of Rule 19. 
22. This submission was not raised before the Single Judge or the 
Division Bench. However, as law operates irrespective of the 
choices of parties or their counsels in raising and referring to 
it in a court of law, we have permitted him to argue this 
question of law. We will now examine the application of Section 
31 and its operation. 
23. Section 31 of the M.P. General Clauses Act, 1957, relating to 
extension of its provisions to subordinate legislation is thus, 
distinct and more ambitious than that of its big sister, the 
General Clauses Act, 1897, the Central Legislation which 
extends its provisions to Ordinances and Regulations which 
are in the nature of legislation.22 Conscious of the big leap to 
 
22 Thus, this Court has held in a number of cases that the General Clauses Act, 1897 is only 
applicable to statutes. extend the M.P. General Clauses Act, 1957, for construction of 
subordinate legislations, Section 31 takes care to provide that 
it may be done only when it is not repugnant to the subject and 
context. In its own words – unless there is anything g repugnant 
in the subject and context. 
24. Interpretation statutes such as the General Clauses Act, 1897, 
are enactments intended to set standards in construction of 
statutes. The expression construction is of seminal importance 
as it is oriented towards enabling a seeker of the text of a statute 
to understand the true meaning of the words and their 
intendment. Apart from setting coherent and consistent 
methods of understanding enactments, the interpretation 
statutes also subserve the purpose of reducing prolixity of 
legislations. The standard principles formulated in the 
interpretation statutes must, therefore, be read into any and 
every enactment falling for consideration. 
25. In Pushpa Devi v. Milkhi Ram23 while explaining the purpose and 
object of prefacing a definition or an interpretation with the 
 
23 (1990). phrase- “unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context”- this court held:- 
“19. The opening sentence in the definition of the section 
states “unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context”. In view of this qualification, the court has not only 
to look at the words but also to examine the context and 
collocation in the light of the object of the Act and the 
purpose for which a particular provision was made by the 
legislature. Reference may be made to the observations of 
Wanchoo, J. in Vanguard Fire and General Insurance Co. 
Ltd. v. M/s Fraser and Ross [(1960), 863: AIR 
1960 SC 971: (1960) 30 Com Cas 13] where the learned 
Judge said that even where the definition is exhaustive 
inasmuch as the word defined is said to mean a certain 
thing, it is possible for the word to have a somewhat 
different meaning in different sections of the Act depending 
upon the subject or context… 
20. Great artistry on the bench as elsewhere is, therefore, 
needed before we accept, reject or modify any theory or 
principle. Law as creative response should be so interpreted 
to meet the different fact situations coming before the court. 
For, Acts of Parliament were not drafted with divine 
prescience and perfect clarity. It is not possible for the 
legislators to foresee the manifold sets of facts and 
controversies which may arise while giving effect to a 
particular provision. Indeed, the legislators do not deal with 
the specific controversies. When conflicting interests arise or 
defect appears from the language of the statute, the court 
by consideration of the legislative intent must supplement 
the written word with ‘force and life’. See, the observation 
of 
Lord 
Denning 
in Seaford 
Court 
Estate 
Ltd. v. Asher [(1949) 2 KB 481, 498].” 

26. In Vanguard Fire and General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Fraser and 
Ross24 this Court held that: 
“6. …That is why all definitions in statutes generally begin 
with the qualifying words similar to the words used in the 
 
24 (1960). present case, namely, unless there is anything repugnant in 
the subject or context. Therefore in finding out the meaning 
of the word ‘insurer’ in various sections of the Act, the 
meaning to be ordinarily given to it is that given in the 
definition clause. But this is not inflexible and there may be 
sections in the Act where the meaning may have to be 
departed from on account of the subject or context in which 
the word has been used and that will be giving effect to the 
opening sentence in the definition section, namely, unless 
there is anything repugnant in the subject or context. In view 
of this qualification, the court has not only to look at the 
words but also to look at the context, the collocation and the 
object of such words relating to such matter and interpret 
the meaning intended to be conveyed by the use of the 
words under the circumstances…” 

27. In the ultimate analysis, interpretation statutes or definitions in 
interpretation clauses are only internal aids of construction of 
a statute. Who do they aid? Interpretation is the exclusive 
domain of the Court.25 A Constitutional Court is tasked with the 
sacred duty of interpreting the Constitution, Acts of Parliament 
or States, subordinate legislations, regulations, instructions 
and even to practices having force of law. Whichever or wherever 
the instrument, interpretation is the exclusive province of the 
Court.26 The principle is aptly enunciated as: 
 “The Court has the function of authoritatively construing 
legislation, that is, determining its legal meaning so far as is 
necessary to decide a case before it. This function is 
exclusive to the Court, and a meaning found by any other 
 
25 Keshavji Ravji & Co. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, (1990). 
26 Dr. Major Meeta Sahai v. State of Bihar, (2019). person, for example an authorising agency, an investigating 
agency, an executing agency, a prosecuting agency, or even 
the legislature itself, except when intending to declare or 
amend the law, is always subject to the determination of the 
court. 
It is usually said that the making of law, as opposed to its 
interpretation, is a matter for the legislature, and not for the 
courts, but, in so far as that legislature does not convey its 
intention clearly, expressly and completely, it is taken to 
require the court to spell out that intention where necessary. 
This may be done either by finding and declaring 
implications in the words used by the legislator, or by 
regarding the breadth or other obscurity of the express 
language as conferring a delegated legislative power to 
elaborate its meaning in accordance with public policy 
(including legal policy) and the purpose of the legislation. 
Whichever course is adopted, in accordance with the 
doctrine of precedent the court’s operation influences the 
future legal meaning of the enactment by producing what 
may be called sub-rules, which are implied or expressed in 
the court’s judgment.”27 
28. Subordinate legislation, by its very nature, rests upon the 
executive’s understanding of the primary legislation. When a 
Court is of the opinion that such an understanding is not in 
consonance with the statute, it sets it aside for being ultra-vires 
to the primary statute. 
29. We will now examine if there is anything repugnant to the 
subject or context to disapply the mandate of Section 31 of M.P. 
 
27 Halsbury’s Laws, (5th edn, 2018), vol 96, para 694. 

General Clauses Act, 1957, to the construction of the 1996 
Rules. If the subject and context guide us in coming to that 
conclusion, we will not extend the effect of repeal in Section 10 
of the MP General Clauses Act, 1957 to the repealed Rule 19. 
On the other hand, if the subject and context have no bearing 
on the construction of the Rule, then we will give effect to 
Section 10 and apply the repealed Rule to the liability incurred 
by the appellant during the license year 2009-10 and allow the 
imposition of four times the duty as penalty. 
30. The 1996 Rules regulate the grant of license for manufacture 
and bottling of foreign liquor, procurement of spirit, storage, 
quality and control, sale, export, verification etc. Rule 19 
provides for penalties for contravention of any of the Rules or 
provision of the Act. There are different penalties for violation of 
different rules. 
31. The regulatory process requires the Government to deal with the 
problem of diversion and unlawful sale of foreign liquor and also 
provide an appropriate penalty and punishment. The process of 
identifying a crime and prescribing an appropriate punishment 
is a complex and delicate subject that the State has to handle 

while making rules and enforcing them. The gravity of the 
offence, its impact on society and human vulnerability are taken 
into account to provide the required measure of deterrence and 
reform. Day to day working of the Rules, reposing their 
effectiveness, 
ineffectiveness, 
deficiency 
of 
deterrence, 
disproportionate penalty having a chilling effect on genuine 
businesses, are some routine factors which require the 
executive to make necessary amendments to the rules. In this 
context, depending on the nature of offence, the proportionate 
penalty is required to be modulated from time to time. In light 
of this, we can appreciate that the felt need of the State to 
amend and substitute Rule 19 which provided a higher penalty 
at four times the duty, with a simple penalty not exceeding the 
duty payable. 
32. If the amendment by way of a substitution in 2011 is intended 
to reduce the quantum of penalty for better administration and 
regulation of foreign liquor, there is no justification to ignore the 
subject and context of the amendment and permit the State to 
recover the penalty as per the unamended Rule. The subject of 
administration of liquor requires close monitoring and the 

amendment must be seen in this context of bringing about good 
governance and effective management. Seen in this context, the 
principle of Section 10 of MP General Clauses Act, 1957, 
relating continuation of a repealed provision to rights and 
liabilities that accrued during the subsistence of the Rule does 
not subserve the purpose and object of the amendment. 
33. It is also submitted on behalf of the State that the substituted 
Rule cannot be given retrospective effect. We are not in 
agreement with this submission either. It is wrong to assume 
that the substituted Rule is given retrospective effect if its 
benefits are made available to pending proceedings or to those 
that have commenced after the substitution. Rule 19 which was 
substituted on 29.03.2011 is made applicable to proceedings 
that have commenced with the issuance of the demand notice 
in November, 2011. The Rule operates retroactively and thus 
saves it from arbitrarily classifying the offenders into two 
categories with no purpose to subserve. 
34. The single Judge as well as the Division Bench have adopted 
two different approaches and we have not agreed with either of 
them. The single Judge was of the view that the amendment by 

way of substitution has the effect of repealing the law which 
existed as on the date of repeal. We have already explained the 
limitation in this approach. The Division Bench on the other 
hand, held that levy of penalty is substantive law, and as such, 
it cannot operate retrospectively. This again is a wrong 
approach. The substituted penalty only mollifies the rigour of 
the law by reducing the penalty from four times the duty to 
value of the duty. Therefore, the bar of Article 20(1)28 of 
imposing a penalty greater than the one in force at the time of 
the commission of the offence has no application. While 
rejecting the reasoning of the single Judge as well as the 
Division Bench, we seek to underscore the importance of a 
simple and plain understanding of laws and its processes, 
keeping in mind the purpose and object for which they seek to 
govern and regulate us. 
35. For the reasons stated above, we allow the appeals and set 
aside the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court in 
 
28 Rattan Lal v. State of Punjab,; Basheer v. State of Kerala, (2004); Nemi Chand v. State of Rajasthan, (2018); Trilok Chand v. State of Himachal 
Pradesh, (2020); M/s. A.K. Sarkar & Co. & Anr. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.,. 

Writ Appeals Nos. 425/2016, 6/2017, 7/2017, 8/2017, 
9/2017, 10/2017, 11/2017, 12/2017, 13/2017, 14/2017, 
15/2017, 16/2017, 17/2017, 19/2017, 20/2017, 21/2017, 
22/2017, 23/2017, 24/2017, 25/2017, 26/2017, 27/2017, 
28/2017, 29/2017, 30/2017, 31/2017, 32/2017, 33/2017, 
34/2017, 35/2017, 36/2017, 37/2017, 38/2017, 39/2017, 
40/2017, 41/2017, 42/2017 and 100/2017 dated 29.06.2017. 
We further hold that the penalty to be imposed on the 
appellants will be on the basis of Rule 19 as substituted on 
29.03.2011. There shall be no order as to costs. 
 
……………………………….J. 
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 

…………………………….J. 
[ARAVIND KUMAR] 
NEW DELHI; 
APRIL 19, 2024