IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2024
( SLP(Crl.)No.8254/2023)
SANJU RAJAN NAYAR
 
… APPELLANT

VERSUS

JAYARAJ & ANR.
… RESPONDENTS
ORDER
Leave granted.
1.
This appeal is directed against the judgment and
order dated 2nd January, 2023 passed by the High Court
of Karnataka at Bangalore in P.No.606/2022 titled
Sri Jayaraj v. State of Karnataka, whereby under
Section 482 Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 the High
Court quashed the First Information Report1 bearing
No.63 of 2021 dated 8.12.2021 for the offence under
Section 7(a) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988, pending before the 23rd Additional City Civil
and Sessions Judge, Bengaluru.
1 ‘FIR’ for short

2.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties
and also perused the written submissions filed by the
parties across the Bar.
3.
Respondent No.1 - Jairaj stands exonerated in the
departmental proceedings in relation to an inquiry
initiated on the basis of the complaint with regard
to the allegations of demand for bribe. As a
consequence thereof, the FIR in Crime No.63/2021
registered on the basis of the complaint made by the
instant appellant, stands quashed by the High Court
of Karnataka at Bengaluru vide its impugned judgment.
4.
Briefly set out, the facts are, that the marriage
of the instant appellant was solemnized on 21.7.2006.
During the subsistence of such marriage, his wife
filed a complaint with the SHO Police Station Krishna
Rajapuram Police Station alleging the appellant to
have sexually harassed his minor child while visiting
the child in the school, which resulted into
registration of FIR No.555/2018 under the different
provisions of the Protection of Children from Sexual

Offences Act, 2012 and Indian Penal Code, 1860.
Respondent No.2, who was entrusted with the
investigation of the said FIR, demanded and accepted
monetary consideration from the instant appellant.
Since the demands of bribe continued, the instant
appellant brought the factum of such bribe to the
notice of Karnataka Human Rights Commission,
Bangalore, by placing on record the evidence inter
alia in the shape of a pendrive. As a result
thereof, based on the preliminary inquiry FIR was
registered with the Anti Corruption Branch, City
Bangalore Police Station on 8.12.2021 being Crime
Case No.63 of 2021 under the provisions of Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988. Based on the preliminary
investigation, the authorities also accorded sanction
for prosecuting Respondent No.1.
5. In quashing the FIR the High Court observed that
“there is no direct evidence, where this petitioner
has demanded any money or bribe from the
complainant”. Also that “there is no material to
proceed against this accused No.1. That apart, it is

worth to mention that there was complaint registered
against respondent No.2 in Crime No.555/2018 for both
offences under Sections POCSO as well as Section 354
of IPC on the complaint filed by the wife of
respondent No.2. During the investigation, the
petitioner/accused No.2 said to have summoned the
complainant to the police station who is said to have
been harassed by them and was demanded money. But
later, only in order to overcome the complaint filed
against respondent No.2, by his wife this complaint
was filed for taking revenge against the police as
they had summoned the respondent No.2 to the police
for the purpose of investigation in Crime
No.555/2018”.
6.
At this point in time, we observe that two
persons were named as accused whereas the petition
for quashing was preferred only by one of the
accused, namely, Jairaj. The FIR was categorical
that ASI Sivakumar (Accused No.2) had received money
and that Police Inspector Jairaj had assured that
they would provide chargesheet in lieu of Rs.80,000/-

and that the complainant would also have to pay
Rs.500 per week when he visits the police station, as
a condition of bail.
7.
In the aforesaid backdrop, in the considered view
of this Court, the approach adopted by the Courts in
quashing the FIR in the attending facts and
circumstances, is legally unsustainable. It ventured
into an inquiry, unwarranted at this stage, holding
that there is no direct evidence that the present
respondent had demanded any money and that there was
no material to proceed against him, completely
forgetting, if not ignoring the material which had
surfaced during the course of investigation, amongst
others, the pendrive, allegedly, indicating his
complicity in the crime.
8.
Under these circumstances, in the attending facts
and circumstances, we allow the appeal, more so when
despite the accused having been exonerated in the
departmental proceedings yet the competent authority,
vide Annexure P3 proceeded to accord sanction for

prosecution. The High Court, in our considered view,
failed to account for the principles enunciated by
this Court in the case of State of Haryana & Ors. v.
Bhajan Lal & Ors., (1992) SCC Suppl.1 335.
 
9.
We may also observe that it was the pleaded case
of the Lokayukta before the High Court that the
continuance of the trial was not on the very same
evidence as what weighed with the authorities in
exonerating the employee in the departmental
proceedings. This fact, also appears not to have
been considered by the High Court in its correct
perspective.
10. For the aforesaid reasons, the present appeal is
allowed and the impugned judgment and order dated 2nd
January, 2023 passed by the High Court of Karnataka
at Bangalore in P.No.606/2022 titled Sri Jayaraj
v. State of Karnataka is quashed and set aside.
11. Consequentially, the FIR subject matter of the
present proceedings stands restored to be taken to
its logical end, in accordance with law. We clarify

that all questions of fact and law, as also other
pleas raised, are left open for the parties to be
agitated, if so advised and desired, before the
appropriate forum at the appropriate stage.
………………………………J.
(SANJAY KAROL)
………………………………………………………………………J.
(PRASANNA BHALACHANDRA VARALE)
Dated: April 23, 2024;
Place: New Delhi.