IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
 [ SLP (] 
 
MAYA GOPINATHAN 

 … APPELLANT 
 
VS. 
 
ANOOP S.B. & ANR. 

… RESPONDENTS 
 
JUDGMENT 
DIPANKAR DATTA, J. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeal assails the final judgment and order dated 5th April, 
2022 of the High Court of Kerala (“High Court”, hereafter) in a 
matrimonial appeal1. The High Court partly allowed the appeal of the 
respondents and set aside the relief granted to the appellant by the 
Family Court, Alappuzha, Kerala (“Family Court”, hereafter). 
 
1 Matrimonial Appeal No. 847 of 2011 

3. 
We have noticed that the second respondent passed away on 11th July, 
2022 during the pendency of this appeal; hence, the first respondent, 
surviving as the sole contesting respondent in the present lis, has 
opposed the appeal. 
4. 
Although the parties before the Family Court were at issue on several 
fronts, the ambit of the dispute before us is limited as would unfold 
hereafter. The brief factual matrix relevant for a decision on the present 
appeal, discerned from the records, is as follows: 
I. 
Marriage of the appellant and the first respondent was 
solemnised according to Hindu rites and customs on 4th May, 
2003. For both of them, it was their second marriage. While the 
appellant was a widow, the first respondent was a divorcee. 
According to the appellant, 89 sovereigns of gold were gifted to 
her by her family at the time of marriage. Additionally, after the 
wedding, the appellant’s father (“P.W.2”, hereafter) made over to 
the first respondent a sum of Rs. 2,00,000/- (Rupees two lakh) 
through a demand draft dated 26th July, 2004. 
II. 
According to the appellant, on the first night of marriage (i.e., on 
4th May, 2003) itself, the first respondent took custody of all her 
jewellery and entrusted the same to the second respondent 
under the garb of safekeeping. It was also the case of the 
appellant that all such jewellery stood misappropriated by the 
respondents to discharge their pre-existing financial liabilities. 

III. 
In course of time, owing to inter-se disputes and differences, the 
spouses drifted apart. In 2009, the appellant filed an original 
petition2 before the Family Court for the recovery of the value of 
jewellery, and the amount of Rs. 2,00,000/- (Rupees two lakh) 
which was paid by P.W.2 to the first respondent. The appellant 
also filed a petition for dissolution of marriage3. The respondents 
filed a counter claim for Rs. 70,000/- (Rupees seventy thousand) 
as the value of a gold ring and gold chain which the first 
respondent customarily gifted to the appellant during the 
wedding ceremony. 
IV. 
The Family Court, vide common judgment dated 30th May, 2011, 
held that the respondents had indeed misappropriated the 
appellant’s gold jewellery and that she was entitled to recoup the 
loss caused to her by the said misappropriation. The Family Court 
while allowing the appellant to recover Rs. 8,90,000/- (Rupees 
eight lakh ninety thousand) as the value of 89 sovereigns of gold 
from the respondents, also directed the first respondent to 
recompense to the appellant Rs. 2,00,000/- (Rupees two lakh) 
with 6% interest per annum from the date of institution of the 
proceedings till realisation within 3 (three) months. 
V. 
Additionally, the Family Court by a decree of divorce dissolved 
the 
marriage 
between 
the 
parties 
and 
dismissed 
the 
 
2 O.P. (OS) No. 10 of 2009 
3 O.P. (HMA) No. 96 of 2009 

counterclaim of the respondents as well. The Family Court held 
that the ring and chain presented by the first respondent to the 
appellant was in the nature of a gift and the appellant could not 
be compelled to surrender it to the first respondent. 
VI. 
Aggrieved by the decree of the Family Court allowing the 
appellant’s claim with respect to recovery of the value of the gold 
jewellery as well as directing the first respondent to return Rs. 
2,00,000/- (Rupees two lakh) to the appellant with 6% interest, 
the respondents moved the High Court in appeal. There was, 
however, no challenge to the decree for dissolution of marriage. 
VII. 
The High court, vide the impugned judgment, while partly setting 
aside the relief granted by the Family Court held that the 
appellant had not been able to establish misappropriation of gold 
jewellery by the respondents. It was, inter alia, observed by the 
High Court that there was no documentary evidence to prove the 
acquisition of gold jewellery by the appellant’s family, and it 
characterised the testimony of the appellant as unreliable being 
riddled with inconsistencies and gaps in the narrative. However, 
the High Court upheld the direction of the Family Court whereby 
the first respondent was required to return Rs. 2,00,000/- 
(Rupees two lakh) to the Appellant. 
 
5. 
The appellant has taken exception to this judgment of the High Court in 
the present appeal on multiple grounds. The task before us is limited to 

determining 
whether 
the 
appellant 
was 
able 
to 
establish 
misappropriation of her gold jewellery by the respondents and whether 
the High Court committed an error in setting aside the relief granted to 
the appellant by the Family Court. 
6. 
The appellant claimed that during the pre-marriage negotiations it was 
agreed by and between P.W.2 and the first respondent that Rs. 
2,00,000/- (Rupees two lakh) would be paid to the latter. P.W.2 also 
informed the first respondent that the appellant had 50 sovereigns of 
gold from her first marriage and such amount would be further 
supplemented by additional gold which will be bought by P.W.2. 
7. 
As noticed, the appellant further claimed that on the first night of 
marriage all her gold jewellery were taken by the first respondent in his 
custody and given to the second respondent under the garb of 
safekeeping. Also, in keeping with his promise, P.W.2 made over 
Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees two lakh) to the first respondent after marriage. 
At the time of marriage, the first respondent had informed the 
appellant’s family that he conducts certain business activities in 
Kozhikode. Later, the appellant found out that the gold had been utilised 
by the respondents to discharge their pre-existing financial liabilities 
which arose in those business activities. 
8., the respondents disputed the case pleaded by the appellant. 
The respondents denied that any demand for dowry was made by them 
as it was a second marriage for both the parties. However, the 
respondents admitted that P.W.2 informed them of the pre-existing 50 

sovereigns of gold which the appellant had and that P.W.2 had further 
promised the respondents that he would supplement the same. The 
respondents further admitted that Rs. 2,00,000/- (Rupees two lakh) 
was given by P.W.2 through a demand draft. 
9. 
However, the respondents claimed through the testimony of the first 
respondent that they were not aware of the exact amount of gold that 
the appellant was carrying with her since the same was never weighed 
by them. 
10. 
On the point of custody of the gold jewellery, it was the version of the 
respondents that on the first night of marriage the appellant kept the 
same in her own custody by locking it in an almirah. The appellant kept 
the key to the almirah under her pillow; thus, the appellant was in 
complete possession of her gold jewellery and the respondents were 
never given the custody of the said jewellery. The first respondent in 
his testimony stated that on the sixth day of marriage, while wearing 
all her gold jewellery, the appellant along with him went to P.W.2’s 
house. The appellant justified taking all the gold with her by stating that 
she already had a locker facility, and it would be safer to store the gold 
there instead of storing it at the respondents’ house where the elderly 
mother resides alone for the majority of the year. 
11. 
The first respondent asserted that he was a post graduate and employed 
as a manager in a private company. He maintained that he never 
engaged in any sort of business activity and hence did not have any 
financial liability which needed to be discharged. Hence, the appellant’s 

version of utilisation of gold by the respondents to discharge pre-
existing liabilities was not only highly improbable but completely 
imaginary; moreover, the appellant failed to produce any documentary 
evidence to prove the existence of the alleged liabilities of either 
respondent. 
12. 
Lastly, the respondents placed reliance on certain photographs from the 
wedding ceremony of the first respondent’s brother (appellant’s 
brother-in-law), marked Ext.B3 before the Family Court. It took place 
around 4 (four) months after the marriage of the parties. The 
respondents contended that the appellant could be seen wearing her 
wedding jewellery on such occasion, which appeared to be in complete 
contradiction to the appellant’s story that her gold jewellery was taken 
by the first respondent on the first day of her marriage itself with him. 
It is significant to note that the appellant explained Ext.B3 photographs 
by stating that the jewellery worn by her on such occasion did not 
belong to her; on the contrary, the same was borrowed by her from her 
sister-in-law (appellant’s brother’s wife). 
13. 
The Family Court undertook an exhaustive examination of the 
depositions rendered by the witnesses to conclude that the respondents 
had indeed misappropriated the jewellery entrusted to them by the 
appellant. The narrative of events testified by the appellant was 
corroborated in its entirety by P.W.2. On the contrary, it was found that 
the respondents did not specifically deny the appellant’s allegation that 
she had brought with her to the matrimonial home 89 sovereigns of 

gold jewellery. Such an omission to specifically deny the allegation was 
held by the Family Court to amount to an admission. With respect to 
the allegation of misappropriation, the respondents had raised a twofold 
defence – firstly, that it was the appellant who kept all the jewellery in 
a bag, which was kept under lock and key in an almirah on the wedding 
night and was taken by her to her paternal home on the sixth day of 
marriage; and secondly, the fact that it was the appellant who was in 
possession of her wedding jewellery throughout was evidenced by the 
fact that she wore a selection of this very jewellery at the first 
respondent’s brother’s wedding on 12th September, 2003, photographs 
of which event were exhibited as Ext.B3. A comparative analysis of the 
photographs of the wedding of the parties (Ext.A3) with Ext.B3 was 
pressed by both parties, with varying contentions and differing 
conclusions. While the appellant argued that a comparison would show 
that the jewellery worn at the two events were different, the 
respondents submitted that a comparison would clearly show the 
striking similarity in the jewellery worn at the two events, thus proving 
that the appellant had always been in possession of her jewellery. The 
Family Court rejected both arguments of the respondents, with there 
being no evidence for the first argument and the photos on record not 
supporting the second argument. 
14. 
The High Court, in exercise of its appellate powers conferred by the 
Code of Civil Procedure, re-examined the facts on record to arrive at a 
conclusion diametrically opposite to that of the Family Court, i.e., the 

respondents had not misappropriated the appellant’s jewellery and that 
the same was in her possession. 
15. 
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the 
impugned judgment as well as the other materials on record. 
16. 
Having taken a close look at the materials on record and the conclusions 
drawn by the High Court on the basis thereof, we have little doubt in 
our mind that the impugned judgment is legally unsustainable. This is 
because of an erroneous approach adopted by the High Court by 
demanding a standard of proof as if it were seized of a criminal trial as 
well as by basing its findings on assumptions and suppositions which, 
by no stretch of imagination, can be said to be borne from the evidence 
on record. Also, though the judgment of the Family Court delved deep 
into the evidence to arrive at reasonable findings, we have noted with 
some degree of distress that the High Court criticised the judgment as 
one rendered without taking into consideration the factual foundations 
of the case and by jumping to conclusions. 
17. 
We commence our discussion by reminding ourselves of a passage on 
‘Standard of Proof’ found in Halsbury’s Laws of England4, reading thus: 
19. Standard of proof. — To succeed on any issue the party bearing 
the legal burden of proof must (1) satisfy a judge or jury of the 
likelihood of the truth of his case by adducing a greater weight of 
evidence than his opponent, and (2) adduce evidence sufficient to 
satisfy them to the required standard or degree of proof. The 
standard differs in criminal and civil cases. 
In civil cases the standard of proof is satisfied on a balance of 
probabilities. However, even within this formula variations in subject 
matter or in allegations will affect the standard required; the more 
 
4 Volume 17, Fourth Edition 

serious the allegation, for example fraud, crime or professional 
misconduct, the higher will be the required degree of proof, although 
it will not reach the criminal standard. 
In criminal cases, the standard required of the prosecution is proof 
beyond reasonable doubt. This standard is also requisite in cases of 
committal for contempt, and in pension claims cases. 
In matrimonial cases it seems that proof on balance of probabilities 
is sufficient, although proof beyond reasonable doubt is required to 
rebut the presumption of the formal validity of marriage. 
Once a matter is established beyond reasonable doubt it must be 
taken for all purposes of law to be a fact, as there is no room for a 
distinction between what is found by inference from the evidence and 
what is found as a positive fact. 
 (underlining ours, for emphasis) 
18. 
We find an elucidation of ‘Standard of Proof’ in the seminal decision by 
a bench of three Hon’ble Judges of this Court in Dr. N.G. Dastane v. 
Mrs. S. Dastane5. This Court eloquently settled the law in the following 
words: 
“24. The normal rule which governs civil proceedings is that a fact 
can be said to be established if it is proved by a preponderance of 
probabilities. This is for the reason that under the Evidence Act, 
Section 3, a fact is said to be proved when the court either believes 
it to exist or considers its existence so probable that a prudent man 
ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon 
the supposition that it exists. The belief regarding the existence of a 
fact may thus be founded on a balance of probabilities. A prudent 
man faced with conflicting probabilities concerning a fact-situation 
will act on the supposition that the fact exists, if on weighing the 
various probabilities he finds that the preponderance is in favour of 
the existence of the particular fact. As a prudent man, so the court 
applies this test for finding whether a fact in issue can be said to be 
proved. The first step in this process is to fix the probabilities, the 
second to weigh them, though the two may often intermingle. The 
impossible is weeded out at the first stage, the improbable at the 
second. Within the wide range of probabilities the court has often a 
difficult choice to make but it is this choice which ultimately 
determines where the preponderance of probabilities lies. … 
25. Proof beyond reasonable doubt is proof by a higher standard 
which generally governs criminal trials or trials involving inquiry into 
issues of a quasi-criminal nature. A criminal trial involves the liberty 
of the subject which may not be taken away on a mere preponderance 
 
5 (1975) 

of probabilities. If the probabilities are so nicely balanced that a 
reasonable, not a vascillating, mind cannot find where the 
preponderance lies, a doubt arises regarding the existence of the fact 
to be proved and the benefit of such reasonable doubt goes to the 
accused. It is wrong to import such considerations in trials of a purely 
civil nature. 
26. Neither Section 10 of the Act which enumerates the grounds on 
which a petition for judicial separation may be presented nor Section 
23 which governs the jurisdiction of the court to pass a decree in any 
proceeding under the Act requires that the petitioner must prove his 
case beyond a reasonable doubt. Section 23 confers on the court the 
power to pass a decree if it is ‘satisfied’ on matters mentioned in 
Clauses (a) to (e) of the section. Considering that proceedings under 
the Act are essentially of a civil nature, the word ‘satisfied’ must mean 
‘satisfied on a preponderance of probabilities’ and not ‘satisfied 
beyond a reasonable doubt’. Section 23 does not alter the standard 
of proof in civil cases.” 
 (underlining ours, for emphasis) 
 
19. 
A bench of two Hon’ble Judges of this Court [of which one of us (Hon’ble 
Sanjiv Khanna, J.) was a member] in a decision of recent origin in 
Roopa Soni v. Kamalnarayan Soni6 applied the ratio of the decision 
in Dr. N.G. Dastane (supra) while reiterating that the standard of proof 
for disputes in the matrimonial sphere would be preponderance of 
probabilities and not beyond reasonable doubt. 
20. 
Law is well-settled that inference from the evidence and circumstances 
must be carefully distinguished from conjectures or speculation. Since 
the mind is prone to take pleasure to adapt circumstances to one 
another and even in straining them a little to force them to form parts 
of one connected whole, there must be evidence - direct or 
circumstantial - to deduce necessary inferences in proof of the facts in 

issue. There can be no inferences unless there are objective facts, direct 
or circumstantial, from which to infer the other fact which it is sought 
to establish. In some cases, the other facts can be inferred, as much as 
is practical, as if they had been actually observed. In other cases, the 
inferences do not go beyond reasonable probability. If there are no 
positive proved facts - oral, documentary, or circumstantial - from which 
the inferences can be drawn, the method of inference would fail and 
what would remain is mere speculation or conjecture. Therefore, when 
drawing an inference of proof that a fact in dispute is held to be 
established, there must be some material facts or circumstances on 
record from which such an inference could be drawn. In civil cases 
including matrimonial disputes of a civil nature, the standard of proof is 
not proof beyond reasonable doubt ‘but’ the preponderance of 
probabilities tending to draw an inference that the fact must be more 
probable. 
21. 
The facts are clear that the appellant did not lodge any complaint of 
criminal breach of trust but by initiating civil proceedings, sought return 
of money equivalent to her stridhan property which stood lost forever. 
This Court in Rashmi Kumar v. Mahesh Kumar Bhada7 [a decision 
by a bench of three Hon’ble Judges of this Court on a reference made 
by a bench of two Hon’ble Judges, who considered it necessary that a 
fresh look at the view expressed in a previous decision of three Hon’ble 
 
7 (1997) 

Judges in Pratibha Rani v. Suraj Kumar8 be had], after scrutiny of 
several treatises and precedents had the occasion to observe in 
paragraph 10 that the properties gifted to a woman before marriage, at 
the time of marriage or at the time of bidding of farewell or thereafter 
are her stridhan properties. It is her absolute property with all rights to 
dispose at her own pleasure. The husband has no control over her 
stridhan property. He may use it during the time of his distress but 
nonetheless he has a moral obligation to restore the same or its value 
to his wife. Therefore, stridhan property does not become a joint 
property of the wife and the husband and the husband has no title or 
independent dominion over the property as owner thereof. It was also 
observed in paragraph 13 that to make out an offence under section 
406 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, what was required to be proved 
was entrustment of stridhan property with dominion over such property 
to the husband or to any member of his family as well as dishonest 
misappropriation of or conversion to his own use the said property by 
the husband or such other member of his family. Admittedly, we are 
not concerned with any criminal offence and, therefore, proof on 
balance of probabilities would be sufficient. 
22. 
It is true that a finding of fact recorded by a high court is not ordinarily 
disturbed by the Supreme Court but it is not a rigid rule, cast in a 
straitjacket formula, which can never be departed from. It is always 
 
8 (1985) 

open to this Court, in diverse situations, to test whether the conclusions 
of fact reached upon a consideration of the probabilities contain any 
serious error. 
23. 
The impugned judgment embarking on reappreciation of evidence 
reveals several grounds resting whereon the High Court allowed the 
respondents’ appeal. 
24. 
First and foremost, we have found the High Court to have attributed 
lack of bona fide on the part of the appellant solely on account of the 
petition being filed in 2009 although cohabitation of the spouses had 
ended in 2006 itself. In concluding so, the High Court erred to take into 
consideration the explanation proffered by the appellant and P.W.2 that 
substantial amount of time after separation was spent to attempt 
reconciliation; and it is with the fervent hopes of such attempts at 
reconciliation succeeding that legal proceedings were not initiated. 
Matters of matrimony can rarely be said to be simple or straightforward; 
hence, human reaction as per a mechanical timeline before the sacred 
bond of marriage is severed is not what one would expect. Divorce, 
majorly, in Indian society is still considered a stigma, and any delay in 
commencement of legal proceedings is quite understandable because 
of the attempts made to have the disputes and differences resolved; 
more so, in a case of the present nature, when the appellant was faced 
with the imminent prospect of termination of her second marriage. Even 
otherwise, the appellant did not present before the Family Court a time-

barred claim. Doubting the bona fide of the appellant, on facts and in 
the circumstances, was thus not called for. 
25. 
Secondly, the High Court held the appellant’s failure to lead 
documentary evidence to support purchase of 89 sovereigns of gold, 
which she allegedly brought with her to the matrimonial home, as fatal. 
To our mind, the approach is entirely indefensible. The version of the 
respondents with regard to retention of custody of jewellery by the 
appellant has been noticed in paragraph 10 (supra). Although we accept 
as probable that the jewellery had not been weighed, there is no escape 
from the conclusion that the respondents did admit the appellant having 
brought with her sufficient jewellery constituting stridhan. The dispute 
was raised firstly with regard to quantum and secondly, with regard to 
custody. How far is the version of the first respondent believable that 
on the night of the wedding, the appellant put her jewellery in an 
almirah and locked the same, with the keys being kept below the pillow? 
To find an answer, we pose a question to ourselves: for a person of 
ordinary prudence, is it reasonable to expect that a woman, who is 
freshly married and is intending to live in the same house and under 
the same roof with her husband, to keep her personal belongings like 
jewellery, etc. under her own lock and key, thus, showing a spirit of 
distrust to the husband right after the moment she gets married? The 
answer cannot but be in the negative. On the contrary, the circumstance 
that the husband had volunteered to take custody of the jewellery for 
safekeeping with his mother appears to be more plausible than the rival 

version considering the probabilities that are associated with similar 
such situations. The very concept of marriage rests on the inevitable 
mutual trust of the spouses, which conjugality necessarily involves. To 
assume that the appellant from day one did not trust the first 
respondent is rather improbable. The High Court, thus, failed to draw 
the right inference from facts which appear to have been fairly 
established. That apart, we have neither been shown nor do we know 
of any binding precedent that for a claim of return of stridhan articles 
or money equivalent thereof to succeed, the wife has to prove the mode 
and manner of such acquisition. It was not a criminal trial where the 
chain of circumstances had to be complete and conclusively proved, 
without any missing link. Undisputedly, the appellant had brought to the 
matrimonial home sufficient quantum of jewellery, which she wore 
during the marriage and as is evidenced from photographs being Ext. 
A3 series; and, having regard thereto, the High Court committed serious 
error in first doubting and then disbelieving the appellant’s version on 
the specious ground that documents proving acquisition thereof by 
P.W.2 had not been produced. 
26. 
Further, the High Court grossly erred in retuning inherently 
contradictory findings. While casting doubt on the version of the 
appellant that the first respondent had never exhibited love or affection 
for her and that the jewellery was taken by him on the first night itself 
without even sparing the gold chain that was given to her, it held against 
the appellant by remarking that if indeed “that be so, there was no 

chance for giving Rs.2 lakh to the 1st appellant (the husband) on 
26.07.2004 i.e. after about one year of their marriage” (underlining 
ours, for emphasis). Such a finding was recorded even though at a later 
stage, the High Court itself noted the admission of the first respondent 
of receipt of Rs. 2,00,000/- (Rupees two lakh) which he was ready to 
return. We regret, the High Court allowed its vision to be blurred and 
its focus of attention got diverted from the points in dispute. 
27. 
On the issue of whether the first respondent misappropriated the 
appellant’s jewellery, the High Court decided in favour of the first 
respondent on the basis of four conclusions – first, that the appellant 
had led no evidence to prove existence of financial liabilities on the first 
respondent’s part so as to warrant the sale of her jewellery; secondly, 
comparison of photographs being Ext.A3 series on the one hand and 
Ext.B3 on the other showed that the appellant was wearing similar 
jewellery on both occasions, thus, establishing her continuous 
possession of the same; thirdly, the appellant’s sister-in-law, whose 
jewellery the appellant claims to be wearing in Ext.B3 photographs, was 
not examined and this was held adversely against her; and fourthly, it 
was the appellant who admittedly owned a bank locker prior to her 
marriage, while there was no such locker owned by the first respondent, 
making it probable that it was the appellant who had taken the jewellery 
and kept them in her locker. We propose to deal with each of these 
conclusions individually. 

28. 
On the aspect of the first respondent’s financial liabilities and the 
existence of the same, we find that the High Court imposed a greater 
burden on the appellant than was warranted. The appellant could gain 
awareness of the same through multiple informal ways, whereas 
obtaining documentary proof would be well-nigh an impossible task 
especially if such liabilities pre-dated the marriage of the parties. It was 
in the evidence of the appellant that during the pre-marriage 
negotiations, the first respondent had disclosed of his involvement in 
business activities in Kozhikode. In view of the conduct of the first 
respondent subsequent to marriage, we do not consider that anything 
more was required to be proved by the appellant. The avarice of the 
first respondent is evidenced by the acceptance of Rs. 2,00,000/- 
(Rupees two lakh), which would not have occasioned unless a demand 
were made to the appellant’s family. Acceptance of the said amount 
more than a year after the marriage, which was admitted by the first 
respondent, speaks volumes about his conduct. The first respondent’s 
contention that he had not made a demand for the money and was only 
given the same pursuant to a pre-marriage promise made by the 
appellant’s family, was disproved before the Family Court and against 
this finding the first respondent did not appeal. In view of such conduct 
of the first respondent, it is thus highly probable that there existed a 
monetary need, in fulfilment whereof, the appellant’s jewellery would 
have been sold. 

29. 
We now proceed to discuss the much-contested photographs being 
Exts.A3 and B3 series. Upon conducting a detailed scrutiny of the colour 
photographs on record, we cannot help but note the significant 
differences in the jewellery worn by the appellant on her wedding, and 
that on her brother-in-law’s wedding. While the appellant is adorned 
with multiple pieces of jewellery on her own wedding as evidenced by 
Ext.A3, in Ext.B3 we find the appellant to be comparatively scantily 
ornamented, wearing a meagre two necklaces, both of which make no 
appearance on the appellant’s person in Ext.A3. There exists a marked 
contrast in the jewellery worn on both occasions, and based on our 
appreciation of photographs being Exts.A3 and B3 series, it is the 
appellant’s narrative of events we believe and accept to be true. Non-
examination of the appellant’s sister-in-law, whose borrowed jewellery 
the appellant claims to be wearing in Ext.B3, is an insignificant lacuna 
in the appellant’s case and cannot be held to be fatal to it in the light of 
the surrounding facts and circumstances of the case. 
30. 
Black’s Law Dictionary9 defines entrustment as: 
“To give (a person) the responsibility for something after establishing 
a confidential relationship”. 
 
It is the appellant’s contention that she entrusted all 89 sovereigns of 
gold jewellery to the first respondent on the assurance that his mother 
would keep it safely for the appellant. What was required to be proved 
is entrustment of the property in the hands of the husband. 89 
 
9 Ninth Edition 

sovereigns is a substantial amount of gold, and as a newly-wed bride 
entering a new home, it would have been only natural for the appellant 
to trust her newly-wed husband’s word and entrust the custody of such 
precious jewellery to him. It is evidently borne by the depositions of the 
witnesses that the appellant did not permanently gift or transfer the 
jewellery to the first respondent, and only for safekeeping that the 
custody of the jewellery was handed over. The Family Court, thus, 
rightly concluded that there being an element of entrustment, disposal 
and non-return of such jewellery by the first respondent would 
constitute misappropriation. Based on the evidence on record, we too 
are inclined to the view that it is indeed probable that the appellant 
made over possession of her jewellery to the first respondent in the firm 
belief that they would remain in the safe custody of his mother. 
31. 
The fourth ground taken by the High Court, i.e., possession of the 
jewellery vesting in the appellant and not the first respondent, merely 
on the basis of the appellant admittedly owning a bank locker prior to 
marriage, thus giving her a place to store the jewellery, is yet again an 
explanation which is more conjectural than factual, for which reason we 
find ourselves unable to agree with it. 
32. 
Although some doubt was cast regarding the weight of jewellery that 
the appellant claimed to have brought with her and there was absence 
of evidence (except oral) regarding its accurate weight, the High Court 
once again committed error in failing to resolve the issue on this front 
because of its prejudgment from the inception that the appellant’s 

approach smacked of lack of bona fide. The appellant had been married 
before and it is in the evidence of P.W.2 that the appellant had 50 
sovereigns of gold from her first marriage and that P.W.2 assured to 
supplement it. Not only could this evidence be demolished in course of 
cross-examination, it was corroborated by the evidence of the first 
respondent in the sense that he too testified having been told by P.W.2 
during pre-marriage negotiation of due existence of 50 sovereigns of 
gold in the appellant’s locker. In view of such evidence, doubt cast by 
the High Court even to the extent of 50 sovereigns of gold, which the 
appellant already had, seems to be unwarranted. It was further 
assumed by the High Court that it was not believable for a newly 
married woman to be deprived of all gold jewellery on the first night 
itself. We have no reason to agree with such a conclusion drawn by the 
High Court. Greed is a powerful motivator and has spurred humans to 
commit crimes far dastardlier. We, thus, do not find it outside the realm 
of human possibility for a husband to commit against his wife such 
unacceptable and undesirable acts, which were alleged. In the light of 
the same, it can hardly be disputed that the appellant was indeed in 
possession of at least 50, if not 89, sovereigns of gold jewellery when 
she crossed the threshold of the matrimonial home on the fateful night 
of 4th May, 2003. 
33. 
It is further evident from the photographs, i.e., Ext.A3 series that the 
appellant is wearing a considerable amount of gold jewellery. Curiously, 
the respondents did not question the nature, quality, and valuation of 

the gold jewellery. It was never the respondents’ case that the jewellery 
which adorned the appellant during the wedding ceremony was not 
gold, but merely imitation jewellery. This peculiar omission on the part 
of the respondents, to our minds, only lends further plausibility to the 
case made out by the appellant that it was gold jewellery which she 
wore, and that such gold jewellery could have weighed 89 sovereigns. 
34. 
Besides, the High Court unfortunately failed to notice and appreciate 
what the counterclaim of the first respondent before the Family Court 
precisely was. Therein, he demanded the return of the ring and the gold 
chain gifted by him to the appellant, as was customary, at the time of 
marriage. It is well established that gifts made to the bride by the bride’s 
husband or her parents or by relatives from the side of her husband or 
parents, at the time of marriage, constitute her stridhan. It was, thus, 
rightly held by the Family Court that the first respondent could lay no 
claim over the same, since there was nothing to suggest that the 
jewellery was a gift merely temporary in nature, with its return being 
expected in future. The first respondent’s rapacious conduct, as 
glaringly evidenced in the counterclaim filed by him, afforded sufficient 
ground for the Family Court to draw adverse inference against him and 
the High Court patently fell in error in interfering with a well-written 
reasoned decision of the Family Court. 
35. 
The case is one fit for a remand and normally we would have ordered 
so. However, having regard to the lapse of time since proceedings were 
instituted by the appellant before the Family Court (it has been in excess 

of a decade and a half), we considered it fit and proper not to delay a 
decision further which made it necessary to consider the evidence in the 
case. Notwithstanding the infirmities, which are not considered not too 
serious or significant so as to defeat the claim of the appellant, we are 
of the opinion that weighing the evidence on record being what they are 
and on a preponderance of probabilities, it is the appellant who has 
established a stronger and more acceptable case. 
36. 
For the reasons aforesaid, the impugned judgment of the High Court is 
set aside and the judgment of the Family Court that the appellant is 
entitled to relief is accepted. 
37. 
The appellant had successfully initiated action towards recovery of 
money in lieu of 89 sovereigns of gold, which in the year 2009 was 
valued at Rs 8,90,000/- (Rupees eight lakh ninety thousand). Mere 
upholding of the decree of the Family Court at this distance of time, 
without anything more, would bring about injustice to her. Bearing in 
mind the passage of time, the escalation in cost of living, and in the 
interest of equity and justice, we deem it fit in exercise of power 
conferred by Article 142 of the Constitution of India to award to the 
appellant a sum of Rs 25,00,000/- (Rupees twenty-five lakh). We hope 
and trust that such financial recompense would provide to the appellant 
(presently aged 50 years), comfort and security for her future life. 
38. 
The first respondent shall pay Rs 25,00,000/- (Rupees twenty-five lakh) 
to the appellant within six months from date, failing which he shall be 
liable to pay to the appellant interest @ 6 % per annum on the said sum 

from this date till date of full payment. In default of payment as 
indicated above, the appellant will be at liberty to initiate proceedings 
for realisation thereof in accordance with law. 
39. 
With the aforesaid modification of the decree of the Family Court, the 
appeal stands allowed to the extent mentioned before. Parties shall, 
however, bear their own costs. 
 
……………………………J 
(SANJIV KHANNA) 

……………………………J 
(DIPANKAR DATTA) 
New Delhi; 
24th April, 2024.