IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
[.No.36602 of 2022] 
 
MOHD. AHSAN...APPELLANT (S) Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.5460 of 

VERSUS 
STATE OF HARYANA...RESPONDENT (S) 

JUDGMENT 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
This appeal challenges the judgment and order dated 09th 
October, 2013 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of 
Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Criminal Appeal No. 233-
DB of 2007 wherein the Division Bench dismissed the Criminal 
Appeal preferred by the Appellant Mohd. Ahsan and upheld the 
order of conviction and sentence dated 25th January, 2007 as 
recorded by the learned Sessions Judge, Yamuna Nagar 

(hereinafter referred to as the ‘trial Court’) in Sessions Case No. 
09 of 2005. 
3. 
Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present appeal are 
as under:- 
3.1 On 18th August, 2005, at about 01:00 a.m., the SHO of 
Police Station City Jagadhri, namely, Jai Singh (PW-13), received 
telephonic information from P.P. Rakshak Vihar about the death 
of one Vikrant hintu (hereinafter referred to as ‘the deceased’) 
who had been admitted in Civil Hospital, Jagadhri in an injured 
state. On the receipt of the information, PW-13 along with several 
other police personnel rushed to the said hospital wherefrom PW-
13 obtained the medico-legal report (Ex.PC) of the deceased and 
recorded the statement of Sh. Devi Dayal Sharma (PW-10), the 
de-facto complainant. On the basis of the said complaint, the 
First Information Report (“FIR” for short) being FIR No. 373 of 
2005 was registered at Police Station, City Jagadhri for the 
offence punishable under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 

(“IPC” 
for 
short), 
against 
the 
present 
Appellant. 
Subsequently, the post mortem of the deceased was conducted 

on 18th August, 2005 wherein it was concluded that the cause of 
death was shock due to massive haemorrhage in the left plural 
cavity which was sufficient to cause death under normal 
circumstances. 
3.2 The prosecution case is that on 17th August, 2005 at about 
11-11:30 p.m., the de-facto complainant (PW-10) had been 
taking food at Shiv Dhaba which was situated opposite Bus Stop, 
Jagadhri, in the company of Charan Singh and Rajiv Kumar (PW-
12), when another group of four men, namely, Neeraj Gulati (PW-
11), Kamal Kumar, Naresh Kumar and the deceased arrived at 
the Dhaba to partake their meals. To attract the attention of the 
waiter, the deceased called the waiter by use of the word “hello”. 
This gesture irked another customer i.e. the present Appellant 
who was seated in a corner of the Dhaba, smoking a cigarette. 
The Appellant initially abused the deceased in the name of his 
sister and thereafter rose from his seat, walked up to the 
deceased and grappled with him. During the said quarrel, the 
Appellant and the deceased went out of the Dhaba where they 
were separated by the complainant (PW-10) and his companions. 

However, refusing to relent, the Appellant rushed to his car and 
pulled out a glass bottle which he broke on the bonnet of his car 
and thereafter proceeded to inflict five injuries on the body of the 
deceased, due to which the deceased fell to the ground bleeding, 
after which the Appellant fled from the scene. Subsequently, 
Neeraj Gulati (PW-11) and the others present at the Dhaba placed 
the deceased on the motorbike of PW-11 and rushed him to 
Aggarwal Hospital, but owing to the unavailability of a doctor, the 
deceased was subsequently taken to the Civil Hospital, Jagadhri, 
where he eventually succumbed to his injuries. 
3.3 Upon the conclusion of investigation, a chargesheet came to 
be filed before the Court of the Additional Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, Yamuna Nagar. Since the case was exclusively triable 
by the Sessions Court, the same came to be committed to the 
Sessions Judge. 
3.4 Charges came to be framed by the trial Court for the offence 
punishable under Section 302 of the IPC. The Appellant pleaded 
not guilty and claimed to be tried. 

3.5 The prosecution examined 13 witnesses to bring home the 
guilt of the accused. In his defence, the Appellant stated that it 
was a case of false implication since he had not used the glass 
bottle to cause any injury to the deceased; whereas, it was the 
deceased who had rushed towards the Appellant with a broken 
glass bottle in order to physically assault him, during which 
exercise, he had fallen down and had injured his own body with 
the said glass bottle. 
3.6 At the conclusion of the trial, the trial Court found that the 
prosecution had proved the case against the Appellant beyond 
reasonable doubt and accordingly convicted him for the offence 
punishable under Section 302 of the IPC and sentenced him to 
undergo imprisonment for life along with a fine of Rs. 10,000/-. 
3.7 Being aggrieved thereby, the Appellant preferred a Criminal 
Appeal before the High Court. The High Court by the impugned 
judgment dismissed the Criminal Appeal and affirmed the order 
of conviction and sentence awarded by the trial Court. 

3.8 Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal. 
4. 
This Court vide order dated 14th December 2022 had issued 
notice, limited to the question as to whether conviction under 
Section 302 of the IPC could be converted to Part I or Part II of 
Section 304 of the IPC. 
5. 
We have heard Mr. Jay Kishor Singh, learned Advocate-on-
Record appearing for the Appellant and Mr. Shekhar Raj Sharma, 
learned Deputy Advocate General (“D.A.G.” for short), appearing 
for the respondent-State. 
6. 
Mr. Jay Kishor Singh submits that even if the prosecution 
case is taken at its face value, it would reveal that the incident 
occurred out of a sudden fight. It is submitted that there was no 
intention of the appellant to cause death of the deceased. It is 
submitted that the incident had occurred in a sudden fight 
without premeditation, in the heat of passion upon a sudden 
quarrel. It is submitted that from the nature of injuries, it would 
reveal that the appellant had not taken undue advantage or acted 
in a cruel or unusual manner. He therefore submits that the 
conviction under Section 302 of the IPC would not be tenable and 

the offence would be required to be brought under Part I or Part 
II of Section 304 of the IPC. 
7. 
Mr. Shekhar Raj Sharma, learned D.A.G., on the contrary, 
submits that both the courts, upon correct appreciation of 
evidence, have concurrently found the Appellant guilty for the 
commission of the offence punishable under Section 302 of the 
IPC and the said findings warrant no interference. 
8. 
The prosecution case basically rests on the ocular testimony 
of PW10-Devi Dayal son of Sadhu Ram; PW11-Neeraj Gulati son 
of Vinod Kumar; and PW12-Rajiv Kumar son of Sham Lal. 
9. 
PW10-Devi Dayal in his evidence stated that he along with 
Charan Singh and Rajiv Kumar (PW-12) were sitting at Shiv 
Dhaba for taking dinner. In the meantime, Kuldip and Vikrant 
hintu (the deceased) and two other boys reached there. 
Kuldip then placed orders for the meal. It is stated that, in the 
meantime, a car bearing registration No.DL-7729 arrived there 
and its driver alighted from his seat. He then objected to the use 
of the words made by the deceased Vikrant hintu by abusing 
him in the name of his sister. However, PW10 and his associates 

intervened and separated them. They returned inside the 
building of the restaurant but the accused-Appellant and the 
deceased were again heard quarreling. When they rushed out to 
intervene, the accused-Appellant pulled out a glass bottle from 
his car, broke it on the bonnet of his car and caused at least five 
injuries on the person of the deceased with that broken glass 
bottle. Thereafter, the deceased was taken to the Civil Hospital, 
Jagadhri. 
10. Similar is the evidence of PW11-Neeraj Gulati. It will be 
relevant to refer to the following part of his testimony in the 
examination-in-chief. 
“I placed the orders for the meals 
whereafter deceased Vikrant called the 
waiter by the sound of Hello. It seems that 
the accused thought that sound was 
aimed at him and he retaliated by abusing 
Vikrant in the name of his sister. This was 
followed by a heated exchange. They then 
grappled out of the building of the Dhaba. 
We intervened to separate them and 
succeeded. The accused rushed to his car, 
pulled out a bottle from the driver’s seat 
side, broke it on the bumper of the car and 
violently 
attacked 
repeatedly 
victim 
Vikrant.” 

11. Similar is the evidence of PW12-Rajiv Kumar. 
12. PW1-Dr. Vikash Kaushik had examined the deceased 
Vikrant, who was brought in an unconscious condition. He 
found the following injuries on the injured Vikrant:- 
“1. 
Lacerated wound 5cm x 4 cm x bone 
deep on left side of chest 7 cm from 
mid-line. 
 
2. 
Lacerated wound 5cm x 3 cm bone 
deep on dorsomedial aspect of left 
arm and elbow joint. 
 
3. 
Lacerated wound 4cm x 2cm x bone 
deep on anterior aspect of right 
shoulder joint and adjoining area of 
chest. 
 
4. 
Lacerated wound 2 cm x 1 cm x bone 
deep on the medial wall of right 
axilla. 
 
5. 
Punctured wound 1cm x.5cm x bone 
deep on left side of chest.” 
 
13. From the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses 
themselves, it would reveal that there is no premeditation. The 
incident occurred since the appellant believed that the utterances 
by deceased Vikrant hintu were aimed at him and, therefore, 

he retaliated by abusing the deceased. This was followed by a 
heated exchange between them. They grappled out of the 
building of the Dhaba. Though the witnesses were successful in 
separating them, the accused-Appellant rushed to his car, pulled 
out a bottle from the driver’s seat side, broke it on the bumper of 
the car and attacked the deceased. 
14. It is thus clear that the incident occurred without 
premeditation, in a sudden fight, in the heat of passion and upon 
a sudden quarrel. The evidence would also not show that the 
accused-Appellant had either taken undue advantage or acted in 
a cruel or unusual manner. We therefore find that the present 
case would fall under Exception 4 to Section 300 of the IPC. 
15. We therefore find that the present appeal deserves to be 
partly allowed. The conviction of the accused-Appellant under 
Section 302 of the IPC is altered to one under Part I of Section 
304 of the IPC and he is sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for 
a period of eight (08) years and a fine of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five 
thousand) and in default of payment of fine, a further 
imprisonment for a period of three (03) months. 

16. Needless to state that the period already spent by the 
accused-Appellant in custody shall be set-off against the 
aforesaid sentence. 
17. The appeal is partly allowed in the above terms. 

…… 
[B.R. GAVAI] 

…… 
[ARAVIND KUMAR] 

…… 
[SANDEEP MEHTA] 
NEW DELHI; 
APRIL 25, 2024