IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

BANK OF INDIA & ORS
          APPELLANT(S)
                         VERSUS
PANKAJ SRIVASTAVA                                 RESPONDENT(S)
ORDER
1.
Being   aggrieved   by   the   judgment   of   Single   Bench,
allowing the writ petition of the respondent and directing
the   bank   to   consider   his   claim   for   appointment   on
compassionate   ground;   confirmed   in   appeal   by   the
Division Bench, this appeal has been preferred. 
2.
The facts in shorn are, the respondent filed a writ petition
seeking directions to consider his case being eligible and
grant compassionate appointment on the post of Clerk
with immediate effect on account of death of his father
during course of employment. Prayer was also made to
quash the order dated 20.06.2002 issued by the bank. 
3.
In   the   short   counter­affidavit   filed   by   the   bank,   the
scheme prevalent for grant of compassionate appointment

vide Branch Circular No. 92/64 dated 17.03.1999 was
referred,   in   particular,   Clause   10(iv)   thereof.   Further
reference   was   made   regarding   revised   guidelines   vide
letter No. 18/80/97­IR dated 19.02.2002 delegating the
authority to the bank for appointment of dependents of
deceased employee on compassionate ground relating to
cases   involving   major   penalty   and   not   required   to   be
referred to Government of India for clearance. Apropos
the letter dated 20.06.2002 issued by Bank of India in
Board Meeting, indicates that the Executive Director of
the Bank is directed not to consider those cases which
involve   award/consideration/contemplation   of   major
penalty
 
to
 
employees
 
on
 
account
 
of
fraud/forgery/misappropriation or  due to any vigilance
angle/negligence.   The   bank   had   also   filed   a
supplementary affidavit before the writ Court which was
also placed on record. 
4.
Learned Single Bench proceeded on the premise that as
per the contents of the supplementary affidavit, no charge
sheet was served upon prior to the death of the employee,
and opined that the disciplinary proceedings were neither

under contemplation nor initiated, however, the defence
taken was not found plausible in terms of the policy. 
5.
On   filing   intra   court   appeal   by   bank,   the   High   Court
referred the scheme dated 17.03.1999 and analyzed the
purport of Clause 10(iv) and the letter of the Bank of
India in Board Meeting dated 20.06.2002. In reference
thereto, the Court observed that the deceased was neither
punished  with major penalty nor such penalty was in
contemplation against him prior to his death. It is said
that father of the respondent died on 28.07.2000 and till
his death he was not placed under suspension either due
to   contemplation   or   initiation   of   the   departmental
proceedings. As per averments in the counter­affidavit,
the charge sheet was not issued, except to say that it was
under preparation. However, the Division Bench in the
impugned judgment has opined as under: ­
“In   our   considered   opinion,   merely   because
the   charge­sheet   was   said   to   be   under
preparation before the death of the father of
the respondent – petitioner, it cannot be said
that any major penalty was in contemplation.
Thus, the aforesaid submission made by the
learned counsel for  the appellants does not
appeal to this Court which is hereby rejected.”

The   Bench   also   denied   to   accede   the   plea   raised
relying on the judgment of  State of Himachal Pradesh
and   Anr.   Vs.   Shashi   Kumar   (2019)    and
observed that in the present case, there is no delay either
in   applying   or   taking   recourse   before   the   Court   for
appropriate directions to appoint the writ petitioner on
compassionate ground and thus, accepted the reasonings
as given by learned Single Judge. 
6.
Having   heard   learned   counsel   for   the   parties   and   on
perusal of the scheme dated 17.03.1999, in particular,
Clause   10(iv),   which   specifies   the   exceptions   to
recruitment of the dependents of the employees who died
in harness, is relevant, and extracted for ready reference
as under: ­  
10(iv). In case where the deceased employee
had   been   awarded   minor   penalty   or
disciplinary proceedings against the employee
was pending or contemplated at the time of
death of the employee, which would prima­
facie have resulted in award of minor penalty,
appointment on compassionate grounds of the
dependents   will   be   considered   with   the
approval of the bank’s board. In case where
the   deceased   employee   had   been   awarded
major   penalty   or   disciplinary   proceedings
against   the   employee   was   pending   or
contemplated   at   time   of   death   of   the
employee,   which   would   prima­facie   have
resulted   in   award   of   major   penalty,

appointment on compassionate grounds of the
dependents   will   be   considered   with   the
approval of the Government of India, Ministry
of Finance, Department  of Economic Affairs
(Banking Division).  
7.
The afore­quoted clause specifies two exceptions, first, in
the   cases   where   minor   penalty   had   been   awarded   or
disciplinary proceedings against the deceased employee
was   pending   or   contemplated   at   the   time   of   death   of
employee   which   would  prima   facie  result   in   award   of
minor  penalty,  there would  not  be  any  impediment to
consider   the   case   of   dependents   for   compassionate
appointment with the approval of Bank’s board. While in
the   second   exception   it   is   clarified   that   where   the
deceased employee had been awarded major penalty or
the   disciplinary   proceedings   against   the   employee   was
pending or contemplated at the time of death of employee
which would prima facie result in award of major penalty,
the   consideration   of   appointment   on   compassionate
ground of the dependents of such employee may be made
with the approval of the Government of India, Ministry of
Finance,   Department   of   Economic   Affairs   (Banking
Division).  
8.
The letter of the Bank of India in Board Meeting dated

20.06.2002 has been relied upon which was issued in
reference to the revised Government guidelines vide letter
F.   No.   18/80/97­IR   dated   19.02.2002.   The   relevant
portion of the letter dated 20.06.2002 is reproduced as
thus: ­
“Scheme   for   appointment   of   dependents   of
deceased employees on compassionate ground
cases   involving   major   penalty   proceeding
referred to Government of India for clearance
as per earlier Government guidelines vide its
letter F. No. 18/80/97­IR dated 03.11.1998
Revised Government guidelines vide letter F.
No. 18/80/97­IR dated 19.2.2002 delegating
authority to Bank in the above cases.
Apropos   the   directive   given   at   the
Board Meeting held on 20.04.2002 that the
Board   would   decide   on   case   to   case   basis
upon resubmission of the above referred 12
individual   cases   to   it,   memorandum   No.
P/A/SSG/2002­03/212   dated   27.05.2002,
together   with   annexures,   embodying   the
factual   details   of   the   said   12   cases,
submitted   by   Personal   Department,   was
considered.
The
 
Board
 DIRECTED 
that
employment on compassionate ground need
not   be   considered   in   cases   where   major
penalty was awarded considered/contemplated
to
 
employees
 
on
 
account
 
of
fraud/forgery/misappropriation,   on   account
of   any   vigilance   angle/negligence   and
authorized the Executive Director to consider
only those cases not involving the above, for
employment   of   dependent   of   deceased
employees on compassionate ground.
Stamp
Bank of India
Board of Meeting
20.06.2002”
9.
On   perusal   of   Clause   10(iv)   of   the   Scheme   and   the

amended   directions   in   bank’s   Board   Meeting   dated
20.06.2002, it is luculent that even in cases where the
disciplinary   proceedings   against   the   employee   were
pending or were under contemplation prior to his death
which would prima facie result in award of major penalty,
the case of the dependents of the deceased employee on
compassionate ground has not been completely refused
from consideration and it was subject to approval of the
Government. In compliance of government circular dated
19.02.2002,   the   bank   in   its   Board   of   Meeting   dated
20.06.2002 authorized the Executive Director of the Bank
and   said   that   the   cases   for   appointment   on
compassionate ground shall not be considered where the
major penalty was awarded/contemplated to employee on
account   of   fraud/forgery/misappropriation   and   on
account   of   any   vigilance   angle/negligence.   The   above
letter   does   not   debar   the   cases   where   disciplinary
proceedings   were   pending   or   were   in   contemplation
against the employee at the time of death which would
prima facie result in award of major penalty. In our view,
the   decision   of   the   bank   in   its   Board   Meeting   dated

20.06.2002   is   logical   whereby   the   cases   wherein   the
penalty   was   either   awarded   or   contemplated   to   the
deceased employee was not required to be considered.
The letter is silent with respect to contemplation of the
disciplinary proceedings against the deceased employee
which would prima facie result in award of major penalty.
In the facts of the case in hand, the deceased employee
was   not   placed   under   suspension   on   account   of
contemplation   of   the   disciplinary   proceedings   and   the
charge sheet was also not issued. It is merely said that
the   charge   sheet   was   under   preparation,   however,   in
absence of any relevant material disclosed, it might not
be presumed to be a case of prima facie award of major
penalty   on   account   of   contemplation   of   disciplinary
proceedings.   Therefore,   in   our   considered   opinion,
reasoning as given in the judgment by the Division Bench
is completely in consonance with the spirit of the Circular
and it rightly affirmed the decision of the Single Bench to
consider   the   case   of   the   respondent   for   grant   of
compassionate appointment.
10.
In view of the above discussion, we do not find any merit

in the contention to interfere with the order passed by the
Single Bench and the Division Bench of the High Court.
Accordingly, this appeal stands dismissed, being bereft of
any merit. However, we direct that the order passed by
the High Court be now implemented within a period of
four months from the date of the order....………
  
           [ J. K. MAHESHWARI ]...………
   
           [ SANJAY KAROL ]
New Delhi;
April 30, 2024.