IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 2044 OF 2010 
 
FIRDOSKHAN KHURSHIDKHAN. 

VERSUS 

THE STATE OF GUJARAT & ANR. 
 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

WITH 

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 2045 OF 2010 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
These two appeals arise out of a common judgment dated 30th 
November, 2009 rendered by the Division Bench of the High Court 
of Gujarat whereby Criminal Appeal Nos. 1865 of 2006 and 1866 
of 2006 preferred by the appellants herein i.e. Anwarkhan 
Jahilkhan Pathan and Firdoskhan Khurshidkhan Pathan, 
respectively were dismissed. By way of the said appeals, the 
appellants herein had assailed the judgment dated 6th June, 2006 
passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Fast Track 
Court, Nadiad(hereinafter being referred to as the ‘trial Court’) in 

Special Case(NDPS) No. 5 of 2003 convicting the appellants for the 
offences punishable under Section 21 read with Section 8(c) and 
Section 29 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 
1985(hereinafter being referred to as ‘NDPS Act’) and sentencing 
them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for ten years and fine of 
Rs. 1 lakh each in default of payment of fine to undergo simple 
imprisonment for two years. 
Brief facts: - 
2. 
Shri Deepak Pareek(PW-2) posted as Intelligence Officer in 
the Narcotic Control Bureau(hereinafter being referred to as ‘NCB’), 
Ahmedabad received a secret information at his office in the 
morning of 30th January, 2003. The informer divulged that two 
persons would be delivering contraband/illicit substance at the ST 
Bus Stand, Kheda between 4:30 pm and 5:00 pm. The secret 
information also contained the description of features of the 
suspects and the clothes which they would be probably wearing. 
The information also provided that the contraband substance had 
been received from one Adilkhan and that the miscreants would 
be delivering it to a third person. Deepak Pareek(PW-2) jotted down 
the secret information, translated and converted it into a 

typewritten script and forwarded a copy thereof to his immediate 
superior officer. 
3. 
Two panchas i.e. Manubhai(PW-1) and Amit R. Dantani were 
summoned to the NCB office, Ahmedabad where a preliminary 
panchnama taking their consent to participate in the proceedings 
was drawn. Deepak Pareek(PW-2) accompanied with other NCB 
officials and the panchas proceeded to ST Bus Stand, Kheda. The 
raiding party was divided into two groups. Upon reaching the bus 
stand at around 4:30 pm, they saw two persons, whose description 
was matching with the secret information, sitting near the public 
urinals of the bus stand. The officials observed that a bag was 
being held by one of the two suspects who handed the same over 
to the other and proceeded towards the exit gate of the bus stand. 
One group of the raiding team cornered the person who was 
holding the bag whereas, the second group followed the other 
person who was seen proceeding towards the exit gate of the bus 
stand. The first group after disclosing their identity to the suspect 
who was holding the bag, made enquiry about his identity and he 
gave out his name to be Anwarkhan(A-1). The second suspect, 
however, escaped from the spot and could not be apprehended by 
the group of officials who went in his pursuit. The bag held by 

Anwarkhan(A-1) was opened and two polythene bags containing 
suspected 
contraband 
material 
were 
found 
therein. 
The 
contraband substance was weighed at the bus stand and gross 
weight of the two polythene bags came out to be 2kg and 30 grams. 
As the spot where the suspect and the contraband were found was 
a busy public place, the NCB officers in order to avoid security 
issues thought it fit to move to the PWD Guest House adjacent to 
the bus stand for carrying out the seizure, sampling and sealing 
procedure. Accordingly, the team members along with the 
panchas, the suspect and the packet of contraband, moved to the 
PWD Guest House. Three samples were collected from each 
polythene bag and were sealed under the signatures of the 
panchas and the Intelligence Officer(PW-2) of the NCB. The 
second/final part of the panchnama was drawn up and completed 
at the PWD Guest House, Kheda. Summon under Section 67 of 
the NDPS Act was issued to Anwarkhan(A-1) by Deepak 
Pareek(PW-2) which was duly received by him. Statement of 
Anwarkhan(A-1) was recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act 
by Deepak Pareek(PW-2) and thereafter, he was arrested. 
4. 
Further, investigation was assigned to Intelligence Officer 
Vikram Ratnu(PW-3). During investigation, information was 

received that the second suspect who had escaped from the ST Bus 
Stand had been tracked down by the Madya Pradesh Police. The 
Intelligence Officer Deepak Pareek(PW-2) claims to have proceeded 
to Shah Jahan Pur Police Station, Madhya Pradesh where the 
second suspect was found and identified to be Firdoskhan(A-2) 
who volunteered to come down to the Office of NCB, Ahmedabad 
for participating in investigation. Accordingly, Firdoskhan(A-2) 
was brought to NCB Office, Ahmedabad by Deepak Pareek(PW-2) 
on 9th February, 2003 where summon under Section 67 of the 
NDPS Act was served to him. Deepak Pareek(PW-2) recorded the 
statement of Firdoskhan(A-2) under Section 67 of the NDPS Act 
during the intervening night of 9th and 10th February, 2003 
whereafter, Firdoskhan(A-2) was also arrested in the present case. 
5. 
One part of samples was forwarded to the FSL and second 
part of samples was forwarded to the Central Revenues Control 
Laboratory, New Delhi(hereinafter being referred to ‘CRCL’). After 
analysis, a report was received to the effect that the samples gave 
positive test for presence of ingredients of brown sugar/heroin and 
Diacetyl Morphine contents were found therein. 
6. 
A complaint came to be filed by Intelligence Officer, Vikram 
Ratnu(PW-3) against both the accused in the Court of learned 

Sessions Judge, Nadiad. The case was transferred to the Court of 
learned Additional Sessions Judge, Fast Track Court, Nadiad for 
trial. 
7. 
Charges were framed against both the accused for the 
offences mentioned above who abjured their guilt and claimed 
trial. The prosecution examined 4 witnesses and exhibited 38 
documents to prove its case. The accused were questioned under 
Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(hereinafter 
being referred to as ‘CrPC’) upon which, they denied the allegations 
as appearing against them in the prosecution evidence and 
claimed to be innocent. After deliberating upon the submissions 
advanced on behalf of the parties and upon analysing the evidence 
available on record, the trial Court vide judgment dated 6th June, 
2006 proceeded to convict and sentence the appellants in the 
manner stated above. 
8. 
The appeals preferred by the appellants were rejected by the 
High Court of Gujarat vide impugned judgment dated 30th 
November, 2009. 
9. 
Since both the appeals arise out of a common judgment, they 
have been heard analogously and are being decided together. 

Submissions on behalf of the appellants: - 
10. Shri. T.N. Singh, learned counsel representing the appellants 
vehemently contended that the conviction of the appellants as 
recorded by the trial Court and affirmed by the High Court is totally 
unjustified and contrary to facts and law. He advanced the 
following pertinent submissions craving acquittal for both the 
appellants: - 

That the requirements of mandatory procedure contained 
in Section 42 of the NDPS Act were not complied with by 
the Seizure Officer because copy of the secret information 
was not forwarded to the superior officer as mandated by 
Section 42(2) of the NDPS Act. 

That the option to be searched before a Magistrate or a 
Gazetted Officer was also not given to Anwarkhan(A-1) and 
hence, it is a clear case of violation of the mandate of 
Section 50 of the NDPS Act which vitiates the conviction of 
the appellants. 
(iii) That no independent panch witness was associated in the 
search and seizure proceedings and hence, the entire case 
of the prosecution regarding the seizure becomes doubtful. 

That the panch witness Manubhai(PW-1) was serving in 
the Income Tax Department and one of the NCB officials 
being a part of raiding team was previously serving in the 
same Department and hence, it is clearly established that 
the panch witness Manubhai(PW-1) was an interested 
witness. 

That Firdoskhan(A-2) was neither arrested at the spot nor 
his name was recorded in the seizure memo. The witness 
Vikram Ratnu(PW-3) identified the accused Firdoskhan(A-
2) for the first time in the Court without any Test 
Identification 
Parade 
being 
held 
and 
thus, 
the 
identification of Firdoskhan in the Court by PW-3 cannot 
be treated to be reliable. 

That the witness Vikram Ratnu(PW-3) at para 20 of the 
deposition admitted that the contraband articles were 
found in Ahmedabad unattended and hence it is clearly a 
case of the narcotic drugs being planted upon the accused. 
(vii) That the statements of the accused appellants recorded by 
NCB officials under Section 67 of the NDPS Act which have 
been heavily relied upon as incriminating evidence by the 
trial Court as well as the High Court have to be omitted 

from consideration. In this regard, he placed reliance on 
the judgment rendered by this Court in the case of Tofan 
Singh v. State of Tamil Nadu1. 
11. On these counts, learned counsel for the appellants urged 
that the appellants deserve to be acquitted of all the charges. 
Submissions on behalf of Respondents: - 
12., learned counsel appearing for the respondent NCB 
fervently opposed the submissions advanced by the learned 
counsel for the appellants. It was contended that the panch 
witness Manubhai(PW-1) was serving in the Income Tax 
Department and hence, he cannot be termed to be a partisan or a 
stock 
witness. 
Manubhai(PW-1) 
has 
fully 
supported 
the 
prosecution case in his testimony. The evidence of the Intelligence 
Officers, namely, Deepak Pareek(PW-2) and Vikram Ratnu(PW-3) 
is also trustworthy and reliable. They had no cause or motive to 
falsely implicate the accused appellants in a case involving 
recovery of huge quantity of narcotic drug heroin. The evidence of 
Deepak Pareek(PW-2) and Vikram Ratnu(PW-3) is unimpeachable. 
They identified the accused Anwarkhan(A-1) and proved the 
seizure of the contraband narcotic drug from the bag being held by 
 
1 (2021) 

him. Vikram Ratnu(PW-3) also identified Firdoskhan(A-2) as the 
second man who had escaped from the spot. 
13. Learned counsel for the respondents further contended that 
the discrepancy sought to be exploited by the learned counsel for 
the appellant in the statement of Vikram Ratnu(PW-3) wherein it 
is mentioned that the contraband articles were found in 
Ahmedabad unattended, was explained by the witness in his 
further examination wherein, he stated that it was not true that 
the mudammal was found lying abandoned. Thus, as per the 
learned counsel, the prosecution has proved its case against both 
the accused beyond all manner of doubt and that the conviction of 
the accused as recorded by the trial Court and affirmed by the High 
Court does not warrant any interference by this Court. 
14. On these grounds, learned counsel for the respondents 
implored the Court to dismiss both the appeals. 
15. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the 
impugned judgment. We have also thoroughly re-appreciated the 
evidence available on record. 
16. At the outset, we may note that the contention of learned 
counsel for the appellants that the search and seizure was 

undertaken without associating an independent witness is 
untenable on the face of record. Manubhai(PW-1), the panch 
witness associated in the search and seizure proceedings was 
serving in the Income Tax Department and hence by no stretch of 
imagination, can it be accepted that the witness was a stock 
witness of the NCB or was an interested witness. Manubhai(PW-
1) in his sworn testimony proved the recovery panchnama(Exhibit 
P-30) and also fully supported the prosecution case regarding the 
search and seizure of contraband effected from Anwarkhan(A-1). 
Nothing significant could be elicited by the defence in the 
prolonged cross-examination undertaken from Manubhai(PW-1) 
and hence, we have no hesitation in holding that the evidence of 
Manubhai(PW-1) being the panch witness associated in the search 
and seizure effected from Anwarkhan(A-1) is reliable and 
trustworthy. Thus, it is well established that independent panch 
witness was associated in the search and seizure procedure. 
17. It was the fervent contention of learned counsel for the 
appellants that the search and seizure proceedings are vitiated on 
account of non-compliance of the mandatory procedure provided 
under Section 42 of the NDPS Act. The said contention is on the 
face of record, misplaced. The secret information which was 

received by Deepak Pareek(PW-2) was to the effect that two 
suspects would be bringing contraband substance at the ST Bus 
Stand, Kheda which is a public place. 
18. Section 42 of the NDPS Act deals with search and seizure 
from a building, conveyance or enclosed place. When the search 
and seizure is effected from a public place, the provisions of 
Section 43 of the NDPS Act would apply and hence, there is no 
merit in the contention of learned counsel for the appellants that 
non-compliance of the requirement of Section 42(2) vitiates the 
search and seizure. Hence, the said contention is noted to be 
rejected. 
19. So far as the contention of learned counsel for the appellants 
that the search and seizure proceedings are vitiated on account of 
the non-compliance of Section 50 of the NDPS Act is concerned, 
the same is also noted to be rejected because admittedly, the 
seizure in this case was not effected during personal search of the 
appellant Anwar Khan(A-1). Admittedly, the contraband was being 
carried in a polythene bag held by the appellant Anwar Khan(A-1) 
in his hand and hence, there was no requirement for the Seizure 
Officer to have acted under the provisions of Section 50 of the 
NDPS Act before conducting the search and seizure proceedings. 

20. We have minutely gone through the testimony of four 
prosecution witnesses and find that the seizure of contraband 
narcotic drug, i.e., heroin/brown sugar weighing 2 kg and 30 
grams from the bag being held by Firdoskhan(A-2) has been well 
established by these witnesses in their sworn testimony and is 
corroborated by contemporaneous documents which were 
exhibited by them and so also the material exhibits. The witnesses 
Deepak 
Pareek(PW-2), 
Vikram 
Ratnu(PW-3) 
and 
Jan 
Mohammed(PW-4) have faithfully deposed about the whole process 
beginning from the receipt of the secret information, summoning 
of the panchas, raid at the ST Bus Stand, Kheda followed by the 
search of Anwarkhan(A-1), the seizure effected from him and the 
panchnama proceedings at the PWD Guest House followed by the 
transmission of the sample packets to the FSL and CRCL in sealed 
condition. The complete chain of evidence required to prove the 
safe custody of the samples in a sealed condition has been proved 
in the testimony of the three officials of NCB. The CRCL 
report(Exhibit-62) admissible under Section 293 CrPC concludes 
that sample packets A2 and B2 gave positive tests for presence of 
8.4% and 7.9% of Diacetyl Morphine, respectively. Thus, the fact 
regarding the seizure of contraband narcotic drug, i.e., 

heroin/brown sugar weighing 2 kgs and 30 grams from the 
possession of Anwarkhan(A-1) has been duly established by the 
prosecution beyond all manner of doubt. The link evidence 
required to prove the sanctity of the sampling and transmission of 
the samples to the Chemical Analyst is also sacrosanct. The search 
and seizure procedure is free from all doubts. 
21. Learned counsel for the appellants harped upon a 
discrepancy as appearing in the statement of Vikram Ratnu(PW-3) 
wherein he stated that the contraband was found lying abandoned 
at Ahmedabad. This discrepancy was explained by the witness in 
his examination-in-chief at a later point of time. The witness 
clearly stated that the mudammal was not found in an abandoned 
condition and we have no reason to disbelieve the explanation so 
offered by the witness. 
22. In these circumstances, we are of the view that the 
prosecution has duly proved the guilt of Anwarkhan(A-1) beyond 
all manner of doubt by leading convincing and satisfactory 
evidence. 
23. Now, coming to the case of appellant Firdoskhan(A-2) in. 

24. It is not in dispute that the appellant Firdoskhan(A-2) was 
not apprehended on the spot or at the time of seizure. On a perusal 
of the panchnama(Exhibit-30), it is evident that Firdoskhan is not 
named therein. We find that even though Anwarkhan(A-1) was 
present with the raiding team from 4.30 p.m onwards, no effort 
was made by any of the NCB officials to make an inquiry from him 
regarding the identity of his companion who allegedly fled away 
from the spot. 
25. The name of Firdoskhan(A-2) cropped up for the first time in 
the statement of Anwarkhan(A-1) recorded under Section 67 of the 
NDPS Act. However, we are duly satisfied that the sequence in 
which the said statement came to be recorded completely 
discredits 
the 
reliability 
thereof. 
Anwarkhan(A-1) 
was 
apprehended at the bus stand with the packet of narcotic drug at 
around 4:30 p.m. His signatures had been taken on the 
panchnama(Exhibit-30) prepared at 9:00 p.m. and thus, it does 
not stand to reason that the Intelligence Officer would defer 
arresting Anwarkhan(A-1) to a later point of time because, as per 
the arrest memo(Exhibit-43) his arrest is shown at 11:45 p.m. It 
seems that this deferment in formal arrest of Anwarkhan(A-1) was 
only shown in papers so that the Intelligence Officer could record 

the statement of Anwarkhan(A-1) under Section 67 of the NDPS 
Act and avoid the same being hit by the rigours of Article 20(3) of 
the Constitution of India. 
26. The admissibility of a confessional statement of the accused 
recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act was examined by this 
Court in the case of Tofan Singh(supra) and it was laid down that 
such confessional statements are not admissible in evidence. 
27. Hence, the statement(Exhibit-42) of Anwarkhan(A-1) wherein 
he allegedly identified the appellant Firdoskhan(A-2) as the person 
who had escaped from the spot cannot be read in evidence against 
the appellant Firdoskhan(A-2) because the manner in which the 
said statement was recorded leaves much to be desired and creates 
a grave doubt on the sanctity thereof, in addition to the same 
having rendered inadmissible by virtue of Tofan Singh(supra). 
28. The prosecution witness Deepak Pareek(PW-2) claimed that 
Firdoskhan(A-2) was apprehended from Shah Jahan Pur Police 
Station, Madhya Pradesh. However, no document pertaining to 
the apprehension/detention of appellant Firdoskhan(A-2) at the 
Shah Jahan Pur Police Station was placed on record by the 
prosecution. Thus, the very manner in which the said accused 
was apprehended and brought to the NCB Office at Ahmedabad in 

the purported exercise of recording his statement under Section 
67 of the NDPS Act is full of doubt and creates grave suspicion. 
Even otherwise, the confession of the accused recorded under 
Section 67 of the NDPS Act cannot be admitted in evidence as a 
confession as had been held in the case of Tofan Singh(supra). 
Hence the confessional statement(Exhibit-42) does not lend any 
succour to the prosecution in its quest to prove the charges against 
the accused Firdoskhan(A-2). 
29. The witness Vikram Ratnu(PW-3) identified Firdoskhan(A-2) 
as the person who had escaped from the spot, when he testified on 
oath. However, we feel that the first time identification of 
Firdoskhan(A-2) by Vikram Ratnu(PW-3) is not trustworthy and 
reliable. 
30. We may observe that as per the case set out in the complaint 
and the evidence of the NCB officials, the team of narcotic 
officers/officials was divided into two groups. However, it is not 
clear from the evidence of any of the four prosecution witnesses as 
to what was the composition of these two groups. Neither the 
panch witness Manubhai(PW-1) nor the Intelligence Officer Deepak 
Pareek(PW-2) identified Firdoskhan(A-2) as the accused who had 
escaped from the bus stand. In this background, we feel that the 

first time identification of Firdoskhan(A-2) by Vikram Ratnu(PW-3) 
during his evidence in the Court recorded on 14th February, 2005 
i.e. more than two years from the date of incident, is dubitable. 
The evidence of Vikram Ratnu(PW-3) to the extent he claimed to 
have identified Firdoskhan(A-2) is neither reliable nor it gets 
corroborated by any other independent evidence and hence, his 
evidence deserves to be discarded to this extent. 
31. There is no dispute that no contraband substance was 
recovered from the possession of appellant Firdoskhan(A-2). 
32. Resultantly, the conviction of Firdoskhan(A-2) as recorded by 
the trial Court and affirmed by the High Court cannot be sustained 
and he deserves to be acquitted by giving him the benefit of doubt. 
33. As a consequence of the above discussion, the following order 
is passed: - 

 filed by appellant 
Anwarkhan(A-1) lacks merit and is hereby dismissed. He is on 
bail. His bail bonds are cancelled. He shall surrender before the 
trial Court within 30 days to serve the remaining part of sentence 
failing which the trial Court shall take steps to apprehend the 
accused and make him serve out the remaining sentence. preferred by appellant 
Firdoskhan(A-2) is allowed. His conviction as recorded by the trial 
Court vide judgment dated 6th June, 2006 and affirmed by the High 
Court vide judgment dated 30th November, 2009 is quashed and 
set aside. He is acquitted of all the charges. He is on bail and 
need not surrender. His bail bonds stand discharged. 
34. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 

 ……………..…….………………….……….J. 
 (PRASANNA BHALACHANDRA VARALE) 

New Delhi; 
April 30, 2024