IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024

SURESH...APPELLANT (S)Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.1414
of 2021

VERSUS

THE STATE OF KERALA...RESPONDENT (S)
JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.
Leave granted.
2.
This appeal challenges the judgment and order dated
06th December, 2012 passed by the Division Bench of the
High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam (“High Court” for short) in
 wherein the High Court
partly allowed the said Criminal Appeal preferred by Suresh
nni adi Suresh, the present Appellant, and set aside
the conviction of the present Appellant under Sections 3(a)
and 4(a)(i) of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 and Section

27(1) of the Arms Act, 1958 while confirming the conviction
of the present Appellant under Sections 302, 307,143, 147,
148, 324, 326, 427 and 449 read with Section 149 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“IPC” for short) as recorded by the
learned Additional Sessions Judge, Ernakulam (hereinafter
referred to as the ‘trial court’) in Sessions Case No.465 of
2008. The High Court also reduced the sentence of the
present Appellant awarded under Section 307 read with
Section 149 of the IPC from life imprisonment to rigorous
imprisonment for 10 years along with a fine of Rs. 10,000
and further modified the amount of fine payable for the
commitment of the offence punishable under Section 302
read with Section 149 of the IPC as awarded by the trial
court from Rs. 01 lakhs to Rs.10,000. Insofar sentences for
the offences punishable under the remaining Sections were
concerned, the High Court upheld the order passed by the
trial court.

3.
Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present appeal
is as follows: 
3.1
On 06th March, 2006, at about 10:55 a.m., the Control
Room, Ernakulam received information about an unlawful
assembly that had broken into a video shop run by Ajeesh
(PW-2) with the common object of murdering him and had
thereafter proceeded to cause grievous injuries to PW-2 and
his friend Kapil (hereinafter referred to as ‘the deceased’) with
deadly weapons, before hurling country-made bombs into the
said video shop and an adjacent grocery store, run by PW-2’s
father, and had subsequently fled from the scene. On
receiving the said information, the ASI (PW-6) along with a
flying squad reached the spot of the incident, where they
found the deceased in an injured state and took him to RCM
Hospital, Tripunithura, where he was declared dead upon
medical examination. In the meanwhile, Jaimon (PW-1) who
was an eyewitness to the incident, received information about
the death of the deceased while he was at Medical Centre,

Ernakulam where the injured PW-2 was being treated.
Thereafter, PW-1 went to Hill Palace Police Station,
Tripunithura and furnished a statement (Ext. P1 F.I.) on the
basis of which a First Information Report (“FIR” for short)
being Case Crime No. 137 of 2006 was registered against the
members of the unlawful assembly. Subsequently, the post
mortem of the deceased was conducted wherein it was
concluded that his death had been caused by a stab injury
involving the aorta.
3.2
The prosecution case is that Ajeesh (PW-2) and his
father Rajappan were close to the family of one Vidyadharan
who had been kidnapped and murdered by a group led by
Jaison (Accused No.1) on account of prior enmity between
them, since Vidyadharan had opposed the drug trade which
was led by Jaison (Accused No.1). In the investigation and
trial that followed, PW-2 and his father lent their assistance
to the prosecution case therein, which instigated Jaison
(Accused No.1) and 10 of his other associates, including the

present Appellant, to hatch a criminal conspiracy to commit
the murder of PW-2. Pursuant to the same, on 06th March,
2006 at about 10:45 a.m., the 11 accused persons formed an
unlawful assembly with the common object of murdering PW-
2, and set out in a silver Qualis car towards the video shop
run by PW-2 under the name of ‘Kalaya Videos’, which was
situated in a building bearing No.7/274 of Udayamperoor
Panchayat, near Kochupally Junction. The car bore a fake
registration plate and had been rented from Ajith (PW-9) by
Jaison (Accused No.1) after the deposit of a signed blank
cheque and his driving license. On the day of the incident,
PW-2 had opened the said video shop at about 10:00 a.m. after which the deceased had reached the shop to invite PW-2
for the obsequies of his father who had passed away a few
days earlier. While they were chatting inside the shop,
Jaimon (PW-1), their common friend, also reached the shop
and they were subsequently joined by another friend, Siju
(not examined). 

3.3
At about 10:45 a.m., the accused persons who were
armed with deadly weapons like swords, koduwal, choppers
and iron pipes, and were carrying country-made bombs,
smashed the glass door of the video shop and trespassed into
the same. Thereafter they pushed the deceased, PW-1 and
Siju out of the way and proceeded to attack PW-2 with the
said weapons. When the deceased tried to intervene, Jaison
(Accused No.1) directed the other accused persons to kill the
deceased which instigated Accused No. 2 to stab the deceased
in his abdomen with a dagger, who ran out of the shop and
went into the house of PW-2’s father where he collapsed on
the floor. Thereafter, the accused persons inflicted several
injuries on PW-2 who also ran out of the video shop in his
injured state but was chased by the accused persons who
inflicted further injuries on him, which resulted in him falling
down underneath a guava tree. Subsequently, the accused
persons hurled country-made bombs into the video shop and
the grocery store run by PW-2’s father and thereafter, they

fled the scene in their silver Qualis. Subsequently, PW-2’s
neighbour Girish (PW-26), a police constable who was on
leave on the day of the incident, reached the video shop of
PW-2 after hearing the sound of the bombs exploding, where
he found PW-2 in an injured state. Thereafter, PW-2’s father
and PW-26 took him to Medical Centre, Ernakulam. However,
given the severity of his condition, he was referred to
Specialist Hospital, Ernakulam where he was admitted as an
in-patient and treated for his injuries.
3.4
Upon the conclusion of the investigation and after the
Appellant was arrested in 2008, an additional chargesheet
was filed against him before the Court of the Additional Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Ernakulam wherein he was arrayed as
Accused No.6 in the FIR being Case Crime No. 137 of 2006.
Since the case was exclusively triable by the Sessions Court
the same came to be committed to the Court of the learned
Additional Sessions Judge.

3.5
Charges came to be framed by the trial court for the
offences punishable under Sections 302, 307, 143, 147, 148,
120B, 201, 324, 326, 427, 449 read with Section 149 of the
IPC and Section 27 of the Arms Act, 1959 and Sections 3 and
4 of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 against the present
Appellant. The present Appellant pleaded not guilty and
claimed to be tried.
3.6
The prosecution examined 43 witnesses, marked 77
exhibits and identified 39 Material Objects to bring home the
guilt of the accused persons, including the present Appellant.
In his defence, the present Appellant stated that he had been
arrested from Ettumanoor in 2008, two-years subsequent to
the filing of the FIR, and that his name was Suresh Mohan
and not Suresh. As such, the Appellant contended that he
had been falsely implicated in the case.
3.7
At the conclusion of the trial, the trial court found that
the prosecution had proved the case against the present
Appellant and the other accused persons beyond reasonable

doubt and accordingly convicted him for the offences
punishable under 302,307,143,147,148,324,326,427 and
449 read with Section 149 of the IPC and Section 27 of the
Arms Act, 1958 and Sections 3 and 4 of the Explosive
Substances Act, 1908 and sentenced him to undergo
imprisonment for life along with a fine.
3.8
Being aggrieved thereby, the present Appellant preferred
a Criminal Appeal before the High Court. The High Court by
the impugned judgment partly allowed the Criminal Appeal in
the aforementioned terms.
3.9
Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal.
4.
We have heard Shri A. Sirajudeen, learned Senior
Counsel appearing for the appellant and Shri Alim Anvar,
learned counsel appearing for the respondent-State of Kerala.
5.
Shri A. Sirajudeen, learned Senior Counsel submitted
that the present Appellant has been identified for the first
time in Court by PW-1 and PW-2. He submitted that insofar
as the other two eyewitnesses i.e., PW-12 and PW-14 are

concerned, they do not say anything about the role played by
the present Appellant. It is submitted that the present
Appellant was not known previously to any of above 4
witnesses. As such, identification for the first time in the
Court without holding ‘Test Identification Parade’ creates a
serious doubt as to whether these witnesses i.e., PW-1 and
PW-2 have really seen the present Appellant taking part in
the crime. It is further submitted that the present Appellant
was initially described as ‘Unni’ in the first charge-sheet and
in the second charge-sheet, he was described as ‘Suresh alias
Vadi Suresh’. He further submitted that, insofar as the
motive is concerned, the motive is attributed to Accused
No.1-Jaison and not to the present Appellant. He therefore
submitted that the present appeal deserves to be allowed and
the order of conviction and sentence be set aside. 
6.
Shri Alim Anvar, on the contrary, submitted that PW-2
is an injured eyewitness. It is submitted that if a witness is
an injured witness, his evidentiary value would be of greater

degree. He submitted that PW-2 had seen the accused
persons including the present Appellant assaulting him and
therefore it is possible for him not to forget the faces of the
assailants. Learned counsel further submitted that both the
trial court as well as the High Court, on correct appreciation
of the evidence, have concurrently found that the prosecution
has proved beyond reasonable doubt that the present
Appellant is guilty of the crime. It is therefore submitted that
no interference is warranted in the present appeal. 
7.
With the assistance of the learned counsel for the
parties, we have scrutinized the evidence on record. It is not
disputed that the death of the deceased is homicidal and as
such, it will not be necessary to refer to the medical evidence.
The prosecution relied on the testimonies of PW-1, PW-2, PW-
12 and PW-14. 
8.
A perusal of the testimonies of PW-12 and PW-14 would
reveal that they do not say anything about the present

Appellant. As such, it will only be necessary to refer to the
testimonies of PW-1 and PW-2. 
9.
It is relevant to note that the incident took place on 6th
of March 2006. Whereas the testimonies of the witnesses
were recorded in the month of August 2010 i.e.,
approximately four and half years after the date of the
incident. 
10.
A perusal of the testimonies of PW-1 and PW-2 would
reveal that it is only the Accused No.1-Jaison, who is known
to them, and the other accused persons were not known to
them. 
11.
PW-1 in his evidence stated that, while he was chatting
with PW-2, the Accused No.1-Jaison and other 4-5 people
jointly broke the front glass of the shop and entered into the
shop. He stated that a fair and fat man pulled and dragged
the deceased Kapil out of the shop. A man with a bag in his
hand had dragged him also out of the shop. PW-2-Ajeesh
was standing inside the cabin of the shop. Accused No.1-

Jaison entered the shop and attacked PW-2-Ajeesh with a
sword. He further submitted that when the deceased Kapil
tried to enter into the shop, Accused No.1-Jaison shouted
from the shop that, ‘kill him’. After hearing this, a fat and
fair man took a tool from the box and pierced it into the
deceased Kapil’s stomach. It is stated that PW-2-Ajeesh was
attacked by Accused No.1-Jaison and his fellow men inside
the cabin. PW-2-Ajeesh jumped out of the cabin and came
out of the shop. He tried to run away but fell down near one
house under a guava tree. However, again PW-2-Ajeesh was
attacked with sickle, sword and iron pipes on his legs and
hands. It is stated that thereafter PW-2-Ajeesh was taken
into an auto-rikshaw by his father Rajappan and a neighbour
Girish (PW-26) to the Medical Centre. He stated that
deceased Kapil was hospitalized by the Police. PW-1 further
stated that when he went to the hospital, he came to know
that deceased Kapil had died. It is stated that thereafter he
went to the Hill Palace Police Station and gave information

regarding the incident. He further identified the present
Appellant saying that another man involved in the incident is
present now and pointed towards the present Appellant.
12.
In his cross-examination, PW-1 clearly admitted that he
does not know the accused persons except Accused No.1-
Jaison. He has also admitted in his cross-examination that
after the present Appellant’s arrest, Police had shown the
present Appellant to him in the Police Station. 
13.
Insofar as PW-2-Ajeesh is concerned, no doubt that he
is an injured eyewitness. In his evidence, he had made
similar narration as that of PW-1. From the perusal of his
evidence, it would reveal that he knew only Accused No.1-
Jaison. He identified the present Appellant as one of the
persons who was accompanying Accused No.1-Jaison. In his
cross-examination, he clearly admitted that he had not
identified the present Appellant or the weapons before the
Magistrate. He had also admitted that the identification
parade was not done so the present Appellant was not

identified. He further stated in his evidence that till the
Police had brought the accused/present Appellant to home,
the name of the present Appellant was not known to him. He
further stated in his evidence that he did not know whether
the accused called Suresh i.e., present Appellant was in the
accused list. 
14.
It is to be noted that though the incident is of the year
2006, the present Appellant was arrested in the year 2008. It
is further to be seen that apart from the identification parade
not being held, the accused/present Appellant was shown to
the witnesses by the Police. As such, we are of the
considered view that conviction only on the basis of
identification of the accused in the Court for the first time
after four and half years of the incident would not be
sufficient for maintaining the same. 
15.
Insofar as the motive is concerned, the motive is
attributed only to Accused No.1-Jaison and not to the present
Appellant. 

16.
The prosecution also relied on the recovery of iron rod
allegedly on the memorandum of the present Appellant under
Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. However, it is
to be noted that the incident took place on 6th March 2006,
whereas the recovery was made on 11th May 2008 i.e., after
about 2 years and 2 months. According to the prosecution,
the said iron rod also had blood stains. It is difficult to
believe as to how the blood stains still remained on the said
iron rod which was recovered from an open place after about
2 years and 2 months and when in the intervening period two
monsoons had passed. As such, no credence could be given
to the said recovery. 
17.
The possibility of mistaken identity also cannot be ruled
out. In the first charge-sheet, the present Appellant was
described as ‘Unni’, whereas in the second charge-sheet, he
was described as ‘Suresh alias Vadi Suresh’. 
18.
In that view of the matter, we find that the prosecution
has failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt. 

19.
In the result, the appeal is allowed. The judgment and
order dated 30th March 2011 passed by the Additional
Sessions Judge, Ernakulam in Sessions Case No. 465 of
2008 and the judgment and order dated 6th December 2012
passed by the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in Criminal
Appeal No.871 of 2011 are quashed and set aside. The
present appellant is acquitted of all the charges charged with.
He is directed to be set at liberty forthwith, if not required in
any other case. 
 …… 
[B.R. GAVAI]
…… 
[SANDEEP MEHTA]
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 30, 2024