& Ors. 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 
OF 2024 

SHARIF AHMED AND ANOTHER... 
APPELLANTS 

VERSUS 

STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH AND ANOTHER... 
RESPONDENTS 
 
W I T H 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 
OF 2024 

A N D 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 
OF 2024 

JUDGMENT 
 
SANJIV KHANNA, J. 
 
Leave granted in the above matters. 
 
2. 
The concerns which have arisen during the course of hearing the present 
appeals are of particular significance for meeting the ends of criminal justice, 
and relate to the nature of chargesheets filed in some jurisdictions by the 
state/police. For the sake of convenience, we would divide the judgment into 
two parts. The first part relates to the legal issue, that is, the contents of the 
chargesheet in terms of Section 173(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 

 & Ors. 
 
19731. The second part deals with the factual aspects of each of the cases, 
and our decision. 
 
PART I 
 
3. 
The issue in the first part relates to chargesheets being filed without stating 
sufficient details of the facts constituting the offense or putting the relevant 
evidence on record. In some states, the chargesheets merely carry a 
reproduction of the details mentioned by the complainant in the First 
Information Report2, and then proceed to state whether an offence is made 
out, or not made out, without any elucidation on the evidence and material 
relied upon. On this issue, the recent judgment of this Court in Dablu Kujur v. 
State of Jharkhand3 aptly crystallises the legal position in the following words: 
 
“17. Ergo, having regard to the provisions contained in 
Section 173 it is hereby directed that the Report of police 
officer on the completion of investigation shall contain the 
following:— 

A report in the form prescribed by the State 
Government stating- 
 
(a) the names of the parties; 
(b) the nature of the information; 
(c) the names of the persons who appear to be 
acquainted with the circumstances of the case; 
(d) whether any offence appears to have been 
committed and, if so, by whom; 
(e) whether the accused has been arrested; 
(f) whether he has been released on his bond and, if 
so, whether with or without sureties; 
(g) whether he has been forwarded in custody under 
section 170. 
(h) Whether the report of medical examination of the 
woman has been attached where investigation 
relates to an offence under sections 376, 376A, 
376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB or 
section 376E of the Penal Code, 1860” 

1 “Code”, for short. 
2 “FIR”, for short. 
3 2024 SCC Online SC 269. 

 & Ors. 

If upon the completion of investigation, there is no 
sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion 
to justify the forwarding of the accused to a 
Magistrate, the Police officer in charge shall clearly 
state in the Report about the compliance of 
Section 169 Cr. P.C. 

When the report in respect of a case to which Section 
170 applies, the police officer shall forward to the 
Magistrate along with the report, all the documents or 
relevant extracts thereof on which the prosecution 
proposes to rely other than those already sent to the 
Magistrate during investigation; and the statements 
recorded under Section 161 of all the persons whom 
the prosecution proposes to examine as its 
witnesses. 

In case of further investigation, the Police officer in 
charge shall forward to the Magistrate a further report 
or reports regarding such evidence in the form 
prescribed and shall also comply with the details 
mentioned in the above sub para (i) to (iii).” 
 
4. 
The decision in Dablu Kujur (supra) refers to Section 157 of the Code which 
inter alia states that, if on information received or otherwise, an officer of the 
police station has reason to suspect commission of an offence which he is 
empowered under Section 156 to investigate, he shall forthwith send a report 
of the same to the Magistrate empowered to take cognisance of the offence. 
Further, he shall proceed in person or depute any of his subordinate officers to 
proceed to the spot to investigate the facts and circumstances of the case, and 
if necessary, to take measures for discovery and arrest the offender. Such 
report is in the nature of a preliminary report. As per Section 169 of the Code, 
if it appears to the officer in-charge of the police station that there is not 
sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion to justify forwarding the 
accused to the Magistrate, then the officer shall release the person if he is in 
custody on his executing a bond, with or without sureties, with a direction to 

 & Ors. such person to appear if and when so required, before the Magistrate 
empowered to take cognisance of the offence from the police report.4 
 
5. 
Section 170 of the Code deals with the cases where it appears to the officer 
that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground to proceed. In such an 
event he is required to submit a police report or chargesheet under Section 
173(2) of the Code. Elucidating on Section 173(2) of the Code in Dablu Kujur 
(supra), this Court observed: 
“12. We are more concerned with Section 173(2) as we have 
found that the investigating officers while submitting the 
chargesheet/Police Report do not comply with the 
requirements of the said provision. Though it is true that the 
form of the report to be submitted under Section 173(2) has 
to be prescribed by the State Government and each State 
Government has its own Police Manual to be followed by the 
police officers while discharging their duty, the mandatory 
requirements required to be complied with by such officers 
in the Police Report/Chargesheet are laid down in Section 
173, more particularly sub-section (2) thereof. 
 
13. It may be noted that though there are various reports 
required to be submitted by the police in charge of the police 
station before, during and after the investigation as 
contemplated in Chapter XII of Cr. P.C., it is only the report 
forwarded by the police officer to the Magistrate under sub-
section (2) of Section 173 Cr. P.C. that can form the basis 
for the competent court for taking cognizance thereupon. A 
chargesheet is nothing but a final report of the police officer 
under Section 173(2) of Cr. P.C. It is an opinion or intimation 
of the investigating officer to the concerned court that on the 
material collected during the course of investigation, an 
offence appears to have been committed by the particular 
person or persons, or that no offence appears to have been 
committed. 

4 We clarify and respectfully agree with the view expressed by this Court in Siddharth v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh and Another, (2022), which has interpreted Section 170 of the Code. The word 
‘custody’ used in the said Section does not contemplate either police or judicial custody, for otherwise 
the Section would lead to unpalatable and incongruous consequences. It is observed that in normal 
and ordinary course, the police should avoid arresting a person and sending him to jail, if it is possible 
for the police to complete the investigation without his arrest and if every kind of cooperation is provided 
by the accused to the investigating officer in completing the investigation. The word ‘custody’ in Section 
170 has to be interpreted liberally and merely connotes presentation of the accused by the investigating 
officer. This is because personally liberty is an important aspect of the constitutional mandate. 
Existence of the power of arrest, and justification for exercise thereof are two different aspects. Section 
170 of the Code does not impose an obligation on the officer in-charge to arrest each and every 
accused before or at the time of filing of the chargesheet. 

 & Ors. xx 
xx 
xx 
 
15. The issues with regard to the compliance of 
Section 173(2) Cr. P.C., may also arise, when the 
investigating officer submits Police Report only qua some of 
the persons-accused named in the FIR, keeping open the 
investigation qua the other persons-accused, or when all the 
documents as required under Section 173(5) are not 
submitted. In such a situation, the question that is often 
posed before the court is whether such a Police Report 
could be said to have been submitted in compliance with 
sub-section (2) of Section 173 Cr. P.C. In this regard, it may 
be noted that in Satya Narain Musadi v. State of Bihar, this 
Court has observed that statutory requirement of the report 
under Section 173(2) would be complied with if various 
details prescribed therein are included in the report. The 
report is complete if it is accompanied with all the documents 
and statements of witnesses as required by Section 
175(5)…” 
 
6. 
We would like to elaborate on certain aspects, as submission of the 
chargesheet is for taking cognisance and summoning of the accused by the 
Magistrate, which stages are of considerable importance and significance. 
 
7. 
Section 173 of the Code reads: 
“173. Report 
of 
police 
officer 
on 
completion 
of 
investigation.— 
 
(1) Every investigation under this Chapter shall be 
completed without unnecessary delay. 
 
(1A) The investigation in relation to an offence under 
sections 376, 376A, 376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 
376DB or 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall 
be completed within two months from the date on which the 
information was recorded by the officer in charge of the 
police station. 
 
(2) (i) As soon as it is completed, the officer in charge of the 
police station shall forward to a Magistrate empowered to 
take cognizance of the offence on a police report, a report in 
the form prescribed by the State Government, stating— 
 
(a) the names of the parties; 
(b) the nature of the information; 
(c) the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted 
with the circumstances of the case; 
(d) whether any offence appears to have been committed 
and, if so, by whom; 

 & Ors. 
 
(e) whether the accused has been arrested; 
(f) whether he has been released on his bond and, if so, 
whether with or without sureties; 
(g) whether he has been forwarded in custody under section 
170. 
(h) whether the report of medical examination of the woman 
has been attached where investigation relates to an offence 
under [sections 376, 376A, 376AB, 376B, 
376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB or section 376E of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
 
(ii) The officer shall also communicate, in such manner as 
may be prescribed by the State Government, the action 
taken by him, to the person, if any, by whom the information 
relating to the commission of the offence was first given. 
 
(3) Where a superior officer of police has been appointed 
under section 158, the report shall, in any case in which the 
State Government by general or special order so directs, be 
submitted through that officer, and he may, pending the 
orders of the Magistrate, direct the officer in charge of the 
police station to make further investigation. 
 
(4) Whenever it appears from a report forwarded under this 
section that the accused has been released on his bond, the 
Magistrate shall make such order for the discharge of such 
bond or otherwise as he thinks fit. 
 
(5) When such report is in respect of a case to which section 
170 applies, the police officer shall forward to the Magistrate 
along with the report— 
 
(a) all documents or relevant extracts thereof on which the 
prosecution proposes to rely other than those already sent 
to the Magistrate during investigation; 
 
(b) the statements recorded under section 161 of all the 
persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine as its 
witnesses. 
 
(6) If the police officer is of opinion that any part of any such 
statement is not relevant to the subject-matter of the 
proceedings or that its disclosure to the accused is not 
essential in the interests of justice and is inexpedient in the 
public interest, he shall indicate that part of the statement 
and append a note requesting the Magistrate to exclude that 
part from the copies to be granted to the accused and stating 
his reasons for making such request. 
 
(7) Where the police officer investigating the case finds it 
convenient so to do, he may furnish to the accused copies 
of all or any of the documents referred to in sub-section (5). 

 & Ors. 
 
(8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude 
further investigation in respect of an offence after a report 
under sub-section (2) has been forwarded to the Magistrate 
and, where upon such investigation, the officer in charge of 
the police station obtains further evidence, oral or 
documentary, he shall forward to the Magistrate a further 
report or reports regarding such evidence in the form 
prescribed; and the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (6) 
shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such report or 
reports as they apply in relation to a report forwarded under 
sub-section (2)”. 
 
8. 
Sub-section (2) to Section 173 makes a considered departure from sub-
Section (1) to Section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18985. Sub-
section (1)(a) to Section 173 of the 1898 Code had stipulated that as soon as 
the investigation is completed, the officer in-charge of the police station shall 
forward to the Magistrate, a report in the form prescribed by the local 
government, sending forth the names of the parties, nature of the information 
and the names of the people who appear to be acquainted with the 
circumstances of the case and state whether the accused person has been 
forwarded in custody or released on a bond. 
 
9. 
We have referred to Section 173 of the 1898 Code, in view of reliance placed 
during the course of hearing on the decision of this Court in Tara Singh v. 
State6 and R.K. Dalmia etc. v. Delhi Administration7, which refer and relate 
to the 1898 Code. 
 
10. 
In Tara Singh’s case (supra), the question which had arisen was whether the 
challan preferred by the police was complete so as to enable the court to take 
cognisance within the meaning of Section 190(1)(b) of the 1898 Code. It was 
held that a challan submitted in the said case was complete except for 
 
5 “1898 Code”, for short. 
 SC 441. 
 SC 1821. 

 & Ors. submission of the report of the Imperial Serologist and drawing of the sketch 
map of the occurrence. In this context, reference was made to Section 173(1) 
of the 1898 Code and that the report/challan should set forth, viz. the names 
of the parties, nature of the information and names of persons who appear to 
be acquainted with the circumstances of the case. The cognisance, it was held, 
was proper. 
 
11. 
In R.K. Dalmia (supra), again a reference was made to Section 173(1) of the 
1898 Code and that the chargesheet must contain name of the parties, nature 
of the information and the names of persons who appear to be acquainted with 
the circumstances of the case. These observations were made in the context 
of the submission made on behalf of the accused that there was a change in 
the stand of the prosecution, which contention was rejected on several 
grounds, as mentioned in paragraphs 325 and 326 of the footnoted citation. 
 
12. 
It is, therefore, apparent from the language of the legislation, that under the 
Code, that is, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the requirement and the 
manner of providing details in the chargesheet, stand verified. 
 
13. 
The question of the required details being complete must be understood in a 
way which gives effect to the true intent of the chargesheet under Section 
173(2) of the Code. The requirement of “further evidence” or a “supplementary 
chargesheet” as referred to under Section 173(8) of the Code, is to make 
additions to a complete chargesheet,8 and not to make up or reparate for a 
chargesheet which does not fulfil requirements of Section 173(2) of the Code. 
The chargesheet is complete when it refers to material and evidence sufficient 
 
8 State Through Central Bureau of Investigation v. Hemendhra Reddy & Anr.,. 

 & Ors. to take cognizance and for the trial. The nature and standard of evidence to be 
elucidated in a chargesheet should prima facie show that an offence is 
established if the material and evidence is proven. The chargesheet is 
complete where a case is not exclusively dependent on further evidence. The 
trial can proceed on the basis of evidence and material placed on record with 
the chargesheet. This standard is not overly technical or fool-proof, but a 
pragmatic balance to protect the innocent from harassment due to delay as 
well as prolonged incarceration, and yet not curtail the right of the prosecution 
to forward further evidence in support of the charges9. 
 
14. 
In the context of the present issue, it would be apt to refer to Section 190 and 
Section 204 of the Code, along with the provisions relating to contents of 
charge, namely, Sections 211 to 213 and Section 218 of the Code, which read 
as under: 
“190. Cognizance of offences by Magistrates.—(1) 
Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of 
the first class, and any Magistrate of the second class 
specially empowered in this behalf under sub-section (2), 
may take cognizance of any offence— 
 
(a) upon receiving a complaint of facts which 
constitute such offence; 
(b) upon a police report of such facts; 
(c) upon information received from any person other 
than a police officer, or upon his own knowledge, 
that such offence has been committed. 
 
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any 
Magistrate of the second class to take cognizance under 
sub-section (1) of such offences as are within his 
competence to inquire into or try. xx 
xx 
xx 
 
204. Issue of process.—(1) If in the opinion of a Magistrate 
taking cognizance of an offence there is sufficient ground for 
proceeding, and the case appears to be— 

9 See also, para 21 below on the power of the police to investigate under Section 173(8) of the Code. 

 & Ors. 
 
(a) a summons-case, he shall issue his summons for 
the attendance of the accused, or 
(b) a warrant-case, he may issue a warrant, or, if he 
thinks fit, a summons, for causing the accused to 
be brought or to appear at a certain time before 
such Magistrate or (if he has no jurisdiction 
himself) 
some 
other 
Magistrate 
having 
jurisdiction. 
 
(2) No summons or warrant shall be issued against the 
accused under sub-section (1) until a list of the prosecution 
witnesses has been filed. 
 
(3) In a proceeding instituted upon a complaint made in 
writing, every summons or warrant issued under sub-section 
(1) shall be accompanied by a copy of such complaint. 
 
(4) When by any law for the time being in force any process-
fees or other fees are payable, no process shall be issued 
until the fees are paid and, if such fees are not paid within a 
reasonable time, the Magistrate may dismiss the complaint. 
 
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the 
provisions of Section 87. xx 
xx 
xx 
 
211. Contents of charge.—(1) Every charge under this 
Code shall state the offence with which the accused is 
charged. 
 
(2) If the law which creates the offence gives it any specific 
name, the offence may be described in the charge by that 
name only. 
 
(3) If the law which creates the offence does not give it any 
specific name, so much of the definition of the offence must 
be stated as to give the accused notice of the matter with 
which he is charged. 
 
(4) The law and section of the law against which the offence 
is said to have been committed shall be mentioned in the 
charge. 
 
(5) The fact that the charge is made is equivalent to a 
statement that every legal condition required by law to 
constitute the offence charged was fulfilled in the particular 
case. 
 
(6) The charge shall be written in the language of the Court. 

 & Ors. 
 
(7) If the accused, having been previously convicted of any 
offence, is liable, by reason of such previous conviction, to 
enhanced punishment, or to punishment of a different kind, 
for a subsequent offence, and it is intended to prove such 
previous conviction for the purpose of affecting the 
punishment which the Court may think fit to award for the 
subsequent offence, the fact, date and place of the previous 
conviction shall be stated in the charge; and if such 
statement has been omitted, the Court may add it at any time 
before sentence is passed. 
 
212. Particulars as to time, place and person.—(1) The 
charge shall contain such particulars as to the time and 
place of the alleged offence, and the person (if any) against 
whom, or the thing (if any) in respect of which, it was 
committed, as are reasonably sufficient to give the accused 
notice of the matter with which he is charged. 
 
(2) When the accused is charged with criminal breach of 
trust or dishonest misappropriation of money or other 
movable property, it shall be sufficient to specify the gross 
sum or, as the case may be, describe the movable property 
in respect of which the offence is alleged to have been 
committed, and the dates between which the offence is 
alleged to have been committed, without specifying 
particular items or exact dates, and the charge so framed 
shall be deemed to be a charge of one offence within the 
meaning of Section 219: 
 
Provided that the time included between the first and last of 
such dates shall not exceed one year. 
 
213. When manner of committing offence must be 
stated.—When the nature of the case is such that the 
particulars mentioned in Sections 211 and 212 do not give 
the accused sufficient notice of the matter with which he is 
charged, the charge shall also contain such particulars of the 
manner in which the alleged offence was committed as will 
be sufficient for that purpose. xx 
xx 
xx 
 
218. Separate charges for distinct offences.—(1) For 
every distinct offence of which any person is accused there 
shall be a separate charge, and every such charge shall be 
tried separately: 
 
Provided that where the accused person, by an application 
in writing, so desires and the Magistrate is of opinion that 
such person is not likely to be prejudiced thereby, the 
Magistrate may try together all or any number of the charges 
framed against such person. 

 & Ors. 

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the operation of the 
provisions of Sections 219, 220, 221 and 223. 
 
15. 
On the submission of the police report, Dablu Kujur (supra) refers to an earlier 
decision of this Court in Bhagwant Singh v. Commissioner of Police and 
Another10, and discusses the power and the role of the Magistrate when he 
receives the police report and the options available to him, in the following 
words: 
“14. When such a Police Report concludes that an offence 
appears to have been committed by a particular person or 
persons, the Magistrate has three options: (i) he may accept 
the report and take cognizance of the offence and issue 
process, (ii) he may direct further investigation under sub-
section (3) of Section 156 and require the police to make a 
further report, or (iii) he may disagree with the report and 
discharge the accused or drop the proceedings. If such 
Police Report concludes that no offence appears to have 
been 
committed, 
the 
Magistrate 
again 
has 
three 
options: (i) he may accept the report and drop the 
proceedings, or (ii) he may disagree with the report and 
taking the view that there is sufficient ground for proceeding 
further, take cognizance of the offence and issue process, 
or (iii) he may direct further investigation to be made by the 
police under sub-section (3) of Section 156.” 

It is in this context that the provisions of Sections 190 and 204 of the 
Code become important. Clause (a) of Section 190 states that the Magistrate 
can take cognisance of an offence on receiving a complaint of facts which 
constitute such offence. Clause (b) relates to a situation where the Magistrate 
receives a police report carrying such facts, i.e., facts which constitute such 
offence. In Minu Kumari and Another v. State of Bihar and Others11 this 
Court referred to the options available to the Magistrate on how to proceed in 
terms of Section 190(1)(b) of the Code, and held: 
“11...The position is, therefore, now well settled that upon 
receipt of a police report under Section 173(2) a Magistrate 
is entitled to take cognizance of an offence under Section 
 
10 (1985). 
11 (2006). 

 & Ors. 
 
190(1)(b) of the Code even if the police report is to the effect 
that no case is made out against the accused. The 
Magistrate can take into account the statements of the 
witnesses examined by the police during the investigation 
and take cognizance of the offence complained of and order 
the issue of process to the accused. Section 190(1)(b) does 
not lay down that a Magistrate can take cognizance of an 
offence only if the investigating officer gives an opinion that 
the investigation has made out a case against the accused. 
The Magistrate can ignore the conclusion arrived at by the 
investigating officer and independently apply his mind to the 
facts emerging from the investigation and take cognizance 
of the case, if he thinks fit, exercise his powers under Section 
190(1)(b) and direct the issue of process to the accused. 
The Magistrate is not bound in such a situation to follow the 
procedure laid down in Sections 200 and 202 of the Code 
for taking cognizance of a case under Section 190(1)(a) 
though it is open to him to act under Section 200 or Section 

also. 
(See India 
Carat 

Ltd. v. State 
of 
Karnataka [(1989): 1989 SCC (Cri) 306: AIR 
1989 SC 885].) 
 
12. The informant is not prejudicially affected when the 
Magistrate decides to take cognizance and to proceed with 
the case. But where the Magistrate decides that sufficient 
ground does not subsist for proceeding further and drops the 
proceeding or takes the view that there is material for 
proceeding against some and there are insufficient grounds 
in respect of others, the informant would certainly be 
prejudiced as the first information report lodged becomes 
wholly or partially ineffective. This Court in Bhagwant 
Singh v. Commr. of Police held that where the Magistrate 
decides not to take cognizance and to drop the proceeding 
or takes a view that there is no sufficient ground for 
proceeding against some of the persons mentioned in the 
first information report, notice to the informant and grant of 
opportunity of being heard in the matter becomes 
mandatory. As indicated above, there is no provision in the 
Code for issue of a notice in that regard. 
 
13. We may add here that the expressions “charge-sheet” or 
“final report” are not used in the Code, but it is understood in 
Police Manuals of several States containing the rules and 
the regulations to be a report by the police filed under 
Section 170 of the Code, described as a “charge-sheet”. In 
case of reports sent under Section 169 i.e. where there is no 
sufficiency of evidence to justify forwarding of a case to a 
Magistrate, it is termed variously i.e. referred charge, final 
report or summary. Section 173 in terms does not refer to 
any notice to be given to raise any protest to the report 
submitted by the police. Though the notice issued under 
some of the Police Manuals states it to be a notice under 

 & Ors. 
 
Section 173 of the Code, there is nothing in Section 173 
specifically providing for such a notice.” 
 
16. 
This Court in Bhushan Kumar and Another v. State (NCT of Delhi) and 
Another12 while referring to Sections 190 and 204 of the Code has observed 
that the expression “cognisance” in Section 190 merely means “becoming 
aware of”, and when used with reference to a court or a judge it connotes “to 
take notice of judicially”. It indicates the juncture at which the court or 
Magistrate takes judicial notice of the offence with a view to initiate proceedings 
in respect of such an offence. This is different from initiation of proceedings. 
Rather, it is a condition precedent to the initiation of proceedings by a 
Magistrate or judge. At this stage, the Magistrate has to keep in mind the 
averments in the complaint or the police report, and has to evaluate whether 
there is sufficient ground for initiation of proceedings. This is not the same as 
the consideration of sufficient grounds for conviction, as whether evidence is 
sufficient for supporting the conviction or not, can be determined only at the 
stage of trial, and not at the stage of cognisance. This aspect is important and 
will be subsequently referred to when we examine the decision of this Court in 
K. Veeraswami v. Union of India and Others13, and the observations therein 
which have been referred to on several occasions in other judgments. 
 
17. 
Section 204 of the Code does not mandate the Magistrate to explicitly state 
the reasons for issue of summons and this is not a prerequisite for deciding 
the validity of the summons. Nevertheless, the requirement of the Code is that 
the summons is issued when it appears to the Magistrate that there is sufficient 
ground for proceeding against the accused. Summons is issued to the person 
against whom the legal proceedings have commenced. Wilful disobedience is 
 
12 (2012). 
13 (1991). 

 & Ors. liable to be punished under Section 174 of the Indian Penal Code, 186014. As 
a sequitur, keeping in mind both the language of Section 204 of the Code and 
the penal consequences, the Magistrate is mandated to form an opinion as to 
whether there exists sufficient ground for summons to be issued. While 
deciding whether summons is to be issued to a person, the Magistrate can take 
into consideration any prima facie improbabilities arising in the case. The 
parameters on which a summoning order can be interfered with are well settled 
by the decision of this court in Bhushan Kumar (supra). The Magistrate in 
terms of Section 204 of the Code is required to exercise his judicial discretion 
with a degree of caution, even when he is not required to record reasons, on 
whether there is sufficient ground for proceeding. Proceedings initiated by a 
criminal court are generally not interfered with by High Courts, unless 
necessary to secure the ends of justice.15 
 
18. 
The decision in Bhushan Kumar (supra) also refers to Section 251 of the 
Code, which is a stage post appearance of the accused, and observes: 
“20. It is inherent in Section 251 of the Code that when an 
accused appears before the trial court pursuant to summons 
issued under Section 204 of the Code in a summons trial 
case, it is the bounden duty of the trial court to carefully go 
through the allegations made in the charge-sheet or 
complaint and consider the evidence to come to a 
conclusion whether or not, commission of any offence is 
disclosed and if the answer is in the affirmative, the 
Magistrate shall explain the substance of the accusation to 
the accused and ask him whether he pleads guilty 
otherwise, he is bound to discharge the accused as per 
Section 239 of the Code.” 

19. 
Sections 211 to 213 and Section 218 of the Code deal with the contents of the 
charge. The object and purpose of these provisions is to bring the nature of 
 
14 “IPC”, for short. 
15 R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab, AIR 1960 SC 866; State of Haryana and Others v. Bhajan Lal and 
Others, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335. 

 & Ors. allegations against the accused to his notice. These allegations have to be 
proved and established by leading evidence. The accused should not be taken 
by surprise or be unbeknownst so as to cause prejudice to him. The provisions 
of the Code also prescribe how to interpret the words used in the charge in 
terms of Section 214 of the Code, the effect of defects in the charge in terms 
of Section 215 of the Code, the power of the court to alter the charge and recall 
of the witnesses when a charge is altered in terms of Sections 216 and 217 of 
the Code. 
 
20. 
There is an inherent connect between the chargesheet submitted under 
Section 173(2) of the Code, cognisance which is taken under Section 190 of 
the Code, issue of process and summoning of the accused under Section 204 
of the Code, and thereupon issue of notice under Section 251 of the Code, or 
the charge in terms of Chapter XVII of the Code. The details set out in the 
chargesheet have a substantial impact on the efficacy of procedure at the 
subsequent stages. The chargesheet is integral to the process of taking 
cognisance, the issue of notice and framing of charge, being the only 
investigative document and evidence available to the court till that stage. 
Substantiated reasons and grounds for an offence being made in the 
chargesheet are a key resource for a Magistrate to evaluate whether there are 
sufficient grounds for taking cognisance, initiating proceedings, and then 
issuing notice, framing charges etc. 
 
21. 
These provisions, however, have to be read along with the power of the police 
to investigate under sub-section (8) to Section 173 of the Code even when they 
have submitted a report under sub-section (2) to Section 173 of the Code. The 
police also has the power to produce additional documents and evidence, as 
has been held by this Court in Parkash Singh Badal and Another v. State of 

 & Ors. 
 
Punjab and Others16; Narendra Kumar Amin v. Central Bureau of 
Investigation and Others17; and Central Bureau of Investigation v. R.S. Pai 
and Another18. 
 
22. 
Recently a three Judge Bench of this Court in Zakia Ahsan Jafri v. State of 
Gujarat and Another19, has observed: 
“11. This Court in Dayal Singh noted that the investigating 
officer is obliged to act as per the Police Manual and known 
canons of practice while being diligent, truthful and fair in 
his/her approach and investigation. It has been noted in the 
reported decision that an investigating officer is completely 
responsible 
and 
answerable 
for 
the 
manner 
and 
methodology adopted in completing his investigation. 
Concededly, 
upon 
completion 
of 
investigation, 
the 
investigating officer is obliged to submit report setting out 
prescribed details, to the Magistrate empowered to take 
cognizance of the offence referred to therein, without 
unnecessary delay. The report so presented is the 
conclusion reached by the investigating officer on the basis 
of materials collected during investigation. The duty of the 
investigating 
officer 
is 
to 
collate 
every 
relevant 
information/material during the investigation, which he must 
believe to be the actual course of events and the true facts 
unraveling the commission of the alleged crime and the 
person involved in committing the same. He is expected to 
examine the materials from all angles. In the event, there is 
sufficient evidence or reasonable ground that an offence 
appears to have been committed and the person committing 
such offence has been identified, the investigating officer is 
obliged to record his opinion in that regard, as required by 
Section 173(2)(i)(d) of the Code. In other words, if the 
investigating officer intends to send the accused for trial, he 
is obliged to form a firm opinion not only about the 
commission of offence, but also about the involvement of 
such person in the commission of crime. 
 
12. Such opinion is the culmination of the analysis of the 
materials collected during the investigation - that there is 
“strong suspicion” against the accused, which eventually will 
lead the concerned Court to think that there is a ground for 
“presuming” that the accused “has” committed the alleged 
offence; and not a case of mere suspicion. For being a case 
of strong suspicion, there must exist sufficient materials to 
 
16 (2007). 
17 (2015). 
18 (2002). 
19 (2022): 2022 INSC 653. 

 & Ors. corroborate the facts and circumstances of the case; and be 
of such weight that it would facilitate the Court concerned to 
take cognizance of the crime and eventually lead it to think 
(form opinion) that there is ground “for presuming that the 
accused has committed an offence”, as alleged – so as to 
frame a charge against him in terms of Section 228(1) or 
246(1) of the Code, as the case may be. For taking 
cognizance of the crime or to frame charges against the 
accused, the Court must analyze the report filed by the 
investigating officer and all the materials appended thereto 
and then form an independent prima facie opinion as to 
whether there is ground for “presuming” that the accused 
“has” committed an offence, as alleged. (It is not, “may” have 
or “likely” to have committed an offence, but a ground for 
presuming that he has committed an offence). The 
Magistrate in the process may have to give due weightage 
to the opinion of the investigating officer. If such is to be the 
eventual outcome of the final report presented by the 
investigating officer, then there is nothing wrong if he applies 
the same standard to form an opinion about the materials 
collected during the investigation and articulate it in the 
report submitted under Section 173 of the Code. It may be 
useful to refer to the decisions adverted to in Afroz Mohd. 
Hasanfata including in the case of Ramesh Singh and I.K. 
Nangia. xx 
xx 
xx 
 
63. Needless to underscore that every information coming 
to the investigating agency must be regarded as relevant. 
However, the investigating agency is expected to make 
enquiries regarding the authenticity of such information and 
after doing so must collect corroborative evidence in support 
thereof. In absence of corroborative evidence, it would be 
merely a case of suspicion and not pass the muster of grave 
suspicion, which is the pre-requisite for sending the suspect 
for trial. This is the mandate in Section 173(2)(i)(d) of the 
Code, which postulates that the investigating officer in his 
report must indicate whether any offence appears to have 
been committed and if so, by whom. The opinion of the 
investigating officer formed on the basis of materials 
collected during the investigation/enquiry must be given due 
weightage. That would only be the threshold, to facilitate the 
concerned Court to take cognizance of the crime and then 
frame charge if it is of the opinion that there is ground for 
presuming that the accused has committed an offence 
triable under Chapter XIX of the Code.” 

 & Ors. 
 
23. 
In K. Veeraswami (supra), K. Jagannatha Shetty, J. pronounced the judgment 
for himself and M.N. Venkatachaliah, J. (as His Lordship then was) on the 
question of contents of the chargesheet and observed: 
“75. In the view that we have taken as to the nature of the 
offence created under clause (e), it may not be necessary to 
examine the contention relating to ingredient of the offence. 
But since the legality of the charge-sheet has been 
impeached, we will deal with that contention also. Counsel 
laid great emphasis on the expression “for which he cannot 
satisfactorily account” used in clause (e) of Section 5(1) of 
the Act. He argued that that term means that the public 
servant is entitled to an opportunity before the Investigating 
Officer to explain the alleged disproportionality between 
assets and the known sources of income. The Investigating 
Officer is required to consider his explanation and the 
charge-sheet filed by him must contain such averment. The 
failure to mention that requirement would vitiate the charge-
sheet and renders it invalid. This submission, if we may say 
so, completely overlooks the powers of the Investigating 
Officer. The Investigating Officer is only required to collect 
material to find out whether the offence alleged appears to 
have been committed. In the course of the investigation, he 
may examine the accused. He may seek his clarification and 
if necessary he may cross check with him about his known 
sources of income and assets possessed by him. Indeed, 
fair investigation requires as rightly stated by Mr A.D. Giri, 
learned Solicitor General, that the accused should not be 
kept in darkness. He should be taken into confidence if he is 
willing to cooperate. But to state that after collection of all 
material the Investigating Officer must give an opportunity to 
the accused and call upon him to account for the excess of 
the assets over the known sources of income and then 
decide whether the accounting is satisfactory or not, would 
be elevating the Investigating Officer to the position of an 
enquiry officer or a judge. The Investigating Officer is not 
holding an enquiry against the conduct of the public servant 
or 
determining 
the 
disputed 
issues 
regarding 
the 
disproportionality between the assets and the income of the 
accused. He just collects material from all sides and 
prepares a report which he files in the court as charge-
sheet.” 

The latter portion of the aforesaid paragraph, referring to the details of 
the offence and the requirement for them to be proved in order to bring home 
the guilt of the accused at the later stage (the stage of trial) by adducing 
acceptable evidence, has to be understood in the context that the chargesheet 

 & Ors. need not elaborately evaluate the evidence, as the process of evaluation is a 
matter of trial. This does not mean that the chargesheet should not disclose or 
refer to the facts as to meet the requirements of Section 173(2) of the Code, 
and the mandate of the State rules. Further, the earlier portion of the same 
paragraph, while referring to the opinion of the investigating officer, does so to 
demonstrate the significance of the opinion of the investigating officer at this 
stage. However, this does not preclude the Magistrate from exercising her 
powers in adopting an approach independent from such opinion, as has been 
held by this Court in Bhagwant Singh (supra) and Minu Kumari (supra). 
 
24. 
It is the police report which would enable the Magistrate to decide a course of 
action from the options available to him. The details of the offence and 
investigation are not supposed to be a comprehensive thesis of the prosecution 
case, but at the same time, must reflect a thorough investigation into the 
alleged offence. It is on the basis of this record that the court can take effective 
cognisance of the offence and proceed to issue process in terms of Section 
190(1)(b) and Section 204 of the Code. In case of doubt or debate, or if no 
offence is made out, it is open to the Magistrate to exercise other options which 
are available to him. 
 
25. 
In support of our reasoning, we would refer to the very next paragraph in the 
judgment of Shetty, J. in K. Veeraswami (supra) which reads as under: 
“76. The charge-sheet is nothing but a final report of police 
officer under Section 173(2) of the CrPC. The Section 173(2) 
provides that on completion of the investigation the police 
officer investigating into a cognizable offence shall submit a 
report. The report must be in the form prescribed by the 
State Government and stating therein (a) the names of the 
parties; (b) the nature of the information; (c) the names of 
the persons who appear to be acquainted with the 
circumstances of the case; (d) whether any offence appears 
to have been committed and, if so, by whom (e) whether the 
accused has been arrested; (f) whether he had been 

 & Ors. released on his bond and, if so, whether with or without 
sureties; and (g) whether he has been forwarded in custody 
under Section 170. As observed by this Court in Satya 
Narain 
Musadi v. State 
of 
Bihar that 
the 
statutory 
requirement of the report under Section 173(2) would be 
complied with if the various details prescribed therein are 
included in the report. This report is an intimation to the 
magistrate that upon investigation into a cognizable offence 
the Investigating Officer has been able to procure sufficient 
evidence for the court to inquire into the offence and the 
necessary information is being sent to the court. In fact, the 
report under Section 173(2) purports to be an opinion of the 
Investigating Officer that as far as he is concerned he has 
been able to procure sufficient material for the trial of the 
accused by the court. The report is complete if it is 
accompanied with all the documents and statements of 
witnesses as required by Section 175(5). Nothing more need 
be stated in the report of the Investigating Officer. It is also 
not necessary that all the details of the offence must be 
stated. The details of the offence are required to be proved 
to bring home the guilt to the accused at a later stage i.e. in 
the course of the trial of the case by adducing acceptable 
evidence. 
 
This paragraph examines the contents of the chargesheet and on 
elaboration of the same holds that it is in accordance with the terms of Section 
173(2) of the Code as well as the provisions of the penal enactment. In 
furtherance of this, reference is made to Satya Narain Musadi and Others v. 
State of Bihar20, in stating that the chargesheet should comply with the 
statutory requirements, and the various details prescribed therein should be 
included in the report. 
 
26. 
The object and purpose of the police investigation is manyfold. It includes the 
need to ensure transparent and free investigation to ascertain the facts, 
examine whether or not an offence is committed, identify the offender if an 
offence is committed, and to lay before the court the evidence which has been 
collected, the truth and correctness of which is thereupon decided by the court. 

20 (1980). 

 & Ors. 
 
27. 
In H.N. Rishbud and Inder Singh v. State of Delhi21, this Court notes that the 
process of investigation generally consists of: 1) proceeding to the concerned 
spot, 2) ascertainment of facts and circumstances, 3) discovery and arrest, 4) 
collection of evidence which includes examination of various persons, search 
of places and seizure of things, and 5) formation of an opinion on whether an 
offence is made out, and filing the chargesheet accordingly. The formation of 
opinion is therefore the culmination of several stages that an investigation goes 
through. This Court in its decision in Abhinandan Jha and Others v. Dinesh 
Mishra22 states that the submission of the chargesheet or the final report is 
dependent on the nature of opinion formed, which is the final step in the 
investigation. 
 
28. 
The final report has to be prepared with these aspects in mind and should show 
with sufficient particularity and clarity, the contravention of the law which is 
alleged. When the report complies with the said requirements, the court 
concerned should apply its mind whether or not to take cognisance and also 
proceed by issuing summons to the accused. While doing so, the court will 
take into account the statement of witnesses recorded under Section 161 of 
the Code and the documents placed on record by the investigating officer. 
 
29. 
In case of any doubts or ambiguity arising in ascertaining the facts and 
evidence, the Magistrate can, before taking cognisance, call upon the 
investigating officer to clarify and give better particulars, order further 
investigation, or even record statements in terms of Section 202 of the Code. 

21 (1954). 
 SC 117. 

 & Ors. 
 
30. 
Our attention has been drawn to the format prescribed for the State of Uttar 
Pradesh, which by column 16 requires the investigating officer to state brief 
facts of the case. In addition, the State of Uttar Pradesh has issued a circular 
dated 19.09.2023, which refers to an earlier circular bearing No. 59 of 2016 
dated 20.10.2016, and states that the investigation provisions contained in the 
Code and the police regulations with reference to Section 173 of the Code are 
not being consistently complied with and followed by the investigating officers 
and the supervising officers. The need to provide lead details of the offence in 
the chargesheet is mandatory as it is in accord with paragraph 122 of the police 
regulations. Similar directions were issued on 09.09.2022 following the 
direction of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad that brief narration of the 
material collected during investigation, which forms the opinion of the 
investigating officer, should be mentioned in the chargesheet. 
 
31. 
Therefore, the investigating officer must make clear and complete entries of all 
columns in the chargesheet so that the court can clearly understand which 
crime has been committed by which accused and what is the material evidence 
available on the file. Statements under Section 161 of the Code and related 
documents have to be enclosed with the list of witnesses. The role played by 
the accused in the crime should be separately and clearly mentioned in the 
chargesheet, for each of the accused persons. 
 
PART II 
32. 
As we turn to the second part of our judgment, it would be appropriate to lead 
our decision in each case with a brief overview of its pertinent facts: 
A. 
Appeal SLP (Crl.) No. 1074/2017 
• 
The appellants have been involved in a drawn-out litigation with several 
parties over the ownership of Property No. 80-A, 23,072 sq. ft., forming a 

 & Ors. part of Khasra no. 1016/647 and 645, situated within Chandrawli/Shahdara, 
now in Abadi, at Circular Road, Shahdara, Delhi- 110032.23 
• 
Appellant No.2 – Sharif Ahmad and Appellant No.3 – Anwar Ahmad (since 
deceased), purchased a part in the subject property on behalf of their 
partnership firm Dream Land & Co., while Appellant No.1 – Vakil Ahmad 
(since deceased) had done so in his individual capacity. 
• 
To avoid prolixity, we would refrain from setting out the facts of the litigation 
in detail. 
• 
The challenge before us relates to the First Information Report No. 108/2016 
dated 23.05.2016, filed by Respondent No.2/complainant - Mohd. Iqbal, 
under Sections 420, 406 and 506 IPC at police station Hafizpur, Hapur, U.P. against the appellants. The FIR stated that the appellants had agreed to sell 
the subject property to Respondent No. 2 and had received part payment for 
the registry of the subject property. However, the appellants did not register 
the property and also failed to refund the concerned amount to Respondent 
No. 2. 
• 
The Police recorded the statements of Respondent No.2, and the witnesses 
under Section 161 of the Code. 
• 
According to these statements, the appellants had refused to refund the 
amount paid by Respondent No. 2 despite repeated requests to do the same. 
• 
A complaint dated 03.09.2016 was filed against Respondent No. 2 at Police 
Station Tis Hazari by relatives of the appellants on account of receiving 
threats to their life. 
• 
The appellants challenged FIR No. 108/2016 in W.P. (Cr.) No.20221/2016 
before the Allahabad High Court and sought quashing of the proceedings. 
 
23 “subject property”, for short. 

 & Ors. 
 
By an order dated 15.09.2016, the High Court stayed the arrest of the 
appellant until filing of the chargesheet. 
• 
On 24.10.2016, a chargesheet was filed against the appellants under 
Sections 405 and 506 IPC. 
• 
The appellants approached the Allahabad High Court in Cr. M.A. No. 
960/2017 seeking the quashing of the chargesheet and of proceedings in 
Case No. 410/2016. The appellants submitted that the chargesheet is vague, 
filed without proper investigation, and fails to make out any offence. 
• 
The Allahabad High Court dismissed the application for quashing of the 
chargesheet through the impugned order dated 12.01.2017. 
• 
Hence, the appellants have filed the present appeal. 
 
33. 
The FIR as registered, on the question of intimidation states that on 19.03.2016 
the appellants had flatly refused to refund the money and had told Respondent 
No. 2 that they can do whatever they want. They had threatened the entire 
family of the complainant. 
 
34. 
The chargesheet submitted by the investigating officer in the present case, 
under column 16 referring to the facts of the case, reads as under: 
“Sir, the above said case was got registered by the 
complainant Shri Iqbal on 23/5/16 at this police station, the 
investigation of which handed over to me S.I., the 
investigation of which done by me S.I. and from all the 
investigation till now, statement of the complainant, 
statement of the witnesses and inspection of place of 
occurrence, the deal of plot measuring 2600 which is at 
behind Sadar Police Station was finalized by the accused 
persons with the complainant and his partner Surender 
Sharma for 4 crore, for which by not getting executed the 
registry of the same at the time of the complainant and after 
receiving a sum of Rs. 1 crore of his partner Surender 
Sharma as earnest money, selling of plot to Kusum Jain and 
D.K. Jain, by not refunding a sum of Rs. 1 crore of the 
complainant and his partner, grabbing by doing breach of 
trust, making pretexts on demanding again and again and 
the threat to kill, hence the offence under section 406, 506 

 & Ors. 
 
I.P.C. is thoroughly proved upon the accused persons Sharif 
Ahmed, Anwar Ahmed, Vakil Ahmed, Aadil Ahmed, the 
occurrence of section 420 I.P.C. is not found, hence the 
challan of the accused persons, by charge sheet No. 153/16 
is filled in the court, it is prayed that punishment may be 
given by calling the proof.” 
 
35. 
A reading thereof would indicate that it refers to the complaint made by 
Respondent No. 2 – Iqbal on 23.05.2016 relating to the deal of a plot in respect 
of which part consideration was paid as earnest money. But thereafter, the 
appellants had sold the plot and were not refunding the earnest money and by 
doing so have committed breach of trust under Section 406 of the IPC. It also 
refers to the alleged pretexts being made by the appellants on money being 
demanded and a threat to kill being extended. It is also recorded that an 
offence under Section 506 has been proved to have been committed. At the 
same time, the chargesheet states that no offence under Section 420 of the 
IPC is found to have been committed. 
 
36. 
An offence under Section 406 of the IPC requires entrustment, which carries 
the implication that a person handing over any property or on whose behalf the 
property is handed over, continues to be the owner of the said property. 
Further, the person handing over the property must have confidence in the 
person taking the property to create a fiduciary relationship between them. A 
normal transaction of sale or exchange of money/consideration does not 
amount to entrustment.24 Clearly, the charge/offence of Section 406 IPC is not 
even remotely made out. 
 
37. 
The chargesheet states that the offence under Section 420 is not made out. 
The offence of cheating under Section 415 of the IPC requires dishonest 
 
24 See Section 405 of the IPC and judgments of this Court in State of Gujarat v. Jaswantlal Nathalal 
AIR 1968 SC 700; Indian Oil Corpn. v. NEPC India Ltd. and Others (2006); Central Bureau 
of Investigation, SPE, SIU(X), New Delhi v. Duncans Agro Industries Ltd., Calcutta (1996). 

 & Ors. inducement, delivering of a property as a result of the inducement, and damage 
or harm to the person so induced. The offence of cheating is established when 
the dishonest intention exists at the time when the contract or agreement is 
entered, for the essential ingredient of the offence of cheating consists of 
fraudulent or dishonest inducement of a person by deceiving him to deliver any 
property, to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he had 
not been deceived. As per the investigating officer, no fraudulent and dishonest 
inducement is made out or established at the time when the agreement was 
entered. 
 
38. 
An offence of criminal intimidation arises when the accused intendeds to cause 
alarm to the victim, though it does not matter whether the victim is alarmed or 
not. The intention of the accused to cause alarm must be established by 
bringing evidence on record. The word ‘intimidate’ means to make timid or 
fearful, especially: to compel or deter by or as if by threats.25 The threat 
communicated or uttered by the person named in the chargesheet as an 
accused, should be uttered and communicated by the said person to threaten 
the victim for the purpose of influencing her mind. The word ‘threat’ refers to 
the intent to inflict punishment, loss or pain on the other. Injury involves doing 
an illegal act. 
 
39. 
This Court in Manik Taneja and Another v. State of Karnataka and 
Another26, had referred to Section 506 which prescribes punishment for the 
offence of ‘criminal intimidation’ as defined in Section 503 of the IPC, to 
observe that the offence under Section 503 requires that there must be an act 
of threating another person with causing an injury to his person, reputation or 
 
25 “intimidate”. Merriam-Webster.com. Merriam-Webster, 2024. 
26 (2015). 

 & Ors. property, or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is 
interested. This threat must be with the intent to cause alarm to the person 
threatened or to do any act which he is not legally bound to do, or omit to do 
an act which he is entitled to do. Mere expression of any words without any 
intent to cause alarm would not be sufficient to bring home an offence under 
Section 506 of the IPC. The material and evidence must be placed on record 
to show that the threat was made with an intent to cause alarm to the 
complainant, or to cause them to do, or omit to do an act. Considering the 
statutory mandate, offence under Section 506 is not shown even if we accept 
the allegation as correct. 
 
40. 
In view of the aforesaid position, we quash the chargesheet and the 
summoning order. The appellants are discharged. We clarify that the 
observations made above will have no bearing on the civil proceedings, if any, 
already 
initiated 
or 
which 
may 
be 
initiated 
in 
future 
by 
the 
respondent/complainant. 
 
B. 
Appeal SLP (Crl.) No. 5419/2022 
• 
On 26.06.2019 the complainant – Wakeel Ahmad filed a complaint before the 
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, alleging that the accused persons, 
including the appellant – Imran, routinely take money on the pretext of bainama 
of property, and subsequently deny entering into such agreement and 
receiving any money. 
• 
The court allowed the said complaint and ordered the concerned Police Station 
to register the complaint under Sections 420 and 120B IPC. FIR No. 519/2019 
dated 26.07.2019 was registered at Police Station Chandpur, Bijnor, Uttar 
Pradesh. The complainant also stated that the accused persons had 
threatened the complainant against pursuing legal action against them. 

 & Ors. 
 
• 
By an order dated 19.09.2019, the High Court partly allowed the appellant’s 
anticipatory bail application and directed the police not to arrest the appellant 
till the submission of the chargesheet. 
• 
Chargesheet No. 582/2019 dated 18.10.2019 was filed, submitting that 
charges under Sections 420 and 120B IPC are established. The chargesheet 
lists the details of the accused as mentioned in the FIR and the relevant column 
relating to brief facts in the chargesheet reads: 
“Requesting to the Hon’ble Court is that on 28.07.2019 the 
Hon’ble Court ordered under section 156(3) Cr. P.C. for 
registering a FIR No. 519/2019 under the section of 420, 
120B IPC against 
1. Ziyauddin S/o Gyasudding aged about 70 years 
2. Zamaluddin S/o Gyasuddin aged about 65 years 
3. Kamaluddin S/o Gyasuddin aged about 50 years 
4. Rahisuddin S/o. Unknown 
5. Imran aged about 36 years S/o Zamaluddin 
6. Kahsif S/o Zamaluddin aged about 31 all are residence of 
Mohalla Ktarmal, kasba Chandpur, Chanpur, Bijnor, UP. the 
crime under section 420, 120B IPC is proved against the 
Ziyauddin S/o Gyasudding, Zamaluddin S/o Gyasuddin, 
Kamaluddin S/o Gyasuddin, Rahisuddin S/o Unknown, 
Imran S/o Zamaluddin, Kahsif S/o Zamaluddin. 
Hence, filing this charge sheet before the Hon’ble court and 
requesting to this Hon’ble court to punish the all the 
accused.” 
 
• 
By an order dated 10.05.2021, the Allahabad High Court granted interim 
anticipatory bail to the appellant till 03.01.2022, in terms of the conditions 
mentioned in the order, and observed that the appellant herein may approach 
the High Court again if so advised, in case of a change in circumstances. 
• 
On 23.03.2022, Allahabad High Court dismissed the Criminal Misc. 
Anticipatory Bail Application No.2235/2022 filed by the appellant, on the 
grounds of non-bailable warrants having been issued against the appellant and 
the chargesheet having been filed. 
• 
Hence, the appellant has filed the present appeal. 

 & Ors. 
 
41. 
We have already referred to the facts and also to the ingredients of the offence 
under Section 420 IPC. The assertions made in the FIR allege that the accused 
are frauds who have taken bainama (earnest money on the property), but 
thereafter are making excuses. The complainant had visited the accused at 
their house who had then threatened them to implicate them in false cases. 
They denied having received the money. 
 
42. 
We allow the present appeal and direct that in the event of the appellant being 
arrested, he shall be released on bail by the arresting officer/investigating 
officer/trial court on the terms and conditions to be fixed by the trial court. 
 
43. 
However, what is surprising and a matter of concern in the present case, is 
that the police had initially rightly not registered the FIR, which had prompted 
the complainant to approach the Court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, 
Chandpur, Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh, alleging that he is an honest and respected 
person in the society and is well established in business, while the accused 
are fraudulent individuals. The Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate had 
subsequently ordered for the FIR to be registered on the basis of the written 
complaint. 
 
44. 
We would also like to emphasise on the need for a Magistrate to be cautious 
in examining whether the facts of the case disclose a civil or a criminal wrong. 
Attempts at initiating vexatious criminal proceedings should be thwarted early 
on, as a summoning order, or even a direction to register an FIR, has grave 
consequences for setting the criminal proceedings in motion.27 Any effort to 
settle civil disputes and claims which do not involve any criminal offence, by 
 
27 Deepak Gaba and Others v. State of U.P. and Another, (2023). 

 & Ors. way of applying pressure through criminal prosecution, should be deprecated 
and discouraged.28 
 
C. 
Appeal SLP (Crl.) No. 9482/2021 
 
• 
The complainant and Respondent No. 2 herein – Rajesh Wangvelu made a 
written complaint to the Station Officer, Police Station Aliganj, Lucknow, 
alleging that on 23.12.2019 at about 12:15 p.m. two officers of the National 
Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property, Lucknow29, 
namely, Bachhan Singh Rawat, Security Officer and Mahendra Kumar, 
Division Clerk/Caretaker had attacked him with a helmet and lathi, and had 
threatened to kill him. At about 1:12 p.m. FIR No. 556/2019 dated 23.12.2019 
was registered against Bachhan Singh Rawat and Mahendra Kumar under 
Section 323, 504 and 506 IPC. 
• 
A statement under Section 161 of the Code was also recorded, where Rajesh 
Wangvelu stated that he was discriminated against for belonging to a different 
State. He had done nothing wrong and did not allow his subordinates to do 
anything wrong, for which reason Bachhan Singh Rawat and Mahender Kumar 
remained angry with him. He added in his statement that the appellant – 
Manager Singh was also present during this altercation. He had abused him 
and stated – “maaro sale ko, bahut imandaar banta hai” i.e., “hit him, he wants 
to be too honest”. Bachhan Singh Rawat and Mahendra Kumar had hit him till 
he fainted. When he regained consciousness, they had left the place. 
• 
Manager Singh, as the Director General of the NRLC, claims that he had 
noticed several discrepancies and administrative errors committed by Rajesh 
Wangvelu, who was working as the Library and Information Officer. 
 
28 Indian Oil Corpn. v. NEPC India Ltd. and Others, (2006). 
29 “NRLC”, for short. 

 & Ors. 
 
• 
After issuing show-cause notices to Rajesh Wangvelu and considering his 
response, the Ministry of Culture issued a letter dated 02.08.2019, under the 
signature of appellant, indicating that Rajesh Wangvelu prima facie appeared 
to have committed temporary embezzlement of Rs. 38,338/- and for which 
action should be taken. 
• 
A decision to shift the library was also confirmed by a committee, to which 
Rajesh Wangvelu had expressed his displeasure. On the day of shifting, i.e. 
23.12.2019, a physical altercation occurred between Rajesh Wangvelu and the 
officers Bachhan Singh Rawat and Mahendra Kumar. 
• 
Manager Singh has relied upon written communication of Bachhan Singh 
Rawat in which he has stated that on 23.12.2019 at about 12:00 noon, he was 
informed by Mahendra Kumar, that Rajesh Wangvelu had taken some items in 
his bag without the gate pass. Information in this regard had been given to 
Manager Singh and the Vigilance Officer. When Bachhan Singh Rawat had 
tried to frisk Rajesh Wangvelu, he had, in presence of another staff member 
Dr. Neeta Nigam, threatened Bachhan Singh Rawat and Mahendra Kumar with 
dire consequences and had sprayed chemical on their faces. Rajesh 
Wangvelu had assaulted them and thereupon had run away from the spot. On 
23.12.2019 Manager Singh had accordingly written a letter to the Station 
Officer of Aliganj Police Station, informing him of the incident. Manager Singh 
is also relying on the communication dated 26.12.2019 written by him to the 
Director General of Police, Lucknow, and the communication dated 06.01.2020 
by the appellant Manager Singh to the sub-inspector, and inquiry officer Police 
Station Aliganj. 
• 
Rajesh Wangvelu was examined at 01:30 p.m., and his medical legal report 
dated 23.12.2019 refers to six injuries which have been found to be caused by 
a hard and blunt object. The injuries were simple. Rajesh Wangvelu, however, 

 & Ors. also relies upon a report dated 24.12.2019, obtained by a private diagnostic 
centre, which states that there was a fracture at the head of the fifth metacarpal 
bone of the left hand. 
• 
Manager Singh filed a petition for quashing of the proceedings 
FIR No. 556/2019 before the Allahabad High Court. He was given the benefit 
of arrest till the filing of the chargesheet, by an order of the High Court dated 
09.01.2020. 
• 
On 04.02.2020, a chargesheet was filed with an addition of Sections 308, 325 
and 120B IPC, and impleading Manager Singh as an accused. The 
chargesheet under Section 173 of the Code, submitted before the court in the 
present case, under the column relating to brief facts of the case reads as 
under: 
“Sir, the aforesaid case was registered on the basis of 
written report/complaint of the complainant of the case and 
the investigation was being done by the S.I. Shri 
Ramchandra Mishra. On 15.01.2020 I have received the 
investigation. During the investigation, on the basis of the 
statement of the complainant as well as on the basis of 
medical report, section 120B/308/325 IPC was added and 
the name of accused Manager Singh has come into light, in 
which Bachan Sing Rawat and Mahendra Kumar were sent 
in judicial custody on 24.12.19. Till the filing of charge sheet, 
the accused Manager Singh has been granted stay of arrest 
by 
the 
court. 
The 
offences 
under 
Section 
323/504/506/120B/308/325 IPC are duly proved against the 
accused Bachan Singh Rawat, Mahendra Kumar and 
Manger Singh. Therefore, charge sheet is filed against the 
accused Bachan Singh Rawat, Mahendra Kumar and 
Manager Singh under Section 323/504/506/120B/308/325 
IPC before the Hon’ble Court. It is requested to summon the 
proof and punish and accused.” 
 
• 
On the chargesheet being submitted in the court of the Magistrate, order dated 
10.02.2020 was passed recording that the chargesheet has been submitted 
for offences under 323, 504, 506, 120B, 308, 325 of the IPC against Bachhan 
Singh Rawat, Mahendra Kumar and Manager Singh. The order, taking 
cognisance and issuing summons, reads: 

 & Ors. 
 
“The chargesheet was filed under the offence number 
556/2019, Section 323, 504, 506, 120B, 308, 325, IPC, 
Police Station Aliganj against the accused Bachan Singh 
Rawat, Mahendra Kumar and Manager Singh. Reviewed all 
prosecution forms. The grounds for taking cognizance are 
sufficient. Cognizance is taken. 
 
ORDER 
 
Register the case. The copies are ready attached. Accused 
Bachan Singh Rawat and Mahendra Kumar are out on bail. 
Jamanatnama is attached in the file and the arrest of the 
accused Manager Singh was a stay on the arrest till the filing 
of the chargesheet in the sequence of the order of the 
Hon’ble High Court, Miscellaneous Bench – 262/2020 order 
dated 09-01-20. Summons issued against the accused. 
Giving copy for paperwork. Attendance should be presented 
on 01-03-2020.” 
 
• 
It appears that the matter was taken up for hearing by the Special Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, Lucknow on 18.02.2021, which records the presence of the 
counsel for Rajesh Wangvelu and that application for exemption from personal 
appearance was moved on behalf of Bachhan Singh Rawat and Mahendra 
Kumar. Manager Singh was absent and bailable warrants were issued against 
him, and he was required to appear on 04.03.2021. 
• 
On 04.03.2021, an application for exemption from personal appearance was 
moved on behalf of Manager Singh on the ground that he had gone out for 
personal reasons where he had taken ill. This application was rejected on 
04.03.2021 by the Special Chief Judicial Magistrate, recording that Manager 
Singh had not obtained bail till then and there is no provision for granting 
exemption from personal appearance prior to obtaining bail. Therefore, non-
bailable warrants have been issued against him. 
• 
Another order dated 04.03.2021 records that bailable warrants were issued 
against Manager Singh but he had remained absent. To ensure his personal 
appearance non-bailable warrants were issued against him. 

 & Ors. 
 
• 
By the impugned order dated 16.03.2021, the High Court had dismissed the 
petition filed by Manager Singh under Section 482 of the Code, to quash the 
criminal proceedings against him. 
• 
On 03.09.2021, the High Court granted a further period of 10 days’ time to 
Manager Singh to surrender. He did not surrender and filed another application 
seeking extension of time to surrender. 
• 
On 03.12.2021, Manager Singh filed the present appeal challenging 
correctness of the impugned order dated 16.03.2021. 
• 
Rajesh Wangvelu has, before us, referred to FIR No. 224 of 2020 registered 
under Sections 406, 419, 420, 467, 468, 471 IPC on account of certain 
contracts having been awarded by Manager Singh, Dr. Neeta Nigam, Bachhan 
Singh Rawat, Mahendra Kumar, to M/s. V.K. Singh Construction Company, 
Punjab, in which case a final report has been submitted to the court. He has 
also referred to an office order dated 03.09.2021 passed by the Government 
of India, Ministry of Culture, terminating services of Manager Singh with 
immediate effect. 
 
45. 
Having regard to the facts of the present case, including the chargesheet as 
filed, which in our opinion is bereft of all details and particulars, we quash the 
summoning order against Manager Singh. The Special Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, would re-examine the entire matter in terms of the observations 
made in the present judgment and thereupon proceed in accordance with law. 
 
46. 
We, however, would allow the present appeal to the extent that the non-
bailable warrants issued against Manager Singh are unsustainable and should 
be quashed. It is a settled position of law that non-bailable warrants cannot be 
issued in a routine manner and that the liberty of an individual cannot be 
curtailed unless necessitated by the larger interest of public and the State. 

 & Ors. 
 
While there are no comprehensive set of guidelines for the issuance of non-
bailable warrants, this Court has observed on several occasions that non-
bailable warrants should not be issued, unless the accused is charged with a 
heinous crime, and is likely to evade the process of law or tamper/destroy 
evidence.30 
 
47. 
Further, the observation that there is no provision for granting exemption from 
personal appearance prior to obtaining bail, is not correct, as the power to grant 
exemption from personal appearance under the Code31 should not be read in 
a restrictive manner as applicable only after the accused has been granted 
bail. This Court in Maneka Sanjay Gandhi and Another v. Rani Jethmalani32 
held that the power to grant exemption from personal appearance should be 
exercised liberally, when facts and circumstances require such exemption.33 
Section 205 states that the Magistrate, exercising his discretion, may dispense 
with the personal attendance of the accused while issuing summons, and allow 
them to appear through their pleader. While provisions of the Code are 
considered to be exhaustive, cases arise where the Code is silent and the court 
has to make such order as the ends of justice require. In such cases, the 
criminal court must act on the principle, that every procedure which is just and 
fair, is understood as permissible, till it is shown to be expressly or impliedly 
prohibited by law.34 
 
48. 
It is also directed that Manager Singh shall be released on bail by the arresting 
officer/ investigating officer/trial court on the terms and conditions to be fixed 
 
30 Inder Mohan Goswami and Another v. State of Uttaranchal and Others, (2007); Vikas v. 
State of Rajasthan, (2014). 
31 Section 205 of the Code. Also see, Section 317 of the Code. 
32 (1979). 
33 See also, Puneet Dalmia v. Central Bureau of Investigation, Hyderabad, (2020). 
34 See, Popular Muthiah v. State Represented by Inspector of Police (2006) and earlier 
judgment of the Calcutta High Court in Rahim Sheikh (1923) 50 Cal 872, 875. 

 & Ors. by the trial court in connection with the chargesheet originating from FIR No. 
556 of 2019. The direction given by the High Court in its order dated 
09.01.2020 restricting the grant of anticipatory bail till the filing of the 
chargesheet is accordingly modified. We have issued the said direction in 
exercise of power under Article 142 read with Article 136 of the Constitution of 
India in view of the peculiar facts of the present case, including issue of non-
bailable warrants etc. by the court of Special Chief Judicial Magistrate. 
 
CONCLUSION 
49. 
In view of the aforesaid discussion, 

the appeal SLP (Crl.) No. 1074/2017 preferred by 
Sharif Ahmed and Adil is allowed and the criminal proceedings are 
quashed; 

the appeal SLP (Crl.) No. 5419/2022 is allowed with 
the direction that in the event of being arrested, the appellants – 
Imran and Kamaluddin shall be released on anticipatory bail in 
connection with the chargesheet under Sections 420 and 120B IPC 
 FIR No. 519/2019 dated 26.07.2019 registered at 
Police Station Chandpur, District Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh on terms and 
conditions to be fixed by the trial court. In addition, the appellants – 
Imran and Kamaluddin shall comply with the conditions mentioned 
in Section 438(2) of the Code; 

the appeal SLP (Crl.) No. 9482/2021 preferred by 
Manager Singh is partly allowed by – 
(a) quashing the summoning order issued against Manager Singh, 
with an order of remand to the Magistrate in terms of the 
observations in this judgment; 

 & Ors. 
 
(b) quashing the non-bailable warrants issued against Manager 
Singh; and 
(c) directing release of Manager Singh on bail by the arresting 
officer/investigating officer/trial court on terms and conditions 
fixed by the trial court in connection with the chargesheet under 
Sections 323, 504, 506, 120B, 308 and 325 IPC, 
FIR No. 556/2019 dated 23.12.2019 registered at Police Station 
Aliganj, District Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh.