IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NOS.1636-1637 OF 2016
UNION OF INDIA & ANR.... APPELLANT(S) 
 VS.
DR. ASKET SINGH & ORS.... RESPONDENT(S)
 
 JUDGMENT
 Abhay S.Oka, J.
Heard the learned counsel appearing for the
parties.
2.
The facts of the case are glaring. The respondents
are the owners of the lands subject matter of these
appeals. At the instance of the Ministry of Defence,
acquisition proceedings were initiated under the
Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act,
1952 (for short "the 1952 Act"). A notice of acquisition
under Section 7 of the 1952 Act was issued on 26th March,
1964 which was published in the State Government Gazette
on 3rd April, 1964. The vesting of the acquired property
was complete on publication of the notice in the official
gazette.

3.
The provisions for grant of compensation in respect
of the acquired land are found in Section 8 of the 1952
Act. The first option provided therein is to fix the
compensation by an agreement between the acquiring body
and the owners. if there is no such agreement, under
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 8, the Central
Government is required to appoint an arbitrator for
determining the amount of compensation payable. An offer
for payment of compensation was made by the appellants
belatedly after 12 years on 16th
 August, 1976. The
respondents declined to accept the said offer.
Therefore, the Land Acquisition Officer addressed a
letter to the Government on 8th October, 1976 to appoint
an arbitrator. Accordingly, the Additional District
Judge, Gurdaspur was appointed as the Arbitrator. Nearly
22 years thereafter on 8th
 May, 1998, the award was
declared by the Arbitrator by which he came to the
conclusion that the market value of the acquired land was
Rs.150/- per Marla. 
4.
An appeal was preferred by the first respondent as
well as by the present appellants for challenging the
award of the Arbitrator. By the impugned judgment, the
High Court held that the market value ought to be
Rs.350/- per Marla which was determined in the cases of

similarly situated acquired lands. As there was a gross
and inordinate delay in completing the arbitral
proceedings for determination of the market value,
relying upon the decisions of this Court in the cases of
Harbans Singh Shanni Devi v. Union of India1 and Union of
India v. Chajju Ram2 which were followed by this Court in
a decision in the case of Dilawar Singh & Ors. v. Union
of India & Ors.3, the High Court granted solatium at the
rate of 30% of the market value and interest on the
compensation amount at 9% and 15%.
5.
The submission of the learned counsel appearing for
the appellants is that the relief of solatium and
interest has been granted in earlier cases by this Court
where there was a delay on the part of the Central
Government in appointing an Arbitrator for determination
of compensation. In this case, the delay is mainly in
disposal of the arbitral proceedings. He, therefore,
submitted that the High Court ought not to have awarded
both solatium and interest. 
 The learned counsel
appearing for the first respondent pointed out that in
terms of the impugned judgment, the first respondent has
received the entire compensation amount about 7 years
1. decided on 11th February, 1985 in 
2. (2003) 
3. (2010) 

back.
6.
It will be useful to refer to paragraphs 9 and 10
of the decision of this Court in the case of Dilawar
Singh3 which reads thus:
"9.
It is common ground that the provisions of
the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable
Property Act, 1952 do not make any provision for
the grant of solatium or interest to the
expropriated landowners. The absence of any such
provision in the said act was in fact made a
basis for a challenge to the constitutional
validity of the enactment which was repelled by
this Court in Union of India v. Hari Krishan
Khosla4. 
 This Court pointed out that any
comparison between acquisition made under the
Requisitioning and acquisition Act would be
odious in view of the dissimilarities between the
two enactments. That decision was followed in
subsequent pronouncements of this Court in Union
of India v. Chajju Ram2 where a similar attack
was mounted against the constitutional validity
of the Defence of India Act, 1971 but repelled by
this Court relying upon the decision in Hari
Krishan Khosla4.
10.
What is noteworthy is that in both these
matters this Court had made a distinction between
cases in which there was inordinate delay in the
appointment of an arbitrator and consequent delay
in the determination of the amount of
compensation payable to the owners and other case
4. 1993 Supp (2) SCC 149

where there was no such delay. In para 79 of the
judgment of this Court in Hari Krishan Khosla4,
this Court observed:
"79. This is a case in which for 16
years no arbitrator was appointed. We
think it is just and proper to apply the
principle laid down in
 Harbans Singh
Shanni Devi v. Union of India1. The Court
held as under:
Having regard to the peculiar facts
and circumstances of the present case
and particularly in view of the fact
that the appointment of the arbitrator
was not made by the Union of India for
a period of 16 years, we think this is
a fit case in which solatium at the
rate of 30% of the amount of
compensation and interest at the rate
of 9% per annum should be awarded to
the appellants. We are making this
order having regard to the fact that
the law has in the meanwhile been
amended with a view to providing
solatium at the rate of 30% and
interest at the rate of 9% per annum."
7.
As noted in the said decision, there is no
provision for grant of solatium and interest under the
1952 Act.

8.
It is true that the right to hold immovable
property is no longer a fundamental right but it is a
right under Article 300A of the Constitution of India.
Considering the peculiar provisions of the 1952 Act, the
land owned by the first respondent stood vested in the
Central Government on 3rd April, 1964. Therefore, the
compensation ought to have been paid to the first
respondent within a reasonable time from 3rd April, 1964.
Under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 8, there
is a provision to decide the amount of compensation by an
agreement. Such agreement could have been arrived at,
provided the Central Government had submitted their
proposal or offer to the first respondent. However, the
offer was actually made by the Collector in August, 1976.
Thus, there was no attempt made by the Central Government
to bring about the consensus on the market value for a
period of more than 12 years. Inordinate time of 12
years was taken by the Government to offer compensation
to the first respondent. We must record here that this
delay of more than 12 years is attributable solely to the
Central Government. After the Arbitrator was appointed
on 8th October, 1976, it took slightly less than 20 years
to conclude the proceedings. There is nothing placed on
record to show that the proceedings were delayed due to

any conduct attributable to the first respondent. The
delay in appointing the arbitrator must be attributed to
the Central Government, as the Central Government took 12
years to offer compensation. In effect, market value
prevailing on the date of acquisition was paid to the
owners after lapse of more than 30 years from the date of
vesting.
9.
After having perused the aforesaid decisions of
this Court, we find that as there are no provisions under
the 1952 Act to compensate the owner for the delay in
making payment of compensation, a direction was issued by
this Court that in such cases, solatium and interest must
be paid by the Central Government. The main reason for
taking the said view is that the compensation must be
paid to the owner of the acquired property within a
reasonable time from the date on which the acquired
property vested in the acquiring body. The requirement of
making payment of compensation within a reasonable time
from the date of vesting must be read into the 1952 Act.
In fact, such a long delay of 12 years even in offering
compensation will attract arbitrariness which is
prohibited by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The first respondent had an option of even seeking
quashing of the acquisition on the ground of this

arbitrariness which may have violated his rights under
Article 300A of the Constitution of India.
10.
Considering the huge delay involved in payment of
compensation, the High Court has rightly granted solatium
and interest in terms of the decisions of this Court. In
fact, we are surprised to note that the appellants have
dragged the first respondent to this Court. There is
absolutely no merit in these appeals. As the first
respondent has been paid compensation 7 years back, we
are refraining from imposing costs.
11.
Hence, the appeals are dismissed.

NEW DELHI;
May 01, 2024.