IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

(.L.P. (CRL.) NO. 5530 OF 2023) 
SHANKAR...APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS. 
 
WITH 

(.L.P. (CRL.) NO. 6321 OF 2024) 
(DIARY NO. 29192 OF 2023) 
VISHAL SINGH...APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeals arise out of a decision of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad dated 04.04.2023 in Application under 
Section 482 No. 30221 of 2017, whereby the High Court refused to 
quash a summoning order dated 24.08.2017 passed under Section 
319 of the Cr.P.C. by the Additional District & Sessions Judge, 

Kanpur Dehat, where the Appellants herein were directed to face 
a trial for offence under Section 302 IPC. Both the Appellants being 
identically placed, their appeals are being dealt with together. 
3. 
The issue that arises for our consideration is whether there 
is sufficient material against the Appellant prompting the Trial 
Court to pass a summoning order under Section 319 Cr.P.C. The 
principles of law being settled by the judgments of the 
constitutional benches of this Court, this question hinges upon the 
facts of the present case, which is as follows: 
4. Facts and investigation: 
On 10.05.2011, the first informant 
(PW-1), who is the mother of the deceased, got an FIR lodged at 
P.S. Ghatampur, informing that her son was found dead near a 
tubewell in the wheat field of a fellow villager. In her statement, 
she alleged that her son was murdered by the present appellants, 
the father of the appellants, along with two others, due to certain 
old enmity existing between the two families. 
5. 
The following day, the investigation officer recorded a 
statement of PW-1 under Section 161 Cr.P.C. In this statement she 
also stated that the deceased was quarrelsome, had a habit of 
picking up fights with other villagers and had a few criminal cases 
going on against them. Previously, he had also picked up fights 

with the father of the appellants. She stated that on 08.05.2011, 
Mahendra Singh, a gangster of the same village, came on a bike 
and asked the deceased to accompany him, on the pretext that 
Mahendra Singh would pay back a sum of Rs. 8,000 which he had 
borrowed from PW-1, and also that he would help the deceased 
arrive at a compromise with Accused No. 1 (father of the 
appellants) and Accused No. 3. Accordingly, the deceased left on 
the motorcycle of Mahendra Singh. She stated that Accused Nos. 
1-3 were standing at a distance noticing the developments. She 
stated with conviction that Accused Nos. 1-3 along with Mahendra 
Singh killed the deceased. In this statement, PW-1 stated that the 
appellants were not involved and that she wrote their name in her 
first information statement incorrectly and without collecting full 
information. Two other persons (witness), Rajau Sengar and Karan 
Singh, in their Section 161 statements reiterated the statement of 
PW-1. Even they stated that the present appellants had no role 
whatsoever in the commission of the crime. 
6. 
After conducting the investigation, the IO filed a chargesheet 
on 22.06.2011, where the present appellants were not named as 
accused. There were only four named accused in the chargesheet, 
however, Mahendra Singh who was arrayed as Accused No. 4 was 

absconding. It was categorically stated in the chargesheet that 
after investigation, it came to light that the naming of the present 
appellants was false. 
7. Trial: On 20.05.2016, PW-1 was examined where she stated 
that “My old enmity with accused Bacha Singh has been going in 
for the last 11 years and on the basis of suspicion, I had written the 
names of Shankar and Vishal in the FIR.” However, at a later stage 
of her examination, she stated that “It is wrong to suggest that 
because of old enmity, I have wrongly written the names of Bacha 
Singh and his sons in the FIR”. Apart from PW-1, none of the other 
5 witness, spoke about the complicity of the appellants in the 
commission of the offence. 
8. Trial Court: Pursuant to the statement made by PW-1 in her 
examination in chief, the Assistant Public Prosecutor, on 
31.07.2017, filed an application under Section 319 of the Cr.P.C. to summon the appellants herein to face the trial. 
9. 
The Ld. Trial Court, on 24.08.2017, allowed the application 
filed by the APP after noting certain previous decisions of this 
Court where it was held that if the evidence tendered in the course 
of trial shows that any person not named as an accused has a role 
to play in the commission of the offence, then he could be 

summoned to face trial even though he may not have been charge 
sheeted. 
10. High Court: The above order passed by the Trial Court was 
challenged by the Appellants before the High Court by filing a 
petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. This petition came to be 
dismissed by the High Court by its order dated 04.04.2023. While 
dismissing the petition, the High Court noted that at the stage of 
Section 482, the Court is only supposed to see if there exists a 
prima-facie case. It is this order of the High Court which is 
impugned before us. 
11. Issue: The only question arising in the present appeal is 
whether the power under Section 319 Cr.P.C. has been properly 
exercised in light of the facts of the present case and evidence on 
record. 
12. Analysis: We have heard Ld. counsel for appellants, Ms. 
Preetika Dwivedi and Ld. counsel for the Respondent State Mr. 
Ankit Goel. 
13. At the outset, we may note that the four accused who were 
charge-sheeted, have passed away. As against them, the trial has 
abated. The learned counsel for the Respondent State has argued 

that even if the trial has abated against existing accused, there is 
no bar in summoning the appellants and starting the trial afresh1. 
This position of law is well-settled and the learned counsel for the 
appellant has also not disputed the same. 
14. In this background, we will examine the legality of the 
summoning order under Section 319 Cr.P.C. on its own footing. 
Section 319 of the Cr.P.C. is as follows: 
“319. Power to proceed against other persons 
appearing to be guilty of offence 
(1) Where, in the course of any inquiry into, or trial 
of, an offence, it appears from the evidence that any 
person not being the accused has committed any 
offence for which such person could be tried 
together with the accused, the Court may proceed 
against such person for the offence which he 
appears to have committed. 
(2) …. 
(3) …. 
(4) ….” 
15. Having taken note of the provision, we will note the principles 
laid down by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Hardeep Singh 
v. State of Punjab, (2014), for criminal courts to follow 
while exercising power under Section 319 Cr.P.C.: 
“94. In Pyare Lal Bhargava v. State of Rajasthan, 
AIR 1963 SC 1094, a four-Judge Bench of this 
 
1 Gurmail Singh v. State of UP, (2022). 

Court was concerned with the meaning of the word 
“appear”. The Court held that the appropriate 
meaning of the word “appears” is “seems”. It 
imports a lesser degree of probability than proof. 
In Ram Singh v. Ram Niwas, (2009), a 
two-Judge Bench of this Court was again required 
to examine the importance of the word “appear” as 
appearing in the section. The Court held that for the 
fulfilment of the condition that it appears to the 
court that a person had committed an offence, the 
court must satisfy itself about the existence of an 
exceptional circumstance enabling it to exercise an 
extraordinary jurisdiction. What is, therefore, 
necessary for the court is to arrive at a satisfaction 
that the evidence adduced on behalf of the 
prosecution, if unrebutted, may lead to conviction 
of the persons sought to be added as the accused 
in the case. 
95. At the time of taking cognizance, the court has 
to see whether a prima facie case is made out to 
proceed against the accused. Under Section 319 
CrPC, though the test of prima facie case is the 
same, the degree of satisfaction that is required is 
much stricter… 
105. Power 
under 
Section 

CrPC 
is 
a 
discretionary and an extraordinary power. It is to 
be exercised sparingly and only in those cases 
where the circumstances of the case so warrant. It 
is not to be exercised because the Magistrate or the 
Sessions Judge is of the opinion that some other 
person may also be guilty of committing that 
offence. Only where strong and cogent evidence 
occurs against a person from the evidence led 
before the court that such power should be 
exercised and not in a casual and cavalier manner. 
106. Thus, we hold that though only a prima facie 
case is to be established from the evidence led 
before the court, not necessarily tested on the anvil 
of cross-examination, it requires much stronger 
evidence than mere probability of his complicity. 
The test that has to be applied is one which is more 

than prima facie case as exercised at the time of 
framing of charge, but short of satisfaction to an 
extent that the evidence, if goes unrebutted, would 
lead to conviction. In the absence of such 
satisfaction, 
the 
court 
should 
refrain 
from 
exercising power under Section 319 CrPC…..” 
 
16. The degree of satisfaction required to exercise power under 
Section 319 Cr.P.C. is well settled after the above-referred decision. 
The evidence before the trial court should be such that if it goes 
unrebutted, then it should result in the conviction of the person 
who is sought to be summoned. As is evident from the above-
referred decision, the degree of satisfaction that is required to 
exercise power under Section 319 Cr.P.C. is much stricter, 
considering that it is a discretionary and an extra-ordinary power. 
Only when the evidence is strong and reliable, can the power be 
exercised. It requires much stronger evidence than mere 
probability of his complicity. 
17. In this background, we will examine the evidence on record 
which prompted the trial court to exercise the power under Section 
319 Cr.P.C. PW-1, who is the mother of the deceased, is the only 
witness who has named the appellants. 

17.1 In the first information statement, she has taken the name 
of the appellants as having played a role in the commission of the 
crime owing to the past enmity between the two families. The 
relevant portion of this statement is as follows: 
 “I am quite sure that my son Vijay Singh has 
been jointly murdered by Bachha Singh s/o Mohan 
Singh, Shankar s/o Bacha Singh, Vishal s/o Bacha 
Singh- residents of Raha and Sanjay s/o Munna 
Singh, Kallu Singh s/o Munna Singh-residents of 
Jalala, Police Station Ghatampur. We have an old 
existing enmity with these people.” 
 
17.2 However, in her Section 161 statement, she has stated that 
the appellants were not involved and that she named them without 
collecting full information. Two other witness, Rajau Sengar and 
Karan Singh, in their Section 161 statements have also stated that 
the appellants had no role whatsoever in the commission of the 
crime. Relevant portion of PW-1’s statement under Section 161 
Cr.P.C., is as follows:- 
“…I had lent Rs. 8000 to Mahendra Singh long ago 
after selling Lahi. Vijay Singh had asked Mahendra 
Singh many times to repay the borrowed money but 
he did not give it back. Coming under the guise of 
this assurance, Vijay Singh left on Mahendra’s 
motorcycle. Sanjay Singh and Kallu Singh sons of 
Munna Singh and Bacha Singh s/o Mohan Singh 
were also standing at some distance outside the 
house. They also lured my son Vijay Singh and 
accompanied Vijay Singh and Mahendra Singh and 

all four of them killed my son Vijay Singh and threw 
the dead body in the field near the tubewell of 
Mahendra Pratap Singh Bhadoria. The names of 
Shankar Singh and Vishal Singhs sons of Bachha 
Singh, which I have written in the FIR, have been 
written by me falsely without collecting full 
information. My son Vijay Singh was murdered by 
Mahendra Singh s/o Chandrapal Singh Sachan of 
village Laukaha, Bacha Singh s/o Mohan Singh of 
village Raha and Sanjay Singh and Kallu Singh s/o 
Munna Singh of village Jalala. Shankar and Vishal 
sons of Bacha Singh were not involved in my son’s 
murder.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
17.3 Even in the chargesheet, which was filed after investigation, 
the name of the appellants has not been mentioned as accused. 
17.4 It is only in her deposition before the trial court that PW-1 
has once again named the appellants. However, she has also 
stated that she has named them only on the basis of suspicion. 
The relevant portion of her deposition before the Trial Court is as 
follows: 
“In my report, I made Bachha Singh, Shankar, Vishal, 
Kallu Singh and Mahendra Sachan accused. I had 
an old enmity with these people.” 
 
In her cross-examination, PW-1 stated as follows:- 
“There were two-three outstation cases and two-three 
local cases from the village were pending against my 
son Vijay Singh, which are closed now. The said 
cases were closed/concluded during the lifetime of 
Vijay Singh. My old enmity with accused Bacha 

Singh has been going on for the last 11 years and on 
the basis of suspicion, I had written the names of 
Shankar and Vishal in the FIR.” 
18. It is evident from the above that the appellants were named 
in the first information statement, however, in the statement under 
Section 161 Cr.P.C, PW-1 clarified that the names of appellants 
were written in the FIR falsely and without full information. She 
has also stated that the appellants were not involved in the murder 
of her son. Even in the charge sheet, the names of the appellants 
were not mentioned as accused. It is only in her deposition before 
the Trial Court the names of the accused resurfaces again. 
19. None of the other witnesses, being PW’s-2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 have 
deposed anything about the appellants. 
20. On 31.07.2017, i.e. almost a year after the deposition of PW-
1, the prosecution chose to file an application under Section 319 
Cr.P.C. to the following effect:- 
 “It is most respectfully submitted that in the above 
mentioned case, the first informant Mrs. Sheela Singh 
had written the names of Shankar Singh and Vishal 
Singh in the First Information Report and the names 
of Shankar Singh and Vishal Singh have also been 
mentioned by her in her examination in chief also. 
For this reason, it is necessary to summon Shankar 
Singh and Vishal Singh for trial in the said case. 

 Therefore, the Hon’ble court is requested to kindly 
pass an order thereby summoning accused Shankar 
Singh and Vishal Singh sons of Bachha Singh for trial 
in the said case. 

 Yours faithfully, 
Sd/-illegible 
31.7.2017” 
21. At the first place, PW-1 has named the appellants in the FIR 
despite not being an eyewitness to the offence. In her statement 
under Section 161, she sought to clarify the position by recording 
that her family had a long-standing enmity with appellants’ family. 
She also stated that the names of the appellants were mentioned 
and written by her “falsely without collecting full information.” She 
categorically stated that the appellants are not involved in the 
murder of her son. 
22. When we contrast this statement with her deposition given 
five years later, we do not see a drastic change in the stand of 
PW-1. Even in her chief examination, she had stated that she had 
an old enmity with the family of the accused. However, in her cross 
examination, she clarified that as the enmity with the appellants 
family was going on for the last eleven years, names of the 
appellants were mentioned in the FIR on the basis of suspicion. 
Therefore, the change of circumstance which the prosecution 

seeks to contend on the basis of PW-1’s deposition does not satisfy 
the requirement of Section 319 at all. 
23. Having considered the matter in detail, we are of the opinion 
that PW-1, not being an eye-witness, her deposition is not 
sufficient enough to invoke the extra-ordinary jurisdiction under 
Section 319 to summon the appellants. 
24. There are no other witnesses who have deposed against the 
appellants. There is no documentary evidence that the prosecution 
had collected against the appellants. There is absolutely no role 
that is attributed to the appellants. We are of the opinion that the 
deposition of PW-1 is also in line and consistent with her statement 
under Section 161. When these factors are looked in a holistic 
manner, it would be clear that the higher degree of satisfaction 
that is required for exercising power under Section 319 Cr.P.C. is 
not met in the present case. 
25. For the reasons stated above we are of the opinion that the 
Trial Court committed a serious error in allowing the application 
under Section 319 and issuing summons to the appellants. The 
High Court should have exercised its jurisdiction under Section 
482 and quashed the order. The High Court having failed to quash 

the order of summons dated 24.08.2017, we are inclined to allow 
these appeals and set-aside the order passed by the Trial Court 
dated 24.08.2017 and the also the judgment of the High Court 
dated 04.04.2023 dismissing the petition under Section 482. 
26. For the reasons stated above, the present appeals are 
allowed, and the impugned order dated 04.04.2023 passed by the 
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Application under 
Section 482 No. 30221 of 2017 and the order dated 24.08.2017 
passed by the Additional District and Sessions Judge, Court No. 
5, Kanpur Dehat, in S.T. No. 434 of 2011 in Application Paper No. 
83Kha under Section 319 Cr.P.C. are hereby set aside. 
 
………………………………...J. 
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 

………………………………...J. 
[ARAVIND KUMAR]