IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
( SLP 

CHANDER BHAN (D) 
THROUGH LR SHER SINGH 

 …APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 
MUKHTIAR SINGH & ORS. 

 …RESPONDENTS 

JUDGMENT 
 
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J. 
 
1. 
The appeal filed by the appellant presently before us 
challenges the Judgement and order dated 03.10.2019, 
passed in a second appeal by the Punjab and Haryana 
High Court. The impugned Judgement of the High 
Court has reversed the concurrent findings of the trial 
court 
and 
the 
first 
appellate 
court 
and 
has 
consequently 
dismissed 
the 
suit 
of 
specific 
performance filed by the appellant-plaintiff, although a 
partial relief was granted to the appellant by return of 
the earnest money to the appellant, with interest. 

2. 
The facts leading to this appeal are that on 10.11.2002 
appellant and respondent no. 3 entered an agreement 
to sell relating to 16 “Kanals” of land for a total 
consideration of Rs. 8 lakhs, where Rs. 2.50 lakhs was 
paid at the time of agreement and remaining Rs. 5.50 
lakhs was to be paid at the time of execution of sale 
deed, which was to be executed on or before 
10.11.2004. 
3. 
After the agreement to sell but before the date of the 
execution of the sale deed the present appellant having 
received the knowledge that respondent no. 3 was 
likely to alienate the suit property, files a suit for 
permanent 
injunction 
on 
21.07.2003 
against 
respondent no. 3 where an order of temporary 
injunction was passed in his favour on 28.07.2003. On 
the very same day, i.e., 28.07.2003 respondent no. 3 
though executes a “release deed” in favour of his son, 
Harvinder Singh (respondent no. 4), for which 
mutation was also sanctioned. 
4. 
Subsequent to the Release Deed, respondent no. 4, son 
of respondent no.3, executed a registered sale deed 

dated 16.06.2004 in favour of Mukhitar Singh and 
Baljeet Singh (respondent nos. 1-2) for the suit land. 
5. 
The appellant then files a suit for specific performance 
before the Additional Civil Judge, Senior Division, Jind, 
as the defendant i.e. present respondent No.3 did not 
come forward even on the last day i.e. 10.11.2004 to 
execute the sale deed. In his Written Statement, 
respondent no. 3, takes the defence that the agreement 
for 
sale 
was 
signed 
by 
him, 
but 
under 
a 
“misconception”. 
It 
is 
contended 
that 
the 
appellant/plaintiff had taken the defendant to a shop 
for being a witness and had fraudulently obtained his 
signatures on the agreement to sell. Respondents 1 
and 2, on the other hand, claimed to be bonafide 
purchasers for valuable consideration and sought 
protection under Section 41 of the Transfer of Property 
Act, 1882 (hereafter “Act of 1882”). 
6. 
The Trial Court, nevertheless decreed the suit of the 
appellant with costs and directed respondent no. 3 to 
accept balance sale consideration and execute the 
agreement to sell. It was held that respondent no. 3 

had admitted about the execution of the agreement to 
sell in the earlier suit for injunction filed by the 
appellant, and further Vijay Singh (PW-5) had verified 
the execution of the agreement. The Trial Court did not 
give any credence to the objections of the defendants 
(present respondents No. 3 and 4). Both these 
defendants, father and son respectively, had refused to 
depose in the witness box. An adverse inference was 
drawn against them by the Court, on this aspect as 
well. 
7. 
An interesting development, meanwhile took place 
before the Trial Court. PW-7 who was the lawyer of the 
appellant in the injunction suit, had become an 
attesting witness of the “sale deed” executed by 
respondent no. 4 in favour of respondent nos. 1-2. The 
Trial Court, thus observed that from the deposition of 
PW-7 during cross-examination, PW-7 had committed 
a breach of privileged communication and violated 
Section 126 of the Evidence Act, 1872. 
8. 
No appeal against this Judgement was filed by 
respondents 3 and 4. All the same, an Appeal was filed 

by respondents 1 and 2 before the Additional District 
Judge, Jind which was dismissed on 06.03.2012. 
While reiterating the findings of the Trial Court, the 
First Appellant Court had observed that since PW-7 
was the attesting witness of the sale deed in favour of 
respondent 1-2 and also the advocate of the appellant 
in the injunction suit, therefore, it can be safely 
presumed that respondents 1-2 would have been 
aware of the injunction, and consequently their 
defence of bonafide purchaser can never be accepted. 
While dismissing the appeal, the Appellate Court 
observed that the respondents had colluded together to 
defeat the just claim of the plaintiff, i.e., the appellant 
before this Court. 
9. 
Respondents 1-2 then filed their Second Appeal before 
the Punjab and Haryana High Court at Chandigarh, 
which was allowed vide order dated 03.10.2019, which 
is presently under challenge before us. The High Court 
in the impugned order has reversed the judgements of 
the trial court and the First Appellate Court, though it 
held that the plaintiff, i.e., the present appellant was 

entitled to the relief of refund of earnest money along 
with 8% interest per annum from date of agreement till 
date of judgement and 6% interest per annum from 
date of the date of judgement till realization of the 
amount. 
10. 
Primarily three factors weighed with the High Court. 
Firstly, the Release Deed and order of temporary 
injunction were executed and passed on the same day 
i.e. 28.07.2003 and it was, therefore, not possible to 
determine that the Release Deed was in violation of the 
injunction order. Secondly, the suit for permanent 
injunction was ultimately dismissed as withdrawn so 
the protection afforded by the order of temporary 
injunction would subsume with the dismissal of the 
main suit. Thirdly, in the deposition and cross-
examination of PW-7, there was no admission that he 
had informed respondents 1-2 about the order of 
temporary injunction in favour of the appellant. 
Although respondents 3 and 4 refused to depose in the 
witness box, yet respondents 1-2 had both appeared as 
a witness and from their deposition, it cannot be 

inferred that they were aware of the injunction order. 
Thus, the High Court concluded that respondents 1-2 
were bonafide purchasers for valuable consideration 
and deserved protection under Section 41 of the Act of 
1882. The relevant observations of the High Court are 
reproduced below: 
“In the suit for permanent injunction, land 
measuring 16 kanals out of khewat No. 322 
khata No. 435 total measuring 86 kanal 14 
marlas was the subject matter. Neither 
Harvinder Singh nor the present appellants 
were party to the said litigation. The interim 
injunction against alienation was allowed 
vide order dated 28.7.2003, the date a 
lawyer appeared on behalf of Iqbal Singh ala Singh and filed memo of appearance. 
The release deed in favour of defendant No. 
2 Harvinder Singh was executed by Iqbal 
Singh ala Singh defendant No. 1 on 
28.7.2003. There is no evidence on record 
as to the time when injunction order was 
passed by the trial court and the time when 
the 
release 
deed 
was 
executed 
and 
registered in favour of Harvinder Singh. 
This apart, sale in violation of an injunction 
order passed by the courts would not 
render the transaction void ab initio and, at 
best, proceedings under Order 39 Rule 2A 
of the Code can be initiated by the 
aggrieved party. There is nothing on record 
suggestive of the fact that respondent-
plaintiff initiated any such proceedings 
against Iqbal Singh or Harvinder Singh. 
Moreover, 
the 
injunction 
order 
dated 
28.7.2003 also lost its life the moment suit 
for 
permanent 
injunction 
was 
later 

dismissed in the year 2004. Counsel for the 
respondent-plaintiff has failed to cite any 
provision in law or a precedent that if suit 
property is transferred in favour of the 
vendor of a litigant claiming bona fide 
purchaser 
during 
pendency 
of 
earlier 
litigation, he is not entitle to protection 
under Section 41 of the TP Act irrespective 
of whether he was aware of pendency of 
that litigation or otherwise. The release 
deed in favour of defendant No. 2 and sale 
deed in favour of the appellants were 
subject to outcome of suit for injunction that 
was eventually dismissed by the Court. In 
this view of the matter, findings of the 
courts to reject plea of bona fide purchaser 
of the appellants on account of pendency of 
suit for permanent injunction are not based 
upon any legal ground, thus, unjustified.” 
 
11. 
While allowing the second appeal, the High Court 
though has upheld the concurrent findings as to the 
execution of the agreement to sell, and that the 
appellant had paid Rs. 2.50 lakhs as earnest money to 
respondent no. 3. Consequently, the High Court gave 
the alternate relief to the appellant, as indicated above. 
12. 
On behalf of the appellant, we have heard learned 
counsel Mr. Rameshwar Singh Malik, Sr. Advocate and 
Mr. Narender Hooda, Sr. Advocate on behalf of 
respondents 1-2. Though service by way of publication 

was done for respondents 3 and 4, they have not 
entered appearance. 
13. 
Mr. Narender Hooda, Sr. Adv for the respondents/ 
defendants has relied on the findings of the High Court 
to submit that respondents 1-2 made due enquiries 
about the suit property, however, the revenue records 
did not indicate that another agreement to sell was 
executed in favour of the appellant. Further, it is 
argued that PW-7 had never informed them about the 
injunction order passed in favour of the appellant. 
Thus, they are the bonafide purchasers for valuable 
consideration and possession has been taken over by 
the respondents 1-2 since 2004 subsequent to which, 
they have renovated the land and installed a pump 
there as well. 
14. 
Mr. Rameshwar Singh Malik, Sr. Adv on behalf of the 
appellant/plaintiff would on the other hand submit 
that the High Court committed a grave error in 
reversing the concurrent findings of the Courts below. 
The transaction qua the suit property was executed by 
the respondents after the appellant obtained an order 

of temporary injunction from the Trial Court, hence the 
entire transactions would be hit by lis pendens given 
under Section 52 of the Act of 1882. Even otherwise, 
the High Court has upheld the findings of the Courts 
below that the agreement to sell in favour of the 
appellant as well as the acceptance of earnest money 
was duly proved. Lastly, the respondent nos. 3 and 4 
never preferred any appeal against the judgements 
passed by the lower courts so they have attained 
finality qua them, which is indicative of the collusion 
between the respondents. 
15. 
In order to appreciate the rival contentions of the 
parties, it will be appropriate to reproduce the relevant 
provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, the 
benefit of which is being claimed by both parties. 
Section 41 of the Act of 1882 which governs the 
principle 
of 
bonafide 
purchaser 
for 
valuable 
consideration is reproduced below: 
“41. Transfer by ostensible owner.—
Where, with the consent, express or 
implied, of the persons interested in 
immovable property, a person is the 
ostensible owner of such property and 
transfers the same for consideration, the 

transfer shall not be voidable on the 
ground that the transferor was not 
authorised to make it: 
 
Provided that the transferee, after taking 
reasonable care to ascertain that the 
transferor 
had 
power 
to 
make 
the 
transfer, has acted in good faith.” 
 
Similarly, Section 52 of the Act of 1882 governs the 
principle of lis pendens and is reproduced below: 
“52. Transfer of property pending 
suit 
relating 
thereto.—During 
the 
[pendency] 
in 
any 
Court 
having 
authority [within the limits of India 
excluding the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir] or established beyond such 
limits] 
by [the 
Central 
Government, 
of [any] suit or proceeding [which is not 
collusive and] in which any right to 
immovable property is directly and 
specifically in question, the property 
cannot be transferred or otherwise dealt 
with by any party to the suit or 
proceeding so as to affect the rights of 
any other party thereto under any 
decree or order which may be made 
therein, except under the authority of the 
Court and on such terms as it may 
impose. 
 
[Explanation.—For the purpose of this 
section, the pendency of a suit or 
proceeding 
shall 
be 
deemed 
to 
commence 
from 
the 
date 
of 
the 
presentation 
of 
the 
plaint 
or 
the 
institution of the proceeding in a court of 
competent jurisdiction, and to continue 
until the suit or proceeding has been 

disposed of by a final decree or order, 
and complete satisfaction or discharge of 
such decree or order has been obtained, 
or has become unobtainable by reason of 
the expiration of any period of limitation 
prescribed for the execution thereof by 
any law for the time being in force.]” 
 
16. 
The object underlying the doctrine of lis pendens is for 
maintaining status quo that cannot be affected by an 
act of any party in a pending litigation. The objective is 
also to prevent multiple proceedings by parties in 
different forums. The principle is based on equity and 
good conscience. This Court has clarified this position 
in a catena of cases. Reference may be made here of 
some, such as: Rajendra Singh v. Santa Singh, AIR 
1973 SC 2537; Dev Raj Dogra v. Gyan Chand Jain, 
(1981); Sunita Jugalkishore Gilda v. 
Ramanlal Udhoji Tanna, (2013). 
17. 
It must be stated here though that by virtue of Section 
1 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 the provisions 
of the said Act are not applicable in the States of 
Punjab, Delhi or Bombay; subject, of course to certain 
exceptions. Yet, in the case of Kanshi Ram v. Kesho 
Ram, AIR 1961 P&H 299 the Punjab and Haryana 

High Court has held that since the explanation to 
Section 52 is based on equity and good conscience this 
principle can be applicable. Recently, this Court in 
Shivshankara and Another v. H.P. Vedavyasa 
Char, held as follows: 
“….Even if it is taken for granted that the 
provisions under Section 52 of the Transfer of 
Property Act are not applicable as such in the 
case on hand it cannot be disputed that the 
principle 
contained 
in 
the 
provision 
is 
applicable in the case on hand. It is a well-
nigh settled position that wherever TP Act is 
not applicable, such principle in the said 
provision of the said Act, which is based on 
justice, equity and good conscience is 
applicable in a given similar circumstance, 
like Court sale etc…..” 
 
In short, there can be no doubt that even if Section 52 
of T.P Act is not applicable in its strict sense in the 
present case then too the principles of lis-pendens, 
which 
are 
based 
on 
justice, 
equity 
and 
good 
conscience, would certainly be applicable. 
18. 
Keeping this in mind, the explanation to Section 52 
which was inserted by the Act No. XX of 1929, clarifies 
that pendency of a suit shall be deemed to have 
commenced from the date on which the plaintiff 
presents the suit. Further, that such pendency would 

extend till a final decree is passed and such decree is 
realised. 
19. 
In the facts of the present case, the suit for permanent 
injunction was filed on 21.07.2003 which is prior to 
the execution of release deed, i.e., 28.07.2003. Thus, 
since the release deed is executed after the suit for 
temporary injunction was filed by the appellant, the 
alienation made by respondent no. 3 in favour of 
respondent no. 4 would be covered by the doctrine of 
lis pendens. 
20. 
In other words, the appellant filed a suit for permanent 
injunction on 21.07.2003 and obtained an order of 
temporary injunction on 28.07.2003. As on 21.07.2003 
the doctrine of lis pendens would take its effect. The 
release deed executed by respondent no. 3 in favour of 
respondent no. 4 was of 28.07.2003, which is 
subsequent to the filing of the suit. Respondent no. 4 
executed the registered sale deed in favour of 
respondents 1-2 on 16.06.2004 which is during the 
operation of the temporary injunction order. Thus, the 
alienation made by respondents, cannot operate 

against the interests of the appellant considering he 
had obtained an order of temporary injunction in his 
favour. The same position has been held by this Court 
in a recent decision of Shivshankara and Another v. 
H.P. Vedavyasa Char (Supra), which has similar facts 
in the context of an injunction order. 
21. 
Once it has been held that the transactions executed 
by the respondents are illegal due to the doctrine of lis 
pendens the defence of the respondents 1-2 that they 
are bonafide purchasers for valuable consideration and 
thus, entitled to protection under Section 41 of the Act 
of 1882 is liable to be rejected. 
22. 
We are presently not getting into the deposition of 
PW-7 though it is unusual and also whether 
respondents 1-2 had knowledge of the injunction, even 
though we find no substantial reasons for the High 
Court to base its entire decision on the deposition of 
this witness (PW-7). We are going by the settled 
position that subsequent purchasers will be bound by 
lis pendens and cannot claim they are bonafide 
purchasers because they were not aware of the 

injunction order, looking at the peculiar facts of the 
present case. 
23. 
Respondents 1-2 have also claimed they have made 
substantial alterations to the property by investing 
money and they have also installed a submersible 
pump. However, this cannot be the basis for the 
respondents to claim any sort of compensation or stake 
any sort of claim against the property. (See: Sardar 
Kar Bachan Singh v. Major S Kar Bhajan Singh, 
AIR 1975 P&H 205) 
24. 
Consequently, the Release Deed dated 28.07.2003 
executed by respondent no. 3 in favour of respondent 
no. 4 and the Sale Deed dated 16.06.2004 executed by 
respondent no. 4 in favour of respondents 1-2 is held 
to be without any legal sanctity. There was an order of 
temporary injunction operating at the time when these 
transactions were made and the alienation made by 
the respondents cannot operate to the disadvantage of 
the appellant. Since the parties to these proceedings 
are bound by the doctrine of lis pendens the 

respondents 1-2 cannot take the protection of bonafide 
purchasers for valuable consideration. 
25. 
Consequently, this appeal is allowed, the Judgement 
dated 03.10.2019 passed by the Punjab and Haryana 
High Court in RSA No. 2746 of 2012 is set aside. The 
decree in favour of the appellant is upheld. The 
respondent no. 3 is directed to accept the balance sale 
consideration of Rs.5,50,000 from the appellant and 
execute the agreement to sell dated 10.11.2002 in 
favour of the appellant, within 3 months from today. 

…...……………………………J. 
 (SUDHANSHU DHULIA) 

 …...……………………………J. 
 (PRASANNA B. VARALE) 
 
New Delhi 
May 03, 2024