IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
( SLP(CIVIL) NO(S). 7071 OF 2024) 

DR. RANBEER BOSE & ANR.. 

VERSUS 

ANITA DAS & ANR. 

 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The appellants in this appeal seek to assail the order dated 
20th February, 2024 passed by the learned Division Bench of the 
High Court of Calcutta in MAT No.2124 of 2023. By the said order, 
the learned Division Bench rejected the appeal preferred by the 
appellants and affirmed the order dated 5th October, 2023 passed 
by the learned Single Judge of the High Court of Calcutta in 
Contempt Petition No.694 of 2022 in WPA No. 24206 of 2019, 
wherein the following directions were issued:- 
 
“Mr. Krishnendu Narayan Choudhury, Chairman, English 
Bazar Municipality is personally present in Court. 

Time has been sought for by the learned senior advocate 
representing the alleged contemnor to comply the direction 
passed by the Court. 

On such request the matter stands adjourned till 30th 
November 2023. 

The order of the Court shall be complied and fresh affidavit 
of compliance be filed on the adjourned date. 

On the assurance given by the learned senior advocate 
representing the alleged contemnor, the personal appearance of 
the alleged contemnor stands dispensed with for the time 
being.” 
 
3. 
The appellants have raised a grievance that the directions 
issued by the learned Single Judge in the contempt petition have 
a direct bearing on their residential premises. It is contended that 
the private respondent(respondent No.1 herein), filed the writ 
petition before the learned Single Judge alleging that while raising 
the construction of the residential property, the appellants did not 
maintain the open spaces prescribed under Rule 50 of the West 
Bengal Municipal(Building) Rules, 2007(hereinafter referred to as 
the ‘Rules of 2007’). 
4. 
Mr. Rana Mukherjee, learned senior counsel appearing for 
the appellants, urged that the learned Single Judge was not 
justified in entertaining the writ petition which raised a purely 
private dispute between two neighbours. He further submitted 
that acting under the pressure of the contempt proceedings, the 

municipal authorities have issued a show cause notice to the 
appellants with the observation that the building raised by the 
appellants herein is in contravention of Rule 50 of the Rules of 
2007. His contention is that there being no allegation that the 
building was constructed in violation of the sanctioned building 
plan, the notice by itself is without jurisdiction. He also urged that 
under the pressure of contempt proceedings, the municipal 
authorities are bent upon passing an adverse order for 
demolishing the construction raised by the appellants herein on 
their plot, which was in strict compliance of the sanctioned 
building plan. He, thus, urged that the appellants herein may be 
given liberty to challenge the enquiry report dated 16th October, 
2023 and the show cause notice dated 24th April, 2024 by taking 
recourse to the provisions contained in West Bengal Municipal Act, 
1993. 
5. However, his submission is that the municipal authorities are 
likely to be prejudiced by the contempt proceedings as they are 
acting under the pressure thereof and thus, the appellants will not 
get a fair chance to contest the notice. 
6. 
Learned counsel appearing for respondent No.1 vehemently 
opposed the submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the 

appellants. He urged that the learned Single Judge, after extensive 
consideration of the material available on record has found that 
the sanctioned building plan was violated by the appellants while 
raising construction of their residential premises and as such, the 
direction to conduct an enquiry into the matter was justified. 
7. 
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the materials 
placed on record. 
8. 
We express our reservations on the exercise of writ 
jurisdiction by the learned Single Judge of the High Court of 
Calcutta in a controversy, which appears to be a purely private 
dispute 
between 
the 
appellants 
herein 
and 
the 
private 
respondent(respondent No.1 herein), being immediate neighbours. 
9. 
Prima facie, we are of the view that if at all the private 
respondent(respondent No.1 herein) was aggrieved of irregularity 
committed, if any, in the construction raised by the appellants on 
their own plot, the appropriate remedy for him would have been to 
approach the municipal authorities and if no proper response was 
forthcoming, then the civil Court was the appropriate forum for 
ventilating the grievances of the nature which have been raised 
before the writ Court. 

10. Be that as it may, the fact remains that now the enquiry 
report has been presented before the High Court of Calcutta by the 
municipal authorities. As per the enquiry report dated 16th 
October 2023, the construction made by the appellants has not 
been found to be in violation of the building plan and rather, it has 
been mentioned that the sanction plan to construct the building 
was granted in violation of Rule 50 of the Rules of 2007. 
11. Indisputably, the appellants have a right to challenge the said 
enquiry report and the show cause notice. Hence, we leave the 
appellants at liberty to challenge the show cause notice dated 24th 
April, 2024 and the enquiry report(s) by resorting to the provisions 
contained in the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993. 
12. Needless to say that the objections so raised by the appellants 
will be considered and decided objectively without being prejudiced 
by either the pending contempt proceedings or the orders passed 
in the writ proceedings. It may be noted that as per sub-clause(3) 
of Section 218 of West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, in case the 
objections raised by the appellants do not find favour of the Board 
of Councillors, they would have a right to file an appeal in the 
Court having jurisdiction. 
13. The appeal is disposed of in above terms. 

14. No order as to costs. 
15. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

 ………………….……….J. 
 (B.R. GAVAI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 

New Delhi; 
May 03, 2024