IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
( SLP(C) NO(S). 23966-23968 OF 2022) 
 
SMITA SHRIVASTAVA. 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH 
& ORS. ETC....RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. Leave granted. 
2. The appellant has approached this Court by way of filing 
present appeals seeking to assail the impugned judgments dated 
7th May, 2022 and 3rd August, 2022, passed by the High Court of 
Madhya Pradesh, Indore Bench in Writ Appeal Nos.1972 of 2019 
and 799 of 2021 and respectively 
whereby, while allowing the writ appeal preferred by the 
respondent herein, the High Court refused to grant the relief of 
appointment to the appellant on the post of Samvida Shala 
Shikshak Grade-III in spite of holding that denial of such 
appointment was grossly illegal and arbitrary. The review petition 

filed against order dated 7th May, 2022, too was dismissed vide 
judgment dated 3rd August, 2022. 
3. 
Detailed facts can be gathered from the impugned judgments 
and thus, the same need not be reiterated in detail. However, in 
nutshell, the controversy can be summarized in the following 
manner. 
4. 
The appellant herein was appointed as an Instructor in the 
Non-Formal Educational Centre established by the State 
Government in the year 1990. She worked on the said post till 1st 
September, 1993. Later on, the State Government decided to 
abolish the post of Instructors. The State Government exercising 
powers conferred upon it by sub-Section(1) of Section 95 read with 
sub-Section(2) of Section 70 of the Madhya Pradesh Panchayat Raj 
Avam Gram Swaraj Adhiniyam, 1993 promulgated recruitment 
rules for the services of the Samvida Shala Shikshak Grade-I, II 
and III in the name of the Madhya Pradesh Panchayat Samvida 
Shala Shikshak(Employment and Conditions of Contract) Rules, 
2005(for short ‘Rules of 2005’). 
5. 
The State Government conducted an examination for the 
selection of Samvida Shala Shikshak Grade-III on 31st August, 
2008. The appellant herein was permitted to participate in the 

examination and was declared passed. However, no appointment 
order was forthcoming in her favour, whereupon she served a legal 
notice to the concerned authority but to no avail. The Rules of 2005 
were amended on 29th July, 2009 by a Gazette Notification 
whereby, sub Rule(2) was inserted in Rule 7-A to the effect that the 
candidates who were working on the post of Instructors in the Non-
Formal Educational Centres were eligible to get appointment. The 
aforesaid amendment made the appellant ineligible to be 
appointed for the post of Samvida Shala Shikshak Grade-III as she 
had been discontinued from the job of Instructor with effect from 
1st September, 1993 and accordingly, in view of the aforesaid 
amendment, the State Government denied appointment to the 
appellant herein which compelled her to institute litigation along 
with similarly situated ex-Instructors. The Writ Petition No. 91 of 
2011 filed by the appellant was allowed on 21st February, 2012 
whereby the notification dated 29th July, 2009 was quashed and a 
direction was given to the State Government to consider the case 
of the appellant for appointment on the post of Samvida Shala 
Shikshak Grade-III, in view of unamended criteria. Another Writ 
Petition No. 1578 of 2011 filed by the appellant was also allowed 
on 1st February, 2013. In spite thereof, the District Education 

Officer, Indore rejected the claim of the appellant for appointment 
which led to further litigation. Finally, the matter came up for 
consideration before the Division Bench of the High Court of 
Madhya Pradesh at Indore in Writ Appeal Nos.1972 of 2019 and 
799 of 2021 which came to be disposed of with the following 
directions: - 
“After the order passed in contempt petition, again the 
appellants rejected the claim of the writ petitioner on 
22.01.2014. The Writ Petitioner has filed Writ Petition 
No.3698/2014 placing the order passed by the Gwalior Bench 
of this High Court in the case of Manmohan Mathur Vs. State 
of M.P (W.P. No.1102/2010 (s) allowed on 30.7.2012). The Writ 
Petitioner has also filed an order of 
whereby the Division Bench has dismissed the Writ Appeal filed 
by the appellants. The 
had also been dismissed and after the dismissal of SLP all the 
Instructors similarly placed writ petitioner have been appointed 
vide order dated 13.03.2018. Thereafter vide order dated 
29.11.2018, six more Instructors were appointed. In view of the 
aforesaid order, again writ petition was disposed of with a 
direction to consider the claim of the writ petitioner but 
unfortunately, Collector, Indore vide order dated 21.10.2019, 
has rejected the representation of the writ petitioner again, 
relying on Rule 7-A. 
Since the State Government has no option but to appoint the 
writ petitioner and other Instructors, therefore, vide notification 
dated 21.03.2018, the provision of 7-A has been made effective 
w.e.f. 01.01.2008 i.e. prior to the date of recruitment in order 
to deny the legitimate claim of the writ petitioner. Despite the 
aforesaid amendment, the Writ Court has allowed the writ 
petition with a direction to the appellants to consider the case 
of the writ petitioner on the post of Samvida Shala Shishak 
Grade-III. 
This case is a glaring example of the adamant attitude of the 
State Government. Mighty State Government has made all 
possible efforts to deny the appointment of the writ petitioner 
on the post of Samvida Shala Shishak Grade-III. The writ 
petitioner is fighting for her right since 2008 fulfilling all the 
educational qualifications for the post of Samvida Shala 
Shishak Grade-III. The writ petitioner is fighting against State 

for her modest claim for appointment to the post of Samvida 
Shala Shishak Grade-III. She had approached four times before 
this Court by filing the writ petitions and contempt petition and 
in order to deny her claim, twice State Government has 
amended the Rules and thereafter when they did not succeed, 
they have given it retrospective effect. By doing this, the State 
/the appellants have passed more than 14 years and made the 
writ petitioner overage (56 years) for the appointment. Every 
time, despite a clear cut finding that the amended rule would 
not apply in the case of the writ petitioner, the appellants have 
every time rejected her legitimate claim by relying on the 
amended rule. This is a fit case for proceeding with contempt 
against the erring officer of the State Government. 
Now post of Samvida Shala Shishak Grade-III has already been 
abolished and all the Shisha Karmis' have been made Assistant 
Teachers after qualifying for the examination. The Writ Petition 
has not challenged the validity of the notification dated 
21.03.2018, by which the provision of 7-A has been made 
effective w.e.f. 01.01.2008. Therefore, in view of this 
subsequent development, now the petitioner is no more eligible 
to get an appointment hence the Writ Appeal is allowed. But 
looking at the conduct of the State as discussed above the Writ 
Petitioner is liable to be compensated by payment of Rs. 
1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lakh) payable by the State.” 
 
6. 
Being aggrieved by the denial of relief despite having 
succeeded in protracted litigations and the highly arbitrary, 
adamant and mala fide approach of the State authorities, the 
appellant herein filed a against the 
order dated 7th May, 2022 which too was dismissed by the order 
dated 3rd August, 2022. The above said orders are assailed in the 
present set of appeals. 
7. 
We have heard and considered the submissions advanced by 
learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the material 
placed on record. 

8. 
It is a glaring case wherein the adamant, arbitrary, mala fide 
and high-handed approach of the State Government and its 
officials has driven the appellant to a series of prolonged litigations 
which were evidently not out of her choice. In spite of having 
passed the selection exam held for the post of Samvida Shala 
Shikshak Grade-III way back on 31st August, 2008, the appellant 
did not reap the fruits of her success. The State Government took 
the shield of an amended rule i.e. Rule 7-A, issued on 29th July, 
2009 for denying relief to the appellant herein, even when the said 
rule had no retrospective application. Not only this, in spite of the 
High Court having struck down the said rule and passing repeated 
orders in favour of the appellant, another notification dated 21st 
March, 2018 was issued making the amended rule effective from 
1st January, 2008 i.e. prior to the date of recruitment. This was 
clearly a mala fide action in an attempt to circumvent the orders 
passed by the High Court by hook or by crook so as to prevent the 
appellant and her peers of their lawful claim to appointment which 
stood crystalized long back. However, despite recognising all the 
unjustified orders faced by the appellant, the Division Bench of 
High Court of Madhya Pradesh failed to provide restitutive relief to 

the appellant even after holding that she was illegally deprived of 
her lawful entitlement. 
9. 
Learned counsel for the appellant has drawn our attention to 
the judgment of this Court in the case of Manoj Kumar v. Union 
of India and Others1. The relevant extracts of which are quoted 
hereinbelow for the sake of ready reference: - 
“19. Within the realm of judicial review in common law 
jurisdictions, it is established that constitutional courts are 
entrusted with the responsibility of ensuring the lawfulness of 
executive decisions, rather than substituting their own 
judgment to decide the rights of the parties, which they would 
exercise in civil jurisdiction. It has been held that the primary 
purpose of quashing any action is to preserve order in the legal 
system by preventing excess and abuse of power or to set aside 
arbitrary actions. Wade on Administrative Law states that the 
purpose of quashing is not the final determination of private 
rights, for a private party must separately contest his own 
rights before the administrative authority. Such private party is 
also not entitled to compensation merely because the 
administrative action is illegal. A further case of tort, 
misfeasance, negligence, or breach of statutory duty must be 
established for such person to receive compensation. 
 
20. We are of the opinion that while the primary duty of 
constitutional courts remains the control of power, including 
setting aside of administrative actions that may be illegal or 
arbitrary, it must be acknowledged that such measures may 
not singularly address repercussions of abuse of power. It is 
equally incumbent upon the courts, as a secondary measure, 
to address the injurious consequences arising from arbitrary 
and illegal actions. This concomitant duty to take reasonable 
measures to restitute the injured is our overarching 
constitutional purpose. This is how we have read our 
constitutional text, and this is how we have built our 
precedents on the basis of our preambular objective to secure 
justice. [The Preambular goals are to secure Justice, Liberty, 
Equality, and Fraternity for all citizens.] 

1 (2024) 

21. In public law proceedings, when it is realised that the 
prayer in the writ petition is unattainable due to passage of 
time, constitutional courts may not dismiss the writ 
proceedings on the ground of their perceived futility. In the life 
of litigation, passage of time can stand both as an ally and 
adversary. Our duty is to transcend the constraints of time and 
perform the primary duty of a constitutional court to control 
and regulate the exercise of power or arbitrary action. By taking 
the first step, the primary purpose and object of public law 
proceedings will be subserved. 
 
22. The second step relates to restitution. This operates in a 
different 
dimension. 
Identification 
and 
application 
of 
appropriate remedial measures poses a significant challenge to 
constitutional courts, largely attributable to the dual variables 
of time and limited resources. 
 
23. The temporal gap between the impugned illegal or arbitrary 
action and their subsequent adjudication by the courts 
introduces complexities in the provision of restitution. As time 
elapses, the status of persons, possession, and promises 
undergoes transformation, directly influencing the nature of 
relief that may be formulated and granted.” 

10. The situation at hand is clearly covered by the aforesaid 
observations made by this Court in the case of Manoj 
Kumar(supra). There is no dispute that the appellant is presently 
of 59 years of age and can hold the post of Samvida Shala 
Shikshak Grade-III till the age of 62 years. The High Court took 
note of the fact that despite a clear-cut finding that the amended 
rule would not apply in the case of the appellant, the State 
Government has rejected her legitimate claim by relying on the 
amended rule. The High Court, on the one hand, thought it fit to 
proceed with contempt action against the erring officers of the 
State Government, but at the same time, denied relief to the 

appellant on the basis of notification dated 21st March, 2018 which 
makes the amended rule i.e. Rule 7-A effective retrospectively i.e., 
with effect from 1st January, 2008. This observation of the High 
Court is in sheer contravention of the findings and conclusions 
recorded earlier. 
11. As a consequence, we are of the firm view that the appellant 
deserves a direction for restitutive relief along with compensation 
for the misery piled upon her owing to the arbitrary and high-
handed action of the State Government and its officials. 
Accordingly, the following directions are issued:- 
(i) The appellant shall forthwith be appointed to the post of 
Samvida Shala Shikshak Grade-III or an equivalent post within 
a period of 60(sixty) days from today. 
(ii) The appointment order will be effective from the date on 
which the first appointment order pursuant to the selection 
process dated 31st August, 2008 came to be issued. 
(iii) The appellant shall be entitled to continuity in service. 
However, she shall not be entitled to back wages. However, 
she is granted exemplary cost quantified at Rs.10,00,000/-
(Rupees Ten Lakhs only). The above amount shall be paid to 
the appellant by the State of Madhya Pradesh within 60 days. 

(iv) The State Government shall hold an enquiry and recover 
the said amount of Rs. 10,00,000/-(Rupees Ten Lakhs only) 
from the officer(s) who were responsible of taking deliberate, 
illegal, mala fide actions for denying relief to the appellant. 
12. The above directions are being given without prejudice to the 
proceedings of contempt contemplated by the High Court in the 
order dated 7th May, 2022. 
13. The appeals are allowed in these terms. 
14. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
May 03, 2024