IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
( SLP (Crl.) No.5719/2023) 

AMANATULLAH KHAN 
 
 …APPELLANT 

VERSUS 

THE COMMISSIONER OF POLICE, DELHI 
& ORS. …RESPONDENTS 

JUDGEMENT 
 
SURYA KANT, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The appellant approached the High Court of Delhi through 
a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India read 
with Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for 
quashing of the ‘History Sheet’ opened against him and the 
proposal to declare him as ‘Bad Character’ with the entry of his 
name in the Surveillance ‘Register-X, Part II, Bundle A’ at Police 
Station Jamia Nagar, District: South-East, Delhi. The Single 
Judge of High Court has, vide the impugned judgment dated 
19.01.2023, dismissed the appellant’s writ petition, giving rise to 
these proceedings. 

3. 
Upon notice, the Delhi Police entered appearance through 
Mr. Sanjay Jain, learned senior counsel, who was apprised of 
some disturbing contents of the History Sheet to the extent it 
pertained to the school going minor children of the appellant and 
his wife, against whom there was apparently no adverse material 
whatsoever for inclusion in the History Sheet. It was then apprised 
that the format of the history sheeters was prescribed following 
Rule 23.8 and Rule 23.9 of the Punjab Police Rules 1934 (in short, 
the “1934 Rules”) as were applicable in the NCT of Delhi. Mr. Jain, 
learned senior counsel for the respondents, however, fairly agreed 
to re-visit the archaic rules with a view to ensure that the dignity, 
self-respect and privacy of the innocent people, who incidentally 
happen to be the family members of a suspect, is not compromised 
at any cost. 
4. 
Mr. Sanjay Jain, learned senior counsel has today placed 
on record the amended Standing Order No.L&O/54/2022 issued 
by the Commissioner of Police, Delhi. The aforesaid Standing 
Order pertains to ‘Surveillance of History Sheeters and Bad 
Characters’. It appears that the Original Standing order was 
issued on 10.06.2022 and paragraph 9(2) thereof titled as 
“Preparation of History Sheet” was replicated from provisions of 
the 1934 Rules. 

5. 
With the amended Standing Order issued on 21.03.2024, 
the Commissioner of Police has provided as follows: 
“The space for “relation and connection” should be 
filled in with a view to afford clues about those 
persons with whom the criminal is likely to harbour 
when wanted by the police, including relations or 
friends living at a distance from his home, and his 
associates in crime, abettors and receivers. It may be 
noted that the space for “relations and connections” 
in the history sheet should reflect identities of those 
persons who can afforded him shelter when the 
offender is running/wanted by the police (in general) 
and should include his associates in crime, abettors 
and receivers (in particular) and no details of any 
minor relatives i.e. son, daughter, siblings should be 
recorded anywhere in the History Sheet unless there 
is evidence that the minor under question can, or 
has earlier had, afforded shelter to the offender, 
“while he was on run from police”. 
While preparing History Sheet, it may also be kept in 
mind that as per Section 74 of the Juvenile Justice 
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, there is 
a prohibition on disclosing the Identity of a child in 
conflict with law or a child in need of care and 
protection of a child victim or witness of a crime 
through a report etc. Even though the History Sheet 
is an internal Police document and not a publicly 
accessible report, care must be taken that identities 
of only those minor relatives are entered into the 
History Sheet against whom evidence exists that 
minor in question has earlier had, afforded shelter to 
the offender, while he was on run from police”. In 
addition to above, the particular nature of each 
person’s connection should be noted against each, 
and, 
when 
persons 
shown 
as 
connections 
themselves have history sheets, a cross reference 
with those History Sheets should be given. Maximum 
phone 
numbers/mobile 
numbers 
or 
associates/relatives/acquaintances of BCs should 
be collected and placed for record. Aadhar Number, 
EPIC 
number, 
e-mail 
ID, 
social 
media 
accounts/profiles viz, facebook, Instagram ID, 
Twitter ID etc. to be placed on file. Further mobile 
numbers 
& 
other 
available 
details 
of 
associates/relatives/acquaintance of BC should be 
collected and placed on record.” 

6. 
We find from the amended Standing Order that in the 
column “relations and connections”, it has been decided that 
identities of only those persons shall be reflected who can afford 
the history sheeter/bad character shelter, when the offender is 
running/wanted by the police and it shall also include names of 
his associates in crime, abettors and receivers. The amended 
Standing Order emphatically says that no details of any minor 
relatives, i.e., son, daughter, siblings shall be recorded anywhere 
in the History Sheet unless there is evidence that such minor, has 
or earlier had, afforded shelter to the offender. 
7. 
Secondly, the amended provision now mandates that 
Section 74 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of 
Children) Act, 2015 shall be meticulously followed, whereunder 
there is a prohibition on disclosing the identity of a child in conflict 
with law or a child in need of care and protection or a child victim 
or a witness of a crime through a report etc. 
8. 
The amended Standing Order further clarifies that ‘History 
Sheet’ is an internal police document and not a publicly accessible 
report. It has cautioned the police officers that care must be taken 
to ensure that identities of only those minor relatives are entered 
in the History Sheet against whom evidence exists that such minor 
had earlier afforded shelter to the offender, while he was on the 
run from the police. The safeguard with regard to the details of 

phone numbers, Aadhar Card, EPIC number, e-mail I.D., social 
media accounts etc., have also been suggested in the amended 
Standing Order. 
9. 
It seems that so far as the case in hand is concerned, the 
decision taken by the respondents to the effect that the History 
Sheet is only an internal police document and it shall not be 
brought in public domain, largely addresses the concern 
expressed by us in the beginning. Secondly, the extra care and 
precaution, to be now observed by a police officer while ensuring 
that the identity of a minor child is not disclosed as per the law 
too, is a necessary step to redress the appellant’s grievances. It 
will surely prevent the undesirable exposure that has been given 
to the minor children in this case. 
10. 
All that we propose to direct the police authorities is that 
the amended Standing Order dated 21.03.2024 be given effect 
forthwith in the appellant’s case also. 
11. 
In addition, we also direct the Commissioner of Police, 
Delhi to designate a senior police officer, in the rank of Joint 
Commissioner of Police or above, who shall periodically 
audit/review the contents of the History Sheets and will ensure 
confidentiality and a leeway to delete the names of such 
persons/juvenile/children who are, in the course of investigation, 

found innocent and are entitled to be expunged from the category 
of “relations and connections” in a History Sheet. 
12. 
It goes without saying that if a Police Officer of Delhi Police 
is found to have acted contrary to the amended Standing Order 
and or the directions given herein above, prompt action against 
such delinquent officer shall be taken. 
13. 
The impugned judgment of the High Court dated 
19.01.2023 stands modified and the instant criminal appeal is 
disposed of in the above terms. 
14. 
Having partially addressed the grievance of the appellant, 
we now, in exercise of our suo motu powers, propose to expand the 
scope of these proceedings so that the police authorities in other 
States and Union Territories may also consider the desirability of 
ensuring that no mechanical entries in History Sheet are made of 
innocent individuals, simply because they happen to hail from the 
socially, 
economically 
and 
educationally 
disadvantaged 
backgrounds, 
along 
with 
those 
belonging 
to 
Backward 
Communities, Scheduled Castes & Scheduled Tribes. While we are 
not sure about the degree of their authenticity, but there are some 
studies available in the public domain that reveal a pattern of an 
unfair, prejudicial and atrocious mindset. It is alleged that the 
Police Diaries are maintained selectively of individuals belonging 

to Vimukta Jatis, based solely on caste-bias, a somewhat similar 
manner as happened in colonial times. All the State Governments 
are therefore expected to take necessary preventive measures to 
safeguard such communities from being subjected to inexcusable 
targeting or prejudicial treatment. We must bear in mind that 
these pre-conceived notions often render them ‘invisible victims’ 
due to prevailing stereotypes associated with their communities, 
which may often impede their right to live a life with self-respect. 
15. 
The value for human dignity and life is deeply embedded in 
Article 21 of our Constitution. The expression ‘life’ unequivocally 
includes the right to live a life worthy of human honour and all 
that goes along with it. Self-regard, social image and an honest 
space for oneself in one’s surrounding society, are just as 
significant to a dignified life as are adequate food, clothing and 
shelter. 
16. 
It seems that a periodic audit mechanism overseen by a 
senior police officer, as directed for the NCT of Delhi, will serve as 
a critical tool to review and scrutinize the entries made, so as to 
ascertain that these are devoid of any biases or discriminatory 
practices. Through the effective implementation of audits, we can 
secure the elimination of such deprecated practices and kindle the 
legitimate hope that the right to live with human dignity, as 
guaranteed under Article 21, is well protected. 

17. 
We are conscious of the fact that States or Union 
Territories, other than the NCT of Delhi, are not before us. They 
have not been heard. No positive mandamus can thus be issued 
to them. Further, we are not aware of the existing Rules/Policies 
or Standing Orders in vogue in different States/Union Territories. 
We, therefore, deem it appropriate, at this stage, to direct all the 
States/Union Territories to revisit their policy-regime and 
consider whether suitable amendments on the pattern of the 
‘Delhi Model’ are required to be made so that our observations 
made in paragraphs 14 to 16 of this order can be given effect in 
true letter and spirit. 
18. 
The Registry is, accordingly, directed to forward a copy of 
this judgement to the Chief Secretary and Director General of 
Police of all States and Union Territories to enable them to 
consider and comply with what has been held above, as early as 
possible but not later than six months. 
19. 
All pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of. 
 
……… 

……… 
New Delhi; 
May 7, 2024.