IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 3684 OF 2023 

 JAGVIR SINGH. 

VERSUS 

STATE OF U.P. 

 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
The instant appeal is directed against the judgment dated 
10th May, 2019 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of 
Allahabad whereby the preferred 
by the appellant for challenging the judgment dated 25th 
November, 2003 and the order of sentence dated 27th November, 
2003 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge No.1, 
Mainpuri(hereinafter being referred to as the ‘trial Court’) in S.T. 
No. 56 of 2003 was rejected. 
2. 
By the said judgment, learned trial Court convicted the 
accused appellant and accused Omkar for the offences punishable 
under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 

1860(hereinafter being referred to as ‘IPC’) while acquitting 
accused Sobran and Durvin from the charges. The accused 
appellant as well as accused Omkar were sentenced to undergo 
imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/-, each and in 
default of payment of fine to further undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for a period of one year. 
This Court is informed that accused Omkar has served out 
the sentence awarded to him and was released on remission. 
Brief facts: - 
3. 
The first informant-Ram Naresh(PW-5) gave a written 
report(Ex.Ka.15) at the Police Station Dannahar, District Mainpuri 
alleging 
that 
his 
sister, 
brother-in-law 
and 
nephew-
Sanju(deceased) were residing nearby his house in village 
Gokulpur for the last 15 years; on 31st August, 2002, at about 5.00 
p.m., accused Omkar came and asked Sanju(deceased) to remove 
his Naands(Hauda) from the land of the accused, to which, 
Sanju(deceased) objected saying that the Naands(Hauda) were 
existing there for a long time; at this, accused Omkar armed with 
a rifle of 315 bore along with Jagvir Singh(appellant herein) armed 
with country made pistol climbed on the roof of house of accused 
Omkar and exhorted the two accused(Durvin and Sobran) to 

surround Sanju(deceased); the accused Durvin and Sobran who 
were armed with country made pistols went to the house of 
Sanju(deceased) who on account of fear and to save his life climbed 
up to the roof of informant’s house. Accused Omkar and Jagvir 
fired shots at Sanju(deceased) from the roof of Omkar’s house. On 
hearing the noise, Ram Naresh-first informant(PW-5) and Ram 
Prakash(PW-1) rushed to the courtyard and found injured-Sanju 
trying to step down, but he rolled down near the staircase and died 
in the courtyard. All four accused ran away from the spot after 
firing gunshots. 
4. 
On the basis of the said report, FIR No. 85 of 2002 (Ex.Ka.2) 
dated 31st August, 2002 came to be registered against the four 
accused namely Omkar, Jagvir Singh, Durvin and Sobran. 
Investigation was assigned to Ganga Prasad Gautam(PW-6) who 
prepared the inquest report(Ex.Ka.6) and other spot documents. 
The dead body of Sanju was subjected to autopsy by Dr. M.L. 
Gupta, Medical Officer(PW-3) who prepared the post mortem 
report(Ex.Ka.1) taking note of four abrasions and two firearm 
wounds on the body of the deceased. The entry wound was located 
on the chest area and the exit wound was located on the back of 
the chest. The Medical Officer(PW-3) opined that the death of Sanju 

was caused due to shock and haemorrhage as a result of ante 
mortem injuries. The Site Inspection Plan(Ex.Ka.12) was prepared, 
statements of witnesses were recorded and a country-made pistol 
was recovered vide recovery memo(Ex.Ka.13) on being pointed out 
by the accused appellant Jagvir Singh. 
5. 
Upon 
conclusion 
of 
the 
investigation, 
a 
charge 
sheet(Ex.Ka.14) came to be filed against the four accused persons 
nominated in the FIR for the offences punishable under Section 
302 read with Section 34 IPC. 
6. 
Since the offence was exclusively sessions triable, the case 
was committed and transferred to the Court of Additional Sessions 
Judge No.1, Mainpuri(‘trial Court’). The trial Court framed charges 
against the accused persons for the above offences. They abjured 
their guilt and claimed trial. The prosecution examined seven 
witnesses, exhibited 15 documents and 8 material objects to prove 
its case. The statements of the accused persons were recorded 
under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973(hereinafter being referred to as 'CrPC’). They denied having 
committed the crime and claimed to have been falsely implicated. 
The accused appellant Jagvir Singh stated in his Section 313 CrPC 
statement that “Pradhan-Ramvir and others were firing from the 

roof of informant which hit deceased-Sanju standing in veranda, 
due to which, Sanju died”. 
7. 
The learned trial Court, proceeded to rely upon the testimony 
of Ram Prakash(PW-1)(father of Sanju), Sultan Singh(PW-2)(uncle 
of Sanju), and Ram Naresh(PW-5)(the first informant and maternal 
uncle of Sanju) as being eyewitnesses of the occurrence. 
8. 
The evidence of Medical Officer(PW-3) was treated as 
conclusive to establish the fact regarding the homicidal death of 
Sanju. Upon conclusion of trial, the learned trial Court acquitted 
two accused Durvin and Sobran and convicted the accused 
appellant and accused Omkar by judgment dated 25th November, 
2003 and sentenced them on above terms by order of sentence 
dated 27th November, 2003. 
9. 
The appeal preferred on behalf of the accused appellant 
challenging the conviction and sentence was rejected by learned 
Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court by judgment dated 
10th May, 2019 which is subjected to challenge in this appeal by 
special leave. 
Submissions on behalf of the appellant: 
10. Shri Kaushal Yadav, learned counsel for the accused 
appellant vehemently urged that the testimony of so called eye 

witnesses, Ram Prakash(PW-1), Sultan Singh(PW-2) and Ram 
Naresh(PW-5) is totally unreliable and they are concocted 
witnesses as they were not present at the crime scene. 
11. It was submitted that the manner and location at which 
Sanju(deceased) received the injuries would make it clear that 
none of these so called eye witnesses were in a position to see the 
incident. 
12. He urged that as per the admitted case of prosecution, 
gunshots were fired by the accused persons while standing on the 
roof of the house of accused Omkar and that time Sanju received 
the gunshot injury while standing on the roof of the house of his 
maternal uncle Ram Naresh(PW-5). Drawing the Court’s attention 
to the Site Inspection Plan(Ex.Ka.12) prepared by Ganga Prasad 
Gautam, Investigating Officer(PW-6), learned counsel urged that 
there is a gap of almost 3-4 houses between the two spots. The 
eyewitnesses were admittedly not anywhere near Sanju(deceased) 
and were admittedly on the ground when the gunshots were fired 
at him. 
13. Thus, there was no possibility that any of these witnesses 
could have actually seen the incident of firing or identified the 
assailant(s) who fired gunshots at Sanju(deceased). 

14. Attention of the Court was drawn to the certain excerpts from 
the evidence of the three star prosecution witnesses namely, Ram 
Prakash(PW-1), Sultan Singh(PW-2) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) which 
are reproduced hereinbelow:- 
Examination in Chief of Ram Prakash(PW-1) 
“Omkar had 315 bore illegal rifle and Jagvir had illegal country 
made gun and Sobran and Durvin were also carrying illegal 
weapons in their hands, they came to my house and Omkar 
asked them to surround Sanju, Sanju climbed the wall of my 
under constructed house and ran towards his maternal Uncle's 
house. The accused reached the roof of their house and Sanju 
has reached the roof of his Uncle's house. On chaos myself and 
my brother in law Ram Naresh also reached the roof of the 
house. I was about 10 paces away from Sanju when Omkar 
fired on him. Out of fear we came down and Sanju also followed 
us. Sanju was shot on roof itself and while getting down the 
blood was flowing and he stumbled upon the stairs. After falling 
from the staircase he died on the spot” 
 
Cross Examination of Ram Prakash(PW-1) 
 
“I work in the bangle factory in Firozabad. My village Gokulpur 
to Firozabad where I work in the factory is about 56-57 kms 
away. The witness of the incident is Sultan Singh who is the 
son of Ramvir Pradhan's uncle. He is nephew in relation to my 
wife Shaitan. During the incident I used to stay in Firozabad in 
the rented accommodation. 
 
Accused Omkar house is towards the north side of my village. 
There is a Chak Road which runs from Omkar's house. The 
chak road is used to travel for the city, there are 3 rooms in 
Omkar's house facing towards east. Each room is at least 5-5 
or 6-6 feet long. There is a dilapidated house while coming 
towards my house from Omkar's house. The dilapidated house 
is about 10-12feet long. There is a Girdhari's finished house 
which is 18feets long in north south and my brother in laws 
Ram Naresh house is situated along with house of Girdhari 
which has one room and a veranda. There is a balcony in front 
of the veranda. Both the doors of the room of Ram Naresh house 
open in the veranda. Both the rooms of Ram Naresh is about 6-
6 or 7-7 feet long. Veranda is about 10-11 feet long. It is 
connected with the wall of my house, one room of Ram Naresh 

a courtyard and two other room, right after that is my house. 
There is a room within a veranda towards the east having 
staircase used for going on to the roof. There is no other way to 
reach the roof of Ram Naresh. Accused Omkar's house cannot 
be seen by standing in the veranda of Ram Naresh. We ran after 
my son incurred injury of fire. 
 
My signature was not taken by the Inspector on the Fard. My 
signatures was not taken anywhere in the Panchama. The 
people who registered the report informed me that your name 
is also mentioned as the witness.” 
 
 Examination in Chief of Sultan Singh(PW-2) 
“Date of incident 31.08.2002 at about 5 pm in the evening. I 
was cutting grass at the time of the incident in my field. I heard 
the sound of the abuse and that surround him so that he 
cannot run away. I saw this while standing on the ram of my 
field that the Omkar was carrying 315 bore rifle, Jagvir carrying 
country made gun and these people were standing on the roof 
of Omkar. I saw that Omkar fired on Sanju who was standing 
on the roof of Ram Naresh. The fire shot hit Sanju. Jagvir also 
fired. 3-4 firing was made on the roof. Sanju incurred firearm 
injury, he could only come towards the staircase and fell from 
there. Then I came to the house of Ram Naresh from my field 
and saw Sanju had died.” 
 
 Cross Examination of Sultan Singh(PW-2) 
 
“My field is 100 mts away from my house towards the south. 
 
From my field deceased Sanju's house is visible but the door is 
not visible nor the complainant Ram Naresh's house and 
veranda is not visible. 
 
I stood in my field after hearing the noise of abuses. I came to 
the place of incident after the firing took place. I did not see the 
bullet entering and exit the body of the deceased but i heard 
the sound of fire and saw Sanju falling down from the 
staircase.” 
 
 Examination in Chief of Ram Naresh(PW-5) 
“At 5 pm 4 people came at the door of Sanju namely Omkar, 
Soberan, Jagvir and Durvin. After taking fodder when Sanju 
came to the house then these people asked him to remove his 
Naands (Hauda) then Sanju replied that Naada (Hauda) were 
there since his birth and that he will not remove. On this all the 

four people ran away to their houses and Omkar carrying a rifle, 
Jagveer, Soberan and Durvin carrying country made pistols 
came there. Durvin and Soberan came in front of the door of 
Sanju. Omkar asked them to surround him while Omkar and 
Jagveer climbed on top of the roof. Out of fear of Durvin and 
Soberan my nephew Sanju reached on the roof of my house 
from his half constructed house. As soon as me and my brother 
in law Ram Prakash from the staircase went to the roof then 
Omkar made 2-3 firing on Sanju. Jagvir also fired. Me and Ram 
Prakash were climbing the stairs up while Sanju was coming 
towards the staircase. 
 
This incident was witnessed by me, my brother in law, Sultan 
Singh S/o Moti Lal and all the people from my house. 
 
Cross Examination of Ram Naresh(PW-5) 
 
In my report I have stated that "I and my brother in law Ram 
Prakash after hearing the sound of firing went towards the roof 
we saw Sanju was injured". This is the correct statement. When 
I climbed one step of the staircase I saw Sanju coming towards 
the staircase, my brother in law saw the same thing with me. 
 
When I and my brother in law reached the courtyard we saw 
Sanju stumbling down from the staircase from the courtyard 
where there is a veranda in front of my house, from where the 
roof of Omkar is not visible. 
 
When Inspector arrived Ram Prakash was present at the place 
of the incident. He was conscious but he did not state anything 
to the Inspector.” 
 
15. Learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that the 
theory setup by Ram Prakash(PW-1) in his examination-in-chief, 
that he and Ram Naresh(PW-5) both climbed on to the roof with 
Sanju(deceased) and saw the gunshots being fired at him is totally 
falsified and contradicted by Ram Naresh(PW-5) who candidly 
admitted that he and his brother-in-law Ram Prakash(PW-1), upon 
hearing the sound of firing, went towards the roof and saw that 

Sanju had been injured by gunshots. This very fact was also 
mentioned in the FIR(Ex.Ka.2). He also urged that the witness Ram 
Naresh(PW-5) admitted in his testimony that they saw Sanju 
stumbling down from the staircase into the courtyard. They were 
standing in the veranda in front of his house and from there the 
roof of Omkar’s house is not visible. 
16. Learned counsel urged that Ram Prakash(PW-1) being the 
father of the deceased did not sign any of the documents prepared 
at the spot. He admitted in his cross examination that during the 
incident, he used to stay in Firozabad in a rented accommodation 
which was about 56-57 kms away from his village Gokulpur where 
the alleged incident took place. The witness also admitted that the 
people who registered the report informed him that his name was 
also mentioned as a witness. Learned counsel submitted that the 
conjoint reading of these admissions as appearing in the evidence 
of Ram Prakash(PW-1) would make it clear that he was not present 
at the spot and was created to be an eye witness at a subsequent 
point of time. 
17. It was contended that the allegation made by the witnesses 
that the accused appellant fired at Sanju while standing beside 

accused Omkar is nothing but a piece of fabrication made owing 
to prior enmity. 
18. It was further submitted that as per Ram Prakash(PW-1) and 
Ram Naresh(PW-5), the incident took place in two parts. In the 
first part, there was an exchange of hot words(arguments) between 
the four accused and Sanju(deceased). Even at that point of time, 
all the four accused were carrying weapon in their hands whereas, 
Sanju(deceased) was alone and unarmed. Thus, if at all, the 
accused were intending to kill Sanju, then there was no reason for 
them to have gone away from the house of Ram Naresh(PW-1) 
where this heated exchange took place. Rather, they could have 
easily shot and killed Sanju then and there. 
19. It was further submitted that the very sequence of events 
regarding the second part of the incident wherein, the witnesses 
claimed that the two accused persons Sobran and Durvin were 
asked to surround Sanju; the accused Omkar and Jagvir 
Singh(accused appellant) went towards the house of Omkar and 
climbed on to the roof; that Sanju climbed to the roof of Ram 
Naresh’s house and then, the gunshots were fired at him by 
accused Omkar and Jagvir Singh from the terrace of Omkar’s 
house is on the face of it a piece of fiction without an iota of truth. 

20. He urged that conviction of the accused appellant is totally 
unjustified because the testimony of the so-called eyewitnesses is 
unreliable on the face of the record. 
Learned counsel thus implored the Court to accept the appeal 
and quash the impugned judgment and acquit the accused 
appellant by giving him the benefit of doubt. 
Submissions on behalf of the Respondent-State: - 
21., Ms. Garima Prasad, learned Additional Advocate 
General representing the State of Uttar Pradesh, vehemently and 
fervently opposed the submissions advanced by learned counsel 
for the appellant and urged that two Courts, i.e., the trial Court 
and the High Court, have recorded concurrent findings of facts 
while convicting the appellant and affirming his conviction and 
hence, this Court should be slow to interfere in such concurrent 
findings of facts. She submitted that it is clear from the testimony 
of the three eye witnesses i.e. Ram Prakash(PW-1), Sultan 
Singh(PW-2) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) that the accused appellant 
Jagvir Singh and the accused Omkar fired gunshots at 
Sanju(deceased) causing his death at the spot. She implored the 
Court to dismiss the appeal. 

22. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the 
impugned judgments and the material placed on record. 
Discussion and Conclusion: 
23. From a perusal of the FIR(Ex.Ka.2), it is manifest that the 
first informant-Ram Naresh(PW-5) categorically mentioned in the 
report that on hearing the gunshots, he and his brother-in-law 
Ram Prakash(PW-1) climbed on the top of the roof and saw that 
Sanju(deceased) was injured, and while he was climbing down the 
staircase, he rolled down, fell in the courtyard near the stairs and 
died. This fact is even admitted by Ram Naresh(PW-5) during this 
cross-examination in the following terms: - 
“However, I mentioned in my report that, “when I and my 
brother-in-law after hearing the gun shots/fire reached the roof 
of the house, we saw Sanju injured”, is correct.” 
 
24. The first informant-Ram Naresh(PW-5) also stated that he 
and Ram Prakash(PW-1) were climbing up the stairs while Sanju 
was coming down the staircase. Sanju got down 2-3 steps from 
the staircase and then stumbled down. When he and his brother-
in-law Ram Prakash(PW-1) reached the courtyard, they saw Sanju 
stumbling down from the staircase from the courtyard, from where 
the roof of Omkar is not visible. 

25. Thus, apparently, the claim made by Ram Prakash(PW-1) in 
his evidence that he and Ram Naresh(PW-5) had reached the roof 
of the house from where they saw Omkar firing at Sanju is a sheer 
piece of concoction and unacceptable on the face of the record. 
26. Another material fact emerging from examination-in-chief of 
Ram Prakash(PW-1) is that he did not allege that accused 
appellant Jagvir Singh also fired at Sanju. He also admitted in his 
cross-examination that the house of accused Omkar will not be 
visible from the courtyard of Ram Naresh. 
27. Both, Ram Prakash(PW-1) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) stated in 
their testimony that they got alarmed on hearing the sound of 
gunfire. If at all the shot had been fired from the house of Omkar, 
there is no reason as to why the witnesses would go to the 
courtyard of the house of Ram Naresh(PW-5) rather than rushing 
towards the direction from where the sound of the gunshot had 
been heard. Manifestly, their attention would be drawn towards 
the sound of the gunshots being fired and in natural course, they 
would look towards that direction and not anywhere else. 
28. Ram Prakash(PW-1) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) deposed in their 
testimony that during the second part of the incident; accused 
Omkar asked the accused Durvin and Sobran(since acquitted) to 

corner and surround Sanju who also rushed to the roof of the 
house of Ram Naresh(PW-5). 
29. We further find that the conduct of the eye-witnesses Ram 
Prakash(PW-1) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) is totally unnatural. Both 
the witnesses claimed to have seen Sanju(deceased) being chased 
and surrounded by accused Durvin and Sobran. Despite, that, 
neither of them, made an attempt to save Sanju from these 
assailants or to at least raise a hue and cry so that the 
neighbouring people could be sounded about the incident. Neither 
of the witnesses made an attempt to intervene or to shield Sanju. 
30. Furthermore, both the witnesses claimed that they saw 
accused Omkar and accused appellant Jagvir Singh rushing 
towards the house of Omkar and climbing the roof thereof. Hence, 
there was no rhyme or reason as to why, Sanju would also climb 
up the roof of Ram Naresh’s house and take the risk of exposing 
himself to the offensive intents of the accused persons. 
31. The participation of accused Durvin and Sobran in the 
incident has not been accepted by the trial Court and on that 
basis, these two accused persons were acquitted. Clearly, thus, the 
story put forth by the witnesses that accused Durvin and Sobran 
were also amongst the four offenders who were making an attempt 

to eliminate Sanju is unacceptable and unbelievable. Thus, the 
quarrel, if any, unquestionably took place between accused Omkar 
and accused appellant Jagvir Singh on the one side and Sanju on 
the other. Once accused Omkar and accused appellant Jagvir 
Singh had moved on from the place where the first part of the 
incident took place, Sanju had no reason, whatsoever, to climb up 
the roof of Ram Naresh’s house because he was not facing any 
threat thereafter. Thus, the entire prosecution case is shrouded 
under a cloud of doubt. 
32. A three judge Bench of this Court in the case of Selveraj v. 
State of Tamil Nadu1 set aside the concurrent findings of guilt 
recorded by the trial Court and the High Court, wherein on an 
appreciation of evidence the prosecution story was found highly 
improbable and inconsistent of ordinary course of human nature. 
The relevant extract of which is reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“4. The conviction of the appellant rests on the oral testimony 
of Natesan and Manisekaran who claimed to be eyewitnesses to 
the murder of the deceased. Both the learned Additional 
Sessions Judge as well as the High Court have believed the 
evidence of these two witnesses and ordinarily we would be 
loath to disturb the concurrent view taken by both these Courts 
as regards the appreciation of their evidence, but we find that 
there are inherent improbabilities in the story put forward by 
these two witnesses and we do not think it would be safe to act 
upon their uncorroborated testimony. In the first place, it is 
difficult to believe that the appellant was so inflamed with 
passion as to demand sexual intercourse with the deceased who 
 
1 (1976) 

happened to be the wife of his cousin, and that too, not while 
she was alone, but in the presence of her husband. Even if he 
was mad with lust, he would not have chosen to come at this 
particular time, namely, 9 p.m. for making advances to the 
deceased, when he must have known that her husband 
Natesan would in all probability be at home. In any event, when 
Natesan came into the house, the appellant would have run 
away and not continued to insist that the deceased should 
submit to sexual intercourse with him. The entire story appears 
to be highly improbable and inconsistent with the ordinary 
course of human nature. Then again, look at the conduct of 
Natesan on seeing this highly explosive situation. He finds that 
the appellant is demanding sexual intercourse with his wife and 
is threatening her with a knife in his hand. And yet, he does not 
step out of the house and shout for help. He does not even try 
to go to the rescue of the deceased. He silently and 
shamefacedly watches his wife being murdered by the 
appellant. He is not alone in the house. Manisekaran has come 
in the meantime, with the result that there are two persons on 
his side and yet, both of them quietly watch the proceedings 
without making any attempt to save the deceased. This conduct 
is highly unnatural and we find it difficult to accept it. 
 
5. It may be noted that Manisekaran's presence at the time of 
the incident is rather unusual. Manisekaran was, according to 
his evidence, working as an apprentice in the tailoring shop of 
Natesan, and it is difficult to believe that he should have been 
at the house of Natesan at 9 p.m. after the tailoring shop was 
closed. Manisekaran was admittedly not staying with Natesan. 
He was living in a house which was a little distance away from 
the house of Natesan. He would ordinarily go back to his house 
after the tailoring shop was closed. But, in order to make 
Manisekaran an eyewitness, the prosecution came forward with 
the story that he was sent by Natesan with edibles for his 
children at 8.15 p.m. This is a tall story which is difficult to 
believe. There is no reason why at 8.15 p.m. Manisekaran 
should have been asked by Natesan to purchase edibles from 
the market and carry them to the house for the children. In all 
probability the children would have finished their meals. Even 
if Manisekaran carried edibles to the house of Natesan, there is 
no reason why he should have waited there for half an hour 
from 8.30 p.m. to 9 p.m. in order to be able to witness the 
incident. It is again strange and unusual that though 
Manisekaran saw the appellant stabbing the deceased, he did 
not utter any shout or attempt to run out of the house for the 
purpose of seeking help for the deceased. We are not at all 
satisfied that Manisekaran was an eyewitness to incident and 
his testimony cannot be relied upon for the purpose of 
supporting the conviction of the appellant.” 

33. The so-called eye witnesses, Ram Prakash(PW-1) and Ram 
Naresh(PW-5) were the closest relatives of the victim. They 
allegedly saw the fatal assault on the victim and yet did not take 
any step to save him from the assault. If these witnesses PW-1 
and PW-5 had actually seen the assault, their reaction and 
conduct does not match up with the reaction expected from them. 
Their conduct is highly unnatural, and we find it difficult to accept 
their presence at the crime scene. 
34. Further, it is evident from the testimony of Ram Prakash(PW-
1) that there is a gap of 3 to 4 houses between the house of Ram 
Naresh(PW-5) and the house of accused Omkar which makes it 
clear that the estimated distance between the two locations would 
be more than 30-40 ft. The Site Inspection Plan(Exhibit P-12) also 
fortifies our conclusion. Both the witnesses, PW-1 and PW-5 
admitted the fact that the roof of accused Omkar was not visible 
from the courtyard of Ram Naresh(PW-5) in their evidence as we 
have elaborated above. In this background, we have no hesitation 
in holding that the so called eye witnesses, PW-1 and PW-5, who 
were unquestionably standing or moving at the ground level could 

not have seen the gunshots being fired at Sanju(deceased) from the 
roof of Omkar’s house. 
35. Sultan Singh(PW-2) admitted that he was working in his field 
when the incident took place and thus, there was no possibility 
that, he could have seen the incident with his own eyes. But 
despite that, the prosecution tried to project him as an eyewitness 
of the incident which again creates a grave doubt on the 
truthfulness and bona fides of the prosecution story. 
36. Resultantly, we have no doubt in our mind that neither of the 
so called eye witnesses i.e., Ram Prakash(PW-1), Sultan Singh(PW-
2) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) had actually seen the gunshots being 
fired at Sanju(deceased). As a matter of fact, the entire sequence 
of events as narrated by prosecution witnesses does not inspire 
confidence. 
37. Indisputably, Sanju received a single gunshot injury which 
proved 
fatal. 
Considering 
the 
significant 
disparities 
and 
discrepancies in the evidence of Ram Prakash(PW-1) and Ram 
Naresh(PW-5) regarding the identity of the assailant who actually 
fired at Sanju(deceased), we feel that the conviction of accused 
appellant Jagvir Singh on the basis of such flimsy and wavering 
evidence is not at all justified. The trial Court as well as the High 

Court 
committed 
glaring 
error 
while 
holding 
that 
Ram 
Prakash(PW-1), Sultan Singh(PW-2) and Ram Naresh(PW-5) were 
eyewitnesses to the incident and that they saw the accused 
appellant along with accused Omkar firing at Sanju(deceased). 
These findings are unsustainable on the face of the record in view 
of the analyses and discussion of evidence made above. 
38. Consequently, the appellant deserves to be acquitted giving 
him the benefit of doubt. Hence, the judgment dated 25th 
November, 2003 and order of sentence dated 27th November, 2003 
passed by the trial Court and judgment dated 10th May, 2019 
passed by the High Court are hereby quashed and set aside. 
39. The appellant is acquitted of the charges. He is in custody 
and shall be released from the prison forthwith, if his custody is 
not required in any other case. 
40. The appeal is accordingly allowed. 
41. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
May 07, 2024