IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 55 OF 2015 
SUKHPAL SINGH 

….APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
NCT OF DELHI 

 ….RESPONDENT(S) 
 
JUDGMENT 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. The instant appeal is directed against the judgment dated 7th 
January, 2010 passed by the High Court of Delhi in Criminal 
Appeal No. 296 of 2003 whereby the appeal filed by the appellant 
against the judgment and order of conviction and sentence dated 
6th March, 2003 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, 
Karkardooma Courts, Delhi(hereinafter being referred to as the 
‘trial Court’) was rejected. 
2. 
By the said judgment, the trial Court convicted the accused 
appellant for the offence punishable under Section 302 of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860(hereinafter being referred to as the ‘IPC’) 

and sentenced him to life imprisonment and fine of Rs.2000/-(in 
default further rigorous imprisonment for six months). 
3. 
Leave was granted by this Court in this matter on 8th 
January, 2015 and the accused appellant was released on bail on 
furnishing bail bonds to the satisfaction of the trial Court. 
Brief facts:- 
4. 
The accused appellant was married to Usha and three 
children were born out of the wedlock. However, the spouses got 
embroiled in a matrimonial strife and thus the appellant left 
company of his wife Usha and started residing at his village Khatta, 
U.P. 
5. 
The officers of Police Station Bhajan Pura received a wireless 
message on 20th May, 1990 from the PCR regarding an incident 
which had taken place outside the shops of Rori and Badarpur. 
Acting on the said information, Head Constable Mohan Lal, 
Constables Jai Pal, Bhagwan Dass and Ramesh Chand along with 
Inspector Ishwar Singh reached House no. J-387, Gali No. 14, 
Kartar Nagar, Delhi where Usha w/o Sukhpal(the appellant herein) 
was found lying dead on a cot in a room of the said house. On 
cursory inspection, abrasions, scratches and other injury marks 

associated with bleeding were noticed on the neck, mouth, 
shoulder and private parts of the deceased Usha. Marks of 
dragging were also found on the right leg below the knee. Strips of 
tablets were found scattered around the cot on which the dead 
body was lying. The police officials claim to have recovered a 
handwritten note(Exhibit PW-12/E) from the crime scene bearing 
a recital indicating that the scribe was the killer of Usha. The 
prosecution alleges that the said note was written by the accused 
appellant. 
6. 
Statement(Exhibit PW-1/A) of Ashok Kumar Pathak, resident 
of House No. J-386, Gali No. 14, Kartar Nagar, Delhi was recorded 
by the police officials on 20th May, 1990 wherein he stated that he 
was residing in the immediate vicinity of House No. J-387, Gali No. 
14, Kartar Nagar, Delhi, where Usha with her husband 
Sukhpal(accused appellant) and three children had been residing 
for the last 3-4 years. Ashok Kumar Pathak was serving with M/s. 
R.P. Associates and that he had got Sukhpal employed in that very 
firm. Sukhpal suspected his wife Usha of infidelity which often led 
to quarrels between them and, therefore, Sukhpal left his wife and 
children and started residing in village Khatta, U.P. He used to 
commute from the village for attending to his job. Sometimes, he 

would also come and stay with Usha. Four days prior to the alleged 
occurrence, Sukhpal had visited Usha and on that day, Usha’s 
sister(Sudha) had also come there. Sukhpal quarrelled with Usha 
and went away. On the next day, Usha’s sister, Sudha(PW-10) took 
the three children of Usha and went to her house. On the day prior 
to incident, i.e., on 19th May, 1990, in the evening when Ashok 
Kumar Pathak had returned from duty and got free after having 
his meals, at about 9.30 p.m., he saw that Sukhpal had come to 
visit Usha on his cycle. The spouses were talking while sitting on 
a cot in the courtyard. He went to the terrace for sleeping and after 
some time, it started raining so he came downstairs and saw that 
Sukhpal and Usha had also gone inside their room. The next 
morning i.e. 20th May, 1990, while he was carrying out his daily 
chores, he saw Sukhpal’s cycle parked in the courtyard and 
presumed that he and Usha were inside the house. He did not see 
any movement in the house for the entire day and even at about 
5.30 p.m., he saw the cycle of Sukhpal parked at the same place 
but neither Sukhpal nor Usha were to be seen. So, he called out 
from outside, but nobody responded, on which he went into the 
room and found Usha lying dead on a cot. Sukhpal was not present 
there. He informed the neighbours who, in turn, called the police. 

He bore a suspicion that Sukhpal(appellant herein) might have 
killed Usha sometime during the night and had fled away. This 
statement was taken as a complaint and based thereupon, FIR No. 
213 of 1990(Exhibit PW-13/F) came to be registered at P.S. 
Bhajanpura for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC. 
7. 
The dead body of Usha was subjected to autopsy and the post 
mortem report(Exhibit PW-15/A) was received with a pertinent 
opinion that cause of death was “Asphyxia resulting from manual 
strangulation”. A confession letter/note(Exhibit PW-12/E) was 
found below the cot where the dead body was lying and it was 
seized vide memorandum(Exhibit PW-13/B) and spot inspection 
memo(Exhibit PW-12/B) was prepared. 
8. 
The Investigating Officer(PW-13) collected two letters(Exhibit 
PW-12/C and PW-12/D) purportedly written by the accused 
appellant from the employer namely Sanjiv Jain(PW-8). Specimen 
Pad(Exhibit PW-13/O) of the employer was also collected and 
seized vide memorandum(Exhibit P-13/N). 
9. 
The prosecution alleges that the accused appellant fled away 
from the crime scene. Efforts were made to trace him out without 
any success and thus proceedings under Section 82 and Section 
83 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(hereinafter being 

referred to as ‘CrPC’) were initiated against him. The accused 
appellant was declared to be a proclaimed offender and a charge 
sheet came to be filed against him under Section 299 CrPC by 
showing him to be an absconder. As per the prosecution case, the 
complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak, Head Constables Mohan Lal 
and Surender Kumar and Inspector Bal Kishan were examined on 
oath in proceedings under Section 299 CrPC and the file was 
consigned to the record room. 
10. The accused appellant could be apprehended on 9th August, 
2000 i.e. nearly after ten years of the incident. He gave a disclosure 
statement pointing out the place of incident. His specimen 
handwritings(Exhibits PW-5/D, 5/E and 5/F) were obtained while 
he was in police custody. Thereafter, the confession note(Exhibit 
PW-12/E), the specimen handwritings(Exhibits PW-5/D, PW-5/E 
and PW-5/F) along with admitted handwritings(Exhibits PW-12/C 
and PW-12/D)(collected from the employer of accused appellant) 
were sent to FSL for comparison. The handwriting expert(PW-24) 
issued a report(Exhibit PW-12/F) opining that the confession 
letter/note(recovered from the crime scene) was in the handwriting 
of the accused appellant. 

11. A supplementary charge sheet came to be filed against the 
accused appellant for the offence punishable under Section 302 
IPC. The trial Court framed charge against the accused appellant 
for the said offence. He pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. The 
prosecution examined 24 witnesses and exhibited 48 documents 
to support its case. 
12. It is relevant to mention here that the complainant Ashok 
Kumar Pathak, was not produced for deposition in the trial which 
resumed after the arrest of the accused appellant. The trial Court 
held that the non-examination of complainant Ashok Kumar 
Pathak was not a deliberate act of the prosecution and rather the 
same was beyond the control of prosecution. The trial Court 
further found that complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak was 
examined on oath on 17th July, 1991 in proceedings under Section 
299 CrPC. In this sworn statement, Ashok Kumar Pathak proved 
his signature on the statement[Exhibit PW-1/A(which led to 
registration of FIR)] made by him to the police on 20th May, 1990 
and gave a detailed account of the sequence of events witnessed 
by him. The complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak could not be 
examined in the trial proceedings post arrest of the accused as he 

could not be found at the address given in the FIR despite all 
sincere efforts. 
13. The trial Court held that since Ashok Kumar Pathak could 
not be located despite genuine efforts, his sworn deposition 
recorded in absence of the accused appellant was liable to be read 
in evidence as per the provisions of Section 299 CrPC. Accordingly, 
the said statement was relied upon as a piece of incriminating 
evidence against the accused appellant. 
14. The trial Court also placed reliance on the confession 
note/letter(Exhibit PW-12/E) holding that the same was found to 
be in the handwriting of the accused appellant by the handwriting 
expert(PW-24) vide report(Exhibit PW-12/F). The said confession 
was treated to be an admission and a strong link of incriminating 
circumstantial evidence against the appellant. 
15. Placing reliance upon the evidence of Ashok Kumar Pathak 
recorded in proceedings under Section 299 CrPC and the evidence 
of the handwriting expert(PW-24), the trial Court held the 
confession note(Exhibit PW-12/E) to be an unimpeachable piece 
of evidence sealing the fate of the accused. Corroboration thereto 
was sought from the evidence of Sudha(PW-10), sister of the 
deceased Usha. By relying on these incriminating links of 

circumstantial evidence, the trial Court proceeded to convict and 
sentenced the accused appellant as above vide judgment dated 6th 
March, 2003. 
16. The appeal preferred by the accused appellant in the High 
Court of Delhi was rejected by learned Division Bench of High 
Court vide judgment dated 7th January, 2010 holding that the 
confession note(Exhibit PW-12/E) written by the accused 
appellant proved his culpability in the crime. The prosecution had 
established that the accused appellant was in company of the 
deceased Usha at her house where she was murdered in the 
intervening night of 19th and 20th May, 1990. The prosecution also 
established that the deceased was done to death by violence in the 
said intervening night and that the accused appellant had 
absconded to flee from justice which established his guilty 
conduct. 
17. The accused appellant has challenged the above judgment 
affirming his conviction and sentence through this appeal by 
special leave. 
Submissions on behalf of the appellant: - 
18. Learned legal aid counsel appointed by Supreme Court Legal 
Services Committee(SCLSC) for representing the appellant 

advanced extensive submissions to assail the impugned judgment. 
He urged that:- 

The trial Court as well as the High Court 
committed 
grave 
factual 
error 
in 
holding 
that 
complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak was examined on 
oath in proceedings under Section 299 CrPC. As per 
learned counsel, this finding is totally contrary to the 
record because the statement of complainant Ashok 
Kumar Pathak relied upon by the trial Court and the 
High Court is actually the statement of the said witness 
recorded by the SHO, PS Bhajan Pura under Section 161 
CrPC which was proved by the Investigating Officer(PW-
13) in proceedings under Section 299 CrPC. 

 The confession note(Exhibit PW-12/E) is a 
fabricated piece of evidence because the prosecution did 
not make any endeavour to get the two admitted 
documents(Exhibit PW-12/C and PW-12/D) collected 
from the employer of the accused appellant, i.e., Sanjiv 
Jain(PW-8) compared with the confession note(Exhibit 
PW-12/E). This contention was made without prejudice 
to the plea that the very process of collecting these 

documents is under a cloud of doubt because the 
Investigating Officer(PW-13) could not have had any idea 
that the accused had worked in M/s. R.P. Associates. 

The handwriting expert’s report(Exhibit PW-12/F) 
and the testimony of the handwriting expert(PW-24) is 
not reliable, since the expert did not give any opinion 
after comparing the admitted writings(Exhibit PW-12/C 
and PW-12/D)(seized from the employer of the accused 
appellant) with the confession note(Exhibit PW-12/E). 

 Without prejudice to the above, learned counsel 
submitted that from a visual comparison of the 
confession 
note(PW-12/E) 
and 
the 
specimen 
handwritings of the accused(Exhibit PW-5/D, PW-5/E 
and PW-5/F), it would become clear that there is no 
similarity whatsoever in the two sets of handwritings so 
as to conclude with any degree of certainty that the 
scribe of these documents was one and the same. He 
thus urged that the report(Exhibit PW-12/F) of the 
handwriting expert(PW-24) is unreliable and cannot be 
pressed into service for affirming the guilt of the 
accused. 

He urged that the evidence of Sudha(PW-10) is 
totally unreliable and not trustworthy and deserves to be 
discarded. It was admitted by the prosecution that the 
accused appellant and Usha had divorced each other 
and thus it is totally unbelievable that the accused 
appellant had come and stayed with Usha, few days 
before the incident as claimed by Sudha (PW-10). He 
urged that the evidence of Sudha(PW-10) is not 
trustworthy and deserves to be discarded. 

 The claim of the prosecution that the accused 
appellant was absconding is totally unfounded because 
in the FIR, it was clearly mentioned that the accused 
appellant after divorcing deceased Usha had started 
residing in his village Khatta, U.P. However, the 
Investigating Officer(PW-13) made no effort whatsoever 
to apprehend the accused appellant from his village. 

 It has been admitted by material prosecution 
witnesses that deceased Usha was indulged in sex trade 
and that Sandeep Kumar used to solicit her services. 
Sandeep 
Kumar 
and 
Rajbir 
Singh(PW-14) 
were 
apprehended by the police on suspicion of the death of 

Usha, however, proper investigation was not made on 
this aspect. As per him, the possibility of Usha having 
been murdered by some other person cannot be ruled 
out. 
19. Learned counsel concluded his submissions urging that the 
case is based purely on circumstantial evidence. The entire chain 
of incriminating circumstances has to be established leading to the 
only conclusion consistent with the guilt of the accused and 
inconsistent with the guilt of anyone else. As per the learned 
counsel, this chain was not established conclusively by cogent and 
clinching evidence and hence conviction of the accused appellant 
as recorded by the trial Court and affirmed by the High Court is 
unsustainable and should be set aside. 
Submissions on behalf of the respondent-State:- 
20., learned counsel for the respondent State fervently 
and vehemently opposed the submissions advanced by learned 
counsel for the appellant and contended that the chain of 
incriminating circumstances is complete in all aspects exclusively 
pointing out towards the guilt of the accused. The learned counsel 
made the following pertinent submissions imploring the Court to 

dismiss the appeal and upheld the conviction of the accused 
appellant: - 

That the statement of Ashok Kumar Pathak 
recorded as PW-1 during proceedings under Section 
299 CrPC was rightly relied upon as admissible and 
reliable piece of evidence. The non-examination of 
Ashok Kumar Pathak during trial is not a deliberate 
act of prosecution, rather, the witness could not be 
examined during regular trial after apprehension of 
the accused appellant. The witness could not be 
traced by the prosecuting agency inspite of best 
efforts. The prolonged abscondence of the accused 
is primarily the reason for non-examination of 
Ashok Kumar Pathak. 

That the complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak in his 
evidence as PW-1 during proceedings under Section 
299 CrPC has admitted his signature on his 
statement[Exhibit PW-1/A(based upon which FIR 
was registered)] and also elaborated about the 
averments made therein which he had witnessed 
with his own eyes. 

(iii) That the evidence of Ashok Kumar Pathak clearly 
establishes the presence of accused appellant with 
Usha on intervening night of 19th/20th May, 1990, 
whereafter, the lady was found murdered and the 
accused was found absconding from the crime scene 
leaving behind a confessional note. Ashok Kumar 
Pathak also proved about the motive of the appellant 
to commit the crime. 

The testimony of Usha’s sister Sudha(PW-10) 
establishes that the accused appellant used to 
quarrel with Usha suspecting her infidelity and 
there were repeated altercations between the 
spouses. They had indulged in a fight just four days 
prior to the incident. This also establishes the 
motive attributed to the appellant to commit the 
offence. 

That there is no evidence on record to show that 
accused appellant and Usha were divorced except a 
bald statement made in this regard in the confession 
note(Exhibit PW-12/E). 

That the report(Exhibit PW-12/F) submitted by the 
handwriting expert, Deepa Verma(PW-24) proves 
that the handwriting on the confession note(Exhibit 
PW-12/E) which was recovered from the crime 
scene matched with the handwriting on the two 
admitted documents(Exhibits PW-12/C and PW-
12/D) collected from the employer of the accused 
appellant and specimen handwritings(Exhibits PW-
5/D, PW-5/E and PW-5/F) given by the accused 
appellant to the police which in turn concludes the 
fact that the confession note is in the handwriting of 
the accused. 
21. He urged that the prosecution has proved the case against 
the accused appellant by leading cogent and convincing chain of 
incriminating circumstantial evidence and implored the court to 
dismiss the appeal. 
22. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the parties and 
have gone through the judgments of the trial Court and the High 
Court as well as the evidence available on record. 

Discussion and Conclusion: - 
23. The main thrust of submissions advanced by Shri Ambreesh 
Kumar Aggarwal, learned legal aid counsel representing the 
appellant so as to criticise the findings of the trial Court and the 
High Court was that both the Courts erred in holding that the 
statement of complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak had been recorded 
on oath in the proceedings under Section 299 CrPC. As per Shri 
Aggarwal, only the Section 161 CrPC statement of complainant 
Ashok Kumar Pathak was exhibited by the Investigating 
Officer(PW-13) and he never stepped into the witness box. 
24. In order to verify this fervent submission of learned counsel 
for the appellant, we carefully sifted through the record and find 
that the submission so made is without any foundation. The 
accused appellant was absconding and could not be arrested and 
thus, the Investigating Officer(PW-13) made all possible efforts 
including the procurement of warrant of arrest, attempt to serve 
the same at the village of the appellant, i.e., Khatta, U.P. He tried 
to locate the accused appellant at various locations, without any 
success. The warrant which is available on record clearly bears the 
address of the accused appellant as Khatta, Prahladpur, Bagpat, 
U.P. 

25. Even proceedings of proclamation and attachment were 
undertaken under Sections 82 and 83 CrPC but to no avail 
because the accused appellant had vanished after the crime and 
was not traceable at the crime scene or at his known address i.e. village Khatta, U.P. The fact regarding his abscondence was also 
published. Accordingly, a charge sheet came to be filed under 
Section 299 CrPC showing the accused appellant to be an 
absconder. 
26. The trial Court passed an order dated 18th March, 1991 
declaring the accused appellant to be an absconder and 
permission was granted to the prosecution to proceed with the trial 
by resorting to the procedure under Section 299 CrPC. This order 
was never questioned before any court of law. 
27. The trial Judge recorded the statement of Ashok Kumar 
Pathak, the complainant as PW-1 under Section 299 CrPC on 17th 
July, 1991 after administrating oath to him which begins in the 
following manner: - 
“Shri Ashok Kumar Pathak, s/o Shri Ram Puran aged 28 years, 
R/O Kartar Nagar, Gali No. 14, Delhi on S.A.(sworn 
affirmation)” 

28. This statement bears the signature of the presiding officer of 
the Court and so also of the complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak. 
Three more witnesses, namely, Head Constables Mohan Lal and 
Surender Kumar and Inspector Bal Kishan were also examined on 
oath in proceedings under Section 299 CrPC. 
29. In this background, the fervent submission of the learned 
counsel for the appellant that the prosecution only exhibited the 
statement of complainant Ashok Kumar Pathak recorded under 
Section 161 CrPC and that he was never examined on oath in 
proceedings under Section 299 CrPC seems to have been made out 
of sheer ignorance and without ascertaining the correct position 
from the original record. 
30. Section 299 of CrPC expressly provides for the power of the 
Court to record evidence in absence of the accused in the following 
term: - 
“299. Record of evidence in absence of accused.—(1) If it is 
proved that an accused person has absconded, and that there 
is no immediate prospect of arresting him, the court competent 
to try or commit for trial, such person for the offence 
complained of may, in his absence, examine the witnesses (if 
any) produced on behalf of the prosecution, and record their 
depositions and any such deposition may, on the arrest of such 
person, be given in evidence against him on the inquiry into, or 
trial for, the offence with which he is charged, if the deponent 
is dead or incapable of giving evidence or cannot be found or 
his presence cannot be procured without an amount of delay, 
expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of 
the case, would be unreasonable. 

(2) If it appears that an offence punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life has been committed by some person or 
persons unknown, the High Court or the Sessions Judge may 
direct that any Magistrate of the First Class shall hold an 
inquiry and examine any witnesses who can give evidence 
concerning the offence and any depositions so taken may be 
given in evidence against any person who is subsequently 
accused of the offence, if the deponent is dead or incapable of 
giving evidence or beyond the limits of India.” 
 
31. Sub-section (1) of Section 299 CrPC is in two parts, the first 
part provides for proof of jurisdictional fact in respect of 
abscondence of an accused person and the second that there was 
no immediate prospect of arresting him. In the event, an order 
under the said provision is passed, deposition of any witness 
taken in the absence of an accused may be used against him if 
the deponent is dead or incapable of giving evidence or cannot be 
found or his presence cannot be procured without any amount of 
delay, expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances 
of the case, would be unreasonable. 
32. This Court in the case of Nirmal Singh v. State of Haryana1 
while considering the issue that under what circumstances and by 
what method, the statement of a witness under Section 299 of 
CrPC could have been tendered in the case for being admissible 
 
1 (2000) 

under Section 33 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and whether 
they can form the basis of conviction, held as follows: 
“4. …..Section 299 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
consists of two parts. The first part speaks of the 
circumstances under which witnesses produced by the 
prosecution could be examined in the absence of the 
accused and the second part speaks of the circumstances 
when such deposition can be given in evidence against the 
accused in any inquiry or trial for the offence with which 
he is charged. This procedure contemplated under Section 299 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure is thus an exception to the 
principle embodied in Section 33 of the Evidence Act inasmuch 
as under Section 33, the evidence of a witness, which a party 
has no right or opportunity to cross-examine is not legally 
admissible. Being an exception, it is necessary, therefore, that 
all the conditions prescribed, must be strictly complied with. In 
other words, before recording the statement of the witnesses 
produced by the prosecution, the court must be satisfied that 
the accused has absconded or that there is no immediate 
prospect of arresting him, as provided under the first part of 
Section 299(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure…. 
…..There possibly cannot be any dispute with the proposition 
of law that for taking the benefits of Section 299 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, the conditions precedent therein must be 
duly established and the prosecution, which proposes to utilise 
the said statement as evidence in trial, must, therefore, prove 
about the existence of the preconditions before tendering the 
evidence. …. 
….On a mere perusal of Section 299 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure as well as Section 33 of the Evidence Act, we 
have no hesitation to come to the conclusion that the 
preconditions in both the sections must be established by 
the prosecution and it is only then, the statements of 
witnesses recorded under Section 299 CrPC before the 
arrest of the accused can be utilised in evidence in trial 
after the arrest of such accused only if the persons are dead 
or would not be available or any other condition 
enumerated in the second part of Section 299(1) of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure is established….” 
(emphasis supplied) 

33. Further, in the case of Jayendra Vishnu Thakur v. State of 
Maharashtra & Another 2 it was held as follows: - 
“25. It is also beyond any cavil that the provisions of 
Section 299 of the Code must receive strict interpretation, 
and, thus, scrupulous compliance therewith is imperative 
in character. It is a well-known principle of interpretation of 
statute that any word defined in the statutory provision should 
ordinarily be given the same meaning while construing the 
other provisions thereof where the same term has been used. 
Under Section 3 of the Evidence Act like any other fact, the 
prosecution must prove by leading evidence and a definite 
categorical finding must be arrived at by the court in regard to 
the fact required to be proved by a statute. Existence of an 
evidence is not enough but application of mind by the court 
thereupon as also the analysis of the materials and/or 
appreciation thereof for the purpose of placing reliance upon 
that part of the evidence is imperative in character. 
29. Indisputably both the conditions contained in the first 
part of Section 299 of the Code must be read conjunctively 
and 
not 
disjunctively. 
Satisfaction 
of 
one 
of 
the 
requirements should not be sufficient….” 

(emphasis supplied) 
 
34. The statement of Ashok Kumar Pathak dated 17th July, 1991 
recorded in proceedings under Section 299 CrPC is as follows: - 
“I am working as Salesman/supply man in the M/s R.P. 
Associates a shop of medicines in Bhagirath Place for the last 
about seven years. In my neighbourhood accused Sukhpal 
along with his wife Usha and children used to reside in 
H.No.387 Gali No.14 Kartar Nagar for the last 3/4 years prior 
to this case. He was having two daughters and one son. Later 
on he also joined service in M/s R.P. Associates, Bhagirath 
Place with my assistance. Accused suspected infidelity of his 
wife Smt. Usha and for this reason they were not having good 
relations and they always used to quarrel with each other. Prior 
to the occurrence of this case accused left his house leaving his 
wife Smt. Usha and three children at the above said house for 
his village Khatta in UP and used to come to his shop therefrom. 
 
2 (2009) 

Sometimes they used to visit with his wife Usha at his house. 
About four days back prior to this occurrence accused Sukhpal 
had come to his house where sister of Usha was also found 
present with Usha at his house and on that day Sukhpal had 
quarrelled with his wife Usha and he then returned. Next day 
sister of Usha also left with three children of Usha to her house, 
leaving her sister alone at her house. 
 
On 19.5.1990 at about 10.30 P.M. I saw accused Usha & 
Sukhpal who came on a cycle to his house having conversation 
with his wife, sitting on a cot in the court-yard of his house, 
and I went on the roof of my house, and slept. In the night when 
the rain was started I came down from the roof and I saw the 
accused Sukhpal along with his wife Usha going into inside 
their room. Both of them went inside their room. Next morning 
due to holiday(closeday being Sunday) I woke up some late and 
started my daily routine work. I found the cycle of Sukhpal 
parked in the court-yard of his house. I thought that both of 
them might be in their room. In the noon I again found the cycle 
of Sukhpal parked in the court-yard of the house but none of 
them was seen outside their room. In the evening at about 5.30 
P.M. when I called them but no response came from his house 
but the door of the room was opened. When I entered the room 
of Usha I found Smt. Usha dead lying on the cot and accused 
Sukhpal was found missing therefrom. I informed the nearby 
residents who called the police. Accused Sukhpal had run away 
from his house after committing the murder of his wife Usha in 
the night. Police came there and completed the proceedings. I 
save my statement to the police and I signed my statement 
which is Ex.PW-1/A and is correct. Other mohalla people also 
collected there. 
 
There were many injuries on the throat and shoulder, neck 
of Smt. Usha. There was blood on the bed sheet on which 
medicines were found scattered and letter written in Hindi by 
accused Sukhpal regarding the murder of his wife Usha was 
also found under the cot. 
 
I identify the hand-writing of Sukhpal on that letter, 
because he was working with me at the aforesaid medicine shop 
where we used to prepare and write the documents. I have seen 
him signing and writing the documents at the above said shop 
with me. Police seized that letter vide a memo Ex.PW1/B and I 
signed the same. 
 
One old cycle make Avon of accused Sukhpal was seized 
vide a memo which is Ex.PW1/D. I signed the same. I had seen 
the accused using that cycle earlier also and so I identify this 
case to be of accused Sukhpal. Surinder Kumar who was also 
present there also signed the memo. 

On 22.5.1990 I was present on my duty at the shop of M/s 
R.P. Associates, 1696/8 Ist floor Mohan Building Bhagirath 
Place where accused Sukhpal also used to work. On that day 
police officials visited the shop where Sanjiv Kumar, owner of 
the above said shop reduced two letters to the police. One letter 
was an application for resignation from the service written by 
Sukhpal to M/s R.P. Associates and another letter at 12.6.89 
addressed to R.P. Associates requesting for service to him. Both 
these letters were written and signed by accused Sukhpal. I 
identify his writing and signature on it. These letters are 
Ext.PW/E and Ex.PW/F. These letters were seized vide memo 
Ex.PW1/G and I signed it. The letter addressed to the police 
officer written by Sukhpal which was seized from the spot by 
the police is Ex.P1. which was taken into possession vide memo 
Ex.PW1/B. Sanjiv Jain owner of the above said shop produced 
one page of the letter pad to the police who seized the same vide 
memo Ex.PW1/H and I signed the same.” 
 
35. The statement of Ashok Kumar Pathak(reproduced supra) 
gives 
positive 
and 
unwavering 
proof 
of 
the 
following 
circumstances: - 

The accused appellant Sukhpal was married to 
Usha(deceased). 

There was an ongoing marital strife between the 
spouses owing to the suspected infidelity of Usha and on 
this ground, they used to quarrel with each other. The 
accused appellant left his wife Usha and his three 
children and started living in village Khatta, U.P. The 
accused suspected infidelity of Usha imputes a strong 
motive to the accused for her murder. 

Ashok Kumar Pathak had facilitated a job for the 
accused appellant in M/s. R.P. Associates. 

Inspite of the strife and acrimonious relationship, 
the accused appellant often used to visit his wife Usha 
and would stay with her. He had come and stayed with 
Usha four days before the incident and at that time, 
Sudha, sister of Usha was also present. Sukhpal 
quarrelled with Usha in presence of her sister and then 
went away. 

A day prior to the incident also, accused appellant 
had come to House No. J-387, Gali No. 4, Kartar Nagar, 
Delhi where the alleged incident took place and stayed 
with Usha. 

 The witness Ashok Kumar Pathak saw the accused 
appellant parking his cycle in the courtyard of the house. 
He also saw the accused appellant(Sukhpal) and 
wife(Usha) talking to each other while sitting on a cot in 
the courtyard. Then it started raining whereupon, both 
were seen going into the house from the courtyard. On 
the next morning, neither the accused appellant nor Usha 
were anywhere to be seen. 

(vii) The witness went to Usha’s house in the evening 
and saw her dead body lying on cot with large number of 
injuries whereas the accused appellant was missing. The 
cycle of the accused appellant was still parked in the 
courtyard of the house. 
(viii) A handwritten note(Exhibit PW-12/E) confessing to 
the murder was found lying underneath the cot on which 
the dead body was lying. The witness categorically stated 
that this note was written in the handwriting of the 
accused appellant which the witness was able to identify 
on account of both having worked together in the same 
concern(M/s. R.P. Associates) for a significant period of 
time. 
36. Thus, the circumstances of motive, last seen, confession and 
abscondence from the crime scene after committing the crime are 
all spoken to by the witness Ashok Kumar Pathak(PW-1) in his 
statement dated 17th July, 1991(reproduced supra) recorded on 
sworn affirmation during the proceedings under Section 299 CrPC. 
It may be stated here that Ashok Kumar Pathak had no motive 
whatsoever to falsely implicate the accused appellant for the 
murder of Usha. 

37. The fact regarding Usha’s homicidal death is not in dispute. 
The Medical Jurist(PW-15) gave categoric testimony to the effect 
that Usha had been manually strangled and the cause of death 
was Asphyxia. Thus, we need not discuss the medical evidence in 
detail. 
38. The statement of Ashok Kumar Pathak by itself provides a 
complete chain of circumstantial evidence sufficient to establish 
the guilt of the accused appellant. The accused appellant vanished 
from the crime scene and remained absconding for a period of 
nearly 10 years. He could be apprehended on 9th August, 2000, 
whereafter, regular trial was conducted. During the period of 
abscondence of the accused appellant, the complainant Ashok 
Kumar Pathak seems to have left his house at Kartar Nagar, Delhi 
where he used to reside earlier. Despite ample efforts being made 
by the Investigating Agency to summon and examine Ashok Kumar 
Pathak, he could not be traced out and produced in the witness 
box for deposition during trial after the accused had been arrested. 
39. Viewed in light of the provisions of Section 299 CrPC read 
with Section 33 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 as interpreted by 
this Court in the case of Nirmal Singh(supra) and Jayendra 
Vishnu Thakur(supra), the trial Court was justified in holding that 

the statement of Ashok Kumar Pathak recorded in these 
proceedings was fit to be read as a piece of substantive evidence. 
We concur with the findings recorded by the trial Court and 
affirmed by the High Court on this vital aspect of the matter. 
40. Sudha(PW-10), sister of deceased Usha also stated that the 
accused appellant used to quarrel with his wife Usha suspecting 
her infidelity. The witness also stated that the accused appellant 
had come to the house of Usha in her presence about four days 
before the incident and went away after fighting with Usha. Thus, 
evidence of this witness also establishes the motive attributed to 
the accused appellant for commission of the murder. Her 
testimony is also sufficient to conclude that inspite of the 
acrimonious relations between the husband and wife, the accused 
appellant used to visit Usha frequently from the village Khatta, 
U.P. where he was residing after having abandoned his wife and 
children. 
41. The witness Sanjiv Jain(PW-8), employer of accused 
appellant gave evidence to the effect that the Investigating 
Officer(PW-13) 
collected 
the 
admitted 
writings 
of 
the 
accused(Exhibit PW-12/C and Exhibit PW-12/D) from him during 
the course of the investigation. Sanjiv Jain(PW-8) had no motive 

whatsoever so as to falsely implicate the accused in this case. He 
had provided employment to the accused which fact is not 
disputed. The version of Sanjiv Jain(PW-8) to the effect that the 
Investigating Officer(PW-13) collected the scripts/documents 
written by the accused while working in his establishment finds 
corroboration from the statement of Ashok Kumar Pathak recorded 
in the proceedings under Section 299 CrPC. 
42. The contention of learned counsel for the appellant that the 
two persons namely, Sandeep Kumar and Rajbir Singh(PW-14) 
were involved in an illicit affair with Usha and they might have 
murdered the lady has no legs to stand because in view of what 
has been stated by Ashok Kumar Pathak in his testimony recorded 
under Section 299 CrPC, it is clear that no one other than the 
accused appellant was present in the house with Usha on the night 
she was murdered. 
43. The Investigating Officer(PW-13) duly proved the process of 
arrest of accused on 9th August, 2000, i.e., after more than 10 
years of the incident. 
44. The specimen writings(Exhibits PW-5/D, 5/E and 5/F) of the 
accused appellant were lawfully collected by the Investigating 
Officer(PW-13) after he was arrested and all these documents were 

placed on record with the charge sheet. These specimen 
writings(Exhibits PW-5/D, 5/E and 5/F) and the admitted 
writings(Exhibits PW-12/C and PW-12/D) of the accused 
appellant along with confession note(Exhibit PW-12/E) recovered 
from the crime scene were sent to the handwriting expert(PW-24) 
for comparison from where a report(Exhibit PW-12/F) was received 
to the effect that the handwritings on these documents match with 
each other. As is required under law, the handwriting expert 
Deepa Verma was examined as a witness(PW-24) and she proved 
the report(Exhibit PW-12/F) establishing the fact that the 
handwriting on the confessional note(Exhibit PW-12/E) recovered 
from the crime scene matched with the handwriting of the accused 
appellant on the specimen and admitted writings. 
45. The 
Investigating 
Officer(PW-13) 
gave 
unimpeachable 
evidence proving the various steps taken by him for collection of 
evidence during investigation so as to link the accused appellant 
with murder of Usha. The fact that the accused appellant was 
present with Usha on the night preceding the murder is firmly 
established from the deposition of Ashok Kumar Pathak. He went 
absconding after the murder and could not be traced out for almost 

10 years which is also a strong circumstance pointing towards his 
guilty state of mind. 
46. The circumstances leading to murder of Usha were in the 
exclusive knowledge of the appellant. He has offered no 
explanation as to the manner in which Usha was strangled to 
death within the confines of the room where only he and the 
deceased were present. The bald plea of denial offered by the 
accused by way of an explanation to this gravely incriminating 
circumstance is not sufficient to absolve him of the burden cast 
upon him by virtue of Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872. 
47. As a consequence of the above discussion, we are of the firm 
view that the prosecution has established the following links in the 
chain of incriminating circumstantial evidence: - 

Motive; 

Last seen together; 
(iii) Medical evidence establishing that the cause of death of 
the deceased was homicidal. 

Confessional note; 

Abscondence for nearly 10 years; 

Wrong explanation given by the accused in his 
statement under Section 313 CrPC; 
(vii) Failure of the accused to offer explanation for the 
homicidal death of his wife in the night time when only 
the accused and deceased were present in the house 
leading to the interference of guilt by virtue of Section 
106 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
48. Connected together, all these facts form a clinching and 
complete 
chain 
of 
incriminating 
circumstances 
pointing 
exclusively towards the guilt of the accused appellant and totally 
inconsistent with his innocence or the involvement of any other 
person in the crime. 
49. Consequently, we have no hesitation in confirming the view 
taken by the trial Court and the High Court in convicting and 
affirming the conviction of the accused appellant for the charge of 
committing murder of Usha. 
50. The impugned judgments do not suffer from any infirmity 
warranting any interference. 
51. Hence, the appeal fails and is hereby dismissed as such. 

52. The appellant is on bail. His bail bonds are cancelled. He 
shall surrender before the trial Court within the next 60 days to 
serve the remainder of the sentence. In case the appellant fails to 
surrender before the trial Court within the aforesaid period, the 
trial Court shall take steps to apprehend him and make him serve 
out the sentence. 
53. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
 ……………………………J. 
 (B.R. GAVAI) 

………..………………….J. 
(SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
May 07, 2024.