IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
( SLP(C) No. 4034 of 2023) 

VIJAY LAXMAN BHAWE SINCE DECEASED 
THROUGH HIS LEGAL HEIRS...APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
P & S NIRMAN PVT. LTD. 
AND OTHERS...RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeal challenges the judgment dated 14th 
December 2022, passed by the High Court of Judicature at 
Bombay (for short, “High Court”) in Civil Revision Application 
No. 269 of 2022, whereby the High Court dismissed the 
revision application filed by the appellants herein, challenging 
the order dated 4th May 2022, passed by the Civil Judge 
(Senior Division), Thane, (for short, “trial court”) in Civil Misc. 
Application No. 1473 of 2021, which was filed by respondent 
No. 1 herein, for condonation of delay in filing of the 

application for restoration, and seeking thereby to restore the 
Special, which came to be dismissed 
for want of prosecution by the trial court on 3rd November 
2011. 
3. 
Vide an order dated 24th April 2023, this Court issued 
notice to the respondents and stayed the proceedings before 
the trial court. 
4. 
Shorn of details, the facts giving rise to the present 
appeal are as under: 
4.1 The present appeal is concerned with certain lands 
situated at Sonkhar Village, in Taluka and District Thane, 
Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as “suit land”). There are 
competing claims with respect to the ownership of the suit 
land. 
4.2 The Government of Maharashtra, through the Special 
Land Acquisition Officer, Metro Centre, Thane, vide Award 
Nos. 1 and 2 in the year 1986 and 1988, respectively, acquired 
the subject land for public purpose, and handed over the said 
lands 
for 
development/execution 
to 
City 
Industrial 
Development Corporation, Maharashtra (CIDCO). 

4.3 In the year 2002, Special 
(hereinafter referred to as “subject suit”) was filed by the 
original plaintiff – Pravin Jamndas Thakkar (Kanani) (since 
deceased and now represented by his legal heirs respondent 
Nos. 2 and 3), in the trial court against the Government of 
Maharashtra (defendant No. 1/respondent No. 4 herein), 
Special Land Acquisition Officer, Thane (defendant No. 
2/respondent No. 5 herein), Vijay Laxman Bhawe (Defendant 
No.3) (since deceased and now represented through his legal 
heirs – viz. appellant Nos. 1 and 2 herein), Union of India 
(defendant No. 4/ respondent No. 6 herein) and City Industrial 
Development Corporation, Maharashtra (CIDCO) (defendant 
No. 5/ respondent No. 7 herein) for relief of declaration that 
the acquisition of suit land is illegal, null and void, and in the 
alternative, if the court holds that acquisition is good then 
declaration that the plaintiff is entitled to 12½ % Gaonthan 
Extension Scheme, in lieu of acquired lands as per the 
Gaonthan Extension Scheme of CIDCO. 
4.4 In the year 2005, the original plaintiff – Pravin Jamndas 
Thakkar (Kanani) passed away. 

4.5 The legal heirs of the original plaintiff, through their 
Power of Attorney holder, one Mr. Arunkumar Jayantilal 
Mucchalla, filed an application for condonation of delay in 
applying for bringing legal heirs of the plaintiff on record, and 
filed another application for bringing the legal heirs of the 
plaintiff on record in the subject suit. 
4.6 Vide order dated 28th November 2006, the trial court 
allowed the application for condonation of delay as well as the 
application for bringing the legal heirs of the plaintiff on record 
in the subject suit. However, vide order dated 3rd November 
2011, the trial court dismissed the subject suit for want of 
prosecution. 
4.7 On 7th November 2019, respondents No. 2 and 3, i.e., the 
legal heirs of the plaintiff, filed an application, viz., Misc. Civil 
Application (MCA) No. 1082 of 2019 in the subject suit, 
seeking condonation of delay of 8 years and 4 days in filing an 
application for restoration of subject suit. This application is 
still pending adjudication. 
4.8 On 12th October 2021, i.e., during the pendency of the 
aforesaid application filed by the legal heirs of the plaintiff, 
respondent No. 1, a private limited company, claiming to be 

the “assignee” from the legal heirs of the plaintiff, filed an 
application viz., Misc. in the subject suit, seeking condonation of delay of 9 years and 
11 months in filing the application for restoration of the 
subject suit. It was the case of respondent No. 1, that it had 
entered into an Agreement for Sale dated 8th December 2009, 
with the legal heirs of the plaintiff, i.e., respondents No. 2 and 
3 and agreed to procure benefit the subject land 
and in lieu thereof had paid part consideration of Rs. 1.51 
crore to the legal heirs of the plaintiff, i.e., respondents No. 2 
and 3 alongwith an irrevocable Power of Attorney dated 8th 
December 2009, thereby appointing respondent No. 1 as their 
constituted Attorney for doing all such acts, deeds and things 
to implement the Agreement for Sale. 
4.9 Vide order dated 4th May 2022, the trial court allowed the 
restoration application being MCA No. 1473 of 2021 filed by 
respondent No.1, subject to the payment of costs of Rs. 
15,000/-, thereby condoning the delay of 9 years and 11 
months. 
4.10 Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the trial court dated 
4th May 2022, the appellants filed Civil Revision Application 

No. 269 of 2022 before the High Court. 
4.11 The High Court, vide impugned judgment, dismissed the 
civil revision application filed by the appellants, upheld the 
order of the trial court and only enhanced the costs awarded 
from Rs. 15,000/- to Rs. 1,50,000/-. 
4.12 Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal. 
5. 
We have heard Shri Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants and Shri C.A. 
Sundaram, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondents. 
6. 
Shri Rohatgi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 
appellants submitted that the learned trial court has totally 
erred in entertaining the application filed at the behest of a 
private party. It is submitted that respondent No.1 is totally a 
stranger to the proceedings. He submitted that, when an 
application filed by the legal heirs of the original plaintiff, i.e. respondents No. 2 and 3 herein being MCA No. 1082 of 2019 
for condonation of delay in filing an application for restoration 
of the subject suit was pending since 7th November 2019, there 
was no occasion for the learned trial court to have considered 
the application filed by a stranger subsequently on 12th 

October 2021. 
7. 
Shri Rohatgi further submitted that, as a matter of fact, 
the subject suit itself is a frivolous one. The suit land belonged 
to the predecessors of the appellants and it was acquired by 
the State and the compensation duly received by the 
appellants. The proceedings for enhancement are also pending 
before the High Court. It is submitted that entertaining the 
application at the instance of a stranger for condonation of 
delay in filing an application for restoration of a frivolous suit 
is nothing else but a travesty of justice. It is submitted that, 
for the same reasons, the judgment of the High Court is also 
not sustainable. 
8. 
Shri Sundaram, learned Senior Counsel appearing on 
behalf of the respondents, on the contrary, submitted that 
respondent No.1 has accrued a right in the lis on account of 
an Agreement for Sale dated 8th December 2009 entered into 
between it and the legal heirs of the original plaintiff. It is 
submitted that, since respondents No.2 and 3 were not 
prosecuting the application for condonation of delay in filing 
the application for restoration of the subject suit, respondent 
No.1 was justified in filing such an application. It is submitted 

that, in any case, no interference is warranted in the 
concurrent orders of the trial court and the High Court. 
9. 
We find that the approach of the trial court in 
entertaining the application filed at the behest of respondent 
No.1 is totally unsustainable in law. The claim of respondent 
No.1 is on an unregistered Agreement for Sale dated 8th 
December 2009. We do not wish to comment anything upon 
the said Agreement for Sale inasmuch as the same may 
prejudice the rights of the parties. However, entertaining an 
application filed at the behest of a stranger for condonation of 
delay in filing an application for restoration of the subject suit 
is totally unsustainable in law. Admittedly, respondent No.1 
has not even been impleaded in the subject suit. As such, the 
application filed at the behest of the stranger, who is not a 
party to the proceedings, is totally illegal. If the approach as 
adopted by the trial court is approved, any Tom, Dick and 
Harry would be permitted to move an application for 
condonation of delay in filing an application for restoration of 
the suit even if he is not a party to the subject suit. 
10. Apart from that, an application for condonation of delay 
in filing an application for restoration of the subject suit at the 

behest of the legal heirs of the original plaintiff is very much 
pending since 7th November 2019. It is difficult to understand 
as to what was the compelling necessity for the trial court to 
have entertained the application filed at the behest of 
respondent No.1 after a period of two years from the date of 
filing of the application by respondents No.2 and 3. The trial 
court could have very well decided the application filed by 
respondents No.2 and 3 on its own merits in accordance with 
law. We do not appreciate the propriety in keeping the 
application filed by the legal heirs of the original plaintiff in 
2019 pending and deciding the subsequent application filed 
by respondent No.1 in October 2021 within a period of six 
months. We do not wish to say anything more on it. 
11. Though, it was urged by the appellants before the High 
Court that respondent No.1 was totally a stranger and the 
reasons given for condonation of delay did not constitute the 
“sufficient cause”, and though the judgments of this Court 
were relied upon to contend as to why the application ought 
not to have been allowed by the trial court, the High Court has 
totally ignored the same. 

12. In light of the view taken by us, though it is not necessary 
for us to consider in detail as to whether the reasoning given 
by the trial court and the High Court as to whether respondent 
No.1 had made out a “sufficient cause” for condonation of 
delay is correct or not, we are of the prima facie view that the 
reasoning given by the trial court as well as the High Court for 
condoning such an inordinate delay will not come under the 
ambit of “sufficient cause” as has been delineated by this 
Court in a catena of judgments. 
13. We find that the order of the trial court as well as the 
High Court are not sustainable in law. The appeal is therefore 
allowed. The judgment dated 14th December 2022, passed by 
the High Court in, 
and the order dated 4th May 2022, passed by the trial court in 
 are quashed and set 
aside. 
14. However, we clarify that the application filed by 
respondents No.2 and 3 being MCA No. 1082 of 2019 would 
be considered by the trial court on its own merits in 
accordance with law. 

15. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. No 
costs. 

…… 
[B.R. GAVAI] 

 …… 
 [SANDEEP MEHTA]