IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 14970-71 OF 2017 

MUNICIPAL COMMITTEE KATRA 
& ORS.. 

VERSUS 
 
ASHWANI KUMAR 
 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 

1. 
The appellants seek to challenge the common judgment and 
final order dated 30th September, 2015 passed by learned Division 
Bench of Jammu and Kashmir High Court in LPAOW No. 20 of 
2015 preferred by the appellants for assailing the order dated 20th 
February, 2015 passed by the learned Single Judge in OWP No. 
1199 of 2013; and in LPAOW No. 21 of 2015, filed by the 
respondent seeking modification of the order dated 20th February, 
2015. The learned Division Bench disposed of the LPAOW No. 20 
of 2015 preferred by the appellants, whereas the cross-appeal 
preferred by the respondent being LPAOW No. 21 of 2015 was 
dismissed. 

2. 
The brief controversy presented for adjudication in these 
appeals is whether the High Court in exercise of writ jurisdiction, 
was entitled to entertain a dispute which was purely civil in nature 
filed for claiming monetary relief/damages arising from fallout of 
contractual obligations. 
3. 
Brief facts relevant and essential for disposal of these appeals 
are that the appellant-Municipal Committee, Katra issued a Notice 
Inviting Tender(hereinafter being referred to as ‘NIT’) dated 3rd 
March, 2010 inviting bids for supply of mules and mazdoors 
essentially involved in transportation of pilgrims from the base 
camp at Katra to holy shrine of Mata Vaishno Devi, atop the 
Trikuta hill. Several bids were received in response to the said NIT. 
The respondent herein was the second highest bidder, who 
subsequently became the highest bidder, as Shri Pritam Das, the 
original highest bidder did not come forward to execute the 
contract. Accordingly, the contract came to be offered to the 
respondent who accepted the offer so given. The tenure of the 
contract as per NIT was from 1st April, 2010 till 31st March, 2011. 
In terms of Clause-8 of the NIT, the successful bidder was required 
to deposit 40% of the bid amount within 24 hours from the time of 
acceptance, i.e. on or before 31st March, 2010. It was also enjoined 

upon the bidder to deposit 5 post dated cheques along with bank 
guarantee to secure the amount for remaining tenure of the 
contract period. 
4. 
Clause-8 of NIT would be germane to the controversy and is 
being reproduced hereinbelow for the sake of ready reference: - 
“8. The successful highest bidder, shall have to deposit 40% of 
the offered amount at the time of provisional acceptance of the 
offer by the committee immediately but not later than 24 hours 
from the time of acceptance. Balance contract amount shall 
have to be deposited in 5 (five) equal installments commencing 
from 1st May to September 2010, in shape of post dated 
cheques along with bank guarantee to be deposited within 24 
hours from the time of acceptance of offer to secure timely 
realization the consideration amount. In case of default to 
deposit 40% of bid offered amount within 24 hours and also 
fails to fulfill other formalities required as per terms and 
conditions, the security deposit/earnest money shall be 
forfeited." 

5. 
The respondent sought relaxation in the Clause-8 of the NIT 
on the ground that the condition of furnishing bank guarantee for 
the remainder amount was unjust and arbitrary. 
6. 
Having failed to get a favourable response from the Municipal 
authorities, the respondent filed a civil suit seeking a declaration 
that Clause-8 of the NIT was arbitrary. The suit was accompanied 
by an application seeking temporary injunction. The Court of 
learned District Judge, Reasi vide order dated 29th April, 2010, 
allowed the application and granted temporary injunction 

directing the appellants herein to issue the order of allotment of 
contract to the respondent-plaintiff. 
7. 
The defendants i.e. appellants herein challenged the order 
dated 29th April, 2010 by filing a Civil 1st Miscellaneous 
Appeal(CIMA) No.312 of 2010 wherein the High Court passed an 
order dated 7th May, 2010 directing the appellants to issue a work 
order in favour of the respondent. 
8. 
In view of the order dated 7th May, 2010 passed by the High 
Court in the above appeal, a formal work order dated 10th May, 
2010 was issued by the appellants to the respondent who 
commenced the work and collected the revenue for the period 
commencing from 10th May, 2010 till 7th April, 2011(time of one 
week extended under orders of the High Court). After conclusion 
of the contract period, the respondent filed a writ petition before 
the High Court being OWP No. 743 of 2013 contending that his 
contract was supposed to commence from 1st April, 2010 and was 
to run for a period of 365 days till 31st March, 2011. However, the 
said period was truncated because the same could be commenced 
from 10th May, 2010 only and hence, the respondent suffered a 
loss of collection of earnings for a period of 33 days. He, therefore, 
claimed pro-rata amount of Rs. 71,06,276/- being the purported 

loss suffered on account of the curtailment of the contract period 
by 33 days. The learned Single Bench of the High Court, vide order 
dated 3rd July, 2013, disposed of the writ petition, OWP No.743 of 
2013 with a direction to the appellants herein to consider the claim 
of the respondent within six weeks from the date of the order. 
9. 
The claim of the respondent was laid before the Executive 
Officer, Municipal Committee, Katra who rejected the same vide 
order dated 12th August, 2013 which was subjected to challenge in 
OWP No. 1199 of 2013. 
10. The learned Single Bench, took up the OWP No.1199 of 2013 
and decided the same vide order dated 20th February, 2015. The 
findings recorded by the learned Single Judge in paragraph Nos. 
14 to 16 of the order are relevant for adjudication of the issue at 
hand and hence, are being reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“14. Indisputable position, thus, emerging is that, whereas the 
petitioner had complied with clause-8 of the auction notice to 
the extent of offering 40% of the auction amount by way of a 
cheque, he, however, had failed to comply with rest of the 
conditions by not issuing five post dated cheques and bank 
guarantee to secure the payment of rest of the auction amount 
and instead questioned the legality of clause-8 by filing suit in 
the court of learned District Judge, Reasi. It was for this failure 
on the part of the petitioner that allotment letter enabling him 
to start performing under the contract from 01.04.2010 was not 
issued by respondent No.3, which, nonetheless, later came to 
be issued on 10.05.2010 pursuant to and in compliance with 
order dated 07.05.2010(supra) passed by this Court. As the 
contract period had to come to an end with the end of the 
financial year, that is, on 31.03.2011, the petitioner again 
approached this Court by way of CMA No. 271/2011 in the 

above mentioned appeal (CIMA No. 312/2010) and because of 
the interim direction issued by this Court on 31.03.2011, he 
continued performing under the contract up to 07.04.2011 
when, however, the interim direction ceased to operate due to 
withdrawal of appeal by the respondents. Fact of the matter, 
thus, precisely is that as against stipulated contract period of 
one year from 01.04.2010 to 31.03.2011 the petitioner could 
perform under the contract and earned revenue from 
10.05.2010 to 07.04.2011 and in that petitioner is not wrong 
in saying that he worked 33 days less than the stipulated 
contract period of 365 days. He thus sought refund of 
proportionate auction amount for these 33 days, firstly, by the 
medium of OWP No. 743/2013 and now by the medium of the 
petition on hand in which he also questions order dated 
12.08.2013 passed by respondent No. 3 in compliance with 
order dated 03.07.2013 passed by this Court in OWP No. 
743/2013. Respondent No.3, by impugned order dated 
12.08.2013, rejected petitioner’s claim holding it as not 
maintainable solely for the reason that petitioner himself was 
at fault for not fulfilling the terms and conditions of the Auction 
Notice. 
 
15. Point sought to be demonstrated on behalf of the 
respondents is that petitioner by not issuing post dated 
cheques and bank guarantee to secure the payment of 
remaining 60% of the total auction amount was responsible for 
non-issue of allotment letter and allotment of contract in his 
favour up to 10.05.2011 and therefore is not entitled to claim 
recovery of proportionate auction amount. 
 
16. It admits of no doubt that petitioner himself was responsible 
for delay in allotment of contract in his favour resulting into his 
inability to collect the revenue for initial period of 39 days, that 
is, from 01.04.2010 to 09.05.2010. Respondents cannot be said 
to have committed any wrong, illegality or breach of contract in 
not issuing allotment letter and allotting the contract to the 
petitioner from 01.04.2010 up to 09.05.2010. It was with the 
intervention and under the interim directions of this Court on 
07.05.2010(supra) that the respondent No. 3 allotted the 
contract in favour of the petitioner on 10.05.2010 and he 
performed under the same up to 7. 4. 2011. This, however, is 
one aspect of the matter and the other aspects, which are 
important nevertheless, are that stipulated period of the 
contract was twelve months, the, auction amount offered and 
paid by the petitioner was for the said period of twelve months 
and the petitioner could not collect the revenue for 32 days out 
of the said twelve months.” 

11. The learned Single Judge recorded a categoric finding that it 
was the respondent herein who failed to comply with the 
requirements of the Clause-8 of the NIT because the five post-dated 
cheques and bank guarantee to secure the payment of the rest of 
the auction amount were not deposited by him leading to non-
issuance of the work order. The respondent questioned the legality 
of the Clause-8 by filing a suit in the Court of learned District 
Judge, Reasi. The learned Single Judge categorically held that it 
was the failure of the respondent-bidder, due to which the 
allotment letter enabling him to start performing under the 
contract from 1st April, 2010 was not issued, which later came to 
be issued on 10th May, 2010 in compliance of the order dated 7th 
May, 2010 passed by the High Court. However, in spite of taking 
note of this unjustified action of the respondent leading to the non-
issuance of the work order, the learned Single Judge went on to 
hold that the writ petitioner(respondent herein) was not wrong in 
saying that he had worked 33 days less than the stipulated 
contract period of 365 days and thus, he was entitled to payment 
of pro-rata auction amount for these days. 
12. The learned Single Judge was persuaded by the equitable 
concept that a social welfare state where the Government has to 

play a key role in protecting and promoting the economic interest 
and social well-being of the citizens, it would not be entitled to or 
justified in earning undue benefit/profit from the citizens. 
Observing so, the learned Single Judge took upon himself to 
quantify the damages suffered by the bidder to be equivalent to net 
revenue collected by the appellant herein during first 32 days of 
contract period commencing from 1st April, 2010 after deducting 
expenses such as salaries and allied expenses and proceeded to 
direct the appellants to make payment thereof to the respondent 
herein. 
13. The intra court appeal preferred by the appellants against the 
said order and the cross-appeal filed by the respondent seeking 
modification of the order passed by learned Single Bench and a 
direction upon the appellant to refund the total amount of 
Rs.71,06,276/- along with interest at 12% per annum without 
making any deductions, stand rejected by common judgment and 
final order dated 30th September, 2013. These orders are subjected 
to challenge at the instance of Municipal Committee, Katra and its 
officials in these appeals by special leave. 
14. Learned counsel Shri Pashupathi Nath Razdan appearing on 
behalf of the appellants urged that admittedly, the respondent was 

responsible for non-issuance of the work order because he did not 
comply with the mandatory requirements contained in Clause-8 of 
NIT. Despite having participated in the auction proceedings with 
open eyes, the respondent pursuant to his second highest bid 
being accepted, challenged the conditions contained in Clause-8 of 
the NIT, by filing a civil suit. Owing to the reluctance shown by the 
respondent in accepting the tender conditions, the appellants 
herein were contemplating to quash the tender and to issue a fresh 
auction notice, but in compliance of the order dated 7th May, 2010, 
passed by the High Court, the work order dated 10th May, 2010 
was awarded to the respondent. He submitted that there cannot 
be any dispute that the work under the contract was to run only 
till 31st March, 2011. The work was commenced by the respondent 
on 10th May, 2010 and the delay was due to his own conduct. He 
submitted that the High Court was not justified in entertaining the 
claim laid by the respondent in the writ petition which primarily 
was filed seeking award of damages in exercise of the extraordinary 
writ jurisdiction. It was fervently contended that such a remedy 
could only have been availed by filing a suit for damages in the 
civil Court. His fervent contention was that the quantification of 
the amount, arrived at by the High Court to be awarded to the 

respondent by way of damages/compensation was not based on 
any logic or reasoning. He thus, implored the Court to accept the 
appeals and set aside the impugned judgments. 
15., Mr. Rakesh K. Khanna, learned senior counsel 
representing the respondent-writ petitioner, vehemently and 
fervently opposed the submissions advanced by the appellants’ 
counsel. He urged that admittedly, the auction notice was issued 
for one year, but despite that the respondent was not allowed to 
work for the entire period of 365 days in terms of NIT. For the 
shortfall of 33 days during which the respondent-writ petitioner 
was not allowed to work, the appellants themselves operated the 
work and thus, it can be presumed that they must have made 
profits out of the same. He urged that the respondent-writ 
petitioner was made to deposit the entire amount under the 
contract for the full period of 365 days in terms of the NIT. The 
appellant Municipal Committee operated the work and earned 
income for this period of 33 days and also charged the respondent-
writ petitioner for the same period. By failing to pay to the 
respondent-writ petitioner the earnings for the period of these 33 
days, the appellant was unduly enriched which is totally alien to 
the concept of a ‘welfare state’ guaranteed under the Constitution 

of India. He submitted that the High Court has assessed and 
quantified the damages suffered by the respondent by applying a 
logical reasoning and granted equitable relief after balancing the 
equities and hence, this Court should be loath to interfere in the 
matter. 
16. However, Mr. Khanna was not in a position to dispute the fact 
that the respondent did not challenge the conditions contained in 
Clause-8 of NIT before participating in the auction proceedings. It 
was also not disputed that the delay in issuance of the work order 
was purely attributable to the respondent who avoided complying 
with the conditions in Clause-8 of the auction notice and dragged 
the proceedings to litigation. 
17. We have considered the submissions advanced at bar and 
have perused the material available on record and have gone 
through the impugned judgments. 
18. The situation at hand is squarely covered by the latin maxim 
‘nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria’, which 
means that no man can take advantage of his own wrong. This 
principle was applied by this Court in the case of Union of India 
v. Maj. Gen. Madan Lal Yadav 1 observing as below: - 
 
1 (1996) 

“28. …In this behalf, the maxim nullus commodum capere potest 
de injuria sua propria — meaning no man can take advantage of 
his own wrong — squarely stands in the way of avoidance by the 
respondent and he is estopped to plead bar of limitation contained 
in Section 123(2). In Broom's Legal Maxim (10th Edn.) at p. 191 it 
is stated: 
“… it is a maxim of law, recognised and established, that no man 
shall take advantage of his own wrong; and this maxim, which is 
based on elementary principles, is fully recognised in courts of law 
and of equity, and, indeed, admits of illustration from every 
branch of legal procedure.” 
The reasonableness of the rule being manifest, we proceed at once 
to show its application by reference to decided cases. It was noted 
therein that a man shall not take advantage of his own wrong to 
gain the favourable interpretation of the law. In support thereof, 
the author has placed reliance on another maxim frustra legis 
auxilium invocat quaerit qui in legem committit. He relies on Perry 
v. Fitzhowe [(1846) 8 QB 757: 15 LJ QB 239]. At p. 192, it is 
stated that if a man be bound to appear on a certain day, and 
before that day the obligee puts him in prison, the bond is void. 
At p. 193, it is stated that “it is moreover a sound principle that 
he who prevents a thing from being done shall not avail himself of 
the non-performance he has occasioned”. At p. 195, it is further 
stated that “a wrong doer ought not to be permitted to make a 
profit out of his own wrong”. At p. 199 it is observed that “the rule 
applies to the extent of undoing the advantage gained where that 
can be done and not to the extent of taking away a right previously 
possessed”. 
 
19. It is beyond cavil of doubt that no one can be permitted to 
take undue and unfair advantage of his own wrong to gain 
favourable interpretation of law. It is a sound principle that he who 
prevents a thing from being done shall not avail himself of the non-
performance he has occasioned. To put it differently, ‘a wrong doer 
ought not to be permitted to make profit out of his own wrong’. The 

conduct of the respondent-writ petitioner is fully covered by the 
aforesaid proposition. 
20. The respondent-writ petitioner participated in the tender 
process without raising any issue about Clause-8 of the auction 
notice. The highest bidder Shri. Pritam Das did not come forward 
to execute the contract thus, the respondent became the highest 
bidder and was offered the work in question. The respondent 
accepted the same with open eyes. However, in order to avoid full 
compliance of Clause-8 of auction notice, the respondent went on 
to file a civil suit. Having participated in the tender proceedings 
with open eyes, the respondent challenged the Clause-8 of the 
auction notice in the civil Court and thereby, stalled the issuance 
of the work order. The matter was taken to the High Court and the 
appellants gave a clear indication before the High Court that they 
were proposing to hold a fresh auction. However, during pendency 
of appeal before the High Court, an order dated 7th May, 2010 came 
to be passed whereby, the appellants were directed to award the 
work to the respondent being L-2. 
21. We feel that once the respondent-writ petitioner had 
participated in the tender process being fully conscious of the 
terms and conditions of the auction notice, he was estopped from 

taking a U-turn so as to question the legality or validity of the 
terms and conditions of the auction notice. By dragging the matter 
to litigation, the respondent himself was responsible for the delay 
occasioned in issuance of the work order which deprived him of 
the opportunity to work for the entire period of 365 days. 
22. Furthermore, the relief which was sought by the respondent 
in the writ petition was purely by way of damages. By no stretch of 
imagination, such relief could have been subject matter of extra 
ordinary writ jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of 
the Constitution of India. The quantification of the damages would 
require entering into disputed questions of facts and hence, the 
High Court ought to have relegated the writ petitioner(respondent 
herein) to the competent Court for claiming damages, if so advised. 
23. Law is well settled that disputes purely 
contractual obligations cannot be entertained by the High Court in 
exercise of the extra ordinary writ jurisdiction. In the case of Union 
of India and Ors. v. Puna Hinda2, this Court held as follows: - 
“24. Therefore, the dispute could not be raised by way of a writ 
petition on the disputed questions of fact. Though, the 
jurisdiction of the High Court is wide but in respect of pure 
contractual matters in the field of private law, having no 
statutory flavour, are better adjudicated upon by the forum 
agreed to by the parties. The dispute as to whether the amount 
is payable or not and/or how much amount is payable are 
 
2 (2021) 

disputed questions of facts. There is no admission on the part 
of the appellants to infer that the amount stands crystallised. 
Therefore, in the absence of any acceptance of joint survey 
report by the competent authority, no right would accrue to the 
writ petitioner only because measurements cannot be 
undertaken after passage of time. Maybe, the resurvey cannot 
take place but the measurement books of the work executed 
from time to time would form a reasonable basis for assessing 
the amount due and payable to the writ petitioner, but such 
process could be undertaken only by the agreed forum i.e. arbitration and not by the writ court as it does not have the 
expertise in respect of measurements or construction of roads.” 

24. In wake of discussion made herein above, this Court is of the 
firm view that the impugned judgments dated 20th February, 2015 
and 30th September, 2015 are ex-facie illegal and without 
jurisdiction. Hence, the same deserve to be and are hereby 
quashed and set aside. 
25. The appeals stand allowed. No order as to costs. 
26. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
May 09, 2024