IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. of 2024 
((CRIMINAL) NO. OF 2024) 
(.27308 OF 2023) 
 
UNION OF INDIA 

VERSUS 
MRITYUNJAY KUMAR SINGH 

 J U D G E M E N T 
 
Aravind Kumar, J. 
1. 
Heard. Delay Condoned. Leave granted. 
 
2. 
The Union of India is questioning the order dated 30.01.2023 
whereunder the respondent has been directed to be enlarged on bail on terms 

and conditions stipulated thereunder by setting aside the order dated 18.11.2021 
passed by the Special Judge, NIA, Ranchi. 
 
3. 
The gist of the prosecution case is that on 22.11.2019, at about 8.00 
PM, the patrolling party of Chandwa Police Station during their routine patrol 
had stopped at Lukuiya More where the banned terrorist organization CPI 
(Moist) had fired indiscriminately at them resulting in the death of four (4) 
police personnel. It is the further case of the prosecution that arms and 
ammunitions were also looted from martyred police personnel by raising 
slogans and thereafter the moist fled away. One of the home guards namely, 
Dinesh Ram, who escaped unhurt had rushed to Chandwa Police Station and 
lodged a complaint resulting in FIR No.158 of 2019 being registered against 18 
named and few unknown persons. 
 
4. 
The Central Government directed the National Investigating Agency 
(for short ‘NIA’) to take up investigation and as such the FIR No.158 of 2019 
was re-registered as RC No.25 of 2020 for the offences under Sections 147, 
148, 149, 452, 302, 353 and 379 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short ‘IPC’) 
read with Section 27 of the Arms Act, 1959, under Section 17 (i) and (ii) of 
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act and Section 10, 13, 17 and 18 of Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (for short ‘UAP Act’) 

5. 
The NIA submitted the supplementary chargesheet against 34 persons 
including the respondent for the offences punishable under Sections 120(B), 
121, 121(A), 122, 147, 148, 149, 302, 307, 353, 395, 396 and 427 of IPC and 
under Sections 10, 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 38, 39 and 40 of UAP Act and under 
Sections 25(1B)(a), 26, 27 and 35 of the Arms Act. 
 
6. 
The first respondent being apprehended sought for being enlarged on 
bail by filing a regular bail application before the Special Judge, NIA, Ranchi. 
After hearing both the parties, the learned Special Judge rejected the bail 
application vide order dated 18.11.2021. 

7. 
Being aggrieved by the rejection of the bail application, the respondent 
herein preferred a separate criminal appeal under Section 21 of NIA Act, 2008 
before the High Court of Jharkhand, Ranchi. The High Court by the impugned 
order dated 30.01.2023 allowed the appeal and ordered for the respondent 
herein for being enlarged on bail subject to conditions stipulated thereunder. 
Hence, this appeal is preferred by Union of India. 
 
8. 
We have heard the arguments of Shri K.M Nataraj, Additional Solicitor 
General of India appearing for the appellant and Shri Siddharth Luthra, learned 

Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent. It is the contention of Shri K.M 
Nataraj, Additional Solicitor General of India, that the respondent was a key 
partner of a construction firm M/s Santosh Construction and was closely 
associated with Regional Commander of CPI-Maoist Ravindra Ganjhu (A-14) 
and provided financial as well as logistics support for the terrorist activities. It 
is further contended that respondent has been in conspiracy with the cadres of 
CPI (Moist) and he had been supporting them not only by giving financial aid 
to the proscribed terrorist organization but also by managing the terrorist fund 
through showing dubious entries and investments in his company/firm’s 
accounts. He has also submitted that the respondent is an active supporter and 
sympathizer of the proscribed terrorist organization and is directly connected 
to the incident which led to the killing of four (4) police personnel of the 
Jharkhand Police. Taking this Court to the materials on record, he contended 
that the search at the house of the respondent had yielded in recovering 
unaccounted cash amounting to Rs.2.64 crores for which there was no plausible 
explanation. 
 
9. 
He would contend that there are other three (3) cases registered against 
the respondent which would suffice to reject the bail in the instant case relying 
upon the letter dated 15.12.2023 written by the father of the complainant in the 
case No.225 of 2023 addressed to the State Police alleging that the respondent 

and his associates are threatening the life of the complainant and pressurizing 
him to withdraw the case and hence there is every likelihood of the witnesses 
in the instant case also being threatened therefore he seeks for allowing of the 
appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court. He would further contend 
that the respondent is an influential person and would make all attempts to 
threaten or influence witnesses and there is every likelihood that he may 
succeed in his attempts if he continues to have the benefit of the bail. He would 
also submit that respondent is an influential and a person with criminal history 
and having close ties with many gangsters and criminals apart from the top 
cadres CPI-Maoist, as such there is every likelihood for the respondent to 
tamper with the evidence and influence the witnesses. Hence, he prays for the 
appeal being allowed and impugned order being set aside. 
 
10. 
Shri Siddharth Luthra, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 
respondent, by supporting the impugned order contends that the High Court has 
rightly set aside the order of the Special Judge by granting bail to the respondent 
conditionally way back on 30.01.2023 and even after lapse of more than 1 year 
and 3 months, there being no allegation on the conditions of bail having been 
violated, itself is a good ground for non-interference with the order of bail 
granted by the High Court. Elaborating his submissions, he would contend that 
the prosecution is seeking for the impugned order being set aside essentially on 

the ground that respondent is involved in three (3) cases apart from the case 
registered by NIA. He would further submit that the case registered by 
Chandwa PS in Case No.99 of 2014 has resulted in acquittal and in the case 
No.108 of 2015, the respondent has been enlarged on bail by the High Court of 
Jharkhand. Lastly, in the case No.4 of 2020, the respondent has been granted 
anticipatory bail by the High Court of Jharkhand and as such the purported 
criminal antecedent did not sway in the mind of High Court while considering 
the prayer for grant of bail. Even otherwise the pendency of three (3) other 
cases would have no bearing for the continuation of the order of bail granted in 
favour of the respondent. Hence, he has prayed for rejection of the appeal. 
 
11. 
Having heard learned Counsel for the parties and on perusal of the 
entire material on record including the additional affidavits filed and the 
counter/reply filed thereto by the respondent, it would emerge from the records, 
by the impugned order High Court had scrutinized the entire material on record 
and has recorded a finding that name of the respondent did not figure in the 
initial FIR registered or in the statements of witnesses and most of the 
statements disclosed the absence of the respondent’s name being taken or any 
overt act being attributed against the respondent. 

12. 
It is well settled law that an accused cannot be detained under the guise 
of punishing him by presuming the guilt and in Vaman Narain Ghiya v. State 
of Rajasthan, (2009), it has been held: 
“8. The law of bail, like any other branch of law, has its own 
philosophy, and occupies an important place in the administration 
of justice and the concept of bail emerges from the conflict 
between the police power to restrict liberty of a man who is 
alleged to have committed a crime, and presumption of innocence 
in favour of the alleged criminal. An accused is not detained in 
custody with the object of punishing him on the assumption of his 
guilt.” 
 
The broad probability of accused being involved in the committing of the 
offence alleged will have to be seen. This Court in NIA v. Zahoor Ahmad Shah 
Watali, (2019) has held: 
23. By virtue of the proviso to sub-section (5), it is the duty of the 
Court to be satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for 
believing that the accusation against the accused is prima facie 
true or otherwise. Our attention was invited to the decisions of 
this Court, which has had an occasion to deal with similar special 
provisions in TADA and MCOCA. The principle underlying those 
decisions may have some bearing while considering the prayer 
for bail in relation to the offences under the 1967 Act as well. 
Notably, 
under 
the 
special 
enactments 
such 
as 
TADA, MCOCA and the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances Act, 1985, the Court is required to record its opinion 
that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is 
“not guilty” of the alleged offence. There is a degree of difference 
between the satisfaction to be recorded by the Court that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is “not guilty” 
of such offence and the satisfaction to be recorded for the 
purposes of the 1967 Act that there are reasonable grounds for 

believing that the accusation against such person is “prima facie” 
true. By its very nature, the expression “prima facie true” would 
mean that the materials/evidence collated by the investigating 
agency in reference to the accusation against the accused 
concerned in the first information report, must prevail until 
contradicted and overcome or disproved by other evidence, and 
on the face of it, shows the complicity of such accused in the 
commission of the stated offence. It must be good and sufficient 
on its face to establish a given fact or the chain of facts 
constituting the stated offence, unless rebutted or contradicted. In 
one sense, the degree of satisfaction is lighter when the Court has 
to opine that the accusation is “prima facie true”, as compared to 
the opinion of the accused “not guilty” of such offence as required 
under the other special enactments. In any case, the degree of 
satisfaction to be recorded by the Court for opining that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that the accusation against the 
accused is prima facie true, is lighter than the degree of 
satisfaction to be recorded for considering a discharge application 
or framing of charges in relation to offences under the 1967 Act. 
Nevertheless, we may take guidance from the exposition 
in Ranjitsing 
Brahmajeetsing 
Sharma [Ranjitsing 
Brahmajeetsing Sharma v. State of Maharashtra, (2005): 2005 SCC (Cri) 1057], wherein a three-Judge Bench of this 
Court was called upon to consider the scope of power of the Court 
to grant bail. In paras 36 to 38, the Court observed thus: (SCC 
pp. 316-17) 
“36. Does this statute require that before a person is released 
on bail, the court, albeit prima facie, must come to the 
conclusion that he is not guilty of such offence? Is it 
necessary for the court to record such a finding? Would 
there be any machinery available to the court to ascertain 
that once the accused is enlarged on bail, he would not 
commit any offence whatsoever? 
37. Such findings are required to be recorded only for the 
purpose of arriving at an objective finding on the basis of 

materials on record only for grant of bail and for no other 
purpose. 
38. We are furthermore of the opinion that the restrictions 
on the power of the court to grant bail should not be pushed 
too far. If the court, having regard to the materials brought 
on record, is satisfied that in all probability he may not be 
ultimately convicted, an order granting bail may be passed. 
The satisfaction of the court as regards his likelihood of not 
committing an offence while on bail must be construed to 
mean an offence under the Act and not any offence 
whatsoever be it a minor or major offence. … What would 
further be necessary on the part of the court is to see the 
culpability of the accused and his involvement in the 
commission of an organised crime either directly or 
indirectly. The court at the time of considering the 
application for grant of bail shall consider the question from 
the angle as to whether he was possessed of the requisite 
mens rea.” 
 
And again in paras 44 to 48, the Court observed: (SCC pp. 318-
20) 
“44. The wording of Section 21(4), in our opinion, does not 
lead to the conclusion that the court must arrive at a positive 
finding that the applicant for bail has not committed an 
offence under the Act. If such a construction is placed, the 
court intending to grant bail must arrive at a finding that the 
applicant has not committed such an offence. In such an 
event, it will be impossible for the prosecution to obtain a 
judgment of conviction of the applicant. Such cannot be the 
intention of the legislature. Section 21(4) of MCOCA, 
therefore, must be construed reasonably. It must be so 
construed that the court is able to maintain a delicate 
balance between a judgment of acquittal and conviction and 
an order granting bail much before commencement of trial. 
Similarly, the court will be required to record a finding as 
to the possibility of his committing a crime after grant of 

bail. However, such an offence in futuro must be an offence 
under the Act and not any other offence. Since it is difficult 
to predict the future conduct of an accused, the court must 
necessarily consider this aspect of the matter having regard 
to the antecedents of the accused, his propensities and the 
nature and manner in which he is alleged to have committed 
the offence. 
45. It is, furthermore, trite that for the purpose of 
considering an application for grant of bail, although 
detailed reasons are not necessary to be assigned, the order 
granting bail must demonstrate application of mind at least 
in serious cases as to why the applicant has been granted or 
denied the privilege of bail. 
46. The duty of the court at this stage is not to weigh the 
evidence meticulously but to arrive at a finding on the basis 
of broad probabilities. However, while dealing with a 
special statute like MCOCA having regard to the provisions 
contained in sub-section (4) of Section 21 of the Act, the 
court may have to probe into the matter deeper so as to 
enable it to arrive at a finding that the materials collected 
against the accused during the investigation may not justify 
a judgment of conviction. The findings recorded by the 
court while granting or refusing bail undoubtedly would be 
tentative in nature, which may not have any bearing on the 
merit of the case and the trial court would, thus, be free to 
decide the case on the basis of evidence adduced at the trial, 
without in any manner being prejudiced thereby. 
47. In Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan [Kalyan 
Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan, (2004): 
2004 SCC (Cri) 1977] this Court observed: (SCC pp. 537-
38, para 18) 
‘18. We agree that a conclusive finding in regard to 
the points urged by both the sides is not expected of 
the court considering a bail application. Still one 
should not forget, as observed by this Court 
in Puran v. Rambilas [Puran v. Rambilas, (2001) 6: 2001 SCC (Cri) 1124]: (SCC p. 344, para 
8) 
“8. … Giving reasons is different from 
discussing merits or demerits. At the stage of 
granting bail a detailed examination of evidence 
and elaborate documentation of the merits of 
the case has not to be undertaken. … That did 
not mean that whilst granting bail some reasons 
for prima facie concluding why bail was being 
granted did not have to be indicated.” 
We respectfully agree with the above dictum of this Court. 
We also feel that such expression of prima facie reasons for 
granting bail is a requirement of law in cases where such 
orders on bail application are appealable, more so because 
of the fact that the appellate court has every right to know 
the basis for granting the bail. Therefore, we are not in 
agreement with the argument addressed by the learned 
counsel for the accused that the High Court was not 
expected even to indicate a prima facie finding on all points 
urged before it while granting bail, more so in the 
background of the facts of this case where on facts it is 
established that a large number of witnesses who were 
examined after the respondent was enlarged on bail had 
turned hostile and there are complaints made to the court as 
to the threats administered by the respondent or his 
supporters to witnesses in the case. In such circumstances, 
the court was duty-bound to apply its mind to the 
allegations put forth by the investigating agency and ought 
to have given at least a prima facie finding in regard to these 
allegations because they go to the very root of the right of 
the accused to seek bail. The non-consideration of these 
vital facts as to the allegations of threat or inducement made 
to the witnesses by the respondent during the period he was 
on bail has vitiated the conclusions arrived at by the High 
Court while granting bail to the respondent. The other 
ground apart from the ground of incarceration which 
appealed to the High Court to grant bail was the fact that a 
large number of witnesses are yet to be examined and there 
is no likelihood of the trial coming to an end in the near 
future. As stated hereinabove, this ground on the facts of 
this case is also not sufficient either individually or coupled 
with the period of incarceration to release the respondent on 

bail because of the serious allegations of tampering with the 
witnesses made against the respondent.’ 
48. 
In Jayendra 
Saraswathi 
Swamigal v. State 
of 
T.N. [Jayendra Saraswathi Swamigal v. State of T.N., 
(2005): 2005 SCC (Cri) 481] this Court observed: (SCC pp. 21-22, para 16) 
‘16. … The considerations which normally weigh 
with the court in granting bail in non-bailable 
offences have been explained by this Court 
in State v. Jagjit Singh [State v. Jagjit Singh, (1962): AIR 1962 SC 253: (1962) 1 Cri LJ 215] 
and Gurcharan 
Singh v. State 
(UT 
of 
Delhi) [Gurcharan Singh v. State (UT of Delhi), 
(1978): 1978 SCC (Cri) 41] and basically 
they are — the nature and seriousness of the offence; 
the character of the evidence; circumstances which 
are peculiar to the accused; a reasonable possibility of 
the presence of the accused not being secured at the 
trial; reasonable apprehension of witnesses being 
tampered with; the larger interest of the public or the 
State and other similar factors which may be relevant 
in the facts and circumstances of the case.’” 
 
24. A priori, the exercise to be undertaken by the Court at this 
stage—of giving reasons for grant or non-grant of bail—is 
markedly different from discussing merits or demerits of the 
evidence. The elaborate examination or dissection of the evidence 
is not required to be done at this stage. The Court is merely 
expected to record a finding on the basis of broad probabilities 
regarding the involvement of the accused in the commission of 
the stated offence or otherwise.” 

13. 
In the teeth of the afore stated position of law when we turn our 
attention to the facts on hand it would not detain us for too long to accept the 

plea of the respondent or in other words reject the contention of the appellant 
for reasons more than one, firstly, the grounds on which the respondent has 
been ordered to be enlarged on bail by the High Court came to be passed way 
back on 30.01.2023 whereunder conditions as stipulated therein has been 
imposed. It is not the case of the prosecution that any of the condition so 
stipulated has been violated or there has been infraction of any of the condition 
so imposed. In the absence of their being a strong prima facie case on the 
conditions of the bail having been violated, it would not be appropriate for the 
said order being reversed or set aside after a lapse of fifteen (15) months. It 
would be apposite to take note of the principles enunciated by this Court in this 
regard and we desist from reiterating laid position of law and it would suffice 
to note the principles enunciated in this regard. 
 
In the case of Himanshu Sharma v. State of Madhya Pradesh, this court has held that considerations for grant of bail 
and cancellation of bails are different and if conditions of bail is flouted or the 
accused had misused the liberty granted or bail was granted in ignorance of 
statutory provisions or bail was obtained by playing fraud then bail granted to 
the accused can be cancelled. 

14. 
During the course of the arguments as already noticed herein above Shri 
K.M Nataraj, Additional Solicitor General of India, has vehemently contended 
that order granting the bail has to be set-aside, essentially on the ground that 
the respondent is involved in three (3) other cases namely: 
“a) Crime No. 99/14 dated 19.09.2014, registered for offences 
under sections 364, 302, 201 & 34 of IPC. (State Police). b) Crime No. 108/15 dated 15.06.2015, registered under sections 
302, 120B and 34 of IPC, Sec. 27 of Arms Act 1959. (State 
Police) 
 
c) Respondent (accused) is also accused in a case being 
investigated by NIA i.e. RC-38/2020/NIA/DLI dated 03.11.2020 
 Chandwa PS, District Latehar (JH) case number 
04/2020 dated 05.01.2020” 

15. 
As rightly contended by Shri Siddharth Luthra, learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for respondent, in the first case afore-mentioned the respondent has 
been acquitted by judgment dated 07.09.2015 (Annexure R-11). In so far as the 
cases at Serial No.2 and 3 (supra), the respondent has been enlarged on bail 
vide orders dated 10.07.2020 (Annexure R-12) and order dated 10.07.2020. In 
yet another case registered by Chandwa PS Case No.225 of 2023 the respondent 
has been enlarged on anticipatory bail in ABP No.426 of 2023. 
 
16. 
The afore-stated facts when seen cumulatively, it would reflect that 
respondent having been enlarged on bail conditionally and the conditions so 
stipulated having not been violated and undisputedly the appellant-state having 

not sought for cancellation of the bail till date would be the prime reason for us 
not to entertain this appeal. In fact, the apprehension of the Union of India that 
respondent is likely to pose threat to the witnesses and there was a threat posed 
to the complainant, Mr. Sanjay Kumar Tiwari, would not be a ground to set 
aside the impugned order enlarging the respondent on bail in as much in the 
case referred against the respondent for the said offence he has been granted 
bail. That apart we are of the considered view that there are no other 
overwhelming material on record to set aside the order granting bail which out 
weighs the liberty granted by the High Court under the impugned order. 

17. 
Hence, we are of the considered view that interference is not warranted. 
However, to allay the apprehension of the prosecution it would suffice to 
observe that the prosecution would be at liberty to seek for cancellation of the 
bail in the event any of the conditions being violated by the respondent and in 
the event of such an application being filed we see no reason as to why said 
application would not be considered on its own merits by the jurisdictional 
court independently and without being influenced by its earlier observations. 
We also make it expressly clear that the observations made under the impugned 
order would be restricted to the consideration of the prayer for bail and the 
jurisdictional court without being influenced by any of the observation shall 

proceed to adjudicate the case on merits after trial. Subject to the above 
observations, the appeal stands dismissed. 

……...………………….J. 
 (Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha) 
 
……...………………….J. 
 (Aravind Kumar) 
New Delhi, 
May 10, 2024