CA 6351/2024

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

( SLP (C) No 10492 of 2023)
Dharnidhar Mishra (D) and Another
 
Appellants

VERSUS

State of Bihar and Others
Respondents
ORDER

Application for substitution to bring on record the legal heirs of the first
petitioner is allowed. Cause title be amended accordingly.

Leave granted.

This appeal arises from a order passed by the High Court of Judicature at
Patna dated 7 February 2023 in the Letters Patent Appeal No 997 of 2019 in
Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No 8408 of 2019 by which the Division Bench of
the High Court disposed of the Letters Patent Appeal by asking the appellant
herein to file an appropriate application before the concerned authority for
disbursement of the value of the land assessed at Rs 4,68,099.

CA 6351/2024

The facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarized as under:
In the year 1976, a notification under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act
was issued for the purpose of construction of State Highway as notified by
the State of Bihar. The land owned by the appellant herein was included in
Section 4 notification referred to above. Sometime in 1977, the land of the
appellant was acquired. However, it is the case of the appellant that not a
single penny was paid to him towards compensation.

The appellant preferred an appropriate application addressed to the State
Government immediately after his land came to be acquired and possession
was taken over in the year 1977 for payment of compensation. It is the case
of the appellant that State did not even pass any award of compensation and
kept the matter in limbo.

Years passed by and the appellant kept on requesting the authorities to pass
an appropriate award and pay the amount towards compensation.

As the respondents did not pay heed to the say of the appellant, he was left
with no other option but to file a writ petition in the High Court of Patna. The
writ petition was heard by a learned Single Judge and by order dated 19 July
2019 rejected the same only on the count that the petition had been filed
after a period of forty-two years of the acquisition. While dismissing the writ
petition, the learned Single Judge also observed that the appellant had failed
to submit any paper or notification in connection with acquisition of his land

CA 6351/2024
for the purpose of payment of compensation.

Being dissatisfied with the order passed by the learned Single Judge rejecting
his writ petition, the appellant went in appeal. The appeal came to be
disposed of by a Division Bench in the following terms:
“A hard copy of the supplementary affidavit on behalf of the
State has been filed across the Board.
Let it be taken on record.
In view of the categorical stand of the State that the land of the
appellants had been consumed and that the State is ready to
compensate the appellants, nothing remains in this appeal to
be decided.
The appellants have been informed about the value of the land
has been assessed at Rs 4,68,099/-.
All that the appellants have to do is to file an application before
the concerned authority as to how the amount shall be
apportioned between him and his son.
It is expected that the decision in that regard by the State
Authority shall be taken without any delay as already the
matter has become five decades old.
The appeal stands disposed of." 

Mr. Dharnidhar Jha, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant
submitted that the State conceded to the fact that the land of the appellant
had been acquired and was put to use for the purpose the same was
acquired. He would submit that if the State thought fit to acquire the land of
his client, then it was obligatory on the part of the State to pass an
appropriate award determining the amount towards compensation. He would

CA 6351/2024
submit that it is not the case that the appellant herein was lethargic in
asserting his rights, but rather kept on requesting the authorities concerned
to determine the amount towards compensation and pay the same.

On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the State of Bihar
submitted that no error, not to speak of any error of law could be said to
have been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned order. He
would submit that it is not in dispute that the land of the appellant was
acquired for a public purpose, but at the same time, it was the duty of the
appellant to pursue the matter further for the purpose of getting appropriate
compensation determined in accordance with law.

Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone
through the materials on record, the only question that falls for our
consideration is whether the High Court committed any error in passing the
impugned order.

We take notice of the fact that the Single Judge of the High Court thought fit
to reject the writ petition only on the ground of delay and in appeal, the
appellate court disposed of the appeal asking the appellant herein to file an
application before the concerned authority for disbursement of the amount of
compensation.

We take notice of two things: First, the High Court in its impugned order has
stated that the appellant herein has been informed about the value of the

CA 6351/2024
land assessed at Rs 4,68,099. We fail to understand on what basis this figure
has been arrived at; at what point of time this amount came to be assessed;
and the basis for the assessment of such amount. Secondly, the order of the
High Court could be said to be a non-speaking order. Although at this stage,
the learned counsel appearing for the State of Bihar submitted that it was an
order obtained with the consent of the parties, yet there is nothing to
indicate that any consent was given by the appellant herein to pass such an
order.

The first thing that the High Court should have enquired with the State is as
to why in the year 1977 itself, that is the year in which the land came to be
acquired, the award for compensation was not passed. The High Court
should have enquired why it took forty-two years for the State to determine
the figure of Rs 4,68,099. The High Court should also have asked the State
the basis of the determination of the amount towards compensation. It is a
well settled position of law that after the award towards compensation is
passed, if the owner of the land is not satisfied with the quantum, he can
even file an appeal for the enhancement of the same. The High Court
proceeded on the footing that the amount of Rs 4,68,099 has been assessed
and it is now for the appellant to file an appropriate application and get the
amount disbursed in his favour.

We are not convinced but rather disappointed with the approach of the High
Court while disposing of the appeal.

CA 6351/2024

There are many issues arising in this litigation and the High Court should
have taken little pains to ask the State why it made the appellant run from
pillar to post. It is sad to note that the appellant passed away fighting for his
right to receive compensation. Now the legal heirs of the appellant are
pursuing this litigation.

In 1976, when the land of the appellant came to be acquired the right to
property was a fundamental right guaranteed by Article 31 in Part III of the
Constitution. Article 31 guaranteed the right to private property, which could
not be deprived without due process of law and upon just and fair
compensation.

The right to property ceased to be a fundamental right by the Constitution
(Forty-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, however, it continued to be a human
right in a welfare State, and a constitutional right under Article 300-A of the
Constitution. Article 300-A provides that no person shall be deprived of his
property save by authority of law. The State cannot dispossess a citizen of
his property except in accordance with the procedure established by law. The
obligation to pay compensation, though not expressly included in Article 300-
A, can be inferred in that Article. [See: K.T. Plantation (P) Ltd. v. State of
Karnataka, (2011) ]

In Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd. v. Darius Shapur Chenai reported in
(2005), this Court held that: 

CA 6351/2024
“6. … Having regard to the provisions contained in Article 300-
A of the Constitution, the State in exercise of its power of
“eminent domain” may interfere with the right of property of a
person by acquiring the same but the same must be for a
public purpose and reasonable compensation therefor must be
paid.”
 (Emphasis supplied)

In N. Padmamma v. S. Ramakrishna Reddy reported in (2008),
this Court held that:
“21.If the right of property is a human right as also a
constitutional right, the same cannot be taken away except in
accordance with law. Article 300-A of the Constitution protects
such right. The provisions of the Act seeking to divest such
right, keeping in view of the provisions of Article 300-A of the
Constitution of India, must be strictly construed.”

 (Emphasis supplied)

In Delhi Airtech Services (P) Ltd. v. State of U.P. reported in (2011), this Court recognised the right to property as a basic human right in the
following words: 
“30. It is accepted in every jurisprudence and by different
political thinkers that some amount of property right is an
indispensable safeguard against tyranny and economic
oppression of the Government. Jefferson was of the view that
liberty cannot long subsist without the support of property.
“Property must be secured, else liberty cannot subsist” was the
opinion of John Adams. Indeed the view that property itself is
the seed-bed which must be conserved if other constitutional
values are to flourish, is the consensus among political thinkers
and jurists.”
 (Emphasis supplied)

In Jilubhai Nanbhai Khachar v. State of Gujarat reported in 1995 Supp (1) SCC
596, this Court held as follows: 

CA 6351/2024
“48. … In other words, Article 300-A only limits the powers of
the State that no person shall be deprived of his property save
by authority of law. There has to be no deprivation without any
sanction of law. Deprivation by any other mode is not
acquisition or taking possession under Article 300-A. In other
words, if there is no law, there is no deprivation.”
 (Emphasis supplied)

In Tukaram Kana Joshi v. MIDC reported in (2013), this Court held
that the State must comply with the procedure for acquisition, requisition, or
any other permissible statutory mode. The State being a welfare State
governed by the rule of law cannot arrogate to itself a status beyond what is
provided by the Constitution.

This Court in State of Haryana v. Mukesh Kumar reported in (2011) held that the right to property is now considered to be not only a
constitutional or statutory right, but also a human right. Human rights have
been considered in the realm of individual rights such as right to shelter,
livelihood, health, employment, etc. Human rights have gained a multi-
faceted dimension.

We regret to state that the learned Single Judge of the High Court did not
deem fit even to enquire with the State whether just and fair compensation
was paid to the appellant or not. The learned Single Judge rejected the writ
petition only on the ground of delay. As held by this court in Vidya Devi v.
The State of Himachal Pradesh & Ors. reported in (2020), delay
and laches cannot be raised in a case of a continuing cause of action or if the
circumstances shock the judicial conscience of the court. The condition of

CA 6351/2024
delay is a matter of judicial discretion, which must be exercised judiciously
and reasonably in the facts and circumstances of the case. As held by this
Court, it would depend upon the breach of fundamental rights, and the
remedy claimed, and when and how the delay arose. There is no period of
limitation prescribed for the courts to exercise their constitutional jurisdiction
to do substantial justice.

 In a case where the demand for justice is so compelling, a constitutional
court would exercise its jurisdiction with a view to promote justice, and not
defeat it. [See: P.S. Sadasivaswamy v. State of T.N., (1975) ]

In Tukaram Kana Joshi v. MIDC reported in (2013), this Court while
dealing with a similar fact situation, held as follows: 
“11. There are authorities which state that delay and laches
extinguish the right to put forth a claim. Most of these
authorities pertain to service jurisprudence, grant of
compensation for a wrong done to them decades ago, recovery
of statutory dues, claim for educational facilities and other
categories of similar cases, etc. Though, it is true that there are
a few authorities that lay down that delay and laches debar a
citizen from seeking remedy, even if his fundamental right has
been violated, under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution, the
case at hand deals with a different scenario altogether. The
functionaries of the State took over possession of the land
belonging to the appellants without any sanction of law. The
appellants had asked repeatedly for grant of the benefit of
compensation. The State must either comply with the
procedure laid down for acquisition, or requisition, or any other
permissible statutory mode.”
 (Emphasis supplied)

CA 6351/2024

In such circumstances referred to above, we are of the view that we should
set aside the impugned order passed by the High Court and remit the matter
for fresh consideration.

In the result, this appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed. The impugned
order passed by the High Court is set aside and the matter is remitted to the
High Court for fresh consideration. Letters Patent Appeal No 997 of 2019 is
restored to its original file. The High Court shall hear both the sides and pass
an appropriate order in accordance with what has been observed by this
Court in this order. We request the High Court to decide the matter within a
period of two months from today.

Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of...…...…...……………….…
 
[J B Pardiwala]..…...…...……………….…
 
[Manoj Misra]
 
New Delhi;
May 13, 2024
CKB

CA 6351/2024
ITEM NO.61 COURT NO.17 SECTION XVI
 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A
 RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

DHARNIDHAR MISHRA (D) & ANR. Appellant(s)Civil Appeal No 6351 of 2024

VERSUS

THE STATE OF BIHAR & ORS. Respondent(s)
(With IA No.88293/2024 - APPLICATION FOR SUBSTITUTION and IA
No.102966/2023 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)
 
Date: 13-05-2024 These matters were called on for hearing today.
CORAM: 
 
Justice J.B. PARDIWALA
 
Justice MANOJ MISRA
For Appellant(s)
Mr. Dharnidhar Jha, Sr. Adv.
 Mr. Jayesh Gaurav, Adv.
 Ms. Diksha Ojha, Adv.
 Mr. Ishwar Chandra Roy, Adv.
 Mr. Ranjan Nikhil Dharnidhar, AOR 
 
For Respondent(s)
Mr. Anshul Narayan, Adv.

Mr. Prem Prakash, AOR 
 
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
 ORDER

Application for substitution to bring on record the legal heirs of the first
petitioner is allowed. Cause title be amended accordingly.

CA 6351/2024

Leave granted.

The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order.

Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
(CHETAN KUMAR)
 
(RAM SUBHAG SINGH)
 A.R.-cum-P.S.
 Court Master
 (Signed Order is placed on the file)