IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
I.A. No.71387 of 2023 
in 
 
S. RAJASEEKARAN 
 … Petitioner 
vs. 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS. 
 … Respondents 
 
Kishan Chand Jain 

 … Applicant 

ORDER 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
1) 
We have heard the learned counsel on the question of 
issuing interim directions for the effective implementation of the 
provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for short, ‘the MV 
Act’) relating to the grant of compensation in case of hit and run 
motor accidents. 
2) 
Section 161 of the MV Act, as applicable from 1st April 
2022, reads thus: 
“161. Special provisions as to compensation 
in case of hit and run motor accident.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force or any instrument 
having the force of law, the Central Government 
shall provide for paying in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the Scheme made 

under sub-section (3), compensation in respect of 
the death of, or grievous hurt to, persons 
resulting from hit and run motor accidents. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
Scheme made under sub-section (3), there shall 
be paid as compensation,— 
(a) in respect of the death of any person 
resulting from a hit and run motor accident, a 
fixed sum of two lakh rupees or such higher 
amount as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government; 
(b) in respect of grievous hurt to any person 
resulting from a hit and run motor accident, a 
fixed sum of fifty thousand rupees or such higher 
amount as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, make a Scheme specifying 
the manner in which the Scheme shall be 
administered by the Central Government or 
General Insurance Council, the form, manner 
and the time within which applications for 
compensation may be made, the officers or 
authorities to whom such applications may be 
made, the procedure to be followed by such 
officers or authorities for considering and passing 
orders on such applications, and all other 
matters connected with, or incidental to, the 
administration of the Scheme and the payment of 
compensation under this section. 
(4) A Scheme made under sub-section (3) may 
provide that,— 
(a) a payment of such sum as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government as interim 
relief to any claimant under such Scheme; 

(b) a contravention of any provision thereof 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which 
may extend to two years, or with fine which shall 
not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but 
may extend to five lakh rupees or with both; 
(c) the powers, functions or duties conferred or 
imposed on any officer or authority by such 
Scheme may be delegated with the prior approval 
in writing of Central Government, by such officer 
or authority to any other officer or authority.” 
3) 
In terms of sub-Section (3) of Section 161, the 
Compensation of Victims of Hit and Run Motor Accidents 
Scheme, 2022 (for short, ‘the Scheme’) has been brought into 
force with effect from 1st April 2022. It superseded the Solatium 
Scheme, 1989 (the Solatium Scheme) framed under unamended 
sub-Section (1) of Section 163 of the MV Act. The broad 
framework of the Scheme can be summarised as follows; 
a) The Scheme provides for the setting up of the Standing 
Committee 
and District 
Level 
Committees. The 
Standing Committee is at the central level. The primary 
duty of the Standing Committee is to periodically review 
the working of the Scheme, including consideration of 
the report of the General Insurance Council. The 
Standing Committee has the power to direct corrective 
steps to be taken. Another important function assigned 
to 
the 
Standing 
Committee 
is 
to 
make 
recommendations to the Central Government for the 
amendment of the Scheme for its better and more 
effective implementation; 

b) The District Level Committees are under a mandate to 
evaluate the progress of the Scheme's implementation 
in the concerned district and take corrective measures. 
Each District Level Committee is under an obligation to 
submit a report to the Standing Committee every 
quarter. The report must include monthly statistics 
about the claim applications received and how the 
same are dealt with. Another essential function of the 
District Level Committee is to ensure that the Scheme 
gets adequate publicity and the claimants are made 
aware of their rights under the Scheme; 
c) Clause 19 provides the procedure for applying for 
compensation under the Scheme. The applications are 
firstly considered by the Claims Enquiry Officer, 
defined in sub-clause (e) of clause 2 of the Scheme. 
Upon receipt of the applications, the Claims Enquiry 
Officer must obtain a copy of the First Accident Report 
(FAR) and post-mortem report (in case of a fatal 
accident) from the concerned authorities. It is the duty 
of the Claim Enquiry Officer to decide who the rightful 
claimants are to claim the compensation; 
d) After receiving a report from the Claims Enquiry 
Officer, 
the 
Claims 
Settlement 
Commissioner 
appointed in terms of sub-clause (f) of clause 2 of the 
Scheme is empowered to sanction the claim as provided 
in clause. It is the ultimate responsibility of the General 
Insurance Council to make an e-payment of the 

compensation amount within 15 days from the date of 
receipt of the sanction order and 
e) Under Clause 24 of the Scheme, the General Insurance 
Council is under an obligation to prepare an annual 
report on the working of the Scheme and submit the 
same to the Standing Committee. The General 
Insurance Council is constituted under Section 64(C) 
of the Insurance Act, 1938. 
4) 
Grave concerns have been raised across the bar about the 
implementation of the Scheme. Our attention was invited to 
year-wise reports titled “Road Accidents in India”, published by 
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways of the Government 
of India annually. The figures of hit and run accidents are as 
under: 

55,942 65,186 69,822 69,621 52,448 57,415 67,387 
It is evident from records published by the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways of the Government of India from 2016-
2022 that there were 55,942 hit and run motor accidents in 
2016, which increased to 65,186 in 2017, 69,621 in 2018, and 
69,621 in 2019. During COVID 19 period, the number of 
accidents decreased. 
5) 
As regards the implementation of the Scheme, our 
attention was invited to two important documents. The first is 
the annual report of the General Insurance Council for the 

financial year 2022-23. It records that only 205 claims were 
received under the Scheme during the said financial year, out of 
which 95 claims have been settled. The second document is the 
answer that the Hon’ble Minister of Road Transport and 
Highways gave to a starred question on 16th March 2023 in Lok 
Sabha. Whether there were any provisions or schemes for 
Compensation to victims of hit and run motor accidents and if 
so; the number of cases registered to seek such compensation 
and the amount disbursed under such scheme. The answer 
records that in the last five years, there were 660 deaths in hit 
and run cases, and there were 113 injury cases for which 
compensation of 184.60 Lakhs was disbursed. If we compare the 
number of hit and run road accidents reported and the number 
of cases registered for seeking compensation, what stares at the 
face is that negligible number of victims have taken advantage 
of the said scheme. One reason may be that the victims were not 
made aware of the existence of the Scheme. This aspect ought 
to have been considered by the Standing Committee. However, 
that has not been done. The Standing Committee must look into 
the causes of non-implementation of the Scheme and direct 
corrective measures to be taken to ensure that every claimant 
who is entitled to the benefit of the Scheme is encouraged to take 
benefit thereof. If the Scheme cannot be effectively implemented 
without making amendments, the Standing Committee must 
recommend amendments to the Scheme. The minutes of the 
meeting of the Standing Committee held on 16th August 2023 
have been placed on record. The minutes record a decision taken 
to issue a direction to the General Insurance Council to submit 

an annual report on the working of the Scheme till the end of 
August 2023. A decision was made to take the initiatives for 
public awareness and sensitisation about the Scheme across the 
states and districts. We are not sure whether the General 
Insurance Council has submitted a report on the working of the 
Scheme by 31st August 2023 as directed and whether the 
Standing Committee has made any decision based on the same. 
6) 
We have perused the suggestions of Shri Gaurav Agrawal, 
the learned Amicus Curiae, and the suggestions submitted by 
Shri EC Agrawala, the learned counsel. When a motor accident 
occurs, the injured or the legal representatives of the deceased 
may not be aware of whether it is a hit and run accident. After 
a motor accident, a report is registered by the officer in charge 
of the jurisdictional Police Station. Clause (d) of Section 145 of 
the MV Act defines a hit and run accident. An accident involving 
a motor vehicle can be considered as a hit and run accident, 
provided the identity of the vehicle that caused the accident 
cannot be ascertained despite reasonable efforts. Obviously, 
reasonable efforts must be made by the Police Station which 
registers the accident. If the Police conclude that it is a case of 
hit and run accident, the Police must inform the victim or the 
legal representatives of the victim, as the case may be, about the 
availability of the Scheme. There are cases where the Police, as 
well as the Claims Enquiry Officer, are aware of the fact that a 
hit and run accident has occurred. However, no efforts are made 
to ensure that the persons entitled to seek compensation file 
their claims. An appropriate direction will have to be issued, 

which will ensure that the victims or the legal representatives of 
the victims, as the case may be, who are entitled to seek 
compensation under the Scheme, are informed about the 
availability of the Scheme and that they are assisted in filing the 
claims. 
7) 
Certain submissions were made on the implementation of 
the Solatium Scheme framed under sub-section (1) of Section 
163 of the MV Act (as it existed before 1st April 2022). We may 
note here that Section 163 of the MV Act, as it existed till 1st 
April 2022, dealt with the Scheme for payment of compensation 
in case of hit and run motor accidents. Sub-clause (2) of clause 
20 of the Solatium Scheme provided a period of limitation of 6 
months for filing claims from the date of the accident, which was 
extendable up to 12 months. Under the Scheme framed in 2022, 
no specific limitation period is prescribed for submitting a claim. 
A submission is made that the period of limitation provided 
under the Solatium Scheme should be done away with, and 
those who are entitled to compensation under the Solatium 
Scheme should be permitted to apply. We propose to issue a 
direction to the Central Government to consider whether a 
modification can be made so that those who were entitled to 
apply under the Solatium Scheme can apply within the time 
extended as a one-time measure. This submission made across 
the bar merits consideration. The reason is that many victims 
may not be aware of their right to apply under the Solatium 
Scheme. 

8) 
In view of the above discussion, we issue the following 
directions:- 
a) We direct the Standing Committee to consider the 
annual 
report 
submitted 
by 
the 
General 
Insurance Council as provided in paragraph 5 of 
the minutes of the meeting dated 16th August 
2023 and to make recommendations to the 
Central 
Government, if necessary, 
for the 
amendment of the Scheme; 
b) The 
Standing 
Committee 
may 
also 
issue 
directions for the effective implementation of the 
Scheme. The Standing Committee shall address 
the major concern that notwithstanding the 
availability of the Scheme, very few eligible 
claimants are taking benefit of the Scheme; 
c) The Standing Committee shall issue elaborate 
directions for developing public awareness and for 
sensitisation of the members of the public about 
the Scheme and 
d) We grant the time of four months to the Standing 
Committee 
to 
report 
compliance 
with 
the 
directions mentioned above to this Court. 
9) 
We issue the following directions, which will operate till 
further orders, which can be modified after looking at the 
compliance made by the Standing Committee:- 

a) If the particulars of the vehicle involved in the 
accident are not available at the time of 
registration of the report regarding the accident 
by the jurisdictional Police Station and if, after 
making reasonable efforts, the particulars of the 
vehicle involved in the accident could not be 
ascertained by the Police within a period of one 
month from the date of registration of accident 
report, the officer-in-charge of the Police Station 
shall inform in writing to the injured or the legal 
representatives of the deceased, as the case may 
be, that compensation can be claimed under the 
Scheme. The contact details such as e-mail ID 
and office address of the jurisdictional Claims 
Enquiry Officer shall be provided by the Police to 
the injured or the legal representatives of the 
deceased, as the case may be; 
b) The officer in charge of the Police Station, within 
one month from the date of the accident, shall 
forward the FAR to the Claims Enquiry Officer as 
provided in sub-clause (1) of clause 21 of the 
Scheme. While forwarding a copy of the said 
report, the names of the victims in case of injury 
and the names of the legal representatives of the 
deceased victim (if available with the Police 
Station) 
shall 
also 
be 
forwarded 
to 
the 
jurisdictional Claims Enquiry Officer, who shall 

cause the same to be entered in a separate 
register. After receipt of the FAR and other 
particulars as aforesaid by the Claims Enquiry 
Officer, if the claim application is not received 
within one month, the information shall be 
provided by the Claims Enquiry Officer to the 
concerned District Legal Service Authority with a 
request to the said authority to contact the 
claimants and assist them in filing the claim 
applications; 
c) A Monitoring Committee shall be constituted at 
every district level consisting of the Secretary of 
the District Legal Service Authority, the Claims 
Enquiry Officer of the district or, if there is more 
than one, the Claim Enquiry Officer nominated by 
the State Government, and a police officer not 
below the level of Deputy Superintendent of Police 
as 
may 
be 
nominated 
by 
the 
District 
Superintendent of Police. The Secretary of the 
District Legal Services Authority shall be the 
Convener of the Monitoring Committee. The 
Committee shall meet at least once in every two 
months to monitor the implementation of the 
Scheme in the district and the compliance with 
the aforesaid directions; 
d) The Claims Enquiry Officer shall ensure that a 
report containing his recommendation and other 

documents are forwarded to the Claim Settlement 
Commissioner within one month from receipt of 
the claim application duly filled in; 
e) The Registry of this Court shall forward a copy of 
this order to the Member Secretaries of the Legal 
Services Authorities of each State and Union 
Territories. The Member Secretaries shall, in 
turn, forward the copies of this order to the 
Secretaries of each District Legal Services 
Authorities within its jurisdiction. After receipt of 
the copies of this order, the Secretaries of the 
District Legal Services Authorities shall take 
steps to form the Monitoring Committees for their 
respective districts and 
f) The Secretaries of the District Legal Services 
Authorities shall submit quarterly reports on the 
functioning of the Monitoring Committees to the 
Member Secretaries of the respective Legal 
Services Authorities of the State or the Union 
Territories, as the case may be. The Member 
Secretaries shall collate the reports submitted by 
all districts and forward a comprehensive report 
to the Registry of this Court. 
10) 
Sub-section (2) of Section 161 of MV Act provides that in 
case of death of any person resulting from hit and run motor 
accident, a compensation of Rs. 2 lakhs or such higher amount 

as may be prescribed by the Central Government shall be paid. 
In case of grievous injury, the compensation amount is Rs. 50 
thousand. The value of money diminishes with time. We direct 
the Central Government to consider whether the compensation 
amounts can be gradually enhanced annually. The Central 
Government shall take an appropriate decision on this issue 
within eight weeks from today. 
11) 
We direct the Central Government to consider whether the 
time limit prescribed in sub-clause (2) of clause 20 of the 
Solatium Scheme can be extended and permission be granted to 
the eligible claimants to apply within the extended time as a one-
time measure. Even on this aspect, we expect the Central 
Government to decide within eight weeks from today. 
12) 
The copies of the compliance reports by various authorities 
reporting compliance with the directions mentioned above shall 
be provided by the concerned authorities to the learned Amicus 
Curiae and the learned counsel representing the parties. List 
on 22nd April 2024 for considering the compliance..……………………..J. 
 (Abhay S. Oka).……………………..J. 
 (Pankaj Mithal) 
New Delhi; 
January 12, 2024.