IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 2531-2532 OF 2024 
((Crl.) NOS.10504-10505 OF 2023) 

SHENTO VARGHESE 

 …APPELLANT 
VERSUS 
JULFIKAR HUSEN & ORS....RESPONDENTS 
 
JUDGEMENT 
Aravind Kumar J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
 
2. 
These appeals have been preferred at the instance of the first 
informant in Crime No.318 of 2022. By the impugned order dated 
09.08.2023, passed in Crl. O.P. Nos.14029 & 14031 of 2023 and Crl. M.P. 
Nos.8658 of 2023, the High Court of Madras has allowed the claim of the 
Respondents-accused for de-freezing of their bank accounts. The High 
Court has ordered for de-freezing on the specific ground that there was delay 
on part of the police in reporting the seizure to the jurisdictional Magistrate. 

The facts in the instant case, which we shall advert to later below, have given 
rise to following question of law: 
 
What is the implication of non-reporting of the seizure 
forthwith to the jurisdictional Magistrate as provided 
under Section 102(3) Cr.P.C.? more specifically; 
Does delayed reporting of the seizure to the Magistrate 
vitiate the seizure order altogether? 
That is the question which needs to be answered in these appeals. 
 
3. 
Our research indicates that there is no authoritative pronouncement 
of this Court on this issue. If we turn to the pronouncements of the High 
Courts, there are decisions1 which have directly confronted this question. 
Having reviewed these decisions, we find that, broadly, there are two 
prevailing strands of thought: one set of cases holding that delayed reporting 
to the Magistrate would, ipso facto, vitiate the seizure order; and the other 
view being that delayed reporting would constitute a mere irregularity and 
would not vitiate the seizure order. 
 
4. 
The former view has been justified on the grounds that: 

the obligation [u/S 102(3) Cr.P.C.] to report the seizure 
forthwith to the Magistrate is mandatory and non-negotiable, 
breach of which would qualify as an illegality in following 
the prescribed statutory procedure2; 

the employment of the word ‘shall’ in Section 102(3) makes 
it clear that non-compliance of the mandatory requirement to 
report forthwith to the Magistrate goes to the root of the 
matter3; 
 
1 See Table at Annexure A for a compilation of the 36 decisions on this issue. 
2 Tmt. T.Subbulakshmi vs The Commissioner of Police 2013(4) MLJ (Crl) 41 
3 The Meridian Educational Society Vs. The State of Telangana, 2022 1 ALT(Cri) 229 

(c) the power to seize has been subjected to procedural 
 
requirements prescribed under Section 102(3) – and 
 
breach of complying with follow-up procedures would 
 
render the exercise of the main power to be without 
 
authority 
and 
jurisdiction 
– 
in 
that 
sense, 
the 
 
requirement to report is in the nature of a condition 
 
subsequent clause.4 

5. 
The latter view has been sustained on the reasoning that: 
a) 
The statutory provision provides no express consequence(s) 
for non-compliance and therefore, the procedural requirement is 
merely directory and not mandatory5; 
b) 
 The power to seize property connected with a crime is 
plenary and the obligation to intimate is a mere incidental exercise 
of power – breach of the latter cannot affect the former6; 
c) 
 the object of reporting is to facilitate disposal of property 
seized – prejudice caused by delayed reporting, if any, can always 
be demonstrated at the trial7; 
d) 
 Neither is there any obligation to seek prior leave before 
exercising the power to seize nor is there any statutorily provided 
consequence for non-compliance of the reporting obligation8; 
e) No prejudice would be caused to the owner of a property by 
non-reporting of seizure to the concerned Magistrate during the 
investigation phase. 
 
Therefore, it cannot be a case of illegality but such an omission 
may only be an irregularity.9 

4 Dr Shashikant D. Karnik Vs. State of Maharashtra, 2008 L.J. 148 
5 Ruqaya Akhter Vs Ut Through Crime Branch, CRM(M) No.223/2022, Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh 
High Court. 
6 Operation Mobilization India Vs. State of Telangana 
7 Bharath Overseas Bank Vs. Minu Publication [1988] MLJ (Crl.) 309 
8 Supra, 7 
9 Supra, 5 

6. 
 In light of conflicting precedents operating across various High 
Courts, we find it expedient and necessary to settle the conflict and bring in 
uniformity in adjudication. 
 
LEGISLATIVE HISTORY – A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS 
Criminal 
Procedure 
Codes 
Relevant Provision 

Section 523- Procedure by police upon seizure of property taken 
under Section 51 or stolen 
The seizure by any Police-officer of property taken under Section 51, or 
alleged or suspected to have been stolen, or found under circumstances 
which create suspicion of the commission of any offence, shall be 
forthwith reported to a magistrate, who shall make such order as he thinks 
fit respecting the delivery of such property to the person entitled to the 
possession thereof, or, if such person cannot be ascertained, respecting 
the custody and production of such property. 

Section 550- Powers to police to seize property suspected to be stolen: 
Any police-office may seize any property which may be alleged or 
suspected to have been stolen, or which may be found under 
circumstances which create suspicion of the commission of any offence. 
Such police-officer, if subordinate to the office in charge of a police 
station, shall forthwith report the seizure to that officer. 

102. Power of police officer to seize certain property.—(1) Any police 
officer may seize any property which may be alleged or suspected to have 
been stolen, or which may be found under circumstances which create 
suspicion of the commission of any offence. 
(2) Such police officer, if subordinate to the officer in charge of a police 
station, shall forthwith report the seizure to that officer 
(3) Every police officer acting under sub-section (1) shall forthwith report 
the seizure to the Magistrate having jurisdiction and where the property 
seized is such that it cannot be conveniently transported to the Court, [or 
where there is difficulty in securing proper accommodation for the 
custody of such property, or where the continued retention of the property 
in police custody may not be considered necessary for the purpose of 
investigation,] he may give custody thereof to any person on his executing 
a bond undertaking to produce the property before the Court as and when 
required and to give effect to the further orders of the Court as to the 
disposal of the same: 
 
10 Hereinafter referred to as “1882 Code”. 
11 Hereinafter referred to as “1898 Code”. 
12 Hereinafter referred to as “1973 Code”. 

[Provided that where the property seized under sub-section (1) is subject 
to speedy and natural decay and if the person entitled to the possession 
of such property is unknown or absent and the value of such property is 
less than five hundred rupees, it may forthwith be sold by auction under 
the orders of the Superintendent of Police and the provisions of Sections 
457 and 458 shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply to the net 
proceeds of such sale.] 

106. (1) Any police officer may seize any property which may be alleged 
or suspected to have been stolen, or which may be found under 
circumstances which create suspicion of the commission of any offence. 
(2) Such police officer, if subordinate to the officer in charge of a police 
station, shall forthwith report the seizure to that officer. 
(3) Every police officer acting under sub-section (1) shall forthwith report 
the seizure to the Magistrate having jurisdiction and where the property 
seized is such that it cannot be conveniently transported to the Court, or 
where there is difficulty in securing proper accommodation for the 
custody of such property, or where the continued retention of the property 
in police custody may not be considered necessary for the purpose of 
investigation, he may give custody thereof to any person on his executing 
a bond undertaking to produce the property before the Court as and when 
required and to give effect to the further orders of the Court as to the 
disposal of the same: Provided that where the property seized under sub-
section (1) is subject to speedy and natural decay and if the person 
entitled to the possession of such property is unknown or absent and the 
value of such property is less than five hundred rupees, it may forthwith 
be sold by auction under the orders of the Superintendent of Police and 
the provisions of Sections 505 and 506 shall, as nearly as may be 
practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale. 
 
7. 
The responsibility of the police officer to promptly inform the 
Magistrate about the seizure can be historically traced to the 1882 Code. 
Oddly enough, this provision was absent in the 1898 Code. In the 1898 
Code, however, it was provided that if the seizing officer was below the rank 
of an officer-in charge of a police station, then such officer was under a duty 
to give information to his superior regarding the seized property. It appears 
that the provision as it existed in the 1898 Code was retained as is in the 
 
13Hereinafter referred to as the “2023 Code”. 

1973 Code. Sub-section (3) to Section 102 was inserted by way of an 
amendment only in the year 1978. This amendment reintroduced the 
reporting obligations of police officer to the Magistrate, as it originally 
existed in the 1882 Code. It also empowered the seizing officer to give 
custody of the seized property to any person, on such person executing a 
bond undertaking to produce the property before the Court as and when 
required. There was no provision in the 1973 Code nor the 1898 Code till 
the insertion of sub-section (3) by an amendment in 1978, empowering the 
police to take a bond from a person undertaking to produce the property 
entrusted to him by the police later on before the Court. The law as it existed 
then was that the bond could be entered before the Court but not in favour 
of the police. While setting aside the order of forfeiture in regard to the bond 
in favour of the police, this Court in Anwar Ahmad v State of UP14, pointed 
out the lacuna in the 1973 Code and suggested the insertion of a suitable 
provision. That is why this sub-section (3) empowering the police to execute 
the bond under certain conditionalities came to be inserted by way of the 
1978 Amendment. For the sake of completeness, it may be observed that 
Section 102 Cr.P.C. in its present form has been retained as is in the 2023 
Code, which is scheduled to come into force on 1st July 2024 and replace the 
1973 Code. 

 SC 680 

8. 
The Notes on Clauses appended to the 1978 Bill had set out the 
following reasons for inserting sub section (3) to Section 102 Cr.P.C.: 
 
“Clause 10- Section 102 is being amended (1) to provide that the 
police officer shall forthwith report the seizure of any property 
under sub-section (1) to the Magistrate, as there is a lacuna in the 
Law and (2) to give effect to the observations of the Supreme Court 
made in Anwar Ahmad vs. the State of U.P. (AIR 1976 SC 680) that 
the police should be given the power to get a bond from the person 
to whom the property seized is entrusted, particularly in cases 
where a bulky property like elephant or car, is seized and the 
Magistrate is living at a great distance and it is difficult to produce 
the property seized before the Magistrate.” 

9. 
The reason cited for inserting the amendment was to overcome a 
‘lacuna’ in the law. What could have been the lacuna in the law that impelled 
the insertion of this amendment? 
 
10. 
In our view, the answer to this question can be derived by referring 
to the provisions in Chapter XXXIV of the 1973 Code which is titled as 
‘Disposal of Property’. Section 457 Cr.P.C. sets out the procedure to be 
followed by police upon seizure of the property. Sub section (1) begin with 
the words: ‘Whenever the seizure of property by any police officer is 
reported to a Magistrate under the provisions of this Code, and such 
property is not produced before a Criminal Court during an inquiry or 
trial…..”. Similarly, we may refer to Section 459 Cr.P.C. which empowers 
the Magistrate with the power to auction/sell seized property in certain 
situations. It begins with the words: ‘If the person entitled to the possession 

of such property is unknown or absent and the property is subject to speedy 
and natural decay, or if the Magistrate to whom its seizure is reported is of 
opinion that……”. 

11. 
Both, Section 457 Cr.P.C. and Section 459 Cr.P.C. contemplates the 
act of seizure by police to be reported to the Magistrate so that necessary 
steps could be taken for its custody and disposal. However, the provision 
[Section 102(1) Cr.P.C.] which conferred substantive power on the police to 
seize property linked to a crime, did not impose on such officers a 
consequent duty to report the seizures made to the Magistrate. Section 523 
in the 1882 Code had coupled the power to seize property linked to the crime 
and the duty to report forthwith the seizure to the Magistrate in the same 
provision. Since the relevant provisions in the 1898 Code and the 1973 Code 
provided only for the substantive power to seize and did not impose any duty 
on such seizing officer to report to the Magistrate, there arose a need for 
amendment. That appears to us to be the lacuna in the law which was sought 
to be overcome. In fact, there are several decisions which indicate that the 
purpose of reporting to the Magistrate is to ensure an order of the disposal 
of the seized property either on superdari, or otherwise, during the pendency 
of the case/investigations under Section 457 Cr.P.C. This further reinforces 
our view regarding the lacuna which was sought to be fixed. Therefore, the 

main object underlying the amendment appears to be a mere gap-filling 
exercise and an attempt to fix a basic omission in legislative drafting. 
 
12. 
It is in this background that we must consider whether ‘seizure 
orders’ can be set at naught for non-compliance with the procedural 
formality of reporting such seizure forthwith to the Magistrate. 
 
13. 
This requires us to consider whether validity of the seizure order is 
contingent on compliance with the reporting obligation? In our view, the 
validity of the power exercised under Section 102(1) Cr.P.C. is not 
dependent on the compliance with the duty prescribed on the police officer 
under Section 102(3) Cr.P.C. The validity of the exercise of power under 
Section 102(1) Cr.P.C. can be questioned either on jurisdictional grounds or 
on the merits of the matter. That is to say, the order of seizure can be 
challenged on the ground that the seizing officer lacked jurisdiction15 to act 
under Section 102(1) Cr.P.C. or that the seized item does not satisfy the 
definition of ‘property’16 or on the ground that the property which was seized 
could not have given rise to suspicion concerning the commission of a crime, 
in order for the authorities to justify the seizure.17 The pre-requisite for 
exercising powers under Section 102(1) is the existence of a direct link 
between the tainted property and the alleged offence. It is essential that the 
 
15 Nevada Properties (P) Ltd. Vs. State of Maharashtra & Anr. (2019) 
16 Ms Swaran Sabharwal Vs. Commissioner of Police, 1990 (68) Comp Cas 652 Delhi (DB) 
17 State of Maharashtra Vs. Tapas D. Neogy, 1999/INSC/417 

properties sought to be seized under Section 102(1) of the Cr.P.C. must have 
a direct or close link with the commission of offence in question.18 
 
14. 
 As stated hereinbefore, the obligation to report the seizure to the 
Magistrate is neither a jurisdictional pre-requisite for exercising the power 
to seize nor is the exercise of such power made subject to compliance with 
the reporting obligation. Contrast this with Section 105E Cr.P.C., 1973 
which provides for similar power of seizure and attachment of property. 
While Section 105E(1) confers the substantive power to make seizure under 
circumstances provided in that section, sub-section (2) of Section 105E 
declares that the order passed under Section 105E(1) ‘shall have no effect 
unless the said order is confirmed by an order of the said Court, within a 
period of thirty days of its being made’. In that sense, the order of seizure, 
for it to take effect and have legal force, is subjected to a further statutory 
requirement of the seizure order being confirmed by an order of Court. It is 
only upon passing of the confirmation order within the stipulated period 
does the order of seizure take effect. Until then, it remains an order in form 
but without having any legal force. 
 
15. 
We find that there are certain other provisions19 in the 1973 Code 
which place similar obligation(s) on the police officer to report their actions 
 
18 Supra, 17. 
19 See, Section 168 Cr.P.C. to the jurisdictional Magistrate. For example, Section 157 Cr.P.C. provides 
that ‘if, from information received or otherwise, an officer in charge of a 
police station has reason to suspect the commission of an offence……he 
shall forthwith send a report of the same to a Magistrate’. As in the case of 
Section 102(3) Cr.P.C., Section 157 Cr.P.C. does not provide for any 
consequence in the event there is failure to promptly comply with the 
reporting obligation. It would be helpful to understand how this Court has 
elucidated on the effect of such non-compliance in the context of Section 
157 Cr.P.C. since the provision is nearly pari materia with Section 102(3). 
 
16. 
It is now too well settled that delay in registration of FIR is no 
ground for quashing of the FIR itself.20 It follows as a corollary that if delay 
in registration of FIR is no ground to quash the FIR, then delay in forwarding 
such FIR to the Magistrate can also afford no ground for nullification of the 
FIR. In fact, this Court has gone to the extent of holding that unless serious 
prejudice is demonstrated to have been suffered as against the accused, mere 
delay in sending the FIR to the Magistrate by itself will not have any 
deteriorating effect on the case of the prosecution.21 If prejudice is 
demonstrated and the prosecution fails to explain the delay, then, at best, the 
effect of such delay would only be to render the date and time of lodging the 
 
20 Ravinder Kumar & Anr. Vs. State of Punjab, (2001) 
21 Supra, 20. 

FIR suspect and nothing more.22 Drawing from this analogy, the delay in 
reporting the seizure to the Magistrate may, subject to proof of prejudice, at 
best, dent the veracity of the prosecution case vis-à-vis the date, time and 
occasion for seizure of the property. Since the proof of prejudice on part of 
the accused and the explanation for delay on part of the prosecution can only 
be demonstrated at trial, the effect of non-compliance becomes an issue to 
be adjudicated at the time of appreciation of evidence. Moreover, this Court 
has consistently held that even illegalities in the investigation (including 
illegality in search and seizures) is no ground for setting aside the 
investigation in toto23. 
 
17. 
 In the background of the aforesaid discussion, therefore, the line of 
precedents which have taken the position that ‘seizure orders’ are vitiated 
for delay in compliance with the reporting obligation are declared to be 
manifestly erroneous and are accordingly, overruled. The relevant question 
to be determined was not whether the duty of the police to report the seizure 
to the Magistrate is mandatory or directory. Instead, what ought to have been 
inquired into was whether the exercise of the seizure power was subjected 
to compliance of reporting obligation, as illustrated in Section 105E Cr.P.C. 

22 Bhajan Singh and Ors. vs. State of Haryana, 2011/INSC/422 
23 HN Rishbud v. State of Delhi (1954) 

18. 
Merely because we have held that non reporting of the seizure 
forthwith by the police officer to the jurisdictional court would not vitiate 
the seizure order, it would not mean that there would be no consequence 
whatsoever as regards the police officer, upon whom the law has enjoined a 
duty to act in a certain way. Since there is an obligation cast on the officer 
to report the seizure forthwith, it becomes necessary to understand the 
meaning of the expression forthwith as used in Section 102(3) CrPC. For, 
without a clear understanding of the said expression, the Magistrate would 
not be in a position to determine whether the obligation cast on the police 
officer has been properly complied with. In this background, the expression 
‘shall forthwith report the seizure to the Magistrate’ occurring in sub-
section (3) of the Section 102 requires to be examined. 
 
19. 
The meaning of the word ‘forthwith’ as used in Section 102(3) has 
not received judicial construction by this Court. However, this Court has 
examined the scope and contours of this expression as it was used under the 
Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971; Preventive Detention Act, 1950; 
Section 157(1) of the Cr.P.C.; and Gujarat Prevention of Anti-Social 
Activities Act, 1985 in the case of Sk. Salim v. State of West Bengal24, Alla 
 
24 (1975) (para 10 and 11) 

China Apparao and Others v. State of Andhra Pradesh25 and Navalshankar 
Ishwarlal Dave v. State of Gujarat26. 
 
20. 
This Court, in Rao Mahmood Ahmad Khan v. Ranbir Singh27, has 
held that the word ‘forthwith’ is synonymous with the word immediately, 
which means with all reasonable quickness. When a statute requires 
something to be done ‘forthwith’ or ‘immediately’ or even ‘instantly’, it 
should probably be understood as allowing a reasonable time for doing it28. 
 
21. 
The expression ‘forthwith’ has been defined in Black’s Law 
Dictionary, 10th Edition as under: 
“forthwith, adv. (14c) 1. Immediately; without delay. 2. Directly; 
promptly; within a reasonable time under the circumstances; with 
all convenient dispatch” 
 
Wharton’s Law Lexicon, 17th Edition describes ‘forthwith’ as extracted: 
Forthwith, When a defendant is ordered to plead forthwith, he 
must plead within twenty four hours. When a statute or rule of 
Court requires an act to be done ‘forthwith’, it means that the act 
is to be done within a reasonable time having regard to the object 
of the provision and the circumstances of the case [Ex parte 
Lamb, (1881) 19 Ch D 169; 2 Chit. Arch. Prac., 14th Edition] 
 
22. 
From the discussion made above, it would emerge that the expression 
‘forthwith’ means ‘as soon as may be’, ‘with reasonable speed and 
 
25 (2002) (para 9) 
26 1993 Supp (3) SCC 754 (para 9) 
27 1995 Supp (4) SCC 275 
28 Bidya Deb Barma v. District Magistrate,. expedition’, ‘with a sense of urgency’, and ‘without any unnecessary delay’. 
In other words, it would mean as soon as possible, judged in the context of 
the object sought to be achieved or accomplished. 
 
23. 
 We are of the considered view that the said expression must receive 
a reasonable construction and in giving such construction, regard must be 
had to the nature of the act or thing to be performed and the prevailing 
circumstances of the case. When it is not the mandate of the law that the act 
should be done within a fixed time, it would mean that the act must be done 
within a reasonable time. It all depends upon the circumstances that may 
unfold in a given case and there cannot be a straight-jacket formula 
prescribed in this regard. In that sense, the interpretation of the word 
‘forthwith’ would depend upon the terrain in which it travels and would take 
its colour depending upon the prevailing circumstances which can be 
variable. 
 
24. 
Therefore, in deciding whether the police officer has properly 
discharged his obligation under Section 102(3) Cr.P.C., the Magistrate would 
have to, firstly, examine whether the seizure was reported forthwith. In doing 
so, it ought to have regard to the interpretation of the expression, ‘forthwith’ 
as discussed above. If it finds that the report was not sent forthwith, then it 
must examine whether there is any explanation offered in support of the delay. 

If the Magistrate finds that the delay has been properly explained, it would 
leave the matter at that. However, if it finds that there is no reasonable 
explanation for the delay or that the official has acted with deliberate 
disregard/ wanton negligence, then it may direct for appropriate departmental 
action to be initiated against such erring official. We once again reiterate that 
the act of seizure would not get vitiated by virtue of such delay, as discussed 
in detail herein above. 
 
25. 
Having clarified the applicable legal position above, we now 
proceed to consider the facts in instant case. 
 
26. 
 The Respondents-accused is said to have placed an order for 
purchase of forty-seven Kerala Model Gold Chains from the Appellant-first 
informant, who worked as a deliveryman in a company called ‘PR Gold’. In 
consideration for the supply of gold chains, the Respondents had agreed to 
provide gold bars of equivalent value. The allegations in the complaint 
suggest that the exchange took place on 20.12.2022. Shortly thereafter, the 
Appellant learns that gold bars handed over to him were fake. On this basis, 
the Appellant approached the police and lodged the first information report. 
On registration of the first information report, the police initiated 
investigation and during such investigation, it was noticed that certain 
monies to the tune of Rs.19,83,036/- were deposited in the bank accounts of 
Accused 1 and 3. On 09.01.2023, the investigating officer wrote to the bank 

and ordered for freezing of their bank accounts. The order of freezing was 
reported to the Magistrate on 27.01.2023. The Respondents had 
unsuccessfully approached29 the jurisdictional Magistrate for taking custody 
of the seized bank accounts. The Respondents then approached the High 
Court by filing an original petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and sought for 
de-freezing of the bank accounts. The High Court vide the impugned order 
has allowed the application of the Respondents-accused for de-freezing of 
the bank accounts, and therefore set at naught the seizure order on the sole 
ground that the order of seizure was not forthwith reported to the Magistrate. 
 
27. 
 The reasoning adopted by the High Court cannot be sustained in the 
light of aforestated discussion. This takes us to the consequential question, 
namely, whether at this distance of time, we ought to direct freezing of the 
bank accounts afresh? The answer has to be in the negative, since 
undisputedly by virtue of the impugned order, the bank accounts of the 
respondents has been defreezed and resultantly, the Respondents would have 
operated the accounts and amount of Rs.19,83,036/- which had been frozen 
would have been withdrawn. The ends of justice would be met and the interest 
of prosecution would be served if the Respondents are called upon, forthwith, 
to execute a bond undertaking to deposit the amount (which has been thus far 
withdrawn from the seized bank accounts) before the jurisdictional Court in 
 
29 Application under Section 457 – Cr. M.C 2032 of 2023 was filed. the event the Court were to return a finding of guilt against the accused 
persons. The Respondents would have to undertake to deposit the amount 
within four weeks from the date on which the Court passes an order of 
conviction. It is needless to say that the bond executed would stand discharged 
if the accused persons are acquitted at the end of trial. 
 
28. 
With these observations, appeals are allowed in part. 
ANNEXURE ‘A’ 
CASES WHERE COURTS HAVE HELD THAT 
BREACH OF REPORTING CONDITIONS IS ILLEGAL 
S.No CASE 
CITATION 
COURT 
1. 
Manish Khandelwal And Ors vs 
The State of Maharashtra And Ors 
 
2019 SCC OnLine Bom 

Bombay 
High Court 
2. 
V Plus Technology Pvt Ltd vs The 
State (Nct Of Delhi) & Anr 
 
2022/DHC/001595 
 
Delhi HC 
3. 
Muktaben M. Mashru vs State Of 
Nct Of Delhi & Anr 
 
2019 SCC OnLine Del 

Delhi HC 
4. 
Tmt.T.Subbulakshmi vs The 
Commissioner of Police 
 
2013(4)MLJ(Crl)41 
Madras High 
Court 
5. 
Ms Swaran Sabharwal Versus 
Commissioner of Police 
1990 (68) Comp Cas 652 
Delhi (DB) 
Delhi High 
Court 
6. 
Uma Maheshwari Vs. The State 
Rep. By Inspector of Police, 
Central Crime Branch, Egmore, 
Channai; 
of 2013 
2013 SCC OnLine Mad 

Madras HC 
7. 
The Meridian Educational Society 
Vs. The State of Telangana; Writ 
Petition No.21106 of 2021 
2022 1 ALT(Cri) 229 
Telangana 
HC 
8. 
Padmini vs. Inspector of Police, 
Tirunelveli 
2008(3) Crimes 716 
(Mad.) 
Madras HC 

9. 
R. Chandrasekar vs. Inspector of 
Police, Salem 
2003 Criminal Law 
Journal 294 
Madras HC 
10. Lathifa Vs. State of Karnataka 
2012 Cri. L.J. 3487 
Karnataka 
High Court 
11. B. Ranganathan Vs. State and Ors 
2003 L.J 2779 
Madras HC 
12. Shashikant D. Karnik Vs. The State 
of Maharashtra 
II(2007)BC337 
 
Bombay HC 
13. Karthika Agencies Export House vs 
The Commissioner of Police 
W.P.No.17953 of 2021 
Madras High 
Court 
14. S. Ganapathi Vs. State and Ors. 
O.P.No.800 of 2014 
 
Madras HC 
15. R. Sivaraj Vs. State of Tamil Nadu 
Criminal O.P.Nos.576 
and 577 of 2013 
Madras HC 
16. Shri. Vilas S/o. Prabhakar Dange 
Vs. State of Maharashtra 
Criminal Writ Petition 
No. 1033/2017 
Bombay HC 
17. Purbanchal Road Service, Gauhati 
VS State 
1991CRILJ2798 
 
Gauhati High 
Court 
18. S. T. Cleopatra VS Commissioner 
of Police, Chennai City, Vepery, 
Chennai 
W.P.No.17953 of 2021 
 
Madras HC 
19. Kiruthika Vs. State rep. by 
Inspector of Police and another 
O.P.No.14733 of 

Madras HC 
20. Dr.Shashikant D. Karnik Vs. State 
Of Maharashtra 
2008 L.J. 148 
Bombay HC 
21. Ali Trading and Anr v The State of 
Assam 
WA 296/2019 
 
Gauhati HC 
22. B. Kavitha v. Inspector of Police & 
ors 
OP. NO. 14824/2019 Madras HC 
CASES WHERE THE COURT HAS HELD THE REPORTING 
 CONDITIONS ARE DIRECTORY AND NOT ILLEGAL 
23. Dattasai (Kisan Seva Kendra) VS 
State of Telangana 
2022 6 ALD 702 
Telangana 
HC 
24. M/S SJS Gold Pvt. Ltd. Thru. 
Director Sunil Jaihind Salunkhe & 
Anr V. State of UP 
Criminal Misc. Writ 
Petition No. - 3511 Of 

Allahabad 
High Court 
25. Amit Singh vs State of U.P. And 
Anr. 
Criminal Misc. Writ 
Petition No. - 11201 Of 

Allahabad 
High Court 
26. Ruqaya Akhter Vs Ut Through 
Crime Branch 
CRM(M) No.223/2022 
 
The Jammu 
& Kashmir 

and Ladakh 
High Court 
27. Narottam Singh Dhillon and 
another vs. State of Punjab 
 
of 2004 
Punjab-
Haryana 
High Court 
28. Vinoshkumar Ramachandran 
Valluvar Vs. The State of 
Maharashtra 
 2011(1) MWN (Cr) 497 
Bombay HC 
29. C.Aranganayagam Vs. State by the 
Director of Vigilance and Anti-
corruption, Erode and another 
1999 SCC OnLine Mad 

Madras HC 
30. M/S. Ap Product vs State Of 
Telangana on 3 December, TEL 

Telangana 
High Court 
31. Mohd. Maqbool Ahmed ateen 
And Anr. vs The Deputy 
Commissioner Of Police 
1996(3) ALT215 
 
Andhra High 
Court 
32. State of Manipur v Canning 
Keishing 
2021 SCC OnLine Mani 

Manipur HC 
33. M.S. Jaggi vs Subaschandra 
Mohapatra 
1977 CRILJ 1902 
 
Orissa High 
Court 
34. Bharath Overseas Bank v. Minu Pu
blication 
[1988] MLJ (Crl.) 309 
Madras HC 
35. Dr. Shaik Haseena v State of 
Telangana 
 
Telangana 
HC 
36. Operation Mobilization India v. 
State of Telangana: (2021) 1 HLT 81 
Telangana 
HC 

….…………………………….J. 
 (Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha) 

…….………………………….J. 
 (Aravind Kumar) 
 
New Delhi, 
May 13, 2024