IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

IN RE- INHUMAN CONDITIONS IN 1382 PRISONS 
ORDER

CONTEXT
1.
Pursuant to our order dated 23rd April, 2024, Mr. Gaurav Agrawal, learned
Amicus Curiae1 has filed a Note summarising details of information2 received from the
States of Bihar, Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Odisha, and Kerala.
2.
The AC submits that the State of Uttar Pradesh has also filed a report which runs
into more than 300 pages; likewise stands the position for the States of Andhra Pradesh,
West Bengal and Madhya Pradesh – all their reports/responses are voluminous.
Mr. Agrawal submits that these three States (supra) may file additional affidavits in terms
of the order dated 23rd April, 2024, for which purpose some time be granted.
3.
It is also submitted that further affidavits have been received from the States of
Telangana, Assam, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra. He requests for time to file a
comprehensive report after going through the said affidavits.
1 hereinafter referred to as the ‘AC’
2 hereinafter referred to as the ‘Note’

STATEWISE STUTUS REPORTS
(A) STATE OF BIHAR
4.
Onto what engages us today, the AC draws the attention of this Court to the
State of Bihar, where overcrowding in jails has been flagged, especially concerning the
(a) District Jails at (i) Aurangabad, (ii) Darbhanga, (iii) Gopalganj, (iv) Khagaria, (v)
Lakhisarai, (vi) Madhepura, (vii) Biharsharif, (viii) Navadah, (ix) Saharsa, (x) Chapra, (xi)
Sitamarhi, (xii) Siwan, (xiii) Supaul, (xiv) Hajipur; (b) Adarsh Central Jail, Beur, and (c)
Central Jail, Purnea.
5.
The Note indicates a measure of slackness pertaining to approvals being
granted for works to commence. In some jails, the capacity enhancement is likely to be
completed by the end of the present Financial Year i.e. by/before March, 2025, whereas
in other jails, suitable land is still being identified.
6.
This Court is not satisfied with the steps taken by the concerned authorities of
the State of Bihar to indicate their seriousness towards addressing issues which are
urgent in nature and cannot be casually dealt with. For instance, apropos improvement in
living conditions for the prisoners in Central Jail, Gaya, it transpires that that approval has
been given for making adequate availability of drainage facility, construction of additional
toilets, construction of kitchen, in the current Financial Year followed by construction over
the next two years. 
7.
For the Sub-Jail, Sherghati, approval has been given for construction of 15
additional toilets and the work is being done by the Building Construction Department.

8. 
The AC has submitted that in terms of the recommendations made by the
Committee constituted by this Court, in 13 Central/ District Jails, insofar as women
prisoners are concerned, the State Government has indicated various steps taken in the
District Jails at Aurangabad, Ara, Katihar, Lakhisarai, and the Central Jail at Gaya.
9.
Again, we would note that though some recommendations made by the
Committee have been accepted/processed, the State Government is yet in the process
of granting approvals for construction of kitchen, increasing the height of the parameter
wall as also for construction/maintenance of clean toilets, separate women prisoners’
hospital, expansion of women prison-wards and barracks and construction of new
prisoner cells. We find no valid reason for the delays in the approvals. Needless to
state, the approval, being the starting point for any project/development to proceed, it
must be dealt with on priority. The Note and the record make it clear that for various jails,
approvals for the works are expected to be given in the present Financial Year 2024-25
i.e. in the next 10 months, upto March, 2025.
10.
In the above background, the AC has prayed for issuance of directions as under:
‘a)
Approval for additional wards in District Jail Aurangabad, District Jail
Lakhisarai and District Jail Nawadah, and the 5 women jails mentioned above
may be expedited by the State Government so that process for construction
can begin at the earliest. The Government has stated that the financial
approval would be given in this financial year. The Government may consider
giving approval in 3 months' time and take further steps thereafter. b)
It is important that with the increase in the capacity, the State
Government may also be directed to ensure that other necessary
infrastructure like sanitation facility, kitchen, staff etc is also upgraded to meet
the additional needs. c)
Construction is going on in District Jail Darbhanga, Central Jail Purnea,
District Jail Saharsa and District Jail Chhapra. Affidavit of the State
Government states that most of the works would be completed by next year

i.e. 2025. The Chief Secretary, State of Bihar may take a review meeting of
the ongoing construction in 6 months' time to ensure that there is no delay in
the said construction. d)
Land identification process is underway interalia in Gopalganj, Khagaria,
Biharsharif and few other districts. It is humbly prayed that the Chief
Secretary may review the matter in 4 months. He may impress upon the
District Magistrates of the urgency, so that land is identified at the earliest.
The progress in this regard may be informed to this Hon'ble Court. e)
It appears that land has been selected for construction of new jail in
Madhepura. Madhepura has huge overcrowding in as much as sanctioned
capacity is 182 and existing capacity is 517 i.e. 2.5 times the sanctioned
capacity. It is prayed that the State Government may be directed to complete
the land acquisition process within 6 months. f)
A new jail is proposed in Supaul for which estimate has been received
from Building Construction Department and process of approval is underway.
The State Government may be directed to expedite approval process so that
construction process can begin.’
11.
 The AC has also highlighted additional issues:
‘… The undersigned has gone through the summary of the report
and respectful submits that the following may need the attention of
the State Government:-
Sr.
No.
Name of jail
Report of the Committee

District
 
Jail
Begusarai
Facilities for children lodged with
their mothers in jail:- There is
women's cell of 10 capacity
located in the prison currently
have 37 women prisons with
one child are living. A temporary
crèche facility is available in the
women's sections. District
Education Officer/ District
Programme Officer Begusarai
have been requested to open an
Anganwari Center in the
women's wing of the jail for the
primary education of the
children of 0-6 years confined
with female prisoners.

There is lack of space inside the
jail for construction of addition
male cell. As the number of
prisoners increases, a situation
of public unrest arise. Keeping
in mind the density of prisoners,
there seems to be a need for
construction of a sub-jail inside
the district.
The Committee unanimously
decided to recommend for
construction of a sub-jail inside
the District between Manjhaul
Sub-Division and Bakhri Sub-
Division.

Central
 
Jail
Bhagalpur/
Women District Jail
Bhagalpur
Construction of
 toilet cum
bathroom with 10 commodes is
required in Mahila Mandal Jail,
Bhagalpur for the purpose of
female prisoners.
There is a need to construct
double washing closets (toilets,
urinals) inside the wards in
Mahila Mandal Jail, Bhagalpur
as per Model Jail Manual, 2016,
which is not available in the jail.
At present, the provision of flush
toilet is not available in Mahila
Mandal
 
Jail,
 
Bhagalpur.
According to the Model Jail
Manual, 2016, all the previously
constructed toilets are required
to be converted into flush toilets
and the previously non-
functional toilets in the jail are
required to be repaired and
renovated.
At present, there is a provision
of one washroom for every 10

prisoners in Mahila Mandal Jail,
Bhagalpur, but it needs repair/
renovation.
Presently, modern kitchen is not
installed in Mahila Mandal Jail,
Bhagalpur. As a result, as per
Model Jail Manual, 2016,
additional modern kitchen is
expected to be installed as per
the prison capacity.

Central Jail Buxar
On the point of welfare of
women prisoners and facilities
for children lodged with their
mother in jails, the Jail
Superintendent stated that
construction of canteen, crèche,
toilets and bathrooms, advanced
kitchen of women is required.

District Patna
Patna has Adarsh Central Beur,
District Jail Phulwarisharif and 4
sub jails. However, there is no
report
 
regarding
 
the
requirements of the said jails.

District Jail Rohtas

[As against capacity
of
 30 women
prisoners, there are
82 women prisoners
lodged in jail].
One female ward is needed for
the women inmates during the
meeting, Jail Superintendent
submitted that place is available
for enhancing the capacity of
existing jail.

District
 
Jail
Samastipur
For the treatment of women
inmates service of one
Gynaecologist (sic) is required
at least once in a week. Hence,
Jail Superintendent is directed
to communicate the matter to
Civil Surgeon, Samastipur for
the arrangement of one
Gynaecologist (sic). It is also
recommended
 
by
 
the

Committee that any child
between age 4-6 years, who is
living with his/her mother,
he/she will be enrolled to the
nearest school for proper
education.
…’
12.
From the aforesaid, it transpires that no specific report regarding requirements
for the Adarsh Central Jail, Beur, Phulwarisharif and 4 Sub-jails of the said jails, has been
furnished.
13.
Ergo, on the recommendation of the AC, a direction is hereby issued to the State
of Bihar not only to implement on priority basis, the recommendations supra but further,
to ensure that the exercise contemplated is undertaken on an urgent basis for all the jails
in its jurisdiction. Milestones be fixed for expeditious implementation/completion thereof.
The State will also endeavour to shorten the timelines presently projected for various
works. Fresh affidavit of compliance shall be filed by the State of Bihar before the next
date.
(B) STATE OF PUNJAB
14.
The AC’s Note highlights overcrowding in jails and points out some timelines for
infrastructural improvement in jails and their upgradation. Four five-year phases have
been indicated viz. from (a) 2024-2025 to 2028-2029, (b) 2029-2030 to 2033-2034, (c)
2034-2035 to 2038-2039, and (d) 2039-2040 to 2043-2044. For the first phase
comprising the Financial Years 2024-2025 to 2028-2029, the Central Jails at Patiala,
Ludhiana, Amritsar, Kapurthala, Faridkot; District Jails at Nabha, Sangrur, Roopnagar,

Mansa, Barnala and Sub-Jail, Fazilka have been included detailing works qua repair,
other constructions including sewage systems, new barracks, repair of hospital cells,
bathrooms, creation of female barracks, creche etc.
15.
For the State of Punjab, the AC seeks the following directions:
‘i)
It is humbly submitted that the Chief Secretary, Government of
Punjab has merely mentioned that summary is submitted. It is hoped that the
Government has decided the recommendations. It is imperative that actual
decisions are taken by the State Government in this regard and atleast (sic)
the works that can be approved in this financial year 2024-25 are approved in
3 months' time. The Government must try and approve as many projects/
works as possible. ii)
Construction of additional capacity should also be matched with other
infrastructure like construction of toilets, enhancement of staff etc. This aspect
should also be examined by the State. iii)
On the last date, this Hon'ble Court had indicated about need for de-
addiction center in atleast (sic) major jails in the State of Punjab. Only
recommendation is given qua Central Jail Faridkot that there is a requirement
for de-addiction center. It is important that the State of Punjab examines the
availability of medical facilities which are required in all Central Jails atleast
(sic) for purposes of de-addiction center. iv)
With regard to women prisoners: The State Government has mentioned
in its affidavit that the Department of Jail will establish sanitary pad dispensing
and disposal machine at Central Jail Ferozepur as recommended by the Dis-
trict Committee. It is humbly submitted that the State Government may exam-
ine whether similar such facility is required and can be made available in other
Central Jails also.’
 
16.
The State of Punjab through its authorities concerned is directed to do the
needful in the above terms and file a fresh affidavit well before the next date of hearing. 
(C) STATE OF CHHATTISGARH
17. 
The Note, as per the Statement of the Director General, Prisons, indicates that
the total capacity of the 33 jails in the State is 14483, whereas currently 18343 prisoners
are lodged. The Statement informs that construction work of 78 prisoner barracks is

being undertaken to increase the capacity to 4450. 26 works would be completed by
December, 2024; 40 works by June 2025, and the remaining works by December, 2025.
It is stated that for ensuring that there is no overcrowding in jails for the next 10 years,
action will be taken on a proposal of 
 
₹ 22.8 crores for construction of 19 additional
prisoner barracks, which would further boost the capacity by 1900. Provision thereof
would be made in the Budget of the next Financial Year and the work would be
completed by December, 2026.
18.
With regard to the welfare of women prisoners and children in the prison, the
Note sets out that the State’s position is that overcrowding would be solved by
completion of the already-sanctioned barracks as also barracks to be sanctioned in the
coming Financial Year. It is said that free sanitary pads are being provided to the women
prisoners and an incinerator machine has also been installed for their disposal. It is
informed that adequate arrangements for toilets and bathrooms in the women’s cells and
for night toilets in the barracks has been made, to handle cleanliness and hygiene. The
State submits that adequate water facilities are in place. For children living with female
prisoners, who are detained in jail, it is stated that nutritious food, clothes and medical
facilities as per the relevant jail rules are being provided. Babies are provided clothes,
food and milk on the advice of the doctor. Baby-kit clothes, soap, oil, powder, mosquito
net, rexine, etc., are being given for new-born baby/ies. A crèche has been arranged in
the jails for children. Children above the age of six years, who do not have any guardian,
are kept in a Children’s Home, with permission from the concerned District Magistrate. It

is informed that the Children’s Home is equipped for the intellectual and physical
development of the children.
19.
The AC has submitted that construction in the existing barracks would ease the
overcrowding to some extent, but the affidavit of the Chief Secretary/Note of the Director
General, Prisons does not deal with the recommendations of the Committee regarding
each of the 16 Central and District Jails. The AC points out that administrative approval in
many cases is pending such as construction of a special jail with capacity of 4000
prisoners in Raipur District, acquisition of land in Village Deori, approval for new jails in
Balrampur etc.
20.
The AC seeks following directions:
‘a)
The Government may examine the specific recommendations qua 16
central/ district jails as highlighted in the note of the undersigned and
examine whether the additional construction of barracks would ease of
overcrowding in that jail. The problem of overcrowding must be seen at jail
level and not for the entire State as a whole. b)
The additional capacity should be matched with other infrastructure
like toilets and enhancement of staff. This aspect should also be examined
by the State. c) It has been mentioned that 19 additional prison barracks of 100 each
would be approved in this financial year. It is prayed that the State
Government may be directed to approve the said proposals within a
period of 3 months so that construction could began. d)
The report of the Committee constituted by this Hon'ble Court qua
women prisoners and children is not available. It is submitted that the said
report may be made available to the undersigned so that the problems can
be highlighted and the recommendations can be brought to the notice of
this Hon'ble Court.’
21.
Directions are issued to the State of Chhattisgarh on the above terms and com-
pliance report be filed on an affidavit before the next date of hearing.

STATE OF RAJASTHAN
22. 
The Note by the AC states that 30 works relating to construction of jails are on-
going, including construction of District Jail Dungarpur, which is likely to be completed by
31st August, 2024, construction of prison barracks in Sub-Jail Kishangarh, District Jail
Barmer, Central Jail Sriganganagar, District Jail Nagaur, District Jail Churu, Central Jail
Kota and District Jail Jhunjhunu. Similarly, reconstruction of open jail quarters in various
jails including Central Jail Kota and District Jail Barmer, most of the works are scheduled
to be completed either in the present calendar year or at the latest, by March, 2025.
23.
As far as the reports of the Committee constituted by this Court are concerned,
para 8 of the Chief Secretary’s affidavit reads as under:
‘The recommendations of the Committee formed under the chairmanship of
the Hon'ble District and Sessions Judges were examined and the following
land has been allotted for prisons-
1.
Sub Jail Bari (Dholpur)
2.
Sub Jail Hindaun City
3.
District Jail Bhilwara
4.
Sub Jail Phalodi
5.
Sub Jail Choti Sadri
6.
District Jail Rajsamand
7.
Sub Jail Bheem
8.
Sub Jail Ramganjmand
9.
Sub Jail Nainwa
10.
Sub Jail Bhawanimandi’
24.
The State Government has stated that various requests for sanction of money
and identification of suitable land for expansion would be done in the coming months.
25.
The AC, in praesenti, does not seek any positive directions to the authorities
concerned. However, the AC submits that the timelines be adhered to, both for works in

progress as also for analysing new proposals. The State is directed to take note of the
afore-stated and proceed accordingly.
(D) STATE OF JHARKHAND
26.
Various recommendations made by the Committee for the 14 Jails
(Central/District) have been indicated. It has been stated that pursuant to the
recommendations of the Committee, the Government has written to all the Prison
Superintendents to seek preparation of estimates from the Jharkhand Police Housing
Corporation Limited3 for the works recommended. The State Government has sought
information wherever new prisons have been recommended for establishment.
27.
 The AC has sought directions as under:
‘i)
There is urgent need for construction of new jail in Deogarh for which
part of the land is also acquired and another part of the land has been
earmarked. The Chief Secretary of the State should ensure that necessary
steps are taken for process of the construction of new Jail at Deogarh and
submit a status report to this Hon'ble Court. ii)
As regards other jails are concerned, the State has directed the
Superintendent of all jails to get estimates for construction of new wards
and/or renovation. It may be (sic) admissible if this process is completed
as soon as possible so that the requirement in each of the jails is
ascertained as soon as possible and those works which can be started
this year can commence at the earliest. iii)
The Superintendent of women jails/wards in the State can also
examine specific issues dealing with hygiene, sanitation and medical
checkup of women and also the facility required for children and
communicate the same as soon as possible to the Headquarter for doing
the needful.’
28.
At this stage, the Court would indicate that the State does not appear serious in
taking immediate remedial measures in the matter inasmuch as it has left it to the Prison
Superintendents to prepare/obtain estimates for the works recommended with the aid of
3 hereinafter referred to as ‘JPHCL’

JPHCL. The Prison Superintendent, being the junior-most officer in the hierarchy, cannot
be expected to have much of a say, real or persuasive, to get things done at the
higher/highest level. With this in mind, this Court had earlier indicated that the Chief
Secretaries of the States/Union Territories would be filing affidavits, with the idea so that
all the recommendations could be scrutinised at the highest level, and consequently,
whatever action would be required, could be taken by the State Government, eliminating
any processual delays.
29. The State shall act in terms of the directions sought by the AC, being mindful of what
we have penned above.
(E) STATE OF ODISHA
30.
The AC’s Note indicates that the affidavit filed by the Chief Secretary is not clear
on one aspect - the Chief Secretary has forwarded minutes of meetings of the
Committees of 13 Districts, whereas there are 30 Districts in the State of Odisha. It is not
clear if the remaining Districts (17) have held their meetings, and if yes, what
report/recommendation(s) have been made. To address the problem of overcrowding in 8
jails, inter alia, additional wards have been constructed in 29 selected jails enhancing the
total capacity of inmates by 2240 during the years 2020-2021, 2021-2022 and 2022-
2023. It is stated that additional wards are also under construction in 23 jails, which
would enhance the inmate capacity by 1625.

31.
For five districts, namely, Nabarangpur, Kandhamal Phulbani, Doegarh, Gajapati
and Sundergarh, for which recommendations have been made by the Committee
concerned, there is nothing to indicate as to what action has been taken on the same.
32. The State is directed to proceed with all possible expedition to ramp up the capacity
and file a fresh affidavit before the next date.

STATE OF KERALA
33.
The affidavit by the Chief Secretary indicates overcrowding issues in 13 prisons4.
Recommendations have also been made by the Committees. Yet, nothing concrete is
forthcoming as to what follow-up action, if any, has been taken by the State Government.
As such, the AC has prayed for issuance of these directions:
‘a)
In some of the Districts in the State of Kerala, the 1 st meeting was
adjourned awaiting reports from the Superintendent of Prisons. It is
therefore, humbly prayed that in such cases, a 2nd meeting may be held
and recommendations to improve the conditions in the prison may be
made. b)
The State of Kerala may be directed to examine the recommenda-
tions made by the Committees in all the districts and take appropriate de-
cisions prioritizing the cases which are urgent and which need immediate
action and compliance affidavits may be filed before the next date of hear-
ing.’
34.
The State is directed to act in terms of the AC’s prayers extracted above and file
a compliance affidavit before the next date.

WAY FORWARD
35. 
Upon careful consideration of the stands taken by the States supra as also the
oral submissions of various other States made through their respective learned counsel,
4 For reference, the State of Kerala has 56 prisons. we are constrained to observe that the State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations have not fully woken up to the dire situation. Bereft of a sense of
urgency, we sense a certain lethargy. It is most unfortunate that upon queries put by
the Court to the learned counsel appearing for the States, the standard response
received is that further time be given to come up with details. Obviously, learned counsel
cannot address the Court without instructions.
36.
There has been a detailed dialogue between the Court, the AC and the learned
counsel, during the hearing. Many aspects and factors have been clarified to learned
counsel appearing for the parties. We presume that learned counsel, having taken note
of the same, would impress upon their respective clients i.e. the respective States or
Union Territories (hereinafter referred to as ‘UT’) to act with diligence. Ex consequenti,
we direct that appropriate response(s) shall be filed by way of additional affidavits
personally affirmed by the Chief Secretary of the State/UT concerned, at least a week
before the next date of hearing, of course, with advance copies to the AC.
37.
In addition to specific directions issued to certain States, it is categorically
indicated that pending approval(s), be it for sanction of projects or identification of
suitable land, the same be proceeded with and brought to their logical conclusion by the
States/UTs within a period of ten weeks, reckoned from today.
38.
Few learned counsel have requested that the Court may specify some common/
uniform parameters for States/UTs to create facilities in prisons. This suggestion is mer-
ited. To begin with, specifications/parameters for jails may be in terms prescribed by and

under the Model Prison Manual 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘MPM’) issued by the
Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs.
39.
Learned Senior counsel for the State of Uttar Pradesh has submitted that as per
the parameters in its latest Jail Manual5, the average area per prisoner is more than what
is provided for in the MPM. It is canvassed that if the MPM specification is applied, then
the capacity of prisons in Uttar Pradesh would increase substantially, with the current
infrastructure alone.
40.
We may note that perhaps mere existence of a large campus area would not
per se mean that the capacity has been enhanced or augmented. What is required to
be seen is that whether the requisite facilities for each individual prisoner are adequate
in terms of sleeping area, mobility within the prison, kitchen/food, health facilities, other
matters etc.
41.
Thus, States/UTs, in their proposed affidavits, should address all issues
holistically, including inmate-capacity enhancement/augmentation. Other logistics such
as creation of posts of wardens/cooks/doctors/various jail staff etc. should also be
factored in.
42.
Before concluding, we may reiterate that prisoners are covered under Article
21 of the Constitution of India. In Sunil Batra (II) v Delhi Administration6, this Court
had pointedly answered that prisoners are persons who are entitled to Fundamental
Rights even while in custody. Rama Murthy v State of Karnataka7, was a case where
5 We take it that the reference is to the Uttar Pradesh Jail Manual, 2022.
6 (1980) 
7 (1997) 

this Court had identified some problems plaguing jails in India, some of which continue
to linger till today. Even before these cases, the view of this Court in respect of
prisoners and undertrials was exposited in State of Maharashtra v Prabhakar
Pandurang Sangzgiri8 and Mohan Patnaik v State of Andhra Pradesh9. These are
merely illustrative but sufficient to demonstrate the intent of this Court to secure basic
facilities for those housed in prisons and were noticed in Orders/Judgment passed in
this writ petition reported as (2016), (2016), (2017), and (2018). We expect all stakeholders to rise to the occasion and
discharge the obligation cast on them as expeditiously as is possible. 
43. 
The matter be next listed on 11th July, 2024 at the top of the Board. 
…………………
 [HIMA KOHLI]

 ……………………………………..J.
 [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
NEW DELHI.
MAY 14, 2024.
 SC 424
9 (1975) 
10 Order dated 05.02.2016.
11 Order dated 03.10.2016.
12 Judgment dated 15.09.2017.
13 Order dated 25.09.2018.