IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 ( SLP (Criminal) No(s). 8990 of 2019) 
 
C. SUBBIAH. 

VERSUS 

THE SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE 
AND OTHERS 

 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 

1. 
Leave granted. 
 
2. 
The instant appeal by special leave is filed against the 
judgment dated 23rd April, 2018 passed by learned Single Judge of 
the Madras High Court, Madurai Bench dismissing the 
O.P.(MD) No. 3846 of 2013 preferred by the appellants herein 
seeking quashing of proceedings of 
pending in the Court of learned Judicial Magistrate No. II, 
Kovilpatti for offences punishable under Sections 420 read with 
Section 120B, Section 294(b), Section 506(ii) read with Section 114 

of the Indian Penal Code, 1860(hereinafter being referred to as the 
‘IPC’). 
 
Brief facts:- 
3. 
Respondent No. 3(hereinafter being referred to as the 
‘complainant’) lodged a complaint in the Court of learned Judicial 
Magistrate No. II, Kovilpatti alleging inter alia that he was having 
a qualification of M.Sc., MD Graduate. He was appointed as a 
Government teacher on 8th October, 2007. Before being appointed 
as a Government teacher, the complainant was doing real estate 
business for earning his livelihood for past 16 years. 
4. 
The complainant was knowing Kannabiran(hereinafter being 
referred to as ‘A-3’) who was working as a Manager in the State 
Bank of India(SBI), Kovilpatti Branch. While being engaged in the 
real estate business, the complainant came into contact with 
Subbiah adambur Jeyaraj(hereinafter being referred to as ‘A-
1’) and his wife A. Vijaya(hereinafter being referred to as ‘A-2’). 
Through A-1 and A-2, the complainant came into contact with 
Chandrasekar(hereinafter being referred to as ‘A-4’), his son 
Pandiyaraj(hereinafter being referred to as ‘A-6’), his wife(S. 
Pandiyammal, hereinafter being referred as ‘A-5’), and his brother 

(K.Shanmugiah, hereinafter being referred as ‘A-8’) who were also 
engaged in real estate business. 
5. 
The complainant claimed that he always trusted his partners 
in business. Taking undue advantage of the trusting nature of the 
complainant, the accused persons induced him to join their real 
estate 
business 
claiming 
that 
they 
had 
strong 
political 
connections. The accused allured and induced the complainant to 
enter into land deals with the intention to defraud the complainant 
right at the inception of the transactions. The complainant was 
told that the documents need not be registered in his own name 
and instead the registration may be carried out in the name of his 
sister-in-law. An alternative option was given that if the documents 
were registered in the names of the accused, the plots could be 
sold immediately to earn higher profits. By flaunting their political 
connections, the accused influenced the complainant to make 
investments into lands assuring that he would reap huge benefits 
out of these deals. 
6. 
The complainant was also fraudulently induced to believe 
that out of the chunks of lands so purchased, smaller plots would 
be carved out and sold to different persons which would frequently 
require physical presence of the seller and since the complainant 

was a teacher, he would face inconvenience if the land parcels were 
to be registered in his name. In this manner, the complainant was 
not allowed to get the purchased properties registered in his name 
despite he making the investments. The complainant was given 
assurances that the plots would be sold for huge profit in a very 
short duration and he would be given his share. By using this 
mode of inducement, A-1, A-3, A-4, and A-6 infused a sense of 
trust in the complainant with the ulterior motive to defraud him 
and to commit breach of trust. 
7. 
It was further alleged that before the complainant had come 
in touch with the accused, he and his brother-in-law 
Chandrasekar, S/o Krishnasamy Naicker had entered into an 
agreement for sale with A. Sairam in respect of a chunk of land at 
Allampatti village, admeasuring 8 acres, but the sale could not be 
finalized because a suit was pending in the District Court, 
Tuticorin in respect of the said land. In the meantime, the 
complainant was appointed as a teacher. The suit pending before 
the District Court, Tuticorin was disposed in favour of A. Sairam. 
8. 
Having given the fraudulent allurements to the complainant, 
the accused got registered a sale deed in their name as Document 
No. 1839 of 2008 dated 27th February, 2008 on the file of Sub 

Registrar Office, Kovilpatti in respect of some plots of land situated 
in the Allampatti village of total area 7.618 acres. The complainant 
invested a sum of Rs. 1,01,47,800/- towards this transaction 
whereas, the accused invested proportionately much lesser 
amounts in the said land deal. A-1, A-3, A-4, and A-6 along with 
the complainant, purchased the said parcel of land from A. Sairam 
for a total consideration of Rs. 3,08,33,600/-. However, as per the 
complainant, the accused never gave him the plots equivalent to 
the investment made by him and thereby, committed fraud and 
breach of trust. 
9. 
The complainant further alleged that A-2 and A-5 had 
conspired with A-1, A-3, A-4, and A-6 to cheat him. The accused 
made the complainant believe that the business of real estate is 
generally carried on by word of mouth and trust. However, at a 
later point of time, the accused started indulging in criminal 
breach of trust with the ulterior motive of cheating the 
complainant. 
10. A-1, A-3, A-4 and A-6 invested the amount provided by the 
complainant towards his share in the land deal and completed the 
sale of the suit property on 27th February, 2008 with A. Sairam. 
However, despite the assurances, the accused conspired and 

refused to give the due share of plots to the complainant thereby 
committing breach of trust. Therefore, a Panchayat meeting was 
convened on 19th July, 2010 and a settlement deed was also 
executed wherein, it was agreed that 52 plots admeasuring 256.51 
cents would be handed over by A-1 and A-2 to the complainant 
towards the investment made by him. 
11. Under the same settlement, A-4 and A-6 were given 45 plots 
to the extent of 233.50 cents for the investment made by them after 
deducting land to the extent of 16.50 cents towards the passages. 
On the very date of execution of the settlement deed, all the 
accused entered into an agreement with Dharamraj(hereinafter 
being referred to as ‘A-7’), brother-in-law of A-4 and executed a 
General Power of Attorney(GPA) in his favour after receiving a sum 
of Rs. 30,00,000/- towards plots Nos. 68, 69, 70 and 71 which 
were a part and parcel of the settlement deed. 
12. The complainant alleged that the accused failed to pay a sum 
of Rs. 19,00,000/- which would be the share amount due to the 
complainant out of the sale price of Rs. 30,00,000/-. Thus, the 
accused persons despite being signatories to the settlement deed 
did not act as promised under the settlement and thereby, 
committed breach of trust. 

13. The accused had also promised to execute the sale deeds of 
some plots in favour of the persons to be nominated by the 
complainant. The complainant provided names of three persons 
for these plots. Three sale deeds were got prepared on stamp 
papers worth Rs. 90,000/-. The accused gave their photographs 
and ID-proofs and signed the sale deeds, but they failed to appear 
at the Sub-Registrar Office, Kovilpatti at the scheduled time for 
registration of the sale deeds. When the complainant enquired 
from A-1 and A-3 as to why they were indulging in such fraudulent 
acts, they abused the complainant and threatened to get rid of 
him. A-1 threatened the complainant that if the matter is reported 
to the police, he would shoot and kill the complainant and his 
family members by using a revolver. While saying so, A-1 
brandished a revolver and handed it over to A-3. 
14. It was further alleged that A-1 further induced the 
complainant to pay a sum of Rs. 41,00,000/- on 14th November, 
2011, whereafter, the sale deed for one of the properties forming a 
part of the settlement memorandum was executed. However, for 
some of the properties, the accused were not abiding by the terms 
of the memorandum and had fraudulently transferred the same to 

other investors. Some land brokers were also present at the time 
when this incident occurred. 
15. Being aggrieved of these continued criminal activities of the 
accused, the complainant submitted a complaint dated 29th June, 
2010 at the Kovilpatti West Police Station but no action was taken 
thereupon. Having failed to get any action on his complaint, the 
complainant approached the Madras High Court, Madurai Bench 
by filing O.P.(MD) No. 1396 of 2011 and as per the directions 
of the High Court, he submitted a fresh complaint to the District 
Superintendent of Police, Tuticorin, but still the FIR was not 
registered. Ultimately, the complainant was compelled to file a 
complaint in the Court of the Jurisdictional Magistrate with a 
prayer to forward the same to the police under Section 156(3) of 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
16. Under the direction of the learned Magistrate, the complaint 
was forwarded to Police Station Kovilpatti West, where FIR No. 305 
of 2011 dated 6th March, 2011 came to be registered. After 
investigation, the Investigating Agency, proceeded to file a charge 
sheet against eight accused with the following conclusions: - 
“By these Criminal Acts accused 1 to 6 have made to believe 
the complainant by their honey coated words have purchased 
lands, along with the complainant, in Alampatti Village in 

Survey No.218/B - 1.5 Acres, Survey No. 219 - 2.74 Acres, 
Survey No.218/1 - 1 Acre, Survey No.221/1 - 2.37 Acres 
totaling in all 7 Acres 61 cents which are valued Rs.6,18,500/- 
as per guideline value but paid Rs.3,08,33,600/- and registered 
the sale deed as Doc.No.1839/08 on the file of SRO Kovilpatti, 
out of the said sale consideration have paid the complainant 
Rs.10,00,100/- as per his proportionate share of his 
investment and without paying the balance sale consideration 
of Rs.91,47,700/- towards his share received from the sale 
consideration or by not giving the proportionate land in 
alternate, they indulged in cheating activities. Therefore the 
acts committed by the accused or criminal nature and they 
appear to have committed the criminal acts which are 
punishable under the following Sections: 
The 1st accused punishable under Section 420 IPC r/w. 120(B) 
IPC and Section 294(b), 506(ii) of IPC. 
The 2nd accused punishable under Section 420 IPC r/w 
Section 120(B) IPC. 
The 3rd accused punishable under Section 420 IPC r/w. 120(B) 
IPC and Section 294(b), 506(ii) of IPC r/w 114 of IPC. 
The 4th accused punishable under Section 420 IPC r/w Section 
120(B) IPC. 
The 5th accused punishable under Section 420 IPC r/w Section 
120(B) of IPC. 
The 6th accused punishable under Section 420 IPC r/w Section 
120(B) of IPC. 
The 7th accused punishable under Section 420 IPC r/w 
Section120(B) of IPC. 
The 8th accused punishable under Section 420 IPC r/w Section 
120(B) of IPC.” 
 
17. It may be mentioned that for the very same set of allegations, 
the complainant had also filed a civil suit by impleading A-1 to A-
6 as defendants which is pending on the file of District Judge, 
Tuticorin in O.S. No. 06 of 2012. 

18. A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-5, A-6, A-7, and A-8 being the appellants 
herein, approached the Madras High Court, Madurai Bench for 
assailing the FIR and the charge sheet by filing a O.P.(MD) No. 
3846 of 2013. The learned Single Judge of Madras High Court 
proceeded to dismiss the said petition preferred by the appellants 
vide order dated 23rd April, 2018 which is subject matter of 
challenge in this appeal by special leave. 
Submissions on behalf of appellants: - 
19. Learned 
senior 
counsel, 
Mr. 
Dama 
Seshadri 
Naidu 
representing the appellants vehemently and fervently contended 
that even if the allegations set out in the FIR and the charge sheet 
are treated to be true on the face of record, the same do not 
constitute the necessary ingredients of the offences alleged. He 
contended that looking at the admitted facts as set out in the 
complaint, the dispute, if any, between the parties is purely of civil 
nature and thus, continuance of the proceedings pursuant to the 
charge sheet filed against the accused appellants would 
tantamount to gross abuse of process of law. The charge sheet 
clearly spells out that a part of the sale proceeds from the land 
deals were paid to the complainant, but the entire amount as per 
his entitlement was not paid. Thus, as per Shri Naidu, for alleged 

part performance of contractual obligations, the tool of criminal 
law has been misused by the complainant. 
20. He further submitted that the complainant being a teacher 
serving in the Government establishment was not entitled to 
indulge in property transactions and thus, at his own risk, he 
made the investments through the accused appellants herein and 
when the profit sharing quotient towards the land deals did not 
work out to the complainant’s satisfaction, the process of criminal 
law was misused so as to launch a purely frivolous prosecution 
against the accused appellants. 
21. The contention of the learned senior counsel was that there 
is no material whatsoever on the record of the case to show that 
the intention of the accused appellants was to defraud the 
complainant right at the time of the inception of the transactions. 
Furthermore, since the allegation of the complainant is regarding 
disproportionate sharing of profits enuring from the land deals 
which he entered with the accused appellants with open eyes, the 
offence of criminal breach of trust would also not be made out 
against the accused appellants. 
22. He urged that the essential ingredients of the offences alleged 
are not made out from the highest allegations levelled by the 

complainant as set out in the charge sheet warranting 
continuation of the criminal proceedings against the accused 
appellants. He placed reliance on the judgments of this Court in 
State of Haryana and Others v. Bhajan Lal and Others1; 
Indian Oil Corpn. v. NEPC India Ltd. and Others2 and Anand 
Kumar Mohatta and Another v. State(NCT of Delhi), 
Department of Home and Another3 in support of his contentions 
and buttressed that the criminal proceedings sought to be taken 
against the appellants as a consequence to the charge sheet are fit 
to be quashed as the same amount to a sheer abuse of process of 
Court apart from the fact that the charge sheet does not disclose 
the necessary ingredients of any cognizable offence. 
Submissions on behalf of respondents-complainant and State:- 
23., learned counsel for the respondent complainant 
as well as the learned Standing Counsel representing the State 
vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions advanced by 
the learned counsel for the appellants. It was contended that, the 
accused appellants won over the trust of the complainant by using 
honey quoted language, and thereby, fraudulently induced him to 
 
1 1992 Supp(1) SCC 335 
2 (2006) 
3 (2019) 

make huge investments in land deals. The complainant was 
assured time and again by the accused that he would be given his 
due share of profits or the plots from the lands, as the case may 
be, which would be purchased in the name of the accused because 
the complainant being a Government teacher could not indulge 
into such transactions. The complainant fell for the allurements 
given by the accused appellants and invested huge sums of money 
for land deals placing blind faith on the assurances given by 
accused. However, the accused appellants resiled from their 
promises and defrauded the complainant by failing to give him the 
requisite number of plots which would fall in his share 
commensurate with the investment made by him. The 
complainant was also deprived of his rightful share in the profits 
reaped after some of the plots had been sold. 
24. They submitted that merely because the complainant has 
also availed civil remedy for the same grievances, that by itself 
cannot disentitle him from invoking jurisdiction of the criminal 
Court to prosecute the accused appellants for their fraudulent acts 
because the allegations set out in the complaint constitute both 
the civil wrong as well as criminal offences and thus parallel 
proceedings can continue. On these grounds, learned counsel for 

the complainant and the learned Standing Counsel for the State 
implored the Court to dismiss the appeal. 
Consideration of submissions and material on record: - 
25. Heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and 
perused the impugned order as well as the complaint and the 
charge sheet filed against the accused appellants. 
26. The arguments were heard, and the judgment was reserved 
on 16th February, 2024. Thereafter, we thought it fit to seek a 
clarification from the learned counsel for the parties because on 
going through the material available on record, we were prima facie 
of the opinion that the case presents sufficient material to direct 
inquiry under the provisions of Section 13(1)(b) and Section 13(2) 
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988(hereinafter being 
referred to as ‘PC Act’) because, manifestly, the complainant being 
a public servant had indulged in large scale benami land 
transactions without disclosing the same to his employer. 
Accordingly, learned counsel for the complainant was put to notice 
and he has submitted a short clarificatory note mentioning therein 
that the complainant is an Income Tax assessee from the year 
2000. It is also submitted in the note that the complainant started 
the business of real estate from the year 2004 onwards and had 

acquired significant wealth during the course of this business. The 
complainant was appointed as a teacher in the Government School 
only in the year 2007 when he was nearly 45 years of age. He has 
superannuated in the year 2022 without any pensionary benefits. 
Thus, it was submitted that whatever money the complainant 
invested in the disputed land deals entered into with the accused, 
were genuine investments made by using his valid and declared 
sources of income and savings. A chart was also set out along with 
this 
explanation 
regarding 
the 
sources 
from 
where 
the 
complainant received various amounts which he claims to have 
invested in the disputed land deals. 
27. Being satisfied with the explanation so offered, we do not find 
any justifiable cause so as to direct an enquiry against the 
complainant for the offences under the PC Act. 
28. Now, we proceed to appreciate the merits of the present 
appeal. 
29. At the outset, we may note that the complainant has come 
out with a clear case that he was already involved in real estate 
business before being selected as a Government teacher in the year 
2007. Hence, it can safely be assumed that he was well versed with 
the nitty gritties of such business and the innocence and ignorance 

feigned by him in the complaint qua pros and cons of fallouts of 
property dealings cannot ex facie be countenanced. 
30. The complainant has alleged in the FIR, that the accused 
fraudulently allured him into buying the lands by using honey 
quoted words and that they also took advantage of the fact that 
the complainant was a teacher serving in a Government institution 
and hence he was persuaded to get the lands registered in the 
name of the accused. However, these allegations are one sided and 
do not present the true picture. The complainant after having been 
appointed in Government service would be conscious that 
indulging in land deals may land him in departmental proceedings. 
It was precisely for that reason, the complainant must have agreed 
that the lands to be purchased may not be registered in his name. 
On the face of the record, the property deals allegedly made in the 
names of other persons by using the funds partially provided by 
the complainant were benami transactions. 
31. We may, at this stage, refer to the relevant provisions of the 
Benami Transactions (Prohibition), Act 1988(hereinafter being 
referred to as the ‘Benami Act’)(applicable at the time of the alleged 
transactions), and particularly Section 2(a), Section 2(c) and 
Section 4 thereof: - 

“2. Definitions- In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires,-- 

benami transaction means any transaction in which 
property is transferred to one person for a consideration paid 
or provided by another person; 

……. property means property of any kind, whether movable or 
immovable, tangible or intangible, and includes any right or 
interest in such property 
 
“4. Prohibition of the right to recover property held 
benami- 

No suit, claim or action to enforce any right in respect of 
any property held benami against the person in whose name 
the property is held or against any other person shall lie by or 
on behalf of a person claiming to be the real owner of such 
property. 

No defence based on any right in respect of any property 
held benami, whether against the person in whose name the 
property is held or against any other person, shall be allowed 
in any suit, claim or action by or on behalf of a person claiming 
to be the real owner of such property. 

Nothing in this section shall apply,-- 
 
(a) where the person in whose name the property is 
held is a coparcener in a Hindu undivided family 
and the property is held for the benefit of the 
coparceners in the family; or 
 
(b) where the person in whose name the property is 
held is a trustee or other person standing in a 
fiduciary capacity, and the property is held for the 
benefit of another person for whom he is a trustee 
or towards whom he stands in such capacity.” 
 
32. As per Section 2(a), any transaction in which property is 
transferred to one person for a consideration paid or provided by 
another person would be a “benami transaction”. 

33. As per Section 2(c), “property” means property of any kind, 
whether movable or immovable, tangible or intangible, and 
includes any right or interest in such property. 
34. Sections 3 of the Benami Act have been declared 
unconstitutional by this Court in the case of Union of India v. 
Ganpati Dealcom (P) Ltd4. A review petition is, however, pending 
against the said judgment. 
35. Section 4(1) of the Benami Act makes it clear that no suit, 
claim or action to enforce any right in respect of any property held 
benami against the person in whose name the property is held or 
against any other person, shall lie or on behalf of a person claiming 
to be real owner of such property. Such person cannot raise a 
defence based on any right in respect of any property held benami 
either against the person in whose name the property is held or 
against any other person. Section 4(2) prohibits the institution of 
any suit, claim or any other action by and on behalf of a person 
claiming to be the real owner of such property. 

 (emphasis supplied) 
36. It is, thus, clear that the complainant in spite of having made 
investments in the land deals which were evidently benami 
 
4 (2023) 

transactions, could not have instituted any civil proceedings for 
recovery against the person(s) in whose name, the properties were 
held which would be the accused appellants herein. Since by 
virtue of the provisions contained in Sections 4(1) and 4(2) of the 
Benami Act, the complainant is prohibited from suing the accused 
for a civil wrong, in relation to these benami transactions, as a 
corollary, allowing criminal prosecution of the accused in relation 
to the self-same cause of action would be impermissible in law. 
37. Going by the allegations as set out in the FIR and the charge 
sheet, it is apparent that it is the admitted case of the complainant 
that the accused appellants made over a part of the purchased 
lands/plots to the complainant and also paid a part of the profits 
to him. However, when the exact share of the investment on pro-
rata basis was not being given to the complainant, he was 
compelled 
to 
convene 
a 
Panchayat 
meeting 
wherein 
a 
Memorandum of Settlement was arrived at. Even despite the 
settlement, the actual share of the lands and profits enuring to the 
complainant was not paid to him. The relevant extract from the 
complaint is reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“10. As a per the Memorandum of Settlement it has been 
ensured that a Plot measuring 169 cents in the Property Item 
No.5 should be given to the complainant for his investment. It 
is also been assured that 32 cents to the 3rd accused 
Kannabiran and 55.50 cents to the 1st accused Subbiah adambur Jeyaraj. Upon the continuous insistence of the 
complainant to register the sale on 169 cents in his favour, the 
1st and 3rd accused and all other accused informed the 
complainant that they will come on 9.9.2010 to register the 
complainant's share. But on 9.9.2010 the 3rd accused 
Kannabiran only came to the Sub - Registrar Office, Kovilpatti. 
The complainant asked the 3rd accused about the other 
accused, he replied that he did not know about them and he 
said the complainant pays the entire amount for 32 cents he is 
ready to execute the sale deed and therefore the complainant 
paid the entire amount for 32 cents and after receiving the same 
on 09.09.2010 the 3rd accused executed a sale deed in respect 
of his 1/4th undivided share and the same was registered as 
Doc. No.8124 of 2010 then he left. For the investment amount 
made by the complainant, he has to get 169 cents, adding the 
plots to the extent of 32 cents settled by the 3rd accused 
Kannabiran the complainant has to get in total 201 cents. Out 
of this Kannabiran has got right to sell his 1/4th undivided 
share which is equivalent to 103 cents only. The 1st accused 
C.Subbiah adambur Jeyaraj can execute the Plots only to 
an extent of 100 cents to the complainant. But having 
committed the breach of trust and cheating the complainant 
without coming to the Sub Registrar Office on 9.9.2010 and 
keeping the 1 acre without executing in favour of the 
complainant, he is not only committing a breach of trust but 
also 
intimidating 
the 
complainant 
by 
threatening 
the 
complainant continuously with dire consequences that he is 
having political influence and no one can do anything. 
 
11. Since the 1st Accused expressed his willingness to execute 
a sale deed in respect of the Property Item No.2 in the 
Memorandum of Settlement dated 19.10.2010 which is plots 
situate in Nehru Maha College Road, Malumichampatti Village, 
Kovai Corporation, if the complainant pays a sum of 
Rs.41,00,000/- to the 1st Accused. Believing his words the 
complainant on 14.1.2011 paid a sum of Rs.41,00,000/- to the 
1st Accused and completed the sale. And also gave an assurance 
that they will act in accordance with the Settlement and on the 
very same date executed an Agreement of Execution. But they 
have been cheating the complainant without transferring the 
complainant's share in the Property Item No.5 as per the 
settlement dated 19.07.2010. Also it is found in the 
Memorandum of Settlement dated 19.7.2010 that as for as the 
Item No.1 concern only the 1st accused has to get the release 
after paying Rs.31,52,000/- to the Complainant. The 1st 
accused is cheating even without executing the same. And as 
per the Memorandum of Settlement dated 19.7.2010 as for as 
the 3rd Item is concern they have to divide the property in 

proportionate to their respective investments. Item No.4 has 
already been sold by the investors.” 
 
38. It is thus clear that from the complaint, there is no such 
allegation therein which can persuade the Court to hold that the 
intention of the accused appellants was to defraud the 
complainant right from the inception of the transactions. The 
accused appellants have unquestionably, passed on some plots as 
well as part profits from the land deals to the complainant but the 
dispute is regarding the quantification of profits and full 
satisfaction of the share claimed by the complainant proportional 
to the investments made by him. 
39. These allegations can at best give a cause to the complainant 
to sue the accused appellants in a civil Court. However, as 
discussed above, such remedy is barred by Section 4 of the Benami 
Act. 
40. The complainant has clearly alleged that the accused caused 
him monetary loss because the appropriate share of profits was 
not passed on to him after some plots from the entire chunk had 
been sold. This Court in the case of Sarabjit Kaur v. State of 
Punjab and Anr5 observed that: - 

 “A breach of contract does not give rise to criminal prosecution 
for cheating unless fraudulent or dishonest intention is shown 
right at the beginning of the transaction. Merely on the 
allegation of failure to keep up the promise will not be enough 
to initiate criminal proceedings”. 
 
41. Similarly, in the case of Vijay Kumar Ghai v. State of W.B.6, 
this Court while tracing the earlier decisions on the subject 
observed as under: 
24. This Court in G. Sagar Suri v. State of U.P. [G. Sagar Suri v. 
State of U.P., (2000) ] observed that it is the duty and 
obligation of the criminal court to exercise a great deal of 
caution in issuing the process, particularly when matters are 
essentially of civil nature. 
 
25. This Court has time and again cautioned about converting 
purely civil disputes into criminal cases. This Court in Indian 
Oil Corpn. [Indian Oil Corpn. v. NEPC India Ltd., (2006) ] noticed the prevalent impression that civil law remedies 
are time consuming and do not adequately protect the interests 
of lenders/creditors. The Court further observed that: (Indian 
Oil Corpn. case [Indian Oil Corpn. v. NEPC India Ltd., (2006) ) 
 
“13. … Any effort to settle civil disputes and claims, 
which do not involve any criminal offence, by applying 
pressure through criminal prosecution should be 
deprecated and discouraged.” 
 
42. Thus, we are of the firm view that the necessary ingredients 
of the offences punishable under Section 406 and Section 420 IPC 
are not made out against the accused appellants from the admitted 
allegations set out in the complaint and the charge sheet. It cannot 
be doubted that a dispute which is purely civil in nature has been 
 
6 (2022) 

given a colour of criminal prosecution alleging fraud and criminal 
breach of trust by misusing the tool of criminal law. 
43. The Investigating Officer has also applied offences under 
Section 294(b) and Section 506(ii) read with Section 114 IPC in the 
charge sheet. On going through the entire charge sheet, we do not 
find any such material therein which can justify invocation of the 
offence under Section 294(b) IPC which reads as below: - 
“294. Obscene acts and songs.—Whoever, to the annoyance 
of others, 
(a) …. 
(b) sings, recites or utters any obscene song, ballad or 
words, in or near any public place, 
Shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three 
months, or with fine, or with both.” 

44. The complainant alleged that the accused abused him by 
using profane language. Section 294(b) IPC would clearly not apply 
to such an act. Apart from a bald allegation made by the 
complainant that A-1 abused him and intimidated him on 28th 
July, 2010, there is no material which can show that the accused 
indulged in criminal intimidation of the complainant so as to 
justify invocation of the offence punishable under Section 506(ii) 
IPC. 
45. We have to be conscious of the fact that the complainant has 
tried to misuse the tool of criminal law by filing the patently 

frivolous FIR dated 6th March, 2011, wherein the allegation is 
levelled regarding the so-called incident of criminal intimidation 
dated 28th July, 2010. The said allegation otherwise is also belied 
for the reason that in the FIR, the complainant states that he filed 
a complaint dated 29th July, 2010 in Kovilpatti West Police Station, 
but the RTI reply from the said police station clearly states that no 
such complaint was ever received. 
46. Thus, we are persuaded to accept the contention of learned 
counsel for the accused appellants to hold that the criminal 
prosecution instituted against the accused appellants in 
pursuance of the totally frivolous FIR tantamounts to sheer abuse 
of the process of law. 
47. At the cost of repetition, it may be reiterated that in view of 
the clear bar contained in Section 4 of the Benami Act, the 
complainant could not have sued the accused appellants for the 
same set of facts and allegations which are made the foundation 
of the criminal proceedings. Since, if such allegations do not 
constitute an actionable civil wrong, in such circumstances, 
allowing the prosecution of the accused appellants for the very 
same set of facts, would tantamount to abuse of the process of law. 

48. Consequently, the impugned order whereby the petition filed 
by the appellants seeking quashing of the Criminal Case No. 250 
of 2012 and FIR No. 305 of 2011 was dismissed, does not stand to 
scrutiny, thus, the same is hereby quashed and set aside. 
49. As a result, all proceedings sought to be taken against the 
appellants in pursuance of the charge sheet dated 10th August, 
2011 are also quashed. 
50. The appeal is allowed accordingly. 
51. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

 ………………….……….J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
May 15, 2024