IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 ( SLP (Criminal) No(s). 2122 of 2024) 

DASARI SRIKANTH. 

VERSUS 

STATE OF TELANGANA 
 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
This appeal is preferred by the appellant for assailing the 
judgment dated 27th June, 2023 passed by the High Court of the 
State of Telangana at Hyderabad partly allowing the Criminal 
Appeal No.178 of 2021 preferred by the appellant, upholding his 
conviction for offences under Sections 354D and 506-Part I of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860(hereinafter being referred to as the ‘IPC’), 

but reducing the sentence of imprisonment for both the offences 
to three months. 
3. The accused appellant was tried by the Special Fast Track 
Court, Suryapet(hereinafter being referred to as ‘trial Court’). Vide 
judgment dated 9th April, 2021, the trial Court acquitted the 
accused appellant for the offences under Section 11 read with 
Section 12 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 
2012(hereinafter being referred to as ‘POCSO Act’) but at the same 
time, convicted and sentenced him for offences under Sections 
354D and 506-Part I IPC as follows: 
i) 
Under Section 354D IPC: Rigorous Imprisonment 
for 2 years and a fine of Rs. 1000/-(in default to 
undergo Simple Imprisonment for one month) 
 
ii) 
Under 
Section 

Part 
I 
IPC: 
Simple 
Imprisonment for 6 months and a fine of Rs. 
500/-(in default to undergo Simple Imprisonment 
for 15 days) 
 
4. 
As stated above, the High Court reduced the sentences 
awarded to the accused appellant to three months on both counts. 
A pertinent plea has been raised in this appeal that the appellant 
and the complainant(victim) have married each other on 6th 

August, 2023 as per the Hindu rites and customs and that the 
marriage has also been registered in the Office of Registrar of 
Hindu Marriages and Sub Registrar, Kodad, District Suryapet, 
Telangana. An affidavit of the complainant affirming this fact was 
placed on record. Accordingly, vide order dated 16th April, 2024, 
we directed the learned Standing Counsel for the State of 
Telangana to verify the fact regarding the marriage of the appellant 
and the complainant from the concerned police station. 
5. 
Ms. Devina Sehgal, learned counsel representing the State 
has filed a compliance affidavit sworn by the Sub-Inspector of the 
police station concerned who has verified the fact that the 
appellant and the complainant have solemnized marriage with 
each other and the marriage was registered as per the Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955 at the Office of Registrar and Sub Registrar, 
Kodad, Suryapet District, Telangana on 23rd, September, 2023. 
The copy of the marriage certificate is annexed with the said 
affidavit. 
6. 
As is evident from the record, the appellant was initially 
charged for the offences under Sections 354D and 506 of IPC and 
Section 11 read with Section 12 of POCSO Act. However, the 

learned trial Court did not find the offences under the POCSO Act 
proved and acquitted the accused appellant from the said charges. 
7. 
The offences under Section 354D IPC and Section 506 IPC 
are personal to the complainant and the accused appellant. The 
fact that the appellant and the complainant have married each 
other during the pendency of this appeal gives rise to a reasonable 
belief that both were involved in some kind of relationship even 
when the offences alleged were said to have been committed. 
8. 
Since, the appellant and the complainant have married each 
other, the affirmation of the judgment rendered by the High Court 
would have the disastrous consequence on the accused appellant 
being sent to jail which in turn could put his matrimonial 
relationship with the complainant in danger. 
9. 
As a consequence, we are inclined to exercise the powers 
under Article 142 of the Constitution of India for quashing the 
conviction of the accused appellant as recorded by the learned trial 
Court and modified by the High Court. 
10. As a result, the impugned judgment dated 27th June, 2023 
passed by the High Court and judgment dated 9th April, 2021 
passed by the trial Court are hereby quashed and set aside. 
11. The appellant is acquitted of the charges. 

12. The appeal is allowed in these terms. 
13. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
May 15, 2024