IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 28410-28414 of 2023) 

DINESH AND OTHERS ETC. 

VERSUS 

STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH 
AND OTHERS ETC. 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 

1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The instant appeals by special leave have been filed by the 
appellants herein for assailing the common final judgment and 
order dated 13th October, 2023 passed by the High Court of 
Madhya Pradesh, Indore Bench in a batch of writ petitions 
whereby, the petitions filed by the appellants to assail the 
proceedings of acquisition of the appellants’ land were dismissed. 
3. 
The State of Madhya Pradesh published a notification dated 
27th May, 2022 under Section 11 of the Right to Fair Compensation 
and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 

Resettlement Act, 2013(hereinafter being referred to as the ‘Act of 
2013’) proposing to acquire lands of Village Jamodi, Tehsil 
Pithampur, District Dhar, Madhya Pradesh of which appellant’s 
lands also formed a part. The lands were sought to be acquired 
for the purposes of establishing a Multi-Model Logistics Park under 
the Bharatmala Project of the Government of India. 
4. 
The appellants submitted their objections to respondent No. 
1-Collector under Section 15 of the Act of 2013 on 1st September, 
2022. However, no response was forthcoming on such objections 
whereupon the appellants filed fresh objections on 23rd December, 
2022 to the Collector-respondent No. 1. 
5. 
The objections were not considered by the respondent No. 1-
Collector, but rather the same were taken up by respondent No. 2 
being the Anuvibhagiya Adhikari(Revenue) Evam Bhu Arjan 
Kshetra, Pithampur, District Dhar, Madhya Pradesh(hereinafter 
being referred to as ‘SDO’). The appellants also submitted written 
arguments on their objections on 31st December, 2022. However, 
the objections filed by the appellants were rejected by the SDO by 
order dated 27th February, 2023 and it was directed that the 
department should publish a declaration under Section 19 of the 
Act of 2013. 

6. 
As a consequence, a declaration along with summary of 
rehabilitation and resettlement was published on 10th March, 2023 
under Section 19 of Act of 2013. Respondent No. 2-SDO published 
information under Section 21 of the Act and notices were issued to 
the appellants regarding the acquisition of their land by 
communication dated 8th August, 2023. 
7. 
Being aggrieved by the rejection of their objections by an 
officer not having jurisdiction, the appellants and similarly 
situated land owners preferred numerous writ petitions before the 
Madhya Pradesh High Court seeking quashing of the afore-stated 
land acquisition proceedings. The writ petitions came to be filed 
on 11th September, 2023 and during the pendency thereof, a final 
award came to be passed by respondent No. 2-SDO on 3rd October, 
2023. The High Court, by order dated 13th October, 2023 
proceeded to dismiss the writ petitions preferred by the appellants 
without considering the merits by simply observing that the same 
had been rendered infructuous owing to the passing of the final 
award. The said order is assailed in these appeals by special leave. 
8. 
The appellants have posed a pertinent question of law for 
assailing the legality and validity of the land acquisition 
proceedings and the order passed by the High Court. The said 

question of law is reproduced hereinbelow for the sake of ready 
reference: - 
“Question No.4: Whether the Hon'ble High Court erred in not 
deciding the writ petition which specifically objected to the 
authority of the Respondent No.2 to hear and decide objections 
filed under section 15 of the Act of 2013 and direct publication 
of 
declaration 
and 
summary 
of 
Rehabilitation 
and 
Resettlement?” 
 
9. 
Notice of the appeals was issued to the respondents, who 
have filed their counter affidavit stating therein that the Collector 
is deemed to be the “appropriate Government” under the proviso 
to Section 3(e) of the Act of 2013 and that he being the appropriate 
Government has got power under Section 3(g) of the Act to 
designate any officer to perform the functions/exercise powers 
vested with the Collector for the purpose of the land acquisition 
proceedings. Taking recourse to the said provisions, the 
respondents have averred at Para 11 of the counter affidavit that 
respondent No. 2-SDO being the officer designated by the 
appropriate Government, personally heard the land owners on the 
objections filed under Section 15 of the Act and prepared a report 
dated 27th February, 2013 which was forwarded to the Collector 
with a recommendation that the objections deserved to be rejected 
and the declaration under Section 19 of the Act may be issued. 

10. It is also stated at Para 12 of the counter affidavit, that the 
respondent No.1-Collector rejected the objections filed by the land 
owners by an order dated 3rd March, 2023 and directed for the 
publication of the declaration under Section 19 of the Act. Thus, 
in sum and substance, the respondents have pleaded that the 
Collector had powers to delegate the jurisdiction to hear the 
objections to the SDO and hence, the objections filed by the land 
owners were rightly heard by the said officer. It is further pleaded 
that the order rejecting the writ petitions preferred by the 
appellants, as having rendered infructuous since the final award 
has been passed, does not warrant any interference. 
11. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the parties and 
have gone through the material placed on record. 
12. The relevant provision being Section 15 of the Act of 2013 is 
reproduced hereinbelow for the sake of ready reference: - 
“15. Hearing of objections.– 
 
(1) Any person interested in any land which has been notified 
under sub-section (1) of section 11, as being required or likely 
to be required for a public purpose, may within sixty days from 
the date of the publication of the preliminary notification, object 
to— 

the area and suitability of land proposed to be 
acquired; 

justification offered for public purpose; 

the findings of the Social Impact Assessment 
report. 

Every objection under sub-section (1) shall be made to the 
Collector in writing, and the Collector shall give the objector an 
opportunity of being heard in person or by any person 
authorised by him in this behalf or by an Advocate and shall, 
after hearing all such objections and after making such further 
inquiry, if any, as he thinks necessary, either make a report in 
respect of the land which has been notified under sub-section 
(1) of section 11, or make different reports in respect of different 
parcels of such land, to the appropriate Government, 
containing his recommendations on the objections, together 
with the record of the proceedings held by him along with a 
separate report giving therein the approximate cost of land 
acquisition, particulars as to the number of affected families 
likely to be resettled, for the decision of that Government. 

The decision of the appropriate Government on the 
objections made under sub-section (2) shall be final.” 
 
13. A bare perusal of Sub-Section (2) of Section 15 of the Act of 
2013 would indicate that the objections to the land acquisition 
notification have to be submitted to the Collector who is 
mandatorily required to give the objector an opportunity of being 
heard in person or by any person authorised in his behalf or by an 
Advocate. After hearing such objections and making such further 
inquiry as may be felt necessary, the Collector is required to make 
a report to the appropriate Government with his recommendations 
on the objections together with the record of the proceedings held 
by him along with a separate report giving therein the approximate 
cost of land acquisition, particulars as to the number of affected 

families likely to be resettled etc. for the decision of that 
Government. As per Sub-Section(3) of Section 15 of the Act, the 
decision of the appropriate Government on the objections made 
under Sub-Section(2) shall be final. 
14. The respondents have taken recourse to Section 3(g)(which 
provides the definition of “Collector”) of the Act of 2013 and the 
proviso under Section 3(e)(which provides the definition of the 
“appropriate Government”) of the Act to contend that the Collector 
of the District is deemed to be the ‘appropriate Government’. Thus, 
the Collector acting as the “appropriate government” under the Act 
is possessed of the authority to designate any other officer to 
perform the functions/exercise powers vested in the Collector for 
the purpose of the land acquisition proceedings. The relevant 
statutory provisions are extracted hereinbelow for the sake of 
ready reference:- 
“3(g) ―Collector means the Collector of a revenue district, and 
includes a Deputy Commissioner and any officer specially 
designated by the appropriate Government to perform the 
functions of a Collector under this Act; 
 
3(e) ―appropriate Government means,— 

in relation to acquisition of land situated within the 
territory of, a State, the State Government; 

in relation to acquisition of land situated within a Union 
territory (except Puducherry), the Central Government; 

(iii) in relation to acquisition of land situated within the Union 
territory of Puducherry, the Government of Union territory of 
Puducherry; 
 
(iv) in relation to acquisition of land for public purpose in more 
than one State, the Central Government, in consultation with 
the concerned State Governments or Union territories; and 

in relation to the acquisition of land for the purpose of the 
Union as may be specified by notification, the Central 
Government: 
 
Provided that in respect of a public purpose in a District for an 
area not exceeding such as may be notified by the appropriate 
Government, the Collector of such District shall be deemed to 
be the appropriate Government;” 

15. By referring to this power of delegation provided under 
Section 3(g), the respondents have tried to urge that the Collector 
being the appropriate Government forwarded the objections under 
Section 15 of the Act to the SDO vide order dated 2nd December, 
2022 for exercising the delegated powers and to personally hear 
and decide the said objections and thereafter to submit his report. 
The SDO, in compliance of the said order heard the objections and 
prepared the report dated 27th February, 2023. It was thus 
contended that the impugned orders do not suffer from any 
jurisdictional error. 
16. We are afraid that the said interpretation which is sought to 
be given by the respondents is ex facie misplaced and 
misconceived. The provisions contained in Section 15 of the Act of 
2013 are analogous to Section 5-A of the Land Acquisition Act, 

1894. This Court has interpreted Section 5-A of the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 in a catena of decisions. In the case of Om 
Prakash and Another v. State of U.P. and Others1, it was held 
as follows: 
 
“21. ……….Thus, according to the aforesaid decision of this 
Court, inquiry under Section 5-A is not merely statutory but 
also has a flavour of fundamental rights under Articles 14 and 
19 of the Constitution though right to property has now no 
longer remained a fundamental right, at least observation 
regarding Article 14, vis-à-vis, Section 5-A of the Land 
Acquisition Act would remain apposite.” 
 
17. In the case of Union of India and Others v. Mukesh 
Hans2, it was observed: 
“35. At this stage, it is relevant to notice that the limited right 
given to an owner/person interested under Section 5-A of the 
Act to object to the acquisition proceedings is not an empty 
formality and is a substantive right, which can be taken away 
for good and valid reason and within the limitations prescribed 
under Section 17(4) of the Act. The object and importance of 
Section 5-A inquiry was noticed by this Court in the case of 
Munshi Singh v. Union of India [(1973) ] wherein this 
Court held thus: 
 
‘7. Section 5-A embodies a very just and wholesome 
principle that a person whose property is being or is 
intended to be acquired should have a proper and 
reasonable opportunity of persuading the authorities 
concerned that acquisition of the property belonging 
to that person should not be made. … The legislature 
has, therefore, made complete provisions for the 
persons interested to file objections against the 
proposed acquisition and for the disposal of their 
objections. It is only in cases of urgency that special 
powers have been conferred on the appropriate 
Government to dispense with the provisions of 
Section 5-A:’ ” 
 
1 (1998) 
2 (2004) 

18. In the case of Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd. v. Darius 
Shapur Chenai and Others3, this Court has held the right to 
make objections under Section 5-A to be akin to a fundamental 
right. The relevant paras are extracted hereinbelow: - 
“6. It is not in dispute that Section 5-A of the Act confers a 
valuable right in favour of a person whose lands are sought to 
be acquired……. 
 
9. ……..It is also not in dispute that Section 5-A of the Act 
confers a valuable important right and having regard to the 
provisions contained in Article 300-A of the Constitution it has 
been held to be akin to a fundamental right. 
 
15. Section 5-A of the Act is in two parts. Upon receipt of 
objections, the Collector is required to make such further 
enquiry as he may think necessary whereupon he must submit 
a report to the appropriate Government in respect of the land 
which is the subject-matter of notification under Section 4(1) of 
the Act. The said report would also contain recommendations 
on the objections filed by the owner of the land. He is required 
to forward the records of the proceedings held by him together 
with the report. On receipt of such a report together with the 
records of the case, the Government is to render a decision 
thereupon. It is now well settled in view of a catena of decisions 
that the declaration made under Section 6 of the Act need not 
contain any reason. (See Kalumiya Karimmiya v. State of 
Gujarat [(1977) ] and Delhi Admn. v. Gurdip Singh 
Uban [(2000) ]). 
 
29. The Act is an expropriatory legislation. This Court in State 
of M.P. v. Vishnu Prasad Sharma [(1966) ] observed 
that in such a case the provisions of the statute should be 
strictly construed as it deprives a person of his land without 
consent. [See also Khub Chand v. State of Rajasthan [(1967) ] and CCE v. Orient Fabrics (P) Ltd. [(2004) ]]” 

3 (2005) 

19. This Court has interpreted Section 15(2) of the Act of 2013 in 
the case of Shiv Singh and Others v. State of Himachal 
Pradesh and Others4, wherein it was held as under:- 
“6. Under the scheme of the Act, once the objections are 
filed by the affected landowners, the same are required to 
be decided by the Collector under Section 15(2) of the Act 
after affording an opportunity of being heard to the 
landowners, who submitted their objections and after 
making further inquiry, as the Collector may think 
necessary, he is required to submit his report to the 
appropriate Government for appropriate action in the 
acquisition in question. 
7. In this case, we find that the Collector neither gave any 
opportunity to the appellants as contemplated under Section 
15(2) of the Act and nor submitted any report as provided under 
Section 15(2) of the Act to the Government so as to enable the 
Government to take appropriate decision. In other words, we 
find that there is non-compliance of Section 15(2) of the Act by 
the Collector. In our view, it is mandatory on the part of the 
Collector to comply with the procedure prescribed under 
Section 15(2) of the Act so as to make the acquisition 
proceedings legal and in conformity with the provisions of 
the Act.” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
20. The Collector would be deemed to be the “appropriate 
Government” under the proviso to Section 3(e) of the Act of 2013 
only when a land acquisition notification is issued by the 
appropriate Government that is the State Government indicating 
the limits of the area to be acquired for a public purpose and 
appointing the Collector as the authority empowered to acquire 
 
4 (2018) 

that particular area of land ‘in the district’ over which the officer 
holds jurisdiction. Hence, this proviso requires notification by the 
State Government of a particular area within the district to be 
acquired for public purpose and only for such limited area, the 
Collector would be authorised by deeming fiction to act as the 
appropriate Government. 
21. However, a bare perusal of the land acquisition notification 
dated 27th May, 2022(Annexure P-1) would make it clear that the 
same came to be issued by the State Government with the objective 
of acquiring lands for establishing a Multi-Model Logistics Park 
under the Bharatmala Project of the Government of India. Thus, 
neither was the land acquisition notification issued by the District 
Collector nor was the acquisition limited to a particular district. 
Hence, the District Collector could not have exercised the powers 
of the appropriate Government by virtue of the proviso to Section 
3(e) of the Act of 2013 which authority continued to vest in the 
State Government. 
22. It is also clear that in the present case, the order passed by 
the SDO rejecting the objections of the appellants is being tried to 
be validated on the strength of Section 3(g) of the Act of 2013 which 
provides that the Collector means the Collector of Revenue District 

and includes a Deputy Commissioner and any officer especially 
designated by the appropriate Government to perform the 
functions of the Collector under this Act. 
23. There is no dispute that the SDO who rejected the objections 
of the appellants, was never specially designated by the 
appropriate Government to perform the functions of the Collector 
under the Act. Rather, the SDO has been conferred powers to act 
only as the Land Acquisition Officer under the land acquisition 
notification. 
24. The respondents have tried to project that the SDO after 
personally hearing the objections of the land owners against the 
proposed land acquisition under Section 15 of the Act of 2013, 
prepared report dated 27th February, 2023 which was forwarded 
to the Collector opining that the objections deserved to be rejected. 
It is further stated that the District Collector rejected the objections 
vide order dated 3rd March, 2023 and issued a direction to make 
the publication under Section 19 of the Act. 
25. A perusal of the order dated 3rd March, 2023 annexed with 
the counter affidavit of respondent No. 3 would indicate that the 
objections filed by the appellants were actually disposed by the 
SDO(Revenue) and not the Collector acting as the appropriate 

Government. Relevant paras of the said order are extracted 
hereinbelow: - 
“4. After the publication of the Notification, the objections 
received were heard as per law within the prescribed time limit. 
The Objectors appeared on the fixed date and while disposing 
of the aforesaid objections the Sub-Division Officer (Revenue) 
and Land Acquisition Officer, Pithampur has submitted their 
reports. 
6. The Sub-Division Officer (Revenue) and Land Acquisition 
Officer, Pithampur has filed the instant matter while disposing 
of the objections raised therein seeking injunction under 
Section 19.” 
 
26. Para 6 of the order dated 3rd March, 2023 clearly indicates 
that the SDO(Revenue) had forwarded the matter to the Collector 
while disposing of the objections raised therein and seeking 
injunction under Section 19 of the Act. 
27. Furthermore, on discussion made above, the land acquisition 
notification dated 27th May, 2022 was issued by the State 
Government. Hence, neither the District Collector could act as the 
appropriate Government in regard to the acquisition in question 
nor was he authorised to delegate the powers to the SDO. As a 
matter of fact, considering the scheme of the Act of 2013 and the 
law as laid down by this Court in the case of Shiv Singh(supra), 
the District Collector was simply required to hold inquiry on the 
objections filed under Section 15(2) of the Act and thereafter, to 

forward the record of proceedings along with his opinion to the 
State Government for its decision. The State Government is 
mandated to take a decision on the objections as per Section 15(3) 
of the Act. However, these mandatory requirements of the statute 
were not followed in the case, and hence, the proceedings are hit 
by non-compliance of Sections 15(2) and 15(3) of the Act of 2013. 
28. Even if, for the sake of arguments, the SDO is treated to be 
an officer authorised to hear the objections made under Section 
15(2) of the Act, apparently, the final decision on such objections 
would have to be taken by the appropriate Government as per 
Section 15(3) of the Act which is lacking in this case. 
29. The High Court while dismissing the batch of writ petitions 
filed by the land owners including the appellant treated the same 
as having rendered infructuous observing that the final award had 
already been passed on 3rd October, 2023. It is not in dispute that 
the writ petitions came to be filed on 11th September, 2023 and 
thus the mere fact that the final award had been issued during 
pendency of the petitions would not save the acquisition 
proceedings because the hearing of the objections is a sacrosanct 
act treated akin to a fundamental right as held in the case of 
Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd.(supra). Thus, the non-

compliance of this mandatory requirement would vitiate the 
acquisition. 
30. Consequently, the impugned judgment dated 13th October, 
2023 is hereby quashed and set aside ‘qua the appellants herein’. 
As a result, the final award dated 3rd October, 2023 is declared to 
be illegal and quashed ‘qua the appellants lands’. 
31. The respondents-authorities are directed to consider and 
decide the objections filed by the appellants under Section 15 of 
the Act of 2013 as per law whereafter, further proceedings may 
follow. 
32. The appeals are allowed in these terms. No order as to costs. 
33. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of..………..………………………….J. 

 (B.R. GAVAI)...………………………………….J. 

 (SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA)..…………………………………..J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
May 15, 2024