IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 ( SLP (Criminal) No(s). 8529 of 2019) 
 
S. NITHEEN & ORS.. 
 
VERSUS 

STATE OF KERALA & ANR. ….RESPONDENT(S) 

WITH 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
( SLP (Criminal) No(s). 11679 of 2019) 

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
( SLP (Criminal) No(s). 11681 of 2019) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 

1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
These appeals arise out of a common order, and hence the 
same have been heard analogously and are being decided together 
by this judgment. 

3. 
These appeals by special leave are preferred on behalf of the 
appellants herein for assailing the final judgment and order dated 
3rd July, 2019 passed by the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam 
in Crl. MC. No. 8108 of 2018, whereby, the petition preferred by 
the appellants herein seeking quashing of the proceedings of 
 on the file of learned Judicial 
Magistrate First Class, Court-II, Attingal(hereinafter being referred 
to as ‘JMFC’) for the offences punishable under Section 494 read 
with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860(hereinafter being 
referred to as ‘IPC’) was rejected. 
4. 
Learned JMFC after evaluating evidence led on behalf of the 
complainant under Section 244 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973(hereinafter being referred to as ‘CrPC’), proceeded to direct 
framing of charges against the appellants under Section 494 IPC 
vide order dated 28th May, 2018. This order was challenged by the 
appellants by filing a 
before the Court of learned Sessions Judge, Thiruvananthapuram 
which was dismissed vide order dated 26th October, 2018. The 
appellants assailed the aforesaid order passed by learned Sessions 
Judge, Thiruvananthapuram by filing Crl. MC. No. 8108 of 2018 

in the High Court which was rejected by the impugned order. 
Hence these appeals by special leave. 
5. 
The status of the accused arrayed in the complaint vis-a-vis 
the complainant can be enumerated as below: - 
 
Accused No. 1-Lumina B (A-1) 
Legally wedded wife of 
complainant(Respondent No.2 herein) 
Accused No. 2-Saneesh (A-2) 
Person who entered into marriage with 
accused No.1 
Accused No.3-Flory Lopez (A-3) 
Mother of accused No.1 [Appellant in 
SLP(Crl.) No. 11681 of 2019] 
Accused No.4-Vimal Jacob (A-4) 
Brother of accused No.1 [Appellant in 
SLP (Crl.) No. 11679 of 2019] 
Accused No.5-S. Nitheen (A-5) 
Friends of accused Nos. 1 and 2 and are 
witnesses to the second marriage 
[Appellant in SLP (Crl.) No.8529 of 2019] 
Accused No.6- P.R. Sreejith(A-6) 
Accused No.7- H. Gireesh (A-7) 
 
Brief facts: - 
6. 
The complainant- Mr. Reynar Lopez(respondent No.2 herein) 
married Ms. Lumina(A-1) as per the Christian ceremonies in St. 
Theresa’s 
Lisieux 
Church 
at 
Vellayambalam, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala on 16th April, 2007. It is alleged that 
on 13th August, 2010, Ms. Lumina(A-1) contracted marriage with 
Saneesh(A-2) under the Special Marriage Act, 1954 before the 
Marriage Officer, Nemom. It is alleged that the appellants herein(A-
3, A-4, A-5, A-6 and A-7) are relatives and friends of Saneesh(A-2) 
and Ms. Lumina(A-1) and thus they too are responsible for the 

offence of bigamy committed by Ms. Lumina(A-1) as they had the 
common intention to commit such offence. 
Submission on behalf of the appellants: - 
7. 
Shri Kuriakose Varghese, learned counsel for the appellants 
urged that the essential ingredients of the offence punishable 
under Section 494 read with Section 34 IPC are totally lacking in 
the case setup by the complainant. 
8. 
He pointed out from the record that four witnesses were 
examined on behalf of the complainant by way of pre-charge 
evidence namely, Reynar Lopez(himself)(CW-1), Father Laberin 
Yusu(CW-2) of St. May Magdelene Church, Senior Clerk 
Shefeek(CW-3) posted at Sub Registrar Office, Nemom, and 
Treasurer and Record Keeper(CW-4) of St. Therese of Lisieux 
Church where the marriage of Ms. Lumina(A-1) and Saneesh(A-2) 
took place. Learned counsel urged that none of these witnesses 
have spoken about the presence of appellants Vimal Jacob(A-4) 
and Flory Lopez(A-3) at the time of marriage of Ms. Lumina(A-1) 
and Saneesh(A-2). 
9. 
Learned counsel further submitted that, insofar as S. 
Nitheen(A-5), P.R. Sreejith(A-6) and H. Gireesh(A-7) are concerned, 

they are the friends of Saneesh(A-2) and Ms. Lumina(A-2) and are 
simply stated to be the witnesses to the marriage solemnized 
between them at the church. There is no material on record to 
show that any of these three accused knew about the previous 
marriage of Ms. Lumina(A-1) with the complainant. 
10. Learned counsel contended that in absence of any evidence 
except for the bald allegation to the effect that A-5, A-6 and A-7 
were having knowledge regarding the previous marriage of 
Ms.Lumina(A-1) with the complainant, they cannot be charged for 
the offences punishable under Section 494 read with Section 34 
IPC. 
 
He thus implored the Court to accept the appeals and quash 
the impugned orders as well as all the proceedings sought to be 
undertaken against the appellants in the above mentioned 
criminal case. 
Submission on behalf of the respondent/complainant: - 
11., Mr. Alim Anvar learned counsel representing the 
complainant vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions 
advanced by learned counsel for the appellants. He urged that the 
appellants namely, S. Nitheen(A-5), P.R. Sreejith(A-6) and H. 

Gireesh(A-7) being the friends of Ms. Lumina(A-1) and Saneesh(A-
2) participated in their bigamous marriage and stood as witnesses 
to the ceremony and thus, they are liable to be prosecuted for the 
offence of bigamy. 
12. It was further submitted that the appellants Flory Lopez(A-3) 
and Vimal Jacob(A-4) being blood relatives of Ms. Lumina(A-1) 
were aware of her subsisting marriage with the complainant, but 
they took no steps whatsoever to prevent Ms. Lumina(A-1) from 
contracting bigamous marriage with Saneesh(A-2) and thus, they 
too are liable to be prosecuted for the offences punishable under 
Section 494 read with Section 34 IPC. He thus, implored the Court 
to dismiss the appeals. 
13. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced by learned counsel for the parties and have 
gone through the impugned orders, the complaint as well as the 
statements recorded in support thereof at the stage of pre-charge 
evidence. 
Discussion and Conclusion: - 
14. At the outset, we may note that the complaint was filed 
alleging commission of the offence punishable under Section 494 

read with Section 34 IPC. However, post recording pre-charge 
evidence, the learned JMFC passed an order dated 28th May, 2018 
directing framing of charge against all the accused persons for the 
offence punishable under Section 494 IPC. 
15. The essential ingredients of offence under Section 494 IPC, 
as explained by this Court in the case of Gopal Lal v. State of 
Rajasthan1, are as follows: 
“3. The essential ingredients of this offence are: 
(1) that the accused spouse must have contracted the first 
marriage 
(2) that while the first marriage was subsisting the spouse 
concerned must have contracted a second marriage, and 
(3) that both the marriages must be valid in the sense that the 
necessary ceremonies required by the personal law governing 
the parties had been duly performed.” 
 
16. A bare perusal of the penal provision would indicate that the 
order framing charge is erroneous on the face of the record because 
no person other than the spouse to the second marriage could have 
been charged for the offence punishable under Section 494 IPC 
simplicitor. However, this is a curable defect, and the charge can 
be altered at any stage as per the provisions of Section 216 CrPC. 
17. It is a peculiar case wherein, the complainant has not sought 
prosecution of the appellants for the charge of abetting the second 
 
1 (1979) 

marriage by Ms. Lumina(A-1) under Section 109 IPC. The 
appellants herein are being roped in by virtue of Section 34 IPC 
with the allegation that they had the common intention to commit 
the offence under Section 494 IPC. In order to bring home the said 
charge, the complainant would be required to prima facie prove not 
only the presence of the accused persons, but the overt act or 
omission of the accused persons in the second marriage ceremony 
and also establish that such accused were aware about the 
subsisting marriage of Ms. Lumina(A-1) with the complainant. 
18. A perusal of the pre-charge evidence led in support of the 
complaint would reveal that Flory Lopez(A-3) and Vimal Jacob(A-
4) were not even alleged to be present at the time of such marriage. 
Hence, the involvement of these accused for the charge of having 
a common intention to commit the offence under Section 494 IPC 
is not established by an iota of evidence. 
19. So far as S. Nitheen(A-5), P.R. Sreejith(A-6) and H. Gireesh(A-
7) are concerned, they are alleged to be the friends of Ms. 
Lumina(A-1) and Saneesh(A-2) and that they witnessed the alleged 
bigamous marriage. On perusal of the evidence of the complainant 
who testified as CW-1, it becomes clear that all he has alleged in 
his deposition is that accused S. Nitheen(A-5), P.R. Sreejith(A-6) 

and H. Gireesh(A-7) were the witnesses to the second marriage. 
However, there is not even a shred of allegation by the complainant 
that these accused, acted as witnesses to the second marriage 
having knowledge that Ms. Lumina(A-1) was already married to the 
complainant. In absence of such allegation, the prosecution of the 
S. Nitheen(A-5), P.R. Sreejith(A-6) and H. Gireesh(A-7), for the 
charge of having a common intention to commit the offence under 
Section 494 IPC is totally unwarranted in the eyes of law. 
20. This Court in the case of Chand Dhawan(Smt) v. Jawahar 
Lal and Others2 while upholding the order passed by the High 
Court quashing the criminal proceedings under Section 494 IPC 
against the accused therein, observed as follows: - 
9. “………………So far as other respondents are concerned, it 
may be said that they had been unnecessarily and vexatiously 
roped in. The allegations in the complaint so far as these 
respondents are concerned are vague. It cannot be assumed 
that they had by their presence or otherwise facilitated the 
solemnisation of a second marriage with the knowledge 
that the earlier marriage was subsisting. The explanation of 
the first respondent that the second respondent has been 
functioning as a governess to look after his children in the 
absence of the mother who had left them implies that 
respondents 1 and 2 are living together. In this background, the 
allegations made against respondents 3 to 7 imputing them 
with guilty knowledge unsupported by other material would not 
justify the continuance of the proceedings against those 
respondents.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
2 (1992) 

21. As a consequence of the above discussion, we are of the view 
that allowing the proceedings of the criminal case to be continued 
against the appellants would tantamount to gross illegality and 
abuse of the process of Court. The order framing charge as well as 
the order rejecting the revision petition and criminal miscellaneous 
petition preferred by the accused appellants do not stand to 
scrutiny. 
22. Resultantly, the order dated 3rd July, 2019 passed by the 
High Court and all subsequent proceedings sought to be taken 
against the appellants herein in are 
hereby quashed and set aside. However, the trial of Ms. Lumina(A-
1) and Saneesh(A-2) shall continue. 
23. The appeals are allowed in these terms. 
24. No order as to costs. 
25. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
May 15, 2024