IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S).1008 OF 2023 

TRISHA SINGH.…PETITIONER(S) 

VERSUS 
 
ANURAG KUMAR 

 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

ORDER 

1. 
The instant transfer petition came to be preferred by the 
petitioner-wife seeking transfer of the petition filed by the 
respondent-husband under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 
1955 being Matrimonial Case No. 2172/2022 titled as ‘Anurag 
Kumar S/o Ravindra Nath Sharma Vs. Trisha Singh’, pending 
before the Court of 7-Principal Judge, Family Court, Varanasi, U.P. to the Family Court at Pune, Maharashtra. 
2. 
 The transfer petition was dismissed for want of prosecution 
on 26th July, 2023. Subsequently, vide order dated 21st August, 
2023, the transfer petition was restored to its original number and 
on the request of learned counsel for the parties, the matter was 
forwarded to the Supreme Court Mediation Centre for exploring 

the possibility of an amicable settlement between the parties. 
Pursuant to the efforts made by the Mediator, the parties had 
arrived at a settlement which was signed by the petitioner-wife and 
the 
respondent-husband 
before 
Shrabani 
Chakrabarty, 
Advocate/Mediator, Supreme Court Mediation Centre on 26th 
February, 2024. The relevant terms and conditions of the 
settlement agreement which in entirety shall form a part of this 
order are reproduced below: - 
“5. Both the parties hereto have arrived at an amicable 
settlement on the following terms and conditions for dissolution 
of marriage by mutual consent: - 
 
A. That the respondent husband continued to pay certain 
expenses voluntary to the tune of Rs.20 lakhs (Rupees 
twenty lakh only) from March 2020 upto October 2023 for 
his child to the bank account of the petitioner-wife including 
the period the parties were not together. Mediation took 
place at great length between the parties and parties want 
to part away taking divorce. The respondent- husband has 
agreed to pay full and final alimony of Rs.1 Crore 15 lakh 
(one crore and Fifteen lakhs only) to the petitioner-wife. The 
respondent husband has paid an amount of Rs.50 lakh to 
the petitioner wife on 22.02.2024. The remaining alimony 
will be paid will be as under: 
 
(i) Rs.50 Lakh (rupees fifty lakh) only shall be paid 
to the petitioner-wife on or before 31.08.2024; 
 
(ii) The remaining alimony of Rs. 15 lakh (rupees 
fifteen lakh) only will be paid on or before 31.12.2024. 
 
(iii) The gold and jewelries belonging to the petitioner-
wife kept in a locker at Bank of India of Varanasi shall 
be taken by the petitioner within 14th to 20th March 
2024. Petitioner will also collect silver items given on 
marriage from the respondent- husband.” 

3. 
It is thus manifest that there was a clear undertaking by the 
parties before the Mediator that they shall part ways peacefully. 
4. 
It is also clear that the respondent-husband had voluntarily 
paid a sum of Rs. 20 lakhs for the support of his child during the 
period from March, 2020 to October, 2023. The respondent-
husband also paid a sum of Rs. 50 lakhs to the petitioner-wife in 
the terms of the settlement. The remaining amount of permanent 
alimony has been agreed to be paid as per the schedule indicated 
in the settlement deed. Out of this agreed amount, the respondent-
husband has paid a sum of Rs. 50,00,000/-(fifty lacs) only to the 
petitioner-wife. 
5. 
However, today when the matter was taken up, this Court 
was apprised that the petitioner-wife seems to have resiled from 
the settlement agreement. 
6. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner-wife has affirmed that his 
client has stopped instructing him in the matter. Acting on the 
terms of the settlement, the respondent-husband has already 
withdrawn the matrimonial case on 23rd April, 2024 which fact is 
recorded in the order sheet of the Family Court placed on record 
with I.A. No. 112620 of 2024 and thus he is abiding by the terms 
of settlement in letter and spirit. 

7. 
It seems, the petitioner-wife having taken advantage of the 
settlement executed before the Mediator has managed to get the 
matrimonial 
case 
instituted 
by 
the 
respondent-husband 
withdrawn. She has also accepted a sum of Rs.50 lakhs from the 
respondent-husband towards part payment of the permanent 
alimony and thereafter, she is trying to resile from the settlement 
without any justification. The conduct of the petitioner-wife is 
clearly, recalcitrant inasmuch as she has disregarded the terms 
and conditions agreed before the Mediator in the settlement 
proceedings which were undertaken pursuant to the directions of 
this Court. Not only this, because of her conduct, the respondent-
husband has been put to grave disadvantage inasmuch as he has 
withdrawn the matrimonial case and has also paid a significant 
proportion of the permanent alimony to the petitioner-wife in terms 
of the settlement agreement. 
8. 
Learned counsel for the respondent-husband on instructions 
states that his client undertakes to abide by the remaining terms 
and conditions of the settlement agreement in letter and spirit and 
shall make due payments on the schedule dates if the marriage is 
dissolved. 

9. 
A similar situation was examined by this Court in the case of 
Ruchi Agarwal v. Amit Kumar Agrawal and Others1, the 
relevant excerpts whereof read as follows: - 
“4. It is the above order of the High Court that is under 
challenge before us in this appeal. During the pendency of the 
proceedings before the courts below and in this Court, certain 
developments have taken place which have a material bearing 
on the merits of this appeal. The complaint which the appellant 
herein filed is dated 10-4-2002. Thereafter, a divorce petition 
was filed by the appellant wife before the Family Court at 
Nainital. In the said divorce petition a compromise was arrived 
at between the parties in which it was stated that the first 
respondent husband was willing for a consent divorce and that 
the appellant wife had received all her stridhan and 
maintenance in lump sum. She also declared in the said 
compromise deed that she is not entitled to any maintenance 
in future. It is also stated in the said compromise deed that the 
parties to the proceedings would withdraw all criminal and civil 
complaints filed against each other which includes the criminal 
complaint filed by the appellant which is the subject-matter of 
this appeal. The said compromise deed contains annexures 
with the particulars of the items given to the appellant at the 
time of marriage and which were returned. The said 
compromise deed is signed by the appellant. But before any 
order could be passed on the basis of the said compromise 
petition, the appellant herein wrote a letter to the Family Court 
at Nainital which was received by the Family Court on 3-10-
2003 wherein it was stated that she was withdrawing the 
compromise petition because she had not received the agreed 
amount. But subsequently when her statement was recorded 
by the Family Court, she withdrew the said letter of 3-10-2003 
and stated before the court in her statement that she wanted a 
divorce and that there is no dispute in relation to any amount 
pending. The court, after recording the said statement, granted 
a divorce under Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act, 
dissolving the marriage by mutual consent by its order dated 3-
3-2004. 
5. In the compromise petition, referred to hereinabove, both the 
parties had agreed to withdraw all the civil and criminal cases 
filed by each against the other. It is pursuant to this 
compromise, the above divorce as sought for by the appellant 
was granted by the husband and pursuant to the said 
compromise deed the appellant also withdrew Criminal Case 
 
1 (2005) 

No. 63 of 2002 on the file of the Family Court, Nainital which 
was a complaint filed under Section 125 of the Criminal 
Procedure Code for maintenance. It is on the basis of the 
submission made on behalf of the appellant and on the basis of 
the terms of the compromise, the said case came to be 
dismissed. However, so far as the complaint under Sections 
498-A, 323 and 506 IPC and under Sections 3 and 4 of the 
Dowry Prohibition Act is concerned, which is the subject-matter 
of this appeal, the appellant did not take any steps to withdraw 
the same. It is in those circumstances, a quashing petition was 
filed before the High Court which came to be partially allowed 
on the ground of the territorial jurisdiction, against the said 
order the appellant has preferred this appeal. 
6. From the above-narrated facts, it is clear that in the 
compromise petition filed before the Family Court, the appellant 
admitted that she has received stridhan and maintenance in 
lump sum and that she will not be entitled to maintenance of 
any kind in future. She also undertook to withdraw all 
proceedings, civil and criminal, filed and initiated by her 
against the respondents within one month of the compromise 
deed, which included the complaint under Sections 498-A, 323 
and 506 IPC and under Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry 
Prohibition Act from which complaint this appeal arises. In the 
said compromise, the respondent husband agreed to withdraw 
his petition filed under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act 
pending before the Senior Judge, Civil Division, Rampur and 
also agreed to give a consent divorce as sought for by the 
appellant. 
7. It is based on the said compromise the appellant obtained a 
divorce as desired by her under Section 13-B of the Hindu 
Marriage Act and in partial compliance with the terms of the 
compromise she withdrew the criminal case filed under Section 
125 of the Criminal Procedure Code but for reasons better 
known to her she did not withdraw that complaint from which 
this appeal arises. That apart after the order of the High Court 
quashing the said complaint on the ground of territorial 
jurisdiction, she has chosen to file this appeal. It is in this 
background, we will have to appreciate the merits of this 
appeal. 
8. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant, however, 
contended that though the appellant had signed the 
compromise deed with the abovementioned terms in it, the 
same was obtained by the respondent husband and his family 
under threat and coercion and in fact she did not receive lump 
sum maintenance and her stridhan properties. We find it 
extremely difficult to accept this argument in the background 
of the fact that pursuant to the compromise deed the 

respondent husband has given her a consent divorce which she 
wanted, thus had performed his part of the obligation under the 
compromise deed. Even the appellant partially performed her 
part of the obligations by withdrawing her criminal complaint 
filed under Section 125. It is true that she had made a 
complaint in writing to the Family Court where Section 125 
CrPC proceedings were pending that the compromise deed was 
filed under coercion but she withdrew the same and gave a 
statement before the said court affirming the terms of the 
compromise which statement was recorded by the Family Court 
and the proceedings were dropped and a divorce was obtained. 
Therefore, we are of the opinion that the appellant having 
received the relief she wanted without contest on the basis 
of the terms of the compromise, we cannot now accept the 
argument of the learned counsel for the appellant. In our 
opinion, the conduct of the appellant indicates that the 
criminal complaint from which this appeal arises was filed 
by the wife only to harass the respondents. 
9. In view of the abovesaid subsequent events and the 
conduct of the appellant, it would be an abuse of the 
process of the court if the criminal proceedings from which 
this appeal arises is allowed to continue. Therefore, we are 
of the considered opinion to do complete justice, we should 
while dismissing this appeal also quash the proceedings 
arising from registered in 
Police Station Bilaspur (District Rampur) filed under 
Sections 498-A, 323 and 506 IPC and under Sections 3 and 
4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act against the respondents 
herein. It is ordered accordingly. The appeal is disposed of.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
10. On going through the material available on record, we find 
that the matrimonial relations between the spouses have broken 
down irrevocably and there is no possibility of reconciliation and 
revival of the spousal relationship. Hence, looking at the conduct 
of the petitioner-wife as indicated supra and the other attending 
facts and circumstances, we are inclined to exercise the powers 
under Article 142 of the Constitution of India so as to grant decree 

of divorce and hence, the marriage between the petitioner and the 
respondent is dissolved. 
11. However, it is made clear that the respondent in terms of the 
settlement shall make the remaining payment to the petitioner. 
12. The petition is allowed in these terms. 
13. Decree be prepared accordingly. 
 
14. No order as to costs. 
15. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (S.V.N. BHATTI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
 
New Delhi; 
May 15, 2024