IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

 SLP (C) NO. 4504 OF 2021 
 
KOLKATA MUNICIPAL CORPORATION & ANR....APPELLANTS 

VERSUS 
 
BIMAL KUMAR SHAH & ORS. 
…RESPONDENTS 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Introduction... 1 
Facts.... 2 
Submission of Counsels... 7 
Scheme of the Act... 8 
The Right to property: A net of intersecting rights... 15 
The Right to notice...19 
The Right to be heard...20 
The Right to a reasoned decision...21 
The Duty to acquire only for public purpose...22 
The Right of restitution or fair compensation...23 
The Right to an efficient and expeditious process...24 
The Right of conclusion....26 
Conclusions... 28 

JUDGMENT 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
Introduction: The Kolkata Municipal Corporation claims to have 
acquired the property of respondent no. 1 in exercise of powers 
under Section 352 of the Kolkata Municipal Corporation Act, 1980. 
A single Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court have 
concurrently held that there is no such power of compulsory 
acquisition of immovable property under Section 352. While 
upholding the decision of the High Court, we have given our 
additional reasons by interpreting the text and the context in which 
Section 352 is placed in the Act. Rejecting the alternative argument 
of the appellant-Corporation that there is also a provision for 
compensation under Section 363 of the Act when land is acquired 
under Section 352, we have examined the constitutional position 
of acquisition of immovable property whereunder the mere 
presence of power to acquire coupled with a provision for payment 
of fair compensation by itself is not sufficient for a valid 
acquisition. Interpreting “authority of law” in Article 300A of the 
Constitution, we have held that a minimum content of a 
constitutional right to property comprises of seven sub-rights or 

procedures such as the right to notice, hearing, reasons for the 
decision, to acquire only for public purpose, fair compensation, 
efficient conduct of the procedure within timelines and finally the 
conclusion. These sub-rights have synchronously formed part of 
our laws and have attained judicial recognition. Therefore, as 
Section 352 does not provide for these sub-rights or procedures, it 
can never be a valid power of acquisition. Before we deal with the 
submissions and analyse the provisions, we will first narrate the 
necessary facts. 
2. 
Facts: The property in question, Premises No. 106C, 
situated at Narikeldanga North Road, Kolkata – 7000111, 
belongs to Mr. Birinchi Bihari Shah2 having succeeded it 
through a deed of settlement executed by his father. As Birinchi 
Shah was minor at the time when his father passed away, his 
elder brother managed and administered the Property and, in 
that process, he also let out the premises admeasuring 2 bighas 
18 kathas 6 chitaks and 40 square feet in favour of one M/s 
Arora Film Corporation. Upon attaining majority, the Property 
was mutated in the name of Birinchi Shah in the assessment 
book of the appellant-Corporation. It is affirmatively stated that 
 
1 Hereinafter, referred to as the “Property”. 
2 Hereinafter, referred to as “Birinchi Shah”. all municipal dues including taxes with respect to the Property 
were paid regularly. It is also stated that the appellant-
Corporation acknowledged the same and by its letter dated 
07.04.2000 admitting that there are no outstanding dues with 
respect to property tax. 
3. 
In the year 2009, when an attempt was made by the 
appellant-Corporation to forcefully enter and occupy the 
Property, Birinchi Shah filed a writ petition being W.P. No. 126 
of 2009 before the High Court seeking a restraint order against 
the appellant-Corporation. 
4. 
As there was no real contest about the title in the Property 
and the appellant-Corporation having not filed any affidavit-in-
opposition, the High Court disposed of the writ petition by an 
order 
dated 
17.09.2009 
directing 
that 
the 
appellant-
Corporation must hold an enquiry about the encroachments. 
The High Court further directed the appellant-Corporation not 
to make any construction over the Property. 
5. 
In July 2010, Birinchi Shah received information that the 
appellant-Corporation had deleted his name from the category 
of owner and had inserted its own name in the official records. 
Aggrieved, he approached the High Court by filing a writ petition 

bearing W.P. No. 981 of 2010, not only for correction of the 
entries but also to restrain the appellant-Corporation from 
interfering with his peaceful possession over the Property. What 
happened in this writ petition is of seminal importance. The 
learned single Judge, by an order dated 08.01.2015, recorded 
the statement of the appellant-Corporation that they are unable 
to controvert the averments made in the writ petition with 
respect to title and ownership of the Property. The writ petition 
was disposed of restraining the appellant-Corporation from 
interfering with the possession of Birinchi Shah and also 
injuncted them from giving effect to the wrongful recording of 
its name in the official records. The appellant-Corporation was 
also directed to remove its men and material from the Property 
within two weeks from the date of the said order. The specific 
finding of the High Court that the appellant-Corporation could 
not establish its right and the title in the Property is significant. 
6. 
Dissatisfied, the appellant-Corporation filed a writ appeal 
bearing A.P.O. No. 51 of 2015 against the order of the single 
Judge and contended that their affidavit-in-opposition could 
not be filed before the Single Judge as the records were 
misplaced. It is more or less an admitted fact that a plea of 

acquisition was taken for the first time before the Division 
Bench, and this seems to be the reason for the Division Bench 
to remand the matter back to the single Judge after imposing a 
cost of Rs. 50,000/- on the appellant-Corporation. After 
remand, 
the 
appellant-Corporation 
filed 
an 
affidavit-in-
opposition before the single Judge claiming that the land was 
acquired. In view of new developments, Birinchi Shah sought 
permission to withdraw the pending writ petition with the 
liberty to file a fresh writ petition. The High Court permitted this 
by an order dated 11.08.2016. 
7. 
Accordingly, was filed by the 
respondent no. 1, the executor to the estate of Birinchi Shah, 
inter alia, seeking an order quashing the alleged acquisition as 
illegal and to restore their name as owners in the official 
records. 
8. 
The learned single Judge of the High Court, allowing the 
writ petition by order dated 14.09.2017, formulated two 
questions. The first question relates to the maintainability of 
the writ petition, which was answered in the affirmative. As 
there is no contest to this issue, we will not deal with it. The 
second issue relates to the legality and validity of acquisition of 

the Property in exercise of power under Section 352 of the 
Kolkata Municipal Corporation Act, 19803. Answering the 
second question, the learned single Judge held that the 
appellant-Corporation purported to acquire the Property under 
Section 352(a) of the Act when there is no power of compulsory 
acquisition therein. The learned single Judge therefore quashed 
and set-aside the alleged action of acquisition. 
9. 
The appellant-Corporation as well as the respondent no. 1 
assailed the order of learned single Judge in writ appeals 
bearing APO No. 523 of 2017 and APO No. 210 of 2018, 
respectively. 
10. The Division Bench of the High Court, by the judgment 
impugned herein, affirmed the order of the Single Judge and 
accordingly, disposed of the appeals with a direction that the 
appellant-Corporation may initiate acquisition proceedings for 
the Property under Section 536 or 537 of the Act, within five 
months, or in the alternative, restore the name of the last 
recorded owner as the owner of the Property. 
 
3 Hereinafter, referred to as the “Act”. 

11. It is against this judgment and order of the Division Bench 
of the High Court, that the appellant-Corporation is in appeal 
before us. 
12. Submission of Counsels: Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned 
senior counsel, representing the appellant-Corporation, has 
submitted that the appellant-Corporation has the requisite 
statutory power to acquire a property under Section 352 of the 
Act for the purposes of constructing a park, as is the case here. 
He has referred to Section 363 of the Act provisioning 
compensation for acquisitions made under Section 352 of the 
Act and submitted that acquisition under this chapter is 
therefore complete and stands on its own footing. He contended 
that the single and division benches of the High Court erred in 
concluding that Section 537 of the Act is the only provision for 
acquisition. Relying on State of Kerala v. T.M. Peter4, he would 
submit that for differential schemes and purposes of 
acquisition, different compensation structures will not violate 
Article 14 of the Constitution. On the same point, he also relied 
on the decisions of this Court in Girnar Traders (3) v. State of 
 
4 (1980). 

Maharashtra5, and Bankatlal v. Special Land Acquisition 
Officer6. 
13. Mr. Mukul Rohatgi and Mr. Huzefa Ahmadi, learned senior 
counsels, appearing for the respondents, while supporting the 
judgment of the High Court, impugned herein, submitted that the 
power of acquisition is only in Section 537 of the Act and that 
invocation of Section 352 read with Section 363 is illegal and 
violative of Article 300A of the Constitution. In support of their 
submissions, they relied on the judgment of this Court in Nagpur 
Improvement Trust v. Vithal Rao7. 
14. Scheme of the Act: The Kolkata Municipal Corporation Act, 
1980 extends to 636 Sections, followed by 9 Schedules. It has IX 
Parts, of which we are concerned only with Part VI of which 
Chapter XXI – relating to Streets and Public Places and Part VIII of 
which Chapter XXXIII – relating to Acquisition and Disposal of 
Property. As the appellant-Corporation invoked Section 352 of the 
Act to acquire the Property for the purpose of opening a park and 
ward office, we need to examine the provision. Section 352 of the 
Act provides as under: 
 
5 (2011). 
6 (2014). 
7 (1973). 

“Section 352:- Power to acquire lands and 
buildings for public streets and for public 
parking places:– The Municipal Commissioner may, 
subject to the other provisions of this Act – 
(a) acquire any land required for the purpose of 
opening, widening, extending or otherwise improving 
any public street, square, park or garden or of 
making a new one, together with any building 
standing upon such land; 
(b) acquire, in relation to any land or building as 
aforesaid, such land with building thereon outside 
the regular line or the projected regular line of such 
public street; 
(c) acquire any land for the purpose of laying out or 
making a public parking place.” 
 
15. The appellant-Corporation has also relied on Section 363 of 
the Act relating to payment of compensation. The said provision is 
as under: 
“Section 363-Compensation to be paid:– (1) 
Compensation shall be paid by the Corporation to the 
owner of any building or land acquired for a public 
street, square, park or garden under the provisions of 
this Chapter: 
Provided that any increase or decrease in the value 
of the remainder of the property, of which building or 
the land so acquired formed part, likely to accrue 
from the setting back to the regular line of a public 
street, 
shall 
be 
taken 
into 
consideration 
in 
determining the amount of such compensation. 
(2) If any additional land, which will be included in 
the premises of any person permitted or required by 
an order under sub-section (2) of section 360 to set 
forward a building to the regular line of a public 
street, belongs to the Corporation, such order shall be 
a sufficient conveyance to the owner of such land; 
and the price to be paid to the Corporation by the 
owner for such additional land and the other terms 

and conditions of the conveyance shall be set forth in 
such order. 
(3) The Corporation shall pay compensation in respect 
of land or building acquired under this Chapter at the 
following scale: 
(i)…. 
(ii)….” 
 
16. A close examination of the text of Section 352 of the Act 
coupled with the context with respect to the placement of the 
section in the Act, clarifies the purpose and object of the 
provision. The text of Section 352 of the Act provides that the 
Municipal Commissioner may acquire any land required for the 
purpose of opening, widening, extending, etc. of a street, square, 
park, etc. The purpose of this provision is to declare that if the 
Municipal Commissioner is of the view that any land is required 
for the purpose of opening a street, park, etc., such a land may 
be acquired. Once the Municipal Commissioner takes the 
decision to acquire a piece of land, what would then be the 
process of acquisition is not provided in Section 352. It is provided 
in Section 535 occurring in Chapter XXXIII of Part VIII of the Act 
which relates to ‘Acquisition of Property’. 
17. Before we deal with the Section 535, it is sufficient to 
conclude that Section 352 merely contemplates the power and 

duty of the Municipal Commissioner to identify the land intended 
for opening of a street, park etc., and once that decision is taken, 
the Municipal Commissioner would take steps to acquire such a 
property, for a public purpose. 
18. The context in which Section 352 is located in Chapter XXI 
of Part VI of the Act relating to ‘streets for public place’, also makes 
the position clear that this provision relates to vesting of public 
street, squares, parks and gardens in the appellant-Corporation 
but does not provide for the power of acquisition. In the following 
paragraph, we have explained how the text and the context of the 
expression, ‘The Municipal Commissioner may acquire’ in Section 
352 is not at all the power of acquisition. 
19. Upon arriving at a decision to acquire any land for the 
purpose of opening a street, square, park, etc., under Section 352, 
the Municipal Commissioner will then apply to the Government 
under Section 537 of the Act to initiate the process of acquisition. 
Section 537 is located in Chapter XXXIII Part VIII of the Act relating 
to ‘Acquisition of Property’. This Chapter commences with Section 
535 which specifically provides that the appellant-Corporation 
shall have the power to acquire and hold immovable property. It is 
followed by the power to acquire properties through an agreement 

under Section 536 of the Act or in the alternative, through 
compulsory acquisition of immovable property as provided in 
Section 537 of the Act. 
20. The position is thus, clear. Upon application of the Municipal 
Commissioner under Section 537 for the acquisition of land for 
opening of a street, square, park etc., the Government may order 
proceedings to be taken for acquiring land on behalf of the 
appellant-Corporation as if the land is needed for a public purpose 
within the meaning of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 
21. Sections 535, 536 and 537 of the Act are extracted 
hereinbelow for ready reference: 
“Section 535. Acquisition of property. – The 
Corporation shall, for the purposes of this Act, have 
power to acquire and hold movable and immovable 
property or any interest therein, whether within or 
outside the limits of Kolkata. 
 
Section 536. Acquisition of immovable property 
by agreement.— 
(1) Whenever it is provided in this Act that the 
Municipal Commissioner may acquire, or whenever 
it is necessary or expedient for any purpose of this 
Act that the Municipal Commissioner shall acquire, 
any immovable property, such property may be 
acquired by the Municipal Commissioner on behalf 
of the Corporation by agreement on such terms and 
at such rates or prices or at rates or prices not 
exceeding such maxima as may be approved by the 
Mayor-in-Council either generally for any class of 
cases or specially in any particular case. 

(2) Whenever, under any provision of this Act, the 
Municipal Commissioner is authorised to agree to 
pay the whole or any portion of the expenses of 
acquiring any immovable property, he shall do so on 
such terms at such rates or prices or at rates or 
prices not exceeding such maxima as may be 
approved by the Mayor-in-Council either generally or 
in particular as aforesaid. 
(3) The Municipal Commissioner may on behalf of 
the Corporation acquire by agreement any easement 
affecting any immovable property vested in the 
Corporation and the provisions of sub-sections (1) 
and (2) shall apply to such acquisition. 
 
Section 
537. 
Procedure 
when 
immovable 
property cannot be acquired by agreement. – (1) 
Whenever the Municipal Commissioner is unable 
under section 536 to acquire by agreement any 
immovable property or any easement affecting any 
immovable property vested in the Corporation or 
whenever any immovable property or any easement 
affecting any immovable property vested in the 
Corporation is required for the purpose of this Act, 
the State Government may, in its discretion, upon 
application of the Municipal Commissioner, made 
with the approval of the Mayor-in-Council and 
subject to other provisions of this Act, order 
proceedings to be taken for acquiring the same on 
behalf of the Corporation, as if such property or 
easement were land needed for public purpose 
within the meaning of the Land Acquisition Act, 
1894 (I of 1894) 
 
(2)….. 
 
(3) For the purpose of acquisition of immovable 
property under this section, the Land Acquisition 
Act, 1894, shall be subject to the amendment that 
the market value of any land or building to be 
acquired shall be deemed, for the purpose of sub-
section (1) of section 23 of the Act, to be the market-
value determined according to the disposition of 

such immovable property at the date of declaration 
under sub-section (1) of section 4 thereof in respect 
of such immovable property. 
 
(4) The amount of compensation awarded and all 
other charges incurred in the acquisition of any such 
property shall, subject to all other provisions of this 
Act, 
be 
forthwith 
paid 
by 
the 
Municipal 
Commissioner and thereupon such property shall 
vest in the Corporation.” 
 
22. The scheme of the Act makes it clear that Section 352 
empowers the Municipal Commissioner to identify the land 
required for the purpose of opening of public street, square, park, 
etc. and under Section 537, the Municipal Commissioner has to 
apply to the Government to compulsorily acquire the land. Upon 
such an application, the Government may, in its own discretion, 
order proceedings to be taken for acquiring the land. Section 352 
is therefore, not the power of acquisition. We, therefore, reject the 
submission on behalf of the appellant-Corporation that Section 
352 enables the Municipal Commissioner to acquire land. 
23. We will now deal with the other submission of Mr. Jaideep 
Gupta that there is also a provision for compensation under 
Section 363 where land is acquired under Section 352. In so far as 
Section 363 relating to payment of compensation is concerned, the 
High Court has clarified that this provision relates to payment of 

compensation upon an agreement and not for compulsory 
acquisition. We are in agreement with this finding of the High 
Court. 
24. The Right to property: A net of intersecting rights: There 
is yet another aspect of the matter. Under our constitutional 
scheme, compliance with a fair procedure of law before depriving 
any person of his immovable property is well entrenched. We are 
examining this issue in the context of Section 352 of the Act which 
is bereft of any procedure whatsoever before compulsorily 
acquiring private property. Again, assuming that Section 363 of 
the Act provides for compensation, compulsory acquisition will still 
be unconstitutional if proper procedure is not established or 
followed before depriving a person of their right to property. We 
find it compelling to clarify that a rather undue emphasis is laid 
on provisions of compensation to justify the power of compulsory 
acquisition, as if compensation by itself is the complete procedure 
for a valid acquisition. 
25. While it is true that after the 44th Constitutional 
Amendment8, the right to property drifted from Part III to Part XII 
of the Constitution, there continues to be a potent safety net 
 
8 Constitution (Forty-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1978. against arbitrary acquisitions, hasty decision-making and unfair 
redressal mechanisms. Despite its spatial placement, Article 
300A9 which declares that “no person shall be deprived of his 
property save by authority of law” has been characterised both as 
a constitutional and also a human right10. To assume that 
constitutional protection gets constricted to the mandate of a fair 
compensation would be a disingenuous reading of the text and, 
shall we say, offensive to the egalitarian spirit of the Constitution. 
26. The constitutional discourse on compulsory acquisitions, has 
hitherto, rooted itself within the ‘power of eminent domain’. Even 
within that articulation, the twin conditions of the acquisition 
being for a public purpose and subjecting the divestiture to the 
payment of compensation in lieu of acquisition were mandated11. 
Although not explicitly contained in Article 300A, these twin 
requirements have been read in and inferred as necessary 
conditions for compulsory deprivation to afford protection to the 
individuals who are being divested of property12. A post-colonial 
reading of the Constitution cannot limit itself to these components 
 
9 300A of the Constitution: “Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of law. – 
No person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law.” 
10 Lachhman Dass v. Jagat Ram, (2007); Vidya Devi v. State of Himachal Pradesh, 
(2020). 
11 State of Bihar v. Maharajadhiraja Sir Kameshwar Singh of Darbhanga, (1952). 
12 Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd v. Darius Shapur Chenai, (2005); K.T. 
Plantation Pvt Ltd v. State of Karnataka, (2011). alone. The binary reading of the constitutional right to property 
must give way to more meaningful renditions, where the larger 
right to property is seen as comprising intersecting sub-rights, 
each with a distinct character but interconnected to constitute the 
whole. These sub-rights weave themselves into each other, and as 
a consequence, State action or the legislation that results in the 
deprivation of private property must be measured against this 
constitutional net as a whole, and not just one or many of its 
strands. 
27. What then are these sub-rights or strands of this swadeshi 
constitutional fabric constituting the right to property? Seven such 
sub-rights can be identified, albeit non-exhaustive. These are: 
i) duty of the State to inform the person that it intends to acquire 
his property – the right to notice, ii) the duty of the State to hear 
objections to the acquisition – the right to be heard, iii) the duty of 
the State to inform the person of its decision to acquire – the right 
to a reasoned decision, iv) the duty of the State to demonstrate that 
the acquisition is for public purpose – the duty to acquire only for 
public purpose, v) the duty of the State to restitute and rehabilitate 
– the right of restitution or fair compensation, vi) the duty of the 
State to conduct the process of acquisition efficiently and within 

prescribed timelines of the proceedings – the right to an efficient 
and expeditious process, and vii) final conclusion of the 
proceedings leading to vesting – the right of conclusion. 
28. These seven rights are foundational components of a law that 
is tune with Article 300A, and the absence of one of these or some 
of them would render the law susceptible to challenge. The 
judgment of this Court in K.T. Plantations (supra)13 declares that 
the law envisaged under Article 300A must be in line with the 
overarching principles of rule of law, and must be just, fair, and 
reasonable. It is, of course, precedentially sound to describe some 
of these sub-rights as ‘procedural’, a nomenclature that often 
tends to undermine the inherent worth of these safeguards. These 
seven sub-rights may be procedures, but they do constitute the 
real content of the right to property under Article 300A, non-
compliance of these will amount to violation of the right, being 
without the authority of law. 
29. These sub-rights of procedure have been synchronously 
incorporated in laws concerning compulsory acquisition and are 
also recognised by our constitutional courts while reviewing 
administrative actions for compulsory acquisition of private 
 
13 K.T. Plantation Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Karnataka, (2011). property. The following will demonstrate how these seven 
principles have seamlessly become an integral part of our Union 
and State statutes concerning acquisition and also the 
constitutional and administrative law culture that our courts have 
evolved from time to time. 
30. Following are the seven principles: 
30.1. The Right to notice: (i) A prior notice informing the bearer 
of the right that the State intends to deprive them of the right to 
property is a right in itself; a linear extension of the right to know 
embedded in Article 19(1)(a). The Constitution does not 
contemplate acquisition by ambush. The notice to acquire must be 
clear, cogent and meaningful. Some of the statutes reflect this 
right. 
(ii) Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, Section 3(1) of the 
Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952, 
Section 11 of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in 
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013, and 
Section 3A of the National Highways Act, 1956 are examples of 
such statutory incorporation of the right to notice before initiation 
of the land acquisition proceedings. 

(iii) In a large number of decisions, our constitutional courts have 
independently recognised the right to notice before any process of 
acquisition is commenced14. 
30.2. The Right to be heard: (i) Following the right to a 
meaningful and effective prior notice of acquisition, is the right of 
the property-bearer to communicate his objections and concerns 
to the authority acquiring the property. This right to be heard 
against the proposed acquisition must be meaningful and not a 
sham. 
(ii) Section 5A of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, Section 3(1) of the 
Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952, 
Section 15 of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in 
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013, and 
Section 3C of the National Highways Act, 1956, are some statutory 
embodiments of this right. 
 
14 In Narendrajit Singh v. State of U.P., (1970), it was held that a notification under 
Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, even in urgent cases falling under Section 17 of 
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 is the sine qua non of the process of acquisition. In State of 
Mysore v. Abdul Razak Sahib, (1973), it was held that a notice under Section 4 of 
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 is necessary for completing the land acquisition process. In 
Narinderjit Singh and Ranjit Singh v. State of U.P., (1973), this Court held that the 
notice under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 is mandatory and if no notice is 
published, the entire process of land acquisition is vitiated. In Competent Authority v. 
Barangore Jute Factory, (2005), this Court held that if the initial notification 
under Section 3A of the National Highways Act, 1956 is bad, the entire process which is 
followed in pursuance of it is vitiated. 

(iii) Judicial opinions recognizing the importance of this right are 
far too many to reproduce. Suffice to say that that the enquiry in 
which a land holder would raise his objection is not a mere 
formality15. 
30.3. The Right to a reasoned decision: i) That the authorities 
have heard and considered the objections is evidenced only 
through a reasoned order. It is incumbent upon the authority to 
take an informed decision and communicate the same to the 
objector. 
 (ii) Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, Section 3(2) of the 
Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952, 
Section 19 of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in 
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 and 
Section 3D of the National Highways Act, 1956, are the statutory 
incorporations of this principle. 
 
15 In Nandeshwar Prasad v. State of U.P., AIR 1964 SC 1217, this Court has held the right 
under Section 5A of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 to be a substantial one and it cannot be 
taken away. In Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd. v. Darius Shapur Chenai, (2005), 
this Court has held that the right of submitting objections under Section 5A of the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 is a valuable right and the hearing given in pursuance of exercise of 
this right must not be rendered to a mere formality. In Union of India v. Shiv Raj, (2014), this Court held that the rules of natural justice have been ingrained in the scheme 
of Section 5A of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. In Competent Authority v. Barangore Jute 
Factory, (2005), this Court observed that in the process from the initial 
notification to the final declaration, objections play a vital road. In Kamal Trading (P) Ltd. v. 
State of W.B., (2012), this Court quashed the land acquisition proceedings when a 
proper hearing under Section 5A of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 was not accorded. In Gojer 
Bros. (P) Ltd. v. State of W.B., (2013), this Court held quashed the land acquisition 
proceedings when it was observed that a mere formality was rendered in the name of a 
hearing under Section 5A of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 

(iii) Highlighting the importance of the declaration of the decision 
to acquire, the Courts have held that the declaration is mandatory, 
failing which, the acquisition proceedings will cease to have 
effect16. 
30.4. The Duty to acquire only for public purpose: (i) That the 
acquisition must be for a public purpose is inherent and an 
important fetter on the discretion of the authorities to acquire. This 
requirement, which conditions the purpose of acquisition must 
stand to reason with the larger constitutional goals of a welfare 
state and distributive justice. 
(ii) Sections 4 and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, Sections 
3(1) and 7(1) of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable 
Property Act, 1952, Sections 2(1), 11(1),15(1)(b) and 19(1) of the 
Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 and Section 3A(1) of the 
National Highways Act, 1956 depict the statutory incorporation of 
the public purpose requirement of compulsory acquisition. 
 
16 In Mohan Singh v. International Airport Authority of India, (1997), this Court held 
that publication of a declaration under Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 is 
mandatory. In Project Director, Project Implementation Unit v. P.V. Krishnamoorthy, (2021), this Court held that if a declaration is not published under Section 3D of the 
National Highways Act, 1956 then the initial notification and resultantly, the acquisition 
proceedings cease to have effect. 

(iii) The decision of compulsory acquisition of land is subject to 
judicial review and the Court will examine and determine whether 
the acquisition is related to public purpose. If the court arrives at 
a conclusion that that there is no public purpose involved in the 
acquisition, the entire process can be set-aside. This Court has 
time and again reiterated the importance of the underlying 
objective of acquisition of land by the State to be for a public 
purpose17. 
30.5. The Right of restitution or fair compensation: (i) A 
person’s right to hold and enjoy property is an integral part to the 
constitutional 
right 
under 
Article 
300A. 
Deprivation 
or 
extinguishment of that right is permissible only upon restitution, 
be it in the form of monetary compensation, rehabilitation or other 
similar means. Compensation has always been considered to be 
an integral part of the process of acquisition. 
 
17 In Somawanti v. State of Punjab,, this Court held that the 
Constitution permits acquisition of private land by the State only for a public purpose. The 
rationale of taking away private land by the State for a public purpose is that private interest 
must give way to public interest as observed by the Court in Daulat Singh Surana v. First 
Land Acquisition Collector, (2007). In Union of India v. Jaswant Rai Kochhar, (1996) 
 and D. Hanumanth SA v. State of Karnataka, (2010), this Court held 
acquisition proceedings to be valid even if there was a change in the public purpose, so long 
as there is a public purpose for which the land is acquired. The importance of the 
communication of public purpose as an ingredient of the notification for acquisition was 
reiterated by this Court in Munshi Singh v. Union of India, (1973) when acquisition 
proceedings were set aside since the public purpose was mentioned as “planned development 
of the area” which was observed to be wholly insufficient and conveyed no idea as to the 
specific purpose. Similarly, in Madhya Pradesh Housing Board v. Mohd. Shafi, (1992), wherein this Court quashed the acquisition proceedings on the ground that the public 
purpose was mentioned as “residential” which was too vague. 

(ii) Section 11 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, Sections 8 and 9 
of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 
1952, Section 23 of the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency 
in 
Land 
Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation 
and 
Resettlement Act, 2013, and Sections 3G and 3H of the National 
Highways Act, 1956 are the statutory incorporations of the right to 
restitute a person whose land has been compulsorily acquired. 
(iii) Our courts have not only considered that compensation is 
necessary, but have also held that a fair and reasonable 
compensation is the sine qua non for any acquisition process18. 
30.6. The Right to an efficient and expeditious process: (i) The 
acquisition process is traumatic for more than one reason. The 
administrative delays in identifying the land, conducting the 
enquiry and evaluating the objections, leading to a final 
declaration, consume time and energy. Further, passing of the 
award, payment of compensation and taking over the possession 
 
18 In State of U.P. v. Manohar, (2005), this Court held that payment of 
compensation is an integral part of the process of land acquisition. In M. Naga Venkata 
Lakshmi v. Visakhapatnam Municipal Corpn., (2007), this Court held that wherever 
promised, compensation is ought to be paid. In NHAI v. P. Nagaraju, (2022), this 
Court held that compensation must be adequate and must be arrived at keeping in mind the 
market value of the acquired land. In Vidya Devi v. State of H.P., (2020), this Court 
held that even though compensation is not expressly provided for under Article 300A of the 
Constitution, it can be inferred therein. In the American jurisprudence, payment of 
compensation has been made part of due process (See Sweet v. Rechel [159 US 380 (1895): 
40 L.Ed. 188], Delaware L. & W.R. Co. v. Morristown [276 US 182 (1928): 72 L.Ed. 523] and 
United States v. Caltex (Philippines) [344 US 149 (1952): 97 L.Ed. 157). are equally time consuming. It is necessary for the administration 
to be efficient in concluding the process and within a reasonable 
time. This obligation must necessarily form part of Article 300A. 
(ii) Sections 5A(1), 6, 11A, and 34 of the Land Acquisition Act, 
1894, Sections 6(1A) and 9 of the Requisitioning and Acquisition 
of Immovable Property Act, 1952, Sections 4(2), 7(4), 7(5), 11(5), 
14, 15(1), 16(1), 19(2), 25, 38(1), 60(4), 64 and 80 of the Right to 
Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 and Sections 3C(1), 
3D(3) and 3E(1) of the National Highways Act, 1956, prescribe for 
statutory frameworks for the completion of individual steps in the 
process of acquisition of land within stipulated timelines. 
(iii) On multiple occasions, upon failure to adhere to the timelines 
specified in law, the courts have set aside the acquisition 
proceedings19. 
 
19 In Roy Estate v. State of Jharkhand, (2009); Union of India v. Mahendra Girji, 
(2010) and Union of India v. Mahendra Girji, (2010), this Court has 
underscored the importance of following the timelines fixed by the statute. In Mansaram v. 
S.P. Pathak, (1984), this Court has held that the powers relevant to the land 
acquisition process must be exercised within a reasonable time. In Kerala State Housing 
Board v. Ramapriya Hotels (P) Ltd., (1994), this Court has held that if the 
concerned legislation does not stipulate the time-frames within which the process or its 
components are to be completed, it amounts to a violation of Article 14 and Article 21 of the 
Constitution. In Ram Chand v. Union of India, (1994), this Court has acknowledged 
the realisation of the Parliament that the authorities are not completing the acquisition 
proceedings within a reasonable time and thus, the Parliament has introduced time-limits. 
In Ambalal Purshottam v. Ahmedabad Municipal Corpn. (1968), this Court held 
that a notification under Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 must be followed by a 
proceeding for determination of compensation without any unreasonable delay. In Khadim 
Hussain v. State of U.P., (1976), this Court held that excessive intervening delay 

30.7. The Right of conclusion: (i) Upon conclusion of process 
of acquisition and payment of compensation, the State takes 
possession of the property in normal circumstances. The 
culmination of an acquisition process is not in the payment of 
compensation, but also in taking over the actual physical 
possession of the land. If possession is not taken, acquisition is 
not complete. With the taking over of actual possession after the 
normal procedures of acquisition, the private holding is divested 
and the right, title and interest in the property, along-with 
possession is vested in the State. Without final vesting, the State’s, 
or its beneficiary’s right, title and interest in the property is 
inconclusive and causes lot of difficulties. The obligation to 
conclude and complete the process of acquisition is also part of 
Article 300A. ii) Section 16 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, Sections 4 and 5 
of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 
1952, Sections 37 and 38 of the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency 
in 
Land 
Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation 
and 
Resettlement Act, 2013, and Sections 3D and 3E of the National 
Highways Act, 1956, statutorily recognise this right of the acquirer. between notifications under Sections 4 and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, keeping the 
landowner in suspense throughout, is illegal. iii) This step of taking over of possession has been a matter of great 
judicial scrutiny and this Court has endeavoured to construe the 
relevant provisions in a way which ensures non-arbitrariness in 
this action of the acquirer20. For that matter, after taking over 
possession, the process of land acquisition concludes with the 
vesting of the land with the concerned authority. The culmination 
of an acquisition process by vesting has been a matter of great 
importance. On this aspect, the courts have given a large number 
of decisions as to the time, method and manner by which vesting 
takes place21. 
 
20 In State of W.B. v. Vishnunarayan & Associates (P) Ltd., (2002), this Court held 
that possession can be resumed by the acquirer only in a manner known to or recognised by 
law and it cannot resume possession otherwise than in due course of law. In Jilubhai Nanbhai 
Khachar v. State of Gujarat, 1995 Supp (1) SCC 596, this Court held that though eminent 
domain is the highest and most exact idea of property remaining in the Government, or in 
the aggregate body of the people in their sovereign capacity, even then the right to take 
possession of a private property must be exercised in the manner directed by the Constitution 
and the laws of the State, since deprivation of property must take place after following the 
procedure of law and upon ensuring due process. 
21 In Girnar Traders (3) v. State of Maharashtra, (2011), this Court held that under 
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, upon the payment of compensation and taking of possession 
of a land so acquired, the land is vested in the State free of encumbrances and the completion 
of such vesting of the land in the State amounts to the transfer of title from the owner to the 
State by a legal fiction. In P. Chinnanna v. State of A.P., (1994) and Delhi 
Development Authority v. Reena Suri, (2016), this Court held that mere passing 
of award under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 will not suffice to vest the land in the State 
since taking possession is of utmost importance. In Fruit & Vegetable Merchants Union v. 
Delhi Improvement Trust,, this Court held that once the land is 
vested in the State, it is vested neither for a limited purpose nor for a limited duration. 
Further, in Union of India v. Tarsem Singh, (2019), this Court observed that the 
National Highways Act, 1956 has an object of reducing delay in the process of land acquisition 
in order to speedily implement projects pertaining to highways. It is in this context that this 
Court held that under Section 3D of the National Highways Act, 1956, the land to be acquired 
vests in the Union upon the publication of a notification declaring the acquisition, which is 
done after the disposal of objections of the land-owner, if any. 

31. The seven principles which we have discussed are integral 
to the authority of law enabling compulsory acquisition of 
private property. Union and State statutes have adopted these 
principles and incorporated them in different forms in the 
statutes provisioning compulsory acquisition of immovable 
property. The importance of these principles, independent of the 
statutory 
prescription 
have 
been 
recognised 
by 
our 
constitutional courts and they have become part of our 
administrative law jurisprudence. 
32. Conclusions: Returning to the legal submissions of the 
counsel for the appellant-Corporation, as we have noticed that 
Section 352 does not provide for any procedure whatsoever, we 
reject the contention that it contemplates the power of 
acquisition. We have already held that Section 352 is only 
intended to enable the Municipal Commissioner to decide 
whether a land is to be acquired for public purpose. The power 
of acquisition is in fact vested with the State under Section 537 
and it will exercise it, in its own discretion, whenever the 
Municipal Commissioner makes an application to that effect. We 
have also agreed with the decision of the High Court that Section 
363 is not a provision for compensation for compulsory 

acquisition. In this context, we have also held that a valid power 
of acquisition coupled with the provision for fair compensation 
by itself would not complete and exhaust the power and process 
of acquisition. Prescription of the necessary procedures, before 
depriving a person of his property is an integral part of the 
‘authority of law’, under Article 300A and, Section 352 of the Act 
contemplates no procedure whatsoever. 
33. We are not referring to the detailed facts of the case 
involving multiple rounds of litigation where the respondents 
have taken inconsistent stands about the ownership and 
acquisition of the Property. There is no doubt in our mind that 
the exercise of the power is illegal, illegitimate and has caused 
great difficult to the respondent-land-bearer. It is necessary to 
refer to the findings of the learned single Judge that the 
appellant-Corporation acted in blatant violation of statutory 
provisions, these findings are as follows: 
“The facts disclosed by the Corporation in the Affidavit-
in-Opposition evidently shows that the acquisition was 
made by invoking Section 352(a) of the said Act by 
exercising the power of eminent domain. There was a 
doubt in the mind of some of the Municipal Authorities 
whether such sovereign power can be exercised by the 
Statutory Authority like the Corporation and a legal 
opinion was sought by the Chief Municipal Law Officer 
from one of the Senior Advocates. The Senior Advocate, 
however, doubted over the said exercise of power and 

also highlighted the anomalies in such action. On the 
basis of such opinion the Chief Municipal Officer made 
the following remark: - 
 
“Doubt has arisen in the past on the question 
whether the Municipal Commissioner could under 
Section 352(a) of the CMC Act, 1980 straightway 
compulsorily acquire any land by giving notice to 
owner/occupiers also in contract Newspapers and pay 
compensation under Section 363(3) of the Act. The 
former Ch. Mpl. Law Officer had referred the question 
to Mr. P.K. Ghoah Senior Advocate for his opinion. A 
copy of his opinion is placed below for persual. I have 
nothing more to add. If in spite of the anomalies in the 
statute pointed out by Mr. P.K.Ghosh the Mpl. 
Commissioner proceeds to take possession of the land 
in question, I have no comment to make. If the 
aggrieved party moves the Court, then the Court will 
resolve the anomalies.” 
It is curious to note that despite the same, the then 
Mayor put a note that the Corporation may proceed to 
acquire the property by invoking powers under Section 
352(a) and the note of the Chief Municipal Law Officer 
was simply kept in the file. It would further appear 
from the subsequent noting of the Chief Municipal Law 
Officer put on 08.01.1991 wherein it is noted that the 
act is silent as to when the possession is to be taken 
either before or after the payment of compensation 
under Section 363 and according to him, the possession 
can only be taken after the payment of compensation 
under Section 363(3) of the said Act. Despite the 
aforesaid noting, the Municipal Commissioner passed 
an order of acquisition on 18.01.1991 directing to 
acquire the subject land under Section 352(a) of the Act 
with immediate effect and the possession should also 
be taken immediately. There is a serious dispute 
whether the possession was in fact taken in terms of 
the said order of the Municipal Commissioner or not. 
However, it is seen from the notes put on 16.03.1991 
that the possession was taken. The fact remains that 
no compensation has been paid as yet. The Corporation 
has further disclosed a letter allegedly written by the 

recorded 
owner 
on 
14.11.1991 
wherein 
it 
is 
categorically stated that the possession has not been 
taken. Though it appears from the noting that the 
possession was taken way back in 1991 but the record 
maintained by the Corporation was not altered and/or 
corrected and in fact the Corporation continued to 
accept the property tax paid by the recorded owner in 
respect of the said property. Even in the year 2000, the 
Corporation mutated the name of the Birinchi Behari 
Shaw and also issued the No Due Certificate to him. It 
is only in the year 2010 the Corporation deleted the 
name of the said owner and incorporated its name as 
owner thereof. Yet, showing the huge outstanding on 
account of property tax with interest and penalty in the 
letter of intimation issued on 17.07.2010. The 
explanation is sought to be offered that there is no 
synchronization between the two departments of the 
Corporation and a mistake has been committed, which 
cannot confer any equity or right in favour of the 
Petitioner. 
 
I am unable to persuade myself to agree with such 
explanation. For the sake of argument, if it is accepted 
that possession was taken way back in 1991, there 
was no occasion to accept the property tax for more 
than a decade without altering the entries made in the 
assessment register. 
 
This Court, therefore, finds that the Corporation 
acted blatantly in violation of the statutory provision in 
acquiring the property as such acquisition should have 
been facilitated by approaching the State under Section 
537(1) of the said Act. The entire action concerning the 
acquisition of property by invoking Section 352(a) of the 
Act is per se illegal, invalid and in clear contravention 
to the provisions of the Act and are hereby quashed and 
set aside.” 
 
34. In the above analysis, we are of the considered opinion that 
the High Court was fully justified in allowing the writ petition 
and rejecting the case of the appellant-Corporation acquiring 

land under Section 352 of the Act. The impugned judgment does 
not brook interference on any count. 
35. Having considered the matter in detail, we dismiss the 
appeal SLP (C) No. 4504 of 2021 filed by the 
appellant-Corporation against the judgment of the High Court 
of Calcutta in APO No. 523 of 2017 dated 17.12.2019 with costs 
quantified at Rs. 5,00,000/-, to be paid to respondent no. 1 
within a period of sixty days from today. 
36. Pending application(s), if any, shall be disposed of. 
 
………………………………...J. 
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 

………………………………...J. 
[ARAVIND KUMAR]