IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

SMT. SHYAMO DEVI AND OTHERS 

VERSUS 
STATE OF U.P. THROUGH 
SECRETARY AND OTHERS 

 J U D G E M E N T 
 
Aravind Kumar, J. 
 
1. 
This appeal is directed against the judgment dated 19.01.2010 
passed in by the High Court of judicature at 
Allahabad whereunder the writ petition filed by the appellants herein 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘writ petitioners or petitioners’) challenging the 
order dated 23.09.2009 passed in Revision No.68 of 2008-09 came to be 
dismissed and said order came to be upheld for the reason that the revision 

petition is not maintainable and consequently the order dated 07.02.2008 
passed by the Additional Collector holding that proceedings for 
cancellation of the patta could be started at any time came to be upheld. 
 
2. 
By our order dated 13.03.2024, we had made it clear that since 
none had appeared on behalf of the appellants (writ petitioners) no further 
adjournment would be granted and in the interest of justice one last 
opportunity came to be extended to the writ petitioners. However, even 
today when the matter is called in the second round none has appeared on 
behalf of the appellants. Hence, we have proceeded to examine the case on 
merits by considering the pleas advanced in the appeal, grounds urged 
therein and the arguments advanced on behalf of the respondents’ counsel. 
 
3. 
Short facts leading to the filing of this appeal are as under: 
 
4. 
In the year 1969-70, the khasra plot No.185 in Rampur Kedhar 
Village, UP was designated as a Panchayat Ghar but later it was declared 
unsuitable in 1993. On the request of the village Pradhan a portion of the 
said plot was re-assigned for residential use by the Assistant Collector and 
subsequently different plots of land in said survey number came to be 
allotted to different individuals including the writ petitioners under Section 
122-C(i)(d) of Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act 
(hereafter referred to as ‘UPZALR Act’ for short). 

5. 
After 13 years, the Secretary/Lekhpal of Bhumi Prabandhank 
Samiti, Rampur forwarded a report to the jurisdictional Tehsildar opining 
thereunder that plot No.185 had been originally designated as Panchayat 
Ghar and classified under Section 132 of UPZALR Act and accordingly 
recorded in the revenue records, which had been unlawfully allotted for 
residential use. Hence, he proposed for cancellation of the allotments made 
and to take possession of the land from all the allottees including writ 
petitioners. The Tehsildar in turn forwarded a proposal to the District 
Magistrate for cancellation of the allotment vide communication dated 
18.06.2007. This, resulted in show cause notices dated 05.07.2007 being 
issued to the writ petitioners and same was duly replied by them by filing 
objections on 04.10.2007. An application came to be filed by the 
petitioners to decide the issue of the limitation as preliminary issue, since 
the proceedings had been initiated after 13 years from the date of allotment 
contending inter alia that within a period of 3 years the proceedings ought 
to have been initiated. The Additional Collector by order dated 07.02.2008 
was of the view that action initiated being suo moto, no limitation has been 
provided under Section 122-C(6) of UPZALR Act; that during the 
consolidation proceedings the land had been specified “Panchayat Ghar” 
and it was covered under Section 132(6) of the UPZALR Act; the 
allotment of land being irregular and no time limit having been fixed for 

cancellation of allotment made under Section 122-C(6). Hence, he arrived 
at a conclusion that there is no limitation fixed under the Act and 
proceeded to reject the application filed. 
 
6. 
Being aggrieved by the said order the revision petition came to be 
filed before the Additional Commissioner which came to be entertained on 
merits and dismissed. 
 
7. 
Being aggrieved by the aforesaid two (2) orders, the writ 
petitioners challenged the same in which 
came to be dismissed on two grounds namely the revision petition filed 
was not maintainable in the teeth of Section 122-C(7); and, on the ground 
that impugned order dated 07.02.2008 passed by the Additional Collector 
over-ruling the objections of the writ petitioners with regard to limitation is 
correct and it was meritless. Hence, this appeal. 
 
8. 
As already noticed by us herein above, none have appeared on 
behalf of the writ petitioners. Shri Tanmaya Agarwal, learned counsel 
appearing for the respondent-state has vehemently contended that fraud 
vitiates all acts and in the instant case the revenue was empowered under 
the UPZALR Act to cancel the illegal and fraudulent allotment of land 
made in favour of the writ petitioners and as such suit had been instituted 
for cancellation of allotment for which no limitation has been specified 

under Section 122-C(6) of UPZALR Act and particularly when the land in 
question had been reserved as Panchayat Ghar it would be governed under 
Section 132 of the UPZALR Act. He would also submit that even 
otherwise where a bhumidhar uses the land for a purpose not connected 
with agriculture, horticulture or animal husbandry same would be in 
contravention of Section 143 and admittedly no permission had been 
procured for the usage of the land for residential purposes as required 
under Section 143. Hence, he would contend that the authorities were 
within their jurisdiction to initiate the proceedings for cancelling the 
allotment and the revenue authorities as well as the High Court had rightly 
refused to interfere with the impugned order dated 07.02.2008 and rejected 
the writ petition whereunder they had sought for the suit being dismissed 
as barred by limitation. Hence, he prays for rejection of this appeal. 
 
9. 
Having heard the learned Counsel representing the State, it would 
be apposite to note the order dated 17.07.2012 passed by this Court. It 
reads: 
 
“Leave granted. 
In the meanwhile, the parties are directed to maintain 
status quo in respect of the disputed land, as it is obtaining 
today. This would necessarily mean that neither party shall 
change the present character of the property or alienate the 
same to any other person in any manner whatsoever.” 
 
(Emphasis Supplied by us) 

10. 
The writ petitioners who are rustic and illiterate villagers had 
submitted applications for allotment of land for purposes of house 
construction in the village Dhodhar, Tehsil Thakurdwara, District 
Moradabad. Pursuant to the same the writ petitioner’s husband/father 
amongst others were allotted 150 sq. yards land each in Gata No. 185 Mi. 
The said allotment came to be approved by the Sub-District Magistrate on 
27.06.1994 and allotment was made in pursuance to the proposal dated 
15.05.1994 forwarded by The Land Management Committee, Rampur, 
Dhodhar. Hence, the writ petitioners and other allottees have put up 
construction by putting up residential accommodation and have been 
residing therein with their family members. However, after a period of 13 
years namely on 13.06.2007 the Lekhpal submitted a report for 
cancellation of such allotment on the ground that the land allotted to the 
writ petitioners and other allottees were classified as Panchayat Ghar and 
as per Section 132 of UPZALR Act the same could not have been allotted 
to the writ petitioners. Based on the said report, Tehsildar, on 18.06.2007 
forwarded a report to the Sub-District Magistrate, proposing thereunder to 
initiate proceedings and recommended for cancellation of the allotment. 
Hence, the proceedings for cancellation of the allotment came to be 
initiated by issuance of show cause notice dated 05.07.2007 to all the 
allottees. 

11. 
Thus, it emerges from the afore-stated facts that the authorities 
initiated the proceedings for cancellation of the allotment initially based on 
the report dated 13.06.2007 of the Lekhpal which was undisputedly after 
13 years from the date of allotment. It is no doubt true that there is no 
limitation fixed for initiation of the proceedings under the UPZALR Act as 
contended by the learned Counsel for the Respondents. This Court in 
Additional Commssioner, Revenue and Others v. Akhalaq Hussain and 
Another, (2020) vide paragraph 28 has held that sub-section 
(6) of Section 122C empowers the collector to enquire with regard to the 
manner of allotment being irregular and may proceed to cancel the 
allotment if he satisfies that such allotment is irregular. Section 122C (6) 
reads as under: 
“122C (6) The Collector may of his own motion and shall on 
the application of any person aggrieved by an allotment of 
land under this section inquire in the manner prescribed into 
such allotment, and if he is satisfied that the allotment is 
irregular, he may cancel the allotment, and thereupon the 
right, title and interest of the allottee and of every other 
person claiming through him in the land allotted shall cease.” 

12. 
However, the question which requires to be addressed is whether 
such initiation of the proceedings can be at any length of time or at any 
point of time where no limitation is prescribed. This Court in State of 

Punjab Vs. Bhatinda Milk Producer Union Limited reported in (2007) 
 has held: 
“18. It is trite that if no period of limitation has been 
prescribed, statutory authority must exercise its jurisdiction 
within a reasonable period. What, however, shall be the 
reasonable period would depend upon the nature of the 
statute, rights and liabilities thereunder and other relevant 
factors.” 

13. 
This Court had an occasion to consider similar issue in the matter 
of Ibrahimpatnam Taluk Vyavasaya Coolie Sangham v. K. Suresh 
Reddy, (2003) namely the exercise of suo moto power under 
sub-section (4) of Section 50-B of Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) 
Tenancy and Agriculture Lands Act, 1950 (for short ‘AP Act’) i.e., can it be 
at any time or such power is to be exercised within a reasonable time and if 
so, within what time? The facts obtained in the said case was that the 
owners of the subtle land executed various sale deeds in favour of different 
persons on plain paper and possession of the lands was also delivered to 
the purchasers. The vendees applied under Section 50-B of the AP Act for 
validation of sales and the concerned Tehsildar issued validation 
certificates on various dates. The said orders of the Tehsildar came to be 
challenged before the Joint Collector of the District by the Special 
Tehsildar and authorised officer (land reforms) which appeals came to be 
dismissed in 1988. It is thereafter the Joint Collector issued show cause 
notices purporting to exercise the suo moto power under sub-section (4) of 

Section 50-B of the Act to both the vendors and the vendees as to why the 
validation certificates issued in the year 1974 or earlier should not be 
cancelled after considering the objections filed in response to the show 
cause notices, the Joint Collector set aside the validation certificates in 
1989. The learned Single Judge before whom challenge was laid accepted 
the plea of the writ petitioners by arriving at a conclusion that suo moto 
power of revision ought to have been exercised within a reasonable period, 
though Section 50-B (4) of the Act empowers the authority to exercise 
such suo moto power at any time. The impleading applicants who had filed 
the complaint, assailed the order of learned Single Judge before the 
Division Bench without success. In so far as the validation certificates 
which were found to be fraught with fraud came to be set aside by the 
Division Bench and also taking into account that the parties did not 
produce the documents. 
 
14. 
 Sub-section (4) of Section 50-B of the AP Act can be juxtaposition 
with sub-section (6) of Section 122-C of the UPZALR Act for immediate 
reference and it reads: 
Section 122-C (6) 
of UPZALR Act 
Section 50-B (4) 
of AP Act 
122-C (6) The Collector may of his own 
motion and shall on the application of 
any person aggrieved by an allotment of 
land under this section inquire in the 
50-B (4) The Collector may, suo-motu at 
any time, call for and examine the record 
relating to any certificate issued or 
proceedings taken by the Tahsildar under 

manner prescribed into such allotment, 
and if he is satisfied that the allotment is 
irregular, he may cancel the allotment, 
and thereupon the right, title and interest 
of the allottee and of every other person 
claiming through him in the land allotted 
shall cease. this section for the purpose of satisfying 
himself as to the legality or propriety of 
such certificate or as to the regularity of 
such proceedings and pass such order in 
relation thereto as he may think fit: 
Provided that no order adversely affecting 
any person shall be passed under this sub-
section unless such person has had an 
opportunity of making his representation 
thereto. 

15. 
In Ibrahimpatnam’s case (supra) wherein sub-section (4) of 
Section 50-B was pressed into service discloses that the expression ‘the 
collector may, suo moto at any time; is occurring while such expression is 
conspicuously absent in sub-section (6) of Section 122-(C) of UPZALR 
Act. In the aforesaid case, it came to be held by the Apex Court that suo 
moto power should be exercised within a reasonable period even in case of 
fraud and within a reasonable time from the date of discovery of fraud and 
it depends on facts and circumstances of each case. It came to be further 
held: 
“12. The learned Single Judge has referred to and relied on 
various decisions including the decisions of this Court as to 
how the use of the words “at any time” in sub-section (4) of 
Section 50-B of the Act should be understood. In the 
impugned order the Division Bench of the High Court 
approves and affirms the decision of the learned Single 
Judge. Where a statute provides any suo motu power of 
revision without prescribing any period of limitation, the 
power must be exercised within a reasonable time and what 

is “reasonable time” has to be determined on the facts of 
each case. 
 
13. In the light of what is stated above, we are of the view 
that the Division Bench of the High Court was right in 
affirming the view of the learned Single Judge of the High 
Court that the suo motu power under sub-section (4) of 
Section 50-B of the Act is to be exercised within a 
reasonable time. 
 
19. It is also necessary to note that the suo motu power was 
sought to be exercised by the Joint Collector after 13-15 
years. Section 50-B was amended in the year 1979 by adding 
sub-section (4), but no action was taken to invalidate the 
certificates in exercise of the suo motu power till 1989. 
There is no convincing explanation as to why the authorities 
waited for such a long time. It appears that sub-section (4) 
was added so as to take action where alienations or transfers 
were made to defeat the provisions of the Land Ceiling Act. 
The Land Ceiling Act having come into force on 1-1-1975, 
the authorities should have made inquiries and efforts so as 
to exercise the suo motu power within reasonable time. The 
action of the Joint Collector in exercising suo motu power 
after several years and not within reasonable period and 
passing orders cancelling validation certificates given by the 
Tahsildar, as rightly held by the High Court, could not be 
sustained.” 
 
In the teeth of the expression ‘any time’ not being found in sub-section (6) 
of Section 122-C, it would not detain us for too long to set aside the 
impugned orders. 
 
16. 
However, in order to satisfy ourselves as to whether the issue of 
fraud would arise in the instant case? And if so, whether such foundational 
facts had been laid in the proceedings initiated? Or such fraud, if any, has 
been committed by the writ petitioners or attributed to them under the 
show cause notices has also been examined. The foundational facts 

narrated herein above, at the cost of repetition requires to be noticed 
namely the report or the communication of the Lekhpal dated 13.06.2007 
forwarded to the Tehsildar. Perusal of the same does not even suggest or 
indicate of such fraud having occurred or alleged against writ petitioners. 
However, in the report dated 18.06.2007 submitted by the Tehsildar to the 
District Magistrate, it has been stated therein that subject land had been 
preserved for Panchayat Ghar and it is based on the information furnished 
by the peshkar working in the office Sub-District Magistrate who is said to 
have intimated that the file does not bear the signature of the then Sub-
District Magistrate and the Tehsildar is also said to have found certain 
irregularities. In other words, on the basis of such presumed irregularities 
he has jumped to the conclusion that allotment was irregular, against law 
and approval of allotment was on the basis of forged signature of Sub-
District Magistrate. However, the basis of such conclusion namely 
signature of the Sub-District Magistrate having been forged is not specified 
or in other words report is silent. It is also interesting to note that no 
allegation of whatsoever nature has been attributed to the allottees of they 
having forged the signature/s. In this background, we are of the considered 
view that the principles enunciated by this Court in Ibrahimpatnam’s case 
(supra) would be squarely applicable to the facts on hand and as such the 
order impugned herein cannot be sustained. 

17. 
We also make it clear that though the power of the Collector is 
available to initiate suo moto action for cancellation of allotment under 
sub-section (6) of Section 122-C in case of fraud and such foundational 
facts would disclose the same, it would suffice to initiate the proceedings 
as fraud vitiates all proceedings as held in Akhalaq Hussain’s case 
referred to supra. By making this position of law explicitly clear and in the 
facts and circumstances of the present case as unfolded which is discussed 
in detail herein above disclosing same not being laid in show cause notices, 
we are of the considered view that impugned order as well as the orders 
impugned before the writ court would not be sustainable. 
 
18. 
Yet another factor which has swayed in our mind to quash the 
impugned order is the fact that pursuant to the allotment made on 
27.06.1994 the allottees who are poor rustic villagers have constructed 
their houses and the allotment was made based on the approval granted by 
the then Sub-District Magistrate and they have been residing in the 
residential buildings so constructed by them for the last several years and 
to unsettle the same would result in heaping injustice to those poor hapless 
persons and particularly when the subject land has been utilized for 
allotment to the poor and houseless persons. 

19. 
 For the cumulative reasons afore-stated, appeal is allowed and the 
impugned order dated 19.01.2010 as well as the order dated 07.02.2008, 
passed by Additional Collector- respondent No.3 herein and the order 
dated 
23.09.2009 
passed 
by 
the 
Additional 
Commissioner, 
(Administration) Moradabad Division are hereby set aside subject to 
observation made herein above. No order as to costs....…………….J. 
 (C.T Ravi Kumar) 
 
…….…………….J. 
 (Aravind Kumar) 
New Delhi, 
May 16, 2024