IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

SUBODH SINGH 
PETITIONER
 
 VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS
RESPONDENTS
ORDER
1.
Leave granted. 
2.
The present appeal is directed against the order dated 31st August, 2017,
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad whereby, the
Writ Petition filed by the appellant herein praying inter alia for issuing directions to the
respondents to pay additional compensation for the entire land area, subject matter of
the Notification dated 12th December, 2008, issued under Section 20(E)(1) of the Indian
Railways Act1, 1989, at the rate higher than 5% per month and further pay interest @
18% per annum for delay in payment from 30th March, 2011, i.e. the date on which this
Court had passed an order in titled “Dedicated Freight
Corridor Corporation of India Vs. Subodh Singh”, till the actual date of payment
1 For short the ‘Act’
2 (2011) 

in respect of the award dated 08th February, 2010. 
3.
It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the respondents had acquired
land in Village Kakrahi, Tehsil and District Auriya, Uttar Pradesh vide Notifications
dated 10th June, 2008 and 16th December, 2008 issued under Section 20(E)(1) of the
Act. An award was declared on 08th February, 2010 only in respect of the land that
the respondents required. As a result, a parcel of land admeasuring 0.0624 Hectare
was left out. Aggrieved by the said action, the appellant filed a Writ Petition3 before
the High Court for quashing the award dated 08th February, 2010, which was allowed
vide order dated 12th May, 2010. Challenging the said order, the respondents filed a
Petition for Special Leave to Appeal4 before this Court, which was allowed vide
judgment dated 30th March, 2011 holding inter alia that the acquisition in question had
not lapsed and having regard to the second proviso to section 20F(2) of the Act, the
land owners would be entitled to an additional compensation for the delay in making
the payment in terms of the award dated 08th February, 2010, at a rate not less than
5% of the value of the award for each month of delay. 
4.
Pursuant to the aforesaid order, the respondent no.2 issued a certificate in
respect of the entire parcel of land in terms of the Notification dated 12th December,
2008, again leaving an area of 0.0624 Hectare as free from acquisition proceedings.
Being aggrieved by the said decision, the appellant filed another petition5 before the

4 SLP

High Court, which was allowed vide order dated 20th September, 2016 and the
respondents were directed to provide compensation to the appellant for 0.0624
Hectare of land along with additional compensation within a period of two months. 
5.
On 19th November, 2016, the respondents prepared a bank draft for a sum of
₹ 2,74,56,000/- (Rupees Two Crores Seventy Four Lakh Fifty Six Thousand) stating
that the same was in respect of the compensation payable to the appellant in terms of
the order passed by the High Court on 20th September, 2016. While calculating the
additional compensation, the respondent no.2 confined the same to a period of two
months for the delayed period. 
6.
Aggrieved by the compensation offered by the respondents limiting the delay
to only two months, the appellant approached the High Court by filing yet another
petition6 claiming that he was entitled to compensation for a period of 84 months,
which would come to Rs.10,23,28,000/- (Rupees Ten Crores Twenty Three Lakh and
Twenty Eight Thousand), on which the impugned order dated 31st August, 2017, has
been passed observing that the appellant ought to approach the Arbitrator for
determining the additional compensation, by invoking Section 20F (1) of the Act. 
7.
It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the respondents have adopted a
pick and choose policy in the instant case. While they have paid additional
compensation for a period of delay of 66 months to one Smt. Kamla Devi & Ors., who
were similarly situated persons like the appellant and their land was also acquired

under the very same award, in the case of the appellant the respondents have
arbitrarily confined the payment towards the delay only to two months, instead of 84
months. 
8.
We have perused the record and heard the arguments advanced by learned
counsel for the parties. 
9.
At the outset, we may note that the order dated 18th September, 2017, passed
by the Competent Authority refers to an order dated 19th July, 2017, passed by the
High Court in a Writ Petition7 filed by Kamla Devi and others and goes on to record
that after completion of formalities of publication, some portion of the land
admeasuring 0.0890 Hectare had been left out, as the same was not required for the
subject project. Subsequently, another award8 was declared in respect of the left out
area and additional compensation was paid to the land owners @ 5% per month of
the award for a period of 66 months, i.e. from 19th April, 2012 to 12th September, 2017.
In the light of the above, the appellant herein is justified in arguing that he cannot be
treated differently and in his case, the respondents ought not to have confined the
delayed payment on the awarded amount for the left out portion of land to only two
months. 
10.
The aforesaid submission is disputed by learned counsel for the respondents
on a plea that no such direction was issued either by this Court or the High Court
permitting compensation for the delayed period beyond two months, for which
7 WP No. 65267 of 2012
8 Award No. 1/2011-12, dated 19th April, 2012

reliance is sought to be placed on the order dated 20th September, 2016 passed by
the High Court. 
11.
The aforesaid submission is taken note of only to be turned down. The period
of two months referred to by the High Court in its order dated 20 th September, 2016
was only for making payment of the amount. Not that any direction was issued to the
respondents to confine the payment of additional compensation only to a period of
two months. In fact, the order passed by this Court on 30th March, 2011 is crystal
clear and needs no interpretation. Highlighting certain anomalies noticed in Chapter
IV A of the Act, particularly Section 20F, this Court referred to the proviso to Section
20F (2) and observed as follows:
“12. (iii) The second proviso to section 20F (2) requires payment of additional
compensation for the delay in making of the award, at the rate of not less
than five percent of the value of award, for each month of delay. This vests
unguided discretion in the competent authority or the Arbitrator to award
additional compensation at any higher rate and gives room for unnecessary
litigation at the instance of “entitled persons” claiming higher percentages as
additional compensation. It is necessary to consider whether specifying a
fixed monthly rate of increase would serve the ends of justice better instead
of indicating a minimum rate per month. xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
“13. In view of our finding that the acquisition has not lapsed, we allow this
appeal, set aside the judgment of the High Court, and dismiss the challenge
to the acquisition. It is however made clear that in view of the delay in making
the award beyond one year, the first respondent shall be entitled to additional
compensation as provided under the second proviso to section 20F (2) of the
Act. Parties to bear their respective costs.”
12.
It is apparent from the above that the appellant would be entitled to additional
compensation for the delay in making the award @ not less than 5% of the value of
the award for each month’s delay. In our opinion, there was no reason for the High

Court to have relegated the appellant to initiate any arbitration proceedings for
determining the additional compensation when the order passed by this Court had
clarified the manner in which compensation would be calculated and paid for the
delay in making the award for the left out parcel of land. 
13.
In view of the above discussion, the present appeal succeeds. The appellant
is held entitled to additional compensation for the left out portion of land at least @
5% of the value of the award for a period spreading over 84 months. Needless to
state that the amount already paid by the respondents towards the delay, i.e., for a
period of two months, shall be duly adjusted. The remaining amount shall be released
by the respondents within eight weeks from today. Besides the aforesaid amount, the
appellant shall also be entitled to simple interest on the outstanding amount
calculated @ 7% per annum from the date the said amount became due and payable,
till the same is realized. 
14.
The appeal is allowed on the above terms while leaving the parties to bear
their own expenses....…...…………………
 [HIMA KOHLI]...……………………...J.
 [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH] 
NEW DELHI
MAY 16, 2024
PS