IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.OF 2024
(Arising out of Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Criminal)
No.12289 of 2023)
NARA CHANDRABABU NAIDU 

VERSUS

THE STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH 
& ANR.   
      
JUDGMENT
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J.
Leave granted.
2.
The   appellant   is   aggrieved   by   initiation   of   a   criminal
proceeding against him and his detention in connection with the
same by the respondent State through its CID. Allegations have
been   made   against   him   for   commission   of   offences   under

Sections 166, 167, 418, 420, 465, 468, 471, 409, 209 and 109
read with Sections 120­B, 34 and 37 of the Indian Penal Code,
1860 and Section 12 and 13(2) read with Sections 13(1)(c) and (d)
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. The said offences are
alleged   to   have   been   committed   between   the   years   2015   and
2019, during which period he was the Chief Minister of the State
of Andhra Pradesh.  Initially, a First Information Report dated
09.12.2021 was lodged with CID Police Station, Andhra Pradesh,
Mangalagiri implicating twenty­six persons as accused. On that
basis, CR No. 29/2021 was registered. The appellant was not
included   in   the   array   of   accused   persons   in   that   F.I.R.   The
offences primarily relate to siphoning of public funds and I shall
refer broadly to the allegations forming the basis of the F.I.R. in
the succeeding paragraphs of this judgment. The list of accused
persons was subsequently expanded and the appellant was also
arraigned as an accused by an “Accused Adding Memo” dated
08.09.2021 lodged before the Special Judge, SPE & ACB cases
(hereinafter referred to as “the Special Judge”). The appellant was
implicated   as   accused   no.37,   whereas   another   individual,
Kinjarapu Atchannaidu was made the 38th accused. The latter is
a   former   minister   of   Andhra   Pradesh   and   appears   to   be   a

member of the legislative assembly of that State at present. The
appellant was arrested on 09.09.2023 and was produced before
the Special Judge on 10.09.2023. He was remanded to judicial
custody by the Special Judge. The appellant applied before the
High Court on 12.09.2023 for quashing the F.I.R. in Crime No.
29 of 2021 implicating him, invoking the jurisdiction of the Court
under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (1973
Code). The legality of the remand order dated 10.09.2023 was
also challenged in the same petition before the High Court. The
appellant’s plea was rejected and his petition was dismissed on
22.09.2023 by a  learned  Single Judge. The present appeal is
against this judgment of dismissal of the said petition.
3.
The primarily allegation against the appellant is facilitating
diversion   of   public   money   in   the   approximate   range   of
Rs.370/­   crores,   which   was   to   be   used   for   setting   up   of   six
clusters of skill development centres in Andhra Pradesh. For this
purpose, Andhra Pradesh State Skill Development Corporation
(hereinafter referred to as “APSSDC”) was established through a
memorandum   numbered   as   G.O.Ms.   No.47   dated   10.09.2014
(referred to as 13.12.2014 in the order of the Special Judge dated

10.09.2023) issued by the Higher Education (EC A2) Department.
APSSDC entered into an agreement with two corporate entities,
Siemens Industry Software India Pvt. Ltd.  (“SIEMENS” in short)
and Design Tech India Pvt. Ltd. (we shall refer to it henceforth as
“Design Tech”). The original object, in terms of a memorandum
numbered as G.O.Ms. No. 4 dated 30.06.2015 issued by the Skill
Development, Entrepreneurship & Innovation (Skills) Department
approving the said Agreement, was to set up six different clusters
comprising of one Centre of Excellence and five Technical Skill
Development   Institutions   and   Skill   Development   Centres   in
Andhra   Pradesh.   The   total   project   cost   was   conceived   to   be
Rs.3281,05,13,448/­   with   each   of   the   six   clusters   costing
Rs.546,84,18,908/­.  Government contribution was limited to 10
percent   of   the   cost   amounting   to  Rs.55,00,00,000/­,  with
SIEMENS and Design Tech providing grant­in­aid of 90% i.e.,
Rs.491,84,18,908/­.  It is the State’s case that requirement of
contribution of the two corporate entities was ignored and the
final   memorandum   of   agreement   only   entailed   outflow   of
Rs.330/­ crores from the State to Design Tech. A signed copy of
this  memorandum,   which   does   not  carry   any   date,   has   been

made Annexure R­15 to the counter­affidavit of the State (Volume
IV at page 206).
4.
Submission on the part of the State is that in course of an
investigation by the Additional Director General, GST Intelligence
at Pune, while examining claims of availing CENVAT credit by
Design Tech and one Skillar Enterprises India Pvt. Ltd. (“Skillar”),
a financial scam was unearthed involving both SIEMENS and
Design   Tech.   This   was   in   relation   to   funds   pertaining   to   the
project of setting up skill development centres. The complaint of
the   taxing   body   was   that   SIEMENS   and   Design   Tech   had
subcontracted substantial part of their work to Skillar despite
there being no provision of any sub­contract in the Agreement.
Design Tech had claimed that Skillar provided training software
development  including   various   sub­modules   designed   for   high
end software for advance manufacturing of CAD/CAM. As per
Design Tech, royalty and subscription were paid to Skillar, as
they developed the software and Skillar had directly supplied the
same to the Skill Development Centres in Andhra Pradesh. As
recorded in the judgment under appeal, when the tax authorities
confronted Skillar, they took a stand that no technical work was

sub­contracted and the training software development modules,
which   were   provided,   were   technical   materials.  According   to
Skillar  royalty and subscription were wrongly mentioned in the
invoices.   It   appears   that   an   in­depth   scrutiny   by   the   tax
authorities showed that the concerned software including various
sub­modules   purported   to   have   been   supplied   by   Skillar   to
Design Tech was purchased by Skillar from different companies.
It   is   also   the   State’s   stand   that   these   companies   were
shell/defunct companies and they had issued invoices without
providing any services and that they were used as vehicles for
diverting funds. The APSSDC had conducted a forensic audit in
the year 2020 and the audit found flaws and irregularities in the
systems and in utilisation of funds between the financial years
2014­2015 and 2018­2019. 
5.
 
As   per   the   investigating   authorities   a   sum   of
Rs.370/­ crores from the government funds of the APSSDC has
been siphoned off. Case of the State against the appellant is that
he   was   the   mastermind,   who   had   unilaterally   appointed  G.
Subbarao and K Lakshminarayana (accused nos. 1 and 2) as MD
and CEO, and Director for the Skill Development Corporation

without getting approval from the Andhra Pradesh Cabinet. It
was the appellant who had approved the same and as per his
instruction,   Memorandum   of   Association   and   Articles   of
Association of APSSDC were also approved. As per estimation,
costs for six clusters, were projected as Rs.3319.68 crores but
the  private   participants   did   not   infuse   any   fund   as   per   their
original obligation. It is recorded in the impugned judgement that
the   Andhra   Pradesh   Cabinet   headed   by   the   appellant   at   the
instance of the accused no.1 had approved sanction of a budget
of Rs.370/­ crores towards 10% contribution of the government
in the project and G.O.Ms. No.4 dated 30.06.2015 was issued to
that effect. The main complaint against the appellant is that he
had fast tracked the project and approved the cost estimation
with criminal intent and by pursuing the government officials, he
had ensured release of Rs.370/­ crores. The project was allotted
to   Design   Tech   and   SIEMENS   on   nomination   basis,   without
following   any   tender   process.   Misappropriation   of   government
funds through corrupt and illegal methods has been alleged and
abuse of official position has been attributed to the appellant.
Summary of the allegations against the appellant is revealed from
the   Memorandum   dated   08.09.2023,   filed   on   behalf   of   the

prosecution,   for   adding   the   appellant   as   an   accused.   These
allegations, inter­alia, are to the following effect: ­
“….A­37   by   abusing   his   (A­37)   official   position,
fraudulently committed criminal breach of trust with a
common   intention,   caused   wrongful   loss   to   the
Government exchequer by allowing accused and others
to   divert   APSSDC   funds   by   using   fake   invoices   as
genuine one for purpose of cheating through the shell,
defunct
 
companies
 
without
 
providing
materials/services to the APSSDC­Siemens project.”
6.
On behalf of the appellant, the main argument, which was
also   made   before   the   High   Court,   revolves   around   non­
compliance of Section 17A of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988 in implicating the appellant under Sections 12, 13(2) read
with 13(1) (c) and (d) of the 1988 Act and proceeding against him
inter­alia,   under   the   aforesaid   provisions.   The   arguments   on
behalf   of   the   appellants   have   been   mainly   advanced   by
Mr. Harish N. Salve and Mr. Siddharth Luthra, learned Senior
Advocates.   Mr.   Mukul   Rohatgi   with   Mr.   Ranjit   Kumar,   both
learned Senior Counsel have primarily argued on behalf of the
State. It is also the appellant’s case that once fault is found with
implicating the appellant under the aforesaid provisions of the
1988  Act,   the   entire   proceeding   qua   the   appellant   before   the
Special Judge would also collapse because in such a case the

Special Judge under the PC Act would have had acted beyond his
jurisdiction and the remand order would become non­est.
7.
  Section 17A was introduced to the 1988 Act with effect
from 26.07.2018. The said provision reads: ­
“17A.  Enquiry   or   Inquiry   or   investigation   of
offences relatable to recommendations made or
decision taken by public servant in discharge
of official functions or duties.—No police officer
shall conduct any enquiry or inquiry or investigation
into any offence alleged to have been committed by
a public servant under this Act, where the alleged
offence is relatable to any recommendation made or
decision taken by such public servant in discharge
of   his   official   functions   or   duties,   without   the
previous approval— 
(a) in the case of a person who is or was
employed, at the time when the offence was
alleged   to   have   been   committed,   in
connection with the affairs of the Union, of
that Government; 
(b) in the case of a person who is or was
employed, at the time when the offence was
alleged   to   have   been   committed,   in
connection with the affairs of a State, of that
Government; 
(c) in the case of any other person, of the
authority competent to remove him from his
office,   at   the   time   when   the   offence   was
alleged to have been committed: 
Provided that no such approval shall be necessary
for cases involving arrest of a person on the spot on
the charge of accepting or attempting to accept any
undue   advantage   for   himself   or   for   any   other
person: 
Provided further that the concerned authority shall
convey   its   decision   under   this   section   within   a
period of three months, which may, for reasons to be

recorded in writing by such authority, be extended
by a further period of one month.”
8.
The   High   Court,   inter­alia,   held   that   the   said   provision
cannot be applied to any offence committed prior to 26.07.2018.
It has also been highlighted before us on behalf of the State that
offences under Section 13 (1) (c) & (d) were deleted from the said
statute by the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Act, 26 of
2018. It was by the same Amendment Act, that Section 17A was
incorporated in the said statute. On this basis, it is urged, that
any protective measure, which is conceived in the Amendment
Act could not extend to offences committed when such protective
measure   for   obtaining   prior   approval   was   not   a   part   of   the
statutory scheme. The High Court primarily decided the case on
the   premise   that   the   aforesaid   provision   cannot   be   given
retrospective effect. 
9.
The other limb of argument of the State, which was also
sustained by the High Court is that a regular inquiry was already
ordered on 05.06.2018 regarding the allegations of corruption
against the officials of APSSDC. This was ordered by the Director
General of Anti­Corruption Bureau, Andhra Pradesh. A redacted
version   of   this   letter   dated   05.06.2018   has   been   annexed   in

Volume   V   of   the   compilation   of   documents   submitted   by   the
State (at page 2 thereof). This compilation of documents (pages 2
to 7A of the said volume) suggests that Anti­Corruption Bureau
had been asking for information in that regard. I quote below the
redacted version of the said letter:­
“ Office of the Director General
Anti­Corruption Bureau,
Andhra Pradesh,
Vijayawada
Rc No.10/RE­CIU/2018
      Dated:5­6­2018
MEMORANDUM
Sub:­ Public Servants­Industries Department­Allegations of
corruption   against   the   officials   of   A.P.   State   Skill
Development   Corporation,   Vijayawada­Regular   Enquiry­
ordered­Reg.
Ref: 1) Letter of Sri <OMITTED> Pune, dt. 14­5­2018.
2) CBI Letter No.122 2017 (CE­117/2017) CBI/Pune/3865, 
dated 2­10­2017
* * *
The letter of <OMITTED> Pune and letter of CBI, Pune are
enclosed herewith. You are instructed to conduct a Regular
Enquiry into the contents letter of petition and submit a RE
report within the stipulated time. You are also directed to
submit Plan of Action duly approved by the LA­cum­Special
PP, ACB, HO, Vijayawada.
   ­Sd/­
For Director General,
Anti­Corruption Bureau,
A.P., Vijayawada
To:
Sri Narra Venkateswara Rao, 
DSP, CIU, ACB, Vijayawada.”

10.
The High Court has accepted the argument of the State that
a   regular   enquiry   was   ordered   on   05.06.2018   regarding   the
allegations of corruption against the officials of APSSDC by the
DG Anti­Corruption Bureau AP before Section 17A of the 1988
Act came into operation i.e. on 25.07.2018. As a corollary, the
requirement   of   previous   approval   as   contemplated   in   the
aforesaid provision would not be applicable in the case of the
appellant. 
11.
First, I shall examine the point as to whether enquiry had
commenced by the letter of 05.06.2018.  I have quoted the letter
of 05.06.2018 in the preceding paragraph. This letter refers to an
earlier letter dated 14.05.2018 addressed to the Andhra Pradesh
Anti­Corruption   Bureau   by   the   Director   General   of   GST
Intelligence, Pune  submitting information regarding corruption
and siphoning of Government funds pertaining to APSSDC. The
letter dated 05.06.2018 essentially carries a request for enquiry.
There is no indication in the materials produced before us as to
whether any step was taken in pursuance of such request till the
year 2021. The first suggestion of any active enquiry can be seen
in   a   letter   of   22.02.2021   originating   from   the   Deputy

Superintendent of Police, Anti­Corruption Bureau of that State,
which states that the bureau is investigating a regular enquiry
pertaining to allegations of corruption, misappropriation of funds
and procedural lapses in relation to collaboration of APSSDC/AP
Government   with   Design   Tech.   It   appears   that   there   was   a
previous communication in this regard dated 09.02.2021. Even
though   reference   is   made   to   the   letter   of   05.06.2018   in   this
communication, there are no specific particulars of such enquiry
or   the   date   on   which   such   enquiry   was   started.     There   are
subsequent   letters   dated   22.02.2021,   30.03.2021,   23.06.2021
and 18.08.2021, all referring to the letter of 05.06.2018.  But as
it   has   been   already   observed   earlier,   there   are   no   specific
particulars regarding when and in what form the enquiry has
started. There obviously was a time gap between the date of issue
of the letter of 05.06.20218 and actual date on which the enquiry
was commenced. The State has justified this delay in its counter
affidavit. It has been stated that instead of acting on the letter of
the taxing authorities dated 14.05.2018, which in turn has been
referred to in the communication of 05.06.2018, the note file
pertaining to the project was removed by the appellant from the
secretariate in collaboration with other accused persons and this

was done to temper with evidence and to ensure that the offences
were   not   brought   to   light.   This   act   of   removal   of   file   may
constitute   a   or   an   independent   offence.   But   if   otherwise   no
enquiry was started because of such alleged wrong, this time gap
cannot be treated to have caused the date of issue of the letter of
05.06.2018   to   be   starting   point   of   an   enquiry,   in   the   nature
contemplated in Section 17A of the 1988 Act.
12.
Section   17A   thereof   postulates   prior   approval   from   the
appointing   authority   in   relation   to   any   enquiry,   inquiry,   or
investigation under the 1988 Act.  While the expression “inquiry”
has been defined in the 1973 code, there is no specific definition
of   the   word   “enquiry”.     The   Concise   Oxford   English   Law
Dictionary, Revised Tenth Edition, defines the said expression as
“an act of asking for an information”. It entails commencement of
an active search to ascertain the truth or falsity of an alleged
wrongful act.
13.
In ordinary perception, “enquiry” by a police officer would
imply positive exercise for searching certain details or particulars
pertaining   to   allegations   of   commission   of   an   offence   by   an
accused persons or a set of accused persons. “Inquiry” is defined

in Section 2 (g) of the 1973 and implies inquiry conducted under
the Code by a Magistrate or Court. Similarly, “investigation” in
terms   of   Section   2   (h)   of   the   same   Code   includes   all   the
proceedings conducted thereunder for collection of evidence by a
police   officer   or   a   person   authorised   by   a   Magistrate   in   that
behalf.   The   nature   of   actions   undertaken   by   the   State   after
05.06.1988 constitutes neither inquiry nor investigation, as no
step under the 1973 Code was taken by the State prior to the
year 2021.  If that is the meaning attributed to this expression,
the letter of 05.06.2018 or the earlier letter from taxing authority
dated 14.05.2018 cannot be construed to be the commencing
point of any enquiry. These were requests for starting an enquiry,
which obviously did not commence prior to the aforesaid dates in
the year 2021.  Thus, on this point I cannot accept the finding of
the High Court that a regular enquiry was already initiated on
05.06.2018.  The restriction in Section 17A of the 1988 Act is on
conducting   an   enquiry   by   a   police   officer   without   the   prior
approval of the authority specified therein.  A request to conduct
an enquiry by itself cannot be the starting point of the enquiry
under   the   said   provision   to   bypass   the   restriction   postulated
therein.   Moreover, in the facts of this case, actual search for

information had commenced in the year 2021, as I have already
indicated, and lack of action on this count has been attributed by
the   State   to   the   appellant   and   the   other   accused   persons
themselves.  We are not going into the truth of such allegations.
But if such allegations are assumed to be correct, the same shall
only support the appellant’s case that no enquiry was initiated
before incorporation of Section 17A in the statute book.  Further,
in the F.I.R. or the preliminary enquiry report dated 09.12.2021,
there was no reference to the communication of 05.06.2018. I,
accordingly, hold that before Section 17A of the 1988 Act had
become   operational,   no   enquiry,   inquiry   or   investigation   had
commenced as against the appellant in relation to the subject
crime.
14.
Mr. Salve has also relied on a Standard Operating Procedure
(hereinafter   referred   to   as   “SOP”)   for   processing   cases   under
Section 17A of the 1988 Act. This has been issued under Memo
no.428/07/2021­AVD.IV(B) dated 03.09.2021 by the Department
of   Personnel   and   Training   of   the   Government   of   India.     This
memo in detail records how the aforesaid provisions shall apply.
Clause 4.2 thereof stipulates: ­

“Enquiry   for   the   purposes   of   these   SOPs,   means   any
action taken, for verifying as to whether the information
pertains to commission of offence under the Act.”
15.
As   there   is   no   authoritative   guideline   defining   what
constitutes an enquiry, I find it safe to rely on the explanation
given in the aforesaid clause of the SOP.  This explanation also
contemplates any action taken for verifying as to whether the
information pertains to commission of offences under the Act or
not.  Again, the memo of 05.06.2018, if tested standalone, cannot
be construed to imply taking any action. 
16.
The High Court citing the judgments of this Court in the
cases of  Shambhoo Nath Misra ­vs­ State of U.P. & Others
[(1997) ] and State of Uttar Pradesh ­vs­  Paras Nath
Singh  [(2009)   ],  has   held   that   the   protection   of
sanction   sought   by   the   accused   persons   therein   cannot   be
applied   because   when   a   public   servant   is   alleged   to   have
committed   the   offence   of   fabrication   of   records   or
misappropriation of public funds, it cannot be said that he acted
in discharge of his official duty.  Obviously, it cannot be said that
such   misdemeanour   on   the   part   of   a   public   servant   can   be
equated to his official duties. But these judgments were delivered

while interpreting the provisions of Section 197 of 1973 Code.
The requirement of previous sanction contemplated in Section
197 of the 1973 Code comes at the stage of taking cognizance of
an offence.  Thus, a judicial authority, in such a context has the
advantage of coming to some form of opinion as to whether the
offending acts can be said to have been committed in discharge of
his official duty or not.  In the case of Dr. S.M. Mansoori(Dead)
Through   Legal   Representatives   ­vs­     Surekha   Parmar   and
Others  [(2023) ], the complaint related to offences
punishable under Sections 498­A and 506 read with Section 34
of IPC as well as Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act,
1961.     The   police   personnel   had   entered   the   house   of   the
appellant therein without any previous sanction and the charges
framed against the accused were quashed by the High Court on
the ground that prior sanction under Section 197 of 1973 Code
was not taken.   In that context, it was held by a Coordinate
Bench of this Court that looking at the nature of allegations in
the complaint, at that stage it was impossible to conclude that
the   acts   alleged   to   have   been   done   by   the   accused   were
committed by her while in discharge of official duty.   The High

Court   judgment   was   set   aside   and   it   was   opined   by   the
Coordinate Bench in the facts of that case, that a final view on
that issue would be taken only after the evidence was recorded. 
17.
So far as the provision of Section 197 of the 1973 Code is
concerned,   the   requirement   for   deciding   the   question   on
obtaining sanction is at the stage of taking cognizance. Thus,
some element of application of mind is necessary while examining
that issue. In the case of Matajog Dobey ­vs­ H. C. Bhari (AIR
1956 SC 44), there was use of force when a tax raiding party was
resisted   from   conducting   a   search.   This   gave   rise   to   two
complaints,   which   were   sent   to   two   magistrates   for   judicial
enquiry. Summonses were issued against the income tax officials
and   the   accompanying   policemen   over   use   of   force.  Matajog
Dobey (supra), the resistor, contended that use of such force was
not in discharge of official duty. Objection was raised against the
issuance   of   summons   on   the   ground   of   lack   of   sanction   as
contemplated in Section 197 of the Criminal Procedure Code,
which was prevalent at that point of time (1950). Negating such a
contention, a Constitution Bench of this Court observed:­

“20. Is the need for sanction to be considered as soon as
the   complaint   is   lodged   and   on   the   allegations   therein
contained? At first sight, it seems as though there is some
support for this view in Hori Ram case and also in Sarjoo
Prasad   v.   King­Emperor.   Sulaiman,   J.   says   that   as   the
prohibition is against the institution itself, its applicability
must be judged in the first instance at the earliest stage of
institution. Varadachariar, J. also states that the question
must  be  determined   with  reference  to  the  nature  of   the
allegations made against the public servant in the criminal
proceeding. But a careful perusal of the later parts of their
judgments shows that they did not intend to lay down any
such   proposition.   Sulaiman,   J.   refers   (at   P­179)   to   the
prosecution case as disclosed by the complaint or the police
report and he winds up the discussion in these words:“Of
course,   if   the   case   as   put   forward   fails   or   the   defence
establishes that the act purported to be done is in execution
of duty, the proceedings will have to be dropped and the
complaint   dismissed  on   that  ground”.   The   other  learned
Judge also states at p. 185, “At this stage we have only to
see   whether   the   case   alleged   against   the   appellant   or
sought to be proved against him relates to acts done or
purporting to be done by him in the execution of his duty”. It
must be so. The question may arise at any stage of the
proceedings. The complaint may not disclose that the act
constituting the offence was done or purported to be done in
the discharge of official duty; but facts subsequently coming
to light on a police or judicial inquiry or even in the course of
the   prosecution   evidence   at   the   trial,   may   establish   the
necessity for sanction. Whether sanction is necessary or not
may   have   to   be   determined   from   stage   to   stage.   The
necessity may reveal itself in the course of the progress of
the case. xxx
   xxx
xxx
23.   Where   a   power   is   conferred   or   a   duty   imposed   by
statute or otherwise, and there is nothing said expressly
inhibiting the exercise of the power or the performance of
the duty by any limitations or restrictions, it is reasonable
to hold that it carries with it the power of doing all such acts
or employing such means as are reasonably necessary for
such   execution.   If   in   the   exercise   of   the   power   or   the
performance   of   the   official   duty,   improper   or   unlawful
obstruction or resistance is encountered, there must be the
right to use reasonable means to remove the obstruction or
overcome the resistance. This accords with commonsense

and does not seem contrary to any principle of law. The
true position is neatly stated thus in Broom's Legal Maxims,
10th   Edn.   at   p.   312:“   It   is   a   rule   that   when   the   law
commands a thing to be done, it authorises the performance
of whatever may be necessary for executing its command.”
The   scope   of   operation   of   Section   17A   of   the   1988   Act   is,
however,   different   from   that   of   Section   197   of   the  Code.   The
requirement of taking sanction under Section 19 of the 1988 Act
also is at the same stage. Unlike Section 197 of 1973 Code (which
is near identically phrased as the same section in the earlier
version   of   the   Code),   Section17A   of   the   1988   Act   imposes
restriction   on   police   officer   at   the   enquiry   stage   itself,   from
proceeding against a public servant in relation to any offence
alleged   to   have   been   committed   by   him,   relatable   to   any
recommendation   made  or  decision   taken  by   such   public
servant   (emphasis   added),  without   previous   approval   of   the
authorities stipulated in the said Section. We do not think the
cases arising out of Section 197 of the 1973 Code would give
proper guidance for interpreting the provision of Section 17A of
the   1988   Act   because,   in   the   cases   under   Section   197,   the
decision on requirement for sanction is to be taken at the stage of
taking cognizance. Thus, there is in­built scope of application of

judicial mind to assess, at least prima­facie, if an alleged act falls
within discharge of official duty or not. Under the provisions of
Section   17A   of   the   1988   Act,   there   is   no   scope   of   judicial
application   of   mind   in   determining   if   the   flaw   in   making
recommendation or taking decision is interwoven with discharge
of   official   duty   or   function   or   not.   Moreover,   the   qualified
embargo   therein   is   on   a   police   officer.   On   the   point   as   to
assessing whether the offending act is in discharge of official duty
or not, having regard to the nature of duties of a police officer, he
is less equipped to assess that factor, which involves some form
of judicial application of mind.   No material has been placed
before us to demonstrate that the concerned police officer had
undertaken any exercise for prima facie forming his opinion as to
whether the offence alleged against the appellant was relatable to
any recommendation made or decision taken by the appellant in
discharge of his official duty.   Unlike in the case of  Dr. S.M.
Mansoori  (supra), in which the offences involved, by their very
nature, were prima facie not relatable to discharge of official duty
by the accused, here the appellant’s actions relate to making
recommendations or taking decisions and these decisions and
recommendations otherwise, prima face, relate to discharge of

official   functions.     In   the   case   of  State   of   Telangana   ­vs­
Managipet alias Mangipet Sarveshwar Reddy  [(2019) ] the accused questioned the authorisation of the investigating
officer in terms of Section 17 of the 1988 Act.  This Court held:­
“36. The   High   Court   has   rightly   held   that   no
ground   is   made   out   for   quashing   of   the
proceedings for the reason that the investigating
agency intentionally waited till the retirement of
the accused officer. The question as to whether a
sanction is necessary to prosecute the accused
officer,   a   retired   public   servant,   is   a   question
which can be examined during the course of the
trial   as   held   by   this   Court   in K.   Kalimuthu [K.
Kalimuthu v. State, (2005): 2005 SCC
(Cri) 1291]. In fact, in a recent judgment in Vinod
Kumar Garg v. State (NCT of Delhi) [Vinod Kumar
Garg v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2020):
(2020) 1 SCC (Cri) 545: (2020) 1 SCC (L&S) 146],
this Court has held that if an investigation was
not conducted by a police officer of the requisite
rank and status required under Section 17 of the
Act, such lapse would be an irregularity, however
unless   such   irregularity   results   in   causing
prejudice, conviction will not be vitiated or be bad
in law. Therefore, the lack of sanction was rightly
found   not   to   be   a   ground   for   quashing   of   the
proceedings.”
18.
I shall test later in this judgment as to whether the remand
proceeding   before   the   Special   Judge   was   mere   irregularity   or
fatal, but before that I have to answer the question as to whether
the protection of Section 17A is applicable in the case of the
appellant. 

19.
Large   part   of   Mr.   Salve’s   arguments   was   devoted   to   the
proposition that the content of Section 17A of the 1988 Act was
procedural in nature and relying on the judgments of this court
in the cases of (i) Anant Gopal Sheorey ­vs­  State of Bombay
[AIR 1958 SC 915]; (ii)  Rattan Lal ­vs­   State of Punjab  [AIR
1965 SC 444]; and (iii) CBI ­vs­ R.R. Kishore [2023 INSC 817],
he   has   argued   that   the   said   provision   is   retroactive   and   not
retrospective.   His   submission   is   that   the   amended   provision
applies at the starting point of enquiry, inquiry, or investigation,
even though the offence may relate back to a period when the
requirement of obtaining previous sanction was not necessary for
starting these processes.  I have already referred to Section 19 of
the 1988 Act which requires the Court to satisfy itself whether
such   sanction   stated   therein   has   been   taken   at   the   stage   of
taking cognizance. So far as acts of a public servant in making
recommendation or taking decision in discharge of official duties
are   concerned,   an   entry   point   check,   prior   in   time   has   been
contemplated   for   the   investigating   agencies.   Thus,   the
requirement of taking prior approval would arise at that stage,
being   the   beginning   or   commencing   of   enquiry,   inquiry,   or

investigation.   In my view a plain reading of the said Section
leads to such an interpretation. Section 17A does not distinguish
between alleged commission of offence prior to 26.07.2018 or
post   thereof.     This   provision   stipulates   the   time   when   any
enquiry, inquiry or investigation is commenced by a police officer.
Mr. Rohtagi drew my attention to the judgment of this Court in
the case of  State of Rajasthan ­vs­ Tejmal Choudhary  [2021
SCC Online SC 3477] to refute Mr. Salve’s submissions on this
point. In this judgment, a Coordinate Bench has held that the
Section  17A of   the   1988  Act  is  substantive   in nature  and   is
therefore applicable prospectively.  The same view has been taken
by different High Courts but as I have an authority of this Court
on this point, I do not consider it necessary to refer to all these
High Court Judgements.
20.
In   the   case   of  Tejmal   Choudhary  (supra)   the   FIR   was
registered on 01­01­2018 and the accused public servant sought
quashing of the FIR on the ground of introduction of Section 17A
in the 1988 Act.   In para 10 of this judgment, the Coordinate
Bench observed that:­
“10. In State   of   Telangana v. Managipet   alias
Mangipet Sarveshwar Reddy reported (2019) 

87, this Court rejected the arguments that amended
provisions of the PC Act would be applicable to an
FIR, registered before the said amendment came into
force and found that the High Court had rightly held
that   no   grounds   had   made   out   for   quashing   the
proceedings.”
In the present case, original FIR was registered on 09.12.2021
and the appellant was implicated in the aforesaid offences on
08.09.2023.   There is no evidence of any substantive enquiry,
inquiry, or investigation made against him prior to coming into
operation of the Section 17A of the 1988 Act.  Hence, the case at
hand is distinguishable from the ratio laid down in the judgment
of this Court of in the case of Tejmal Choudhary (supra).
21.
The Amendment Act by which Section 17A of the 1988 Act
was brought into the said statute also deleted the provisions of
sub­clauses (c) and (d) of Section 13 (1) thereof.  At the time the
memorandum of adding the appellant as accused was issued, the
said Amendment Act had become operational, but at the time of
alleged commission of offence, aforesaid two sub­clauses were
part of the statute book.   Thus, per se, the appellant could be
held   liable   for   commission   of   offences   stipulated   in   the   said
provisions, though their subsequent deletion might have some
impact   on   the   ultimate   outcome   of   the   case.   We   are   not

concerned with that aspect of the controversy at this stage.   It
has been asserted by Mr. Rohtagi, however, that since at the time
of commission of offence, the protective shield of Section 17A was
not in force, the appellant could not claim the benefits thereof.  I,
however,   do   not   accept   this   argument.   It   has   been   already
observed by me that the point of time Section 17A of 1988 Act
would become applicable is the starting point of enquiry, inquiry,
or investigation and not the time of commission of the alleged
offence.   In the event any of the three acts on the part of the
prosecution   is   triggered   off   post   26.07.2018,   the   mandate   of
Section 17A would be applicable.   The wording of Section 17A
restricts the power of a police officer to conduct any of the three
acts into any offence by a public servant “under this act”.  Thus,
if the process of enquiry commences at a time attracting specific
provisions   of   the   1988   Act   which   stand   deleted   by   the
Amendment   Act  of   2018,  the   restrictive   protection   in   form   of
Section 17A ought to be granted.  The phrase “under this act”, on
such construction ought to include offences which were in the
statue book at the time the subject­offences are alleged to have
been committed. Mr. Rohatgi, however, wants me to construe this
expression,  i.e.  “under this  Act” to mean the 1988 Act, as  it

existed on and from the date the provisions of Section 17A was
introduced. As the said section did not exist at the time of alleged
commission   of   the   offences,   his   submission   is   that   the   said
provision could not apply in the case of the appellant. The said
section,   however,   as   I   have   already   narrated,   had   become
operational when the enquiry started. Thus, proceeding on the
basis that the said provision is prospective in its operation, the
material point of time for determining its prospectivity would be
the starting point of enquiry or inquiry and investigation. 
22.
The question as to whether the phrase “under this Act” used
in Section 17A of the 1988 Act, would mean to be “the Act”, as it
existed at the time of alleged commission of offence or “the Act”
as it stood post amendment when the enquiry commenced would
also have to be answered by this Court.  While dealing with the
issue of necessity for obtaining prior approval, I have already held
that the appellant could be implicated under Section 13 (1)(c) and
(d), as at the time of alleged commission of the offences, these
provisions were alive.  Once certain offences are deleted from an
enactment, they do not vanish totally unless the lawmakers say
so. They move to the back pages and can be revived if they were

committed   before   being   enacted   out   of   the   legislation.   But   I
cannot give a restrictive interpretation to the expression “under
this Act” to give an isolated retrospective operation to the said
phrase, detaching it from rest of the provisions of Section 17A of
the Act and remove the protective shield in a situation where an
enquiry has started after introduction of the said provision but
relates to an offence committed prior to its introduction in 2018.
The said phrase ought to be relatable to the date of starting of the
enquiry, inquiry or investigation and not to the time or date of
commission of offence.
23.
Otherwise,   if   I   apply   an   interpretation   of   the   expression
“under this Act” to mean the statute as it exists at the time the
enactment  is   invoked,   the   same   phrase   is   invoked,   the   same
might   result   in   divesting   the   Special   Judge   of   his   power   to
proceed against the appellant, as at the time the appellant’s case
was brought to the Special Judge, the aforesaid two sub­sections
stood deleted from Section 13 (1) of the 1988 Act. 
I am making this observation because the Special Judge’s
jurisdiction is derived from Sections 3 and 4 of the 1988 Act.
These provisions read:­

“3.   Power   to   appoint   special   Judges.—(1)   The
Central Government or the State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as many
special Judges as may be necessary for such area or
areas or for such case or group of cases as may be
specified   in   the   notification   to   try   the   following
offences, namely:— 
(a) any offence punishable under this Act; and 
(b) any conspiracy to commit or any attempt to
commit or any abetment of any of the offences
specified in clause (a). 
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a
special Judge under this Act unless he is or has been a
Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge or an
Assistant Sessions Judge under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
4.   Cases   triable   by   special   Judges.—(1)
Notwithstanding   anything   contained   in   the   Code   of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or in any other
law for the time being in force, the offences specified in
sub­section (1) of section 3 shall be tried by special
Judges only. 
(2) Every offence specified in sub­section (1) of section
3   shall   be   tried   by   the   special   Judge   for   the   area
within which it was committed, or, as the case may be,
by the special Judge appointed for the case, or where
there are more special Judges than one for such area,
by such one of them as may be specified in this behalf
by the Central Government.
 (3) When trying any case, a special Judge may also
try   any   offence,   other   than   an   offence   specified   in
section   3,   with   which   the   accused   may,   under   the
Code   of   Criminal   Procedure,   1973   (2   of   1974),   be
charged at the same trial. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the trial of an
offence shall be held, as far as practicable, on day­to­

day basis and an endeavour shall be made to ensure
that the said trial is concluded within a period of two
years: 
Provided that where the trial is not concluded within
the   said   period,   the   special   Judge   shall   record   the
reasons for not having done so: 
Provided further that the said period may be extended
by such further period, for reasons to be recorded in
writing but not exceeding six months at a time; so,
however,   that   the   said   period   together   with   such
extended period shall not exceed ordinarily four years
in aggregate.”
24.
Now if I accept the meaning Mr. Rohtagi wants us to give to
the said expression as employed in Section 17A of the 1988 Act,
the same expression i.e. “under this Act” as contained in Section
3   (1)   (a)   would   also   have   to   be   read   to   mean   as   “the   Act”
prevailing at the point of time the appellant’s case is brought to
the Special Judge.  This would result in shrinking the jurisdiction
of the Special Judge to try offences which have been repealed by
the   Amendment   Act   of   2018.   I   am   unable   to   agree   with
Mr.   Rohatgi   on   this   point.   It   is   an   established   principle   of
statutory interpretation that if a particular phrase is employed in
different parts of an enactment, Courts ought to proceed with an
understanding that the legislature intended to assign the same
meaning to that expression used in different provisions thereof,

unless of course, a contrary intention appears from the statute
itself. Here I find no such contrary intention. 
 25. Now I shall examine the legality of a proceeding which is
started   without   complying   with   the   requirement   of   previous
approval under Section 17A of the 1988 Act.   In the case of
Yashwant   Sinha   and   Others   ­vs­   Central   Bureau   of
Investigation through its Director and Another [(2020) ], a Bench of this Court comprising of three Hon’ble Judges,
while   dealing   with   power   of   review   had   also   examined   this
question.  The Bench was unanimous in rejecting the review plea.
In   a   concurring   judgment   one   of   the   Hon’ble   Judges,   (K.   M.
Joseh, J.) held:­
“116. In   the   year   2018,   the   Prevention   of   Corruption
(Amendment)   Act,   2018   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   “the
2018 Act”, for short) was brought into force on 26­7­2018.
Thereunder, Section 17­A, a new section was inserted,
which reads as follows:
“17­A. Enquiry or inquiry or investigation of
offences relatable to recommendations made
or   decision   taken   by   public   servant   in
discharge of official functions or duties.—(1)
No   police   officer   shall   conduct   any   enquiry   or
inquiry or investigation into any offence alleged to
have been committed by a public servant under
this Act, where the alleged offence is relatable to
any recommendation made or decision taken by
such   public   servant   in   discharge   of   his   official
functions or duties, without the previous approval
—

(a) in the case of a person who is or was
employed, at the time when the offence was
alleged   to   have   been   committed,   in
connection with the affairs of the Union, of
that Government;
(b) in the case of a person who is or was
employed, at the time when the offence was
alleged   to   have   been   committed,   in
connection with the affairs  of  a State, of
that Government;
(c) in the case of any other person, of the
authority competent to remove him from his
office,  at   the  time  when  the   offence  was
alleged to have been committed:
Provided that no such approval shall be necessary
for cases involving arrest of a person on the spot on
the charge of accepting or attempting to accept any
undue   advantage   for   himself   or   for   any   other
person:
Provided further that the concerned authority shall
convey   its   decision   under   this   section   within   a
period of three months, which may, for reasons to
be   recorded   in   writing   by   such   authority,   be
extended by a further period of one month.”
(emphasis supplied)
 
117. In terms of Section 17­A, no police officer is permitted
to conduct any enquiry or inquiry or conduct investigation
into   any   offence   done   by   a   public   servant   where   the
offence alleged is relatable to any recommendation made
or decision taken by the public servant in discharge of his
public functions without previous approval, inter alia, of
the authority competent to remove the public servant from
his office at the time when the offence was alleged to have
been committed. In respect of the public servant, who is
involved in this case, it is clause (c), which is applicable.
Unless, therefore, there is previous approval, there could
be neither inquiry or enquiry or investigation. It is in this
context apposite to notice that the complaint, which has
been filed by the petitioners in, moved before the first respondent CBI, is
done after Section 17­A was inserted. The complaint is
dated 4­10­2018. Para 5 sets out the relief which is sought
in the complaint which is to register an FIR under various

provisions. Paras 6 and 7 of the complaint are relevant in
the context of Section 17­A, which read as follows:
“6. We are also aware that recently, Section 17­
A of the Act has been brought in by way of an
amendment to introduce the requirement of prior
permission of the Government for investigation or
inquiry under the Prevention of Corruption Act.
7. We are also aware that this will place you in
the   peculiar   situation,   of   having   to   ask   the
accused himself, for permission to investigate a
case against him. We realise that your hands
are tied in this matter, but we request you to at
least take the first step, of seeking permission of
the   Government   under   Section   17­A   of   the
Prevention of Corruption Act for investigating this
offence   and   under   which,   “the   concerned
authority   shall   convey   its   decision   under   this
section within a period of three months, which
may, for reasons to be recorded in writing by
such authority, be extended by a further period
of one month”.”
(emphasis supplied)
 
118. Therefore,  the   petitioners   have   filed   the   complaint
fully knowing that Section 17­A constituted a bar to any
inquiry   or   enquiry   or   investigation   unless   there   was
previous approval. In fact, a request is made to at least
take the first step of seeking permission under Section 17­
A of the 2018 Act. was filed on 24­10­2018 and the complaint is based on
non­registration of the FIR. There is no challenge to Section
17­A. Under the law, as it stood, both on the date of filing
the petition and even as of today, Section 17­A continues
to be on the statute book and it constitutes a bar to any
inquiry   or   enquiry   or   investigation.   The   petitioners
themselves, in the complaint, request to seek approval in
terms   of   Section   17­A   but   when   it   comes   to   the   relief
sought in the writ petition, there was no relief claimed in
this behalf.”
The   same   view   has   been   reflected   in   the   case   of  Tejmal
Choudhary (supra).

26.
One point which has been urged in relation to this authority
is that this was not a contention raised by the parties in the
judgment of Yashwant Sinha (supra) and was not dealt with by
the majority opinion.    Hence, according to the respondents a
concurring opinion could not be a binding authority on a point
which has not been dealt with by the majority of the Hon’ble
Judges in the Bench. Mr. Rohatgi relied on a decision in the case
of Rameshbhai Dabhai Naika ­vs­ State of Gurajat and Others
[(2012) ] on this point. The ratio of this decision would
not apply in the context of the judgment delivered in the case of
Yashwant Sinha (supra), as in the latter authority the majority
view does not reflect any discord over the concurring view.  In my
opinion,   however,   position   of   law   laid   down   in   a   concurring
judgment ought to be treated as part of the main judgment and
that   opinion   would   form   a   binding   authority.   I   should   not
distinguish between the main judgment and the concurring view
and isolate the reasoning contained in the concurring opinion
and hold the reasoning contained in the main opinion (of majority
of the judges) only to have the status of a binding precedent. The
concurring view is just as much part of the main opinion (of

majority of the judges) and will be a binding precedent, composite
with the majority view. The position of law would be different if
the majority view had expressed, either directly or by implication,
a contrary view.  That is not the case so far as the judgment in
the case of  Yashwant Sinha  (supra) is concerned. Hence this
principle   of   law   contained   in   the   concurring   judgment   would
constitute   precedent   even   though   it   was   expressed   in   a
concurring   judgment   of   a   learned   Single   Judge   which   the
majority members of the Bench have not differed. Thus, the steps
taken   against   the   appellant   under   the   1988   Act   ought   to   be
invalidated as the same did not commence with prior approval as
laid down under Section 17A of the 1988 Act.
27.
The cases of Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. vs. State
of Maharashtra [AIR 2021 SC 315] and State ­vs­  M. Maridoss
[(2023) ] were cited by the respondents to contend that
investigation ought not be scuttled at a nascent stage and it was
also highlighted that the petition for quashing of an FIR was
made within five days  from the date the appellant was arraigned
as an accused.  It is a fact that the appellant had approached the
quashing Court with extraordinary speed but that factor by itself

would not render his action untenable, ousting him from the
judicial forum to have the proceeding against him invalidated.  In
the cases of R.P. Kapur ­vs­  State of Punjab [AIR 1960 SC 866]
and  State of Haryana ­vs­ Bhajan  Lal  [(1992) Supp. (1) SCC
335], it has been held that prosecution undertaken in violation of
a   legal   bar   would   be   a   valid   ground   for   quashment   of   the
proceeding.  Further, in the case of Mahmood Ali & others ­vs­
State of UP [2023 INSC 684] a Coordinate Bench of this Court
has observed:­
“13.…. The Court while exercising its jurisdiction under
Section 482 of the CrPC or Article 226 of the Constitution
need not restrict itself only to the stage of a case but is
empowered to take into account the overall circumstances
leading to the initiation/registration of the case as well as
the materials collected in the course of investigation.….”
 
28.
Now I shall address the issue as to whether striking down
the set of offences under the 1988 Act from the FIR would render
the   remand   order   passed   by   the   Special   Judge   appointed   in
terms of Section 3 of the aforesaid statute illegal and non­est. For
the purpose of testing this legal issue, which was raised on behalf
of the appellant, it would be necessary to refer to the provisions

of Sections 3 and 4 of the 1988 Act which have been reproduced
above. 
29.
The question of lack of prior approval under the 1988 Act
was raised before the Special Judge at the time of remand but
this   argument   was   rejected   on   the   ground   that   time   for
commission of the alleged offences related to a period prior to
26.07.2018.  I have in the earlier part of this judgment discussed
this question and held the point in favour of the appellant.
30.
There are allegations of commission of offences against the
appellant under different provisions of the 1860 Code. I have
been taken through the memorandum for adding the appellant as
accused and also the order of the remand Court. The IPC offences
also relate to the same or similar set of transactions, for which
the   aforesaid   provisions   of   the   1988   Act   were   applied.   The
substantive offences alleged against the appellant are Section 12
and Sections 13(1) (c) and (d) read with Section 13(2), which is
the provisions prescribing punishment.  I am not satisfied, at this
stage, that the 1988 Act offences are so dominant in the set of
allegations   against   the   appellant   that   once   I   consider   the
allegations   against   the   appellant   de   hors   the   alleged   offences

under 1988 Act, the allegations of commission of the IPC offences
would automatically collapse. At this stage, in my opinion, the
alleged commission of IPC offences are not mere ancillary to the
1988 Act offences, as has been argued by Mr. Salve and Mr.
Luthra and if commission of offences by the appellant under the
IPC   provisions   is   proved,   could   form   the   basis   of   conviction
independent of the offences under the 1988 Act. Thus, the ratio
of the judgement of this Court in the case of Ebha Arjun Jadeja
and others ­vs­ State of Gujarat [(2019) ], to which I
was a party, would not aid the appellant. In this judgment, it was
held:­
“18. In the case in hand, the only information recorded
which constitutes an offence is the recovery of the arms.
The police officials must have known that the area is a
notified area under the TADA Act and, therefore, carrying
such arms in a notified area is itself an offence under the
TADA Act. It is true that this may be an offence under the
Arms Act also but the basic material for constituting an
offence both under the Arms  Act  and  the  TADA Act  is
identical i.e. recovery of prohibited arms in a notified area
under the TADA Act. The evidence to convict the accused
for crimes under the Arms Act and the TADA Act is also
the same. There are no other offences of rape, murder, etc. in   this   case.   Therefore,   as   far   as   the   present   case   is
concerned,   non­compliance   with   Section   20­A(1)   of   the
TADA Act is fatal and we have no other option but to
discharge the appellants insofar as the offence under the

TADA Act is concerned. We make it clear that they can be
proceeded against under the provisions of the Arms Act.”
As would be evident from quoted portion of the judgment in
the case of  Ebha Arjun Jadeja  (supra), the Coordinate Bench
had permitted proceeding against the appellant therein under the
provisions of the Arms Act though basic material for constituting
the offences was both under the Arms Act and the TADA. 
31.
In   the   case   of  State   through   Central   Bureau   of
Investigation, New Delhi ­vs­ Jitender Kumar Singh [(2014) ] certain persons who were not public servants were
being tried with a public servant in relation to offences outside
the purview of the 1988 Act. The public servant however was
implicated in offences under the aforesaid statute. It has been
held and observed in this judgment:­
“46. We may now examine Criminal Appeal No. 161 of
2011, where the FIR was registered on 2­7­1996 and the
charge­sheet was filed before the Special Judge on 14­9­
2001 for the offences under Sections 120­B, 420 IPC read
with Sections 13(2) and 13(1) of the PC Act. Accused 9 and
10   died   even   before   the   charge­sheet   was   sent   to   the
Special Judge. The charge against the sole public servant
under the PC Act could also not be framed since he died on
18­2­2005. The Special Judge also could not frame any
charge against non­public servants. As already indicated,
under sub­section (3) of Section 4, the Special Judge could

try non­PC offences only when “trying any case” relating
to PC offences. In the instant case, no PC offence has been
committed by any of the non­public servants so as to fall
under Section 3(1) of the PC Act. Consequently, there was
no occasion for the Special Judge to try any case relating
to the offences under the PC Act against the appellant. The
trying   of   any   case   under   the   PC   Act   against   a   public
servant or a non­public servant, as already indicated, is a
sine qua non for exercising powers under sub­section (3) of
Section 4 of the PC Act. In the instant case, since no PC
offence   has   been   committed   by   any   of   the   non­public
servants and no charges have been framed against the
public servant, while he was alive, the Special Judge had
no occasion to try any case against any of them under the
PC Act, since no charge has been framed prior to the death
of the public servant. The jurisdictional fact, as already
discussed above, does not exist so far as this appeal is
concerned, so as to exercise jurisdiction by the Special
Judge to deal with non­PC offences.
47. Consequently, we find no error in the view taken by
the Special Judge, CBI, Greater Mumbai in forwarding the
case papers of Special Case No. 88 of 2001 in the Court of
the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate for trying the case in
accordance with law. Consequently, the order passed by
the High Court is set aside. The competent court to which
Special Case No. 88 of 2001 is forwarded, is directed to
dispose   of   the   same   within   a   period   of   six   months. is allowed accordingly.”
Citing this authority along with the judgement of this court
in   the   cases   of   (i)  Chiranjilal   Goenka   ­vs­     Jasjit   Singh   &
Others  [(1993)   ],   (ii)  State   of   Tamil   Nadu   ­vs­
Paramasiva Pandian [(2002) ], (iii) State of Punjab ­vs­

Davinder   Pal   Singh   Bhullar  [(2011)   ]   and   (iv)
Kaushik Chaterjee ­vs­  State of Haryana [(2020) ] it
was argued   that   the   defect  of   jurisdiction  strikes   at  the   very
power or authority of the Court and hence the Special Judge
could not have passed the remand order and hence the entire
proceeding against the appellant before the Special Judge ought
to fail.   On the same point, certain other authorities were also
referred to but we do not consider it necessary to individually cite
those authorities and deal with them separately. 
32.
So far as the present case is concerned, the principle of law
laid   down   in   the   authorities   referred   to   in   the   preceding
paragraph would not apply. In Section 4(3) of the 1988 Act it has
been stipulated that when trying any case, a Special Judge may
also try any offence other than an offence specified in Section 3,
with which the accused may be charged with under the 1973
Code, at the same trial. In the case of  Jitender Kumar Singh
(supra),   the   public   servant   against   whom   allegations   of
commission of offences under the 1988 Act were brought, had
died before framing of charge and other accused persons were
not   public   servants.   They   were   not   charged   with   any   offence

under   the   1988   Act.     It   was   in   this   context   the   aforesaid
judgment   was   delivered.   It   has   been   submitted   before   us   on
behalf   of   the   State   that   other   co­accused   persons   have   been
implicated in offences under the 1988 Act.   A similar line of
reasoning was followed in the case of A. Sreenivasa Reddy ­vs­
Rakesh Sharma and Another  [2023 INSC 682]. I have earlier
observed that the  offences against the  appellant relate to the
same   or   similar   set   of   transactions   in   relation   to   which   the
Special Judge is proceeding with the case initiated by the F.I.R. dated   09.12.2021   against   the   other   accused   persons.   In   this
context, I shall refer to Section 223 of the 1973 Code, which
stipulates:­
“223.   What   persons   may   be   charged   jointly.—The
following   persons   may   be   charged   and   tried   together,
namely:— 
(a) persons accused of the same offence committed in the
course of the same transaction;
 (b) persons accused of an offence and persons accused of
abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence; 
(c) persons accused of more than one offence of the same
kind,   within   the   meaning   of   section   219   committed   by
them jointly within the period of twelve months; 
(d) persons accused of different offences committed in the
course of the same transaction; 
(e) persons accused of an offence which includes theft,
extortion,   cheating,   or   criminal   misappropriation,   and

persons accused of receiving or retaining, or assisting in
the   disposal   or   concealment   of,   property   possession   of
which is alleged to have been transferred by any such
offence   committed   by   the   first­named   persons,   or   of
abetment of or attempting to commit any such last named
offence; 
(f) persons accused of offences under sections 411 and
414 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or either of
those sections in respect of stolen property the possession
of which has been transferred by one offence; 
(g) persons accused of any offence under Chapter XII of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) relating to counterfeit
coin and persons accused of any other offence under the
said Chapter relating to the same coin, or of abetment of or
attempting to commit any such offence; and the provisions
contained in the former part of this Chapter shall, so far as
may be, apply to all such charges:
Provided  that  where  a number of  persons  are  charged
with separate offences and such persons do not fall within
any   of   the   categories   specified   in   this   section,   the
[Magistrate or Court of Session] may, if such persons by
an application in writing, so desire, and  [if  he  or it  is
satisfied]   that   such   persons   would   not   be   prejudicially
affected thereby, and it is expedient so to do, try all such
persons together.”
33.
Sub clause (a) of the aforesaid provision of the 1973 Code,
so far as charging and trying of an accused is concerned, could
apply in the present case, as the non­obstante clause with which
Section   4   of   the   1988   Act   is   couched,   would   not   oust   the
principles contained in Section 223 of the 1973 Code.  There is
no incompatibility in applying the aforesaid principle considering

the content of sub­section 3 of Section 4 of 1988 Act. In the case
of Vivek Gupta ­vs­ Central Bureau Investigation and Another
[(2003) ] decided by a Coordinate Bench of this Court,
it has been held:­
“14. The   only   narrow   question   which   remains   to   be
answered   is   whether   any   other   person   who   is   also
charged of the same offence with which the co­accused is
charged, but which is not an offence specified in Section 3
of the Act, can be tried with the co­accused at the same
trial by the Special Judge. We are of the view that since
sub­section (3) of Section 4 of the Act authorizes a Special
Judge to try any offence other than an offence specified in
Section 3 of the Act to which the provisions of Section 220
apply, there is no reason why the provisions of Section
223 of the Code should not apply to such a case. Section
223 in clear terms provides that persons accused of the
same   offence   committed   in   the   course   of   the   same
transaction,   or   persons   accused   of   different   offences
committed in the course of the same transaction may be
charged   and   tried   together.   Applying   the   provisions   of
Sections 3 and 4 of the Act and Sections 220 and 223 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, it must be held that the
appellant and his co­accused may be tried by the Special
Judge in the same trial.
15. This is because the co­accused of the appellant who
have been also charged of offences specified in Section 3
of the Act must be tried by the Special Judge, who in view
of the provisions of sub­section (3) of Section 4 and Section
220 of the Code may also try them of the charge under
Section 120­B read with Section 420 IPC. All the three
accused, including the appellant, have been charged of the
offence under Section 120­B read with Section 420 IPC. If
the Special Judge has jurisdiction to try the co­accused for
the offence under Section 120­B read with Section 420
IPC, the provisions of Section 223 are attracted. Therefore,
it follows that the appellant who is also charged of having
committed  the same  offence in the course of the  same
transaction   may   also   be   tried   with   them.   Otherwise   it
appears rather incongruous that some of the conspirators
charged of having committed the same offence may be

tried   by   the   Special   Judge   while   the   remaining
conspirators who are also charged of the same offence will
be tried by another court, because they are not charged of
any offence specified in Section 3 of the Act.”
34.
A   question   has   also   been   raised   by   the   appellant   as   to
whether the Special Judge could have passed the remand order
in the event the remand was asked for only in respect of alleged
commission of the IPC offences. We are apprised in course of
hearing that the appellant has been enlarged on bail.  Hence, this
question   need   not   be   addressed   by   me   in   this   judgment.   I,
accordingly, dispose of this appeal with the following directions:­
(i)  If   an   enquiry,   inquiry   or   investigation   is   intended   in
respect of a public servant on the allegation of commission of
offence under the 1988 Act after Section 17A thereof becomes
operational, which is relatable to any recommendation made
or decision taken, at least prima facie, in discharge of his
official duty, previous approval of the authority postulated in
sub­section (a) or (b) or (c) of Section 17A of the 1988 Act
shall   have   to   be   obtained.   In   absence   of   such   previous
approval, the action initiated under the 1988 Act shall be
held illegal.

(ii)  The appellant cannot be proceeded against for offences
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 as no previous
approval of the appropriate authority has been obtained. This
opinion of this Court, however, shall not foreclose the option
of the concerned authority in seeking approval in terms of
the aforesaid provision. In this case, liberty is preserved for
the State to apply for such approval as contained in the said
provision.  
(iii)  I   decline   to   interfere   with   the   remand   order   dated
10.09.2023 as I am of the view that the Special Judge had
the jurisdiction to pass such order even if the offences under
the 1988 Act could not be invoked at that stage. Lack of
approval in terms of Section 17A would not have rendered
the entire order of remand non­est.
(iv)  The   appellant,   however,   could   be   proceeded   against
before   the   Special  Judge   for   allegations   of   commission   of
offences under the Indian Penal Code, 1860 for which also he
has been implicated.

35.
The appeal stands partly allowed, in the above terms.
36.
All connected applications stand disposed of. 
……………………….. J.
(ANIRUDDHA BOSE)
NEW DELHI;
16th January, 2024

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024
(

VERSUS

THE STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH & ANR. 
JUDGMENT
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1.
Leave granted.
2.
The entire controversy in the instant Appeal centres around the
interpretation of Section 17A of the Prevention of Corruption
Act,1988 (hereinafter referred to as the “PC Act”), and its
applicability to the facts of the present case. Having had the
benefit of going through the draft opinion of my esteemed Brother
Justice Aniruddha Bose, I deem it appropriate to pen down my
views on the issues involved in the Appeal.

FACTUAL MATRIX:
3.
Bereft of unnecessary details, the bare minimum facts required to
decide the present Appeal are that the appellant, who is sought to
be added as the accused No. 37 vide the “Accused Adding
Memo” dated 08.09.2023, in the FIR No. 29/2021 registered at
the P.S. CID P.S., AP, Amarvathi, Mangalalagiri, on 09.12.2021,
was the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh between 2014-2019.
The said FIR No.29/2021 was initially registered against 26
accused on the basis of the report of the Chairman APSSDC
dated 07.09.2021 and the preliminary enquiry report dated
09.12.2021, for the offences under Sections 166, 167, 418, 420,
465, 468, 471, 409, 201, 109 read with 120-B IPC and Section
13(2) read with Section 13(1)(c) and 13(1)(d) of the PC Act, in
connection with the alleged swindling of funds by the then Special
Secretary and other officers of the Government and by the
Directors, Project team members and other officers of M/s
Siemens and M/s DesignTech and their shell/defunct allies, by
creating bogus invoices and thereby siphoning of funds of the
government. 
4.
As per the case of the respondent state, the office of Director
General, Anti-corruption Bureau, A.P, Vijayawada, vide the
memorandum dated 05.06.2018 had directed the DSP, CIU, ACB,

Vijayawada to conduct a Regular Inquiry into the letter/complaint
dated 14.05.2018 received by it in respect of the allegations of
corruption made against the officials of the A.P. State Skill
Development Corporation Vijayawada. Based on the report of the
complainant Sri Konduru Ajay Reddy, Chairman, APSSDC; and
the PE Report of Sri N. Surendra, Dy. S.P. EOW-II, CID, A.P.
Mangalagiri, the case being FIR No. 29/2021 was registered on
09.12.2021. 
5.
It was stated in the “Accused Adding Memo” dated 08.09.2023
filed in CR No. 29/2021 against the appellant (A-37) inter alia
that– 
“As per the investigation so far done, prima facie
established that A36 committed the offence through a
prior conspiracy led by A-37 along with A-1 A-2 and
others. A-38 colluded with A-37, on 16.2.2015, as a
minister in the AP cabinet led by A-37, approved the cost
estimation of Siemens project received through A-1,
without getting any assessment, verification, proper DPR
and evaluation. The accused A-38 while holding office
as public servant as a Minister holding departments i.e
SDEI & APSSDC, conspired, colluded with A-37, A-2, A-
6 to A-10 and with criminal intention, released the Govt

funds through the accused without verifying the
contribution of Technology partners, allowed other
accused to do fraudulent and illegal acts, committed
misappropriation of Government funds to the tune of
around Rs.279 Crores which were entrusted to them or
under their control by corrupt and illegal methods. A-37
& A-38 through A-1, allowed other accused to divert
APSSDC funds by using fake invoices as genuine one
for purpose of cheating through the shell, defunct
companies without providing materials/services to the
APSSDC-Siemens project by the M/s DesignTech, by
conspiring, colluding and intentionally co-operating in the
commission offence with several acts of by the
concerned Directors of companies and private persons.
A-38 as a Minister holding a concerned department i.e
SDE&I & APSSDC did not review the project and caused
the wrongful loss to the Govt. and wrongful gain to
himself and others. 
Therefore, a prima-facie case was established for the
offences U/s 120(B), 418, 420, 465, 468, 471, 409, 201,
109 r/w 34 & 37 IPC & Section 12, 13(2) r/w 13(1) (c)

and (d) of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 against Sri
Nara Chandra Babu Naidu (A- 37), formerly Chief
Minister of Andhra Pradesh and against Sri K.
Atchannaidu, the then Minister for Labour &
Employment, Factories, Youth & Sports, Skill
Development and Entrepreneurship, Govt. of A.P were
added as accused no. 37 and A-38 respectively to this
case.” 
6.
The appellant was arrested on 09.09.2023 and was produced
before the Special Court for SPE and ACB cases Vijayawada,
A.P. The Special Court on 10.09.2023, passed the order
remanding the appellant (accused no.37) to the judicial custody
till 22.09.2023 under Section 167 Cr.PC by holding inter alia that
the material on record prima facie showed that accused no. 37
had in pursuance of criminal conspiracy, while holding his office
as a public servant, colluded with the other accused and
committed misappropriation of government funds to the tune of
Rs.279 crores by corrupt and illegal methods, causing huge loss
to the Government exchequer. It was also observed that there
was a prima facie material to show the nexus of accused no.37
with the other accused no. 1, 2, 6 and 38 and the other

representatives of shell companies, and also sufficient material
eliciting the role of A-37 in the approval of the Skill Development
Project and its activities, attracting the offences under IPC and
PC Act.
7.
The appellant thereafter filed a petition being in the High Court under Section 482 of Cr.PC seeking
to quash the FIR being no.29/2021 qua him and the
consequential order of remand dated 10.09.2023 passed by the
Special Court. The said Criminal Petition came to be dismissed
by the High Court vide the impugned order dated 22.09.2023
which is under challenge before this Court by way of the present
Appeal.
SUBMISSIONS
8.
During the course of lengthy arguments made by a battery of
lawyers led by learned Senior Advocate Mr. Harish N. Salve
appearing for the appellant, broadly following submissions were
made:

The absence of a prior approval as mandated by Section 17A
of the PC Act, vitiated the conduct of enquiry or inquiry or
investigation; the initiation and continuation of investigation in
FIR No. 29 of 2021 dated 09.12.2021, including the various
investigative steps of adding of the appellant as Accused No.
37 and arresting the appellant on 08.09.2023; and the

remand of the appellant into the custody pursuant to the
orders passed by the Special Court.

Section 17A of the PC Act which was introduced with effect
from 26.07.2018, interdicts “…. any enquiry or inquiry or
investigation into an offence alleged to have been committed
by a public servant ……”, without the previous approval of
functionaries specified in Clauses (a), (b) or (c), as the case
may be, the only exception being where a public servant is
apprehended “red handed”.
(iii) Section 17A constitutes a complete legal bar to the very
initiation of any enquiry, inquiry or investigation as was noted
by this Court in Yashwant Sinha & Ors. Vs. Central Bureau
of Investigation1.
(iv) Section 17A relates to the procedure by which an enquiry,
inquiry or investigation into an offence is to be conducted. It is
a procedural provision, which does not impair any right of the
investigating agencies. In this regard reliance is placed on
Anant Gopal Sheorey vs. State of Bombay2 and on Rattan
Lal Alias Ram Rattan Vs. State of Punjab3. 

No person has a “vested right in the remedies and the
methods of procedure in trials for crime.” A law that draws
upon antecedent facts in its prospective operation is not
1 (2020) 
 SC 915
 SC 444

retrospective - it is sometimes referred to as being
retroactive.
(vi) Section 17A is retroactive in the sense that it would apply in
future in relation to all enquires, inquires or investigations
being conducted, even though such enquiries, inquires or
investigations may be in respect of offences which may have
allegedly been committed prior to coming into force of Section
17A.
(vii) Section 17A (c) uses the phrase “at the time when the offence
was alleged to have been committed”. Meaning thereby it
suggest that the provision is intended to apply to offences
committed in the past without any limitation.

The question whether a prosecution can be initiated after a
substantive offence is deleted is not being raised in the
present case - the appellant’s case will be that in such
matters, if the law does not consider an act to be an offence
anymore, initiating a prosecution after the offence is deleted
violates Article 21. However, that will arise in the Trial and the
issue is not being raised at this stage.
(ix) The conclusion of the High Court that the provision cannot be
applied in the case of any offence committed prior to
26.07.2018 is erroneous, as in the instant case the alleged
offences have taken place till 2019, as for the case of the
prosecution. 

The SOP issued in relation to Section 17A contemplates a
step-by-step approval requirement as per the notification
issued in this behalf. 
(xi) The alleged offences in the present case relate to the
recommendations made/decisions taken by the appellant in
discharge of his official functions or duties. The focus of the
provision under Section 17A is the person who has committed
the offence and not merely the offence. The private acts of a
person, not in his or her capacity as a public servant are not
protected by this provision, however, if the offences are
based on the allegations in connection with recommendations
or decisions taken in discharge of his official functions or
duties, section 17A would apply. The allegations levelled
against the appellant have a clear nexus to his post of Chief
Minister.
(xii) Section 17A uses the phrase “any offence”. Hence the
requirement of obtaining prior approval under Section 17A is
applicable to all offences, and not just offences under the PC
Act. In any event, even if the prior approval under Section
17A applies only to allegations of offences under the PC Act,
the continuation of investigation under IPC offences cannot
be countenanced as the basic material for constituting both
kinds of offences is the same.

It is trite law that if the initial action is not in consonance
with law, all subsequent and consequential proceedings
would fall. In the present case, once offences under the PC
Act are effaced from existence, the custody of the appellant
pursuant to the orders passed by the Special Court from time
to time was without any sanction of law, as the Special Court
in that case had no powers to remand persons accused of
offences under the IPC alone. The jurisdictional fact for the
exercise of jurisdiction by the Special Court is the existence
of an offence under the PC Act, and once such jurisdictional
fact ceases to exist, the orders of Special Court are required
to be treated as without any sanction of law and non-est. In
this regard, reliance is placed on State of Punjab vs.
Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar & Others4. 
(xiv)A legal bar to a prosecution is a valid ground for quashing the
proceedings as held by this Court in R.P. Kapur vs. State of
Punjab5 and State of Haryana Vs. Bhajan Lal6.
9.
Learned Senior Advocate Mr. Mukul Rohtagi for the Respondent –
State of Andhra Pradesh made following submissions: - 

None of the facets contained in Section 17A would be
applicable to the facts of the present case in as much as
4 (2011) 
 SC 866
6 1992 (Suppl.) SCC 335

Section 17A of the PC Act came into force with effect from
26.07.2018, whereas the Regular Enquiry was initiated in
respect of the alleged scam against the appellant and
others by ACB vide the letter dated 05.06.2018, on the
basis of the complaint received from within the DGSTI on
14.05.2018. When the Enquiry began, Section 17A was not
in existence and therefore cannot be made applicable to the
present case. 

On 11.07.2021, the State issued a memo at the request of
the M.D. of APSSDC entrusting a detailed investigation into
the very alleged scam. As long as the enquiry into the
offence. i.e. facts constituting the offence by the ACB and
the CID enquiry are one and the same i.e. about the
siphoning of funds from APSSDC during the period 2015-
2018. Therefore, the date of initiation of Enquiry into the
said offence for the purpose of deciding the applicability of
Section 17A of the PC Act is the date on which the Enquiry
was first initiated into that particular offence, i.e. 05.06.2018
in the instant case. 
(iii) The word “Enquiry” is neither defined in the Code of
Criminal Procedure nor in the PC Act. As per the Standard
Operating Procedure issued by the Government of India
however describes “enquiry” as – “enquiry for the purposes

of the SOPs means any action taken, for verifying as to
whether the information pertains to commission of an
offence under the Act.” Hence, the date of initiation of
Enquiry is only offence specific and not investigation agency
specific or complaint/ complainant specific, and does not
change by the mere change of investigating agency. 
(iv) The Enquiry, which was initiated by the ACB on 05.06.2018
i.e. much prior to the incorporation of Section 17A into the
PC Act, was later entrusted to the AP CID. All the decisions
that formed part of the offences were taken much prior to
the amendment of the PC Act i.e. between 2015 and 2017.
Therefore, no approval as contemplated under Section 17A
would be required. 

The offences allegedly committed by the appellant were not
in discharge of his official functions or duties. Even as per
the appellants case, he was neither the Minister In-Charge
of the concerned Project, nor had he had anything to do
with the concerned corporation (APSSDC).
(vi) In the instant case, the alleged offences have been
registered not only under the PC Act but also under various
offences of Indian Penal Code (IPC) like Sections 409, 166,
167, 418, 420, 465, 468, 471, 201 and 109 read with
Section 120(B) of IPC. Committing criminal breach of

trust/misappropriation of funds could never be construed to
fall under the discharge of official duties. In any case the
question whether an act is within one’s official capacity or
not can only be decided in the course of trial. 
(vii) As held in State of Rajasthan vs. Tejmal Choudhary,7
Section 17A of PC Act is ‘a Substantive Provision’ and is
therefore applicable only prospectively. Section 17A
envisages a substantive right against non-prosecution of
innocent acts in course of official duty; and not an obstacle/
hurdle in the investigation process of the prosecution,
especially when the sanction is denied. Section 17A creates
new rights, disabilities and obligations and therefore it ought
not to be applied retrospectively as held in G.J. Raja vs.
Tejraj Surana 8.
(viii) Under the 2018 amendment, other than introducing
Section 17A, other sections like Section 13 (1)(c) and 13(1)
(d) i.e. the offences for which the appellant is charged, were
specifically repealed and the offences were redefined.
Section 17A can have no application to the offences as they
existed prior to the 2018 amendment. 
(ix) Even if Section 17A of the PC Act were to be applicable to
the present case, the IPC offences would survive and
7 2021 SCC Online SC 3477
8 (2019) 

therefore also the FIR qua the appellant cannot be
quashed. The question of competence of a particular court
to try the offences would arise only after the investigation is
complete and a chargesheet is filed. 

When one of the co-accused has been charged under the
offences under both the PC Act and the IPC, while the other
co-accused have only been charged under the IPC, the
Special Court would have jurisdiction to try both the
accused persons in view of Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the PC
Act. In the instant case 38 persons including multiple public
servants have been arrayed as the accused in Crime No.
29 of 2021 before the AP CID Police Station, and therefore
the Special Court under the PC Act has the jurisdiction to try
all the accused involved in the case. 
(xi) In case of two possible constructions of a provision in the
PC Act, it is the duty of the Court to interpret it in the
manner which roots out corruption, as opposed to creating
a road block in the fight against corruption. 
(xii) Section 17A of the PC Act is substantially similar to Section
197 of the Cr.P.C., and this Court has interpretively
narrowed down the circumstances in which sanction under
Section 197 of Cr.P.C. needs to be obtained, by holding that
official duties, when discharged for collateral or other

benefits, would fall outside the scope of the term “official
duties”.
(xiii) The judgment in case of Yaswant Sinha vs. CBI (supra),
relied upon by the appellant was not a binding precedent,
as the portion thereof relied upon was a discordant note in
Hon’ble Justice Joseph’s judgment, which was in variance
with the main judgment. 
(xiv)The appellant was added as an accused by filing the
“Accused Adding Memo” on 07.09.2023 and the petition for
quashing the FIR was filed by the appellant merely 5 days
later, on 12.09.2023. There was a clear attempt on the part
of the appellant therefore to scuttle the investigation at the
preliminary stage qua him. When there are adequate
grounds to initiate a criminal investigation, the same cannot
be scuttled more particularly when the other central
agencies are also investigating the same scam alleged
against the appellant. 
ANALYSIS:
10. At the outset, it may be noted that the PC Act 1988 sets the
framework for prosecuting individuals involved in corrupt activities
and provides measures to prevent corruption in various spheres
of the society. By emphasizing accountability, transparency and

strict legal consequences, the PC Act stands to combat corruption
and to foster and uphold the culture of ethical conduct. The very
objectives of the Act are to prevent corruption, to promote
transparency and accountability in the public administration, to
deter individuals from engaging in corrupt practices by imposing
strict penalties, protects whistleblowers etc. It also provides for
the investigation and prosecution of corruption cases, outlining
the procedure for gathering evidence, conducting trials and
ensuring a fair and expeditious legal process. By the Prevention
of Corruption (Amendment) Act 2018 (hereinafter referred to as
the Amendment Act, 2018), the PC Act 1988 was further
amended, to fill in the gaps in the description and coverage of the
offence of bribery so as to bring it in line with the current
international practices and also to meet more effectively the
country’s obligations under the United Nations Convention
Against Corruption. The Central Government in exercise of the
powers conferred by sub section (2) of Section (1) of the
Amendment Act, 2018, had vide the Notification dated 26.07.2018
appointed the 26th July 2018 as the date on which the provisions
of the said Amendment shall come into force. Accordingly, the
said provisions of the Amendment Act, 2018 came into force on
26.07.2018.

11. By the Amendment Act 2018, several provisions more particularly
the offences described under Section 7, 8, 9, 10 and 13 in the PC
Act, 1988 were substituted with the new provisions; and several
new provisions like Section 7A, 17A, 18A, 29A etc. were inserted.
Certain provisions pertaining to the punishments of the offences
under the Act were also amended. The newly added Section 17A
being relevant for this Appeal, is reproduced as under: -
“17A. Enquiry or Inquiry or investigation of
offences relatable to recommendations made or
decision taken by public servant in discharge of
official functions or duties.—
No police officer shall conduct any enquiry or inquiry or
investigation into any offence alleged to have been
committed by a public servant under this Act, where the
alleged offence is relatable to any recommendation
made or decision taken by such public servant in
discharge of his official functions or duties, without the
previous approval—
 (a) in the case of a person who is or was employed, at
the time when the offence was alleged to have been
committed, in connection with the affairs of the Union,
of that Government;
(b) in the case of a person who is or was employed, at
the time when the offence was alleged to have been
committed, in connection with the affairs of a State, of
that Government; 
(c) in the case of any other person, of the authority
competent to remove him from his office, at the time
when the offence was alleged to have been committed:
Provided that no such approval shall be necessary for
cases involving arrest of a person on the spot on the
charge of accepting or attempting to accept any undue
advantage for himself or for any other person: 
Provided further that the concerned authority shall
convey its decision under this section within a period of

three months, which may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing by such authority, be extended by a further
period of one month.”
12. Since the main issue involved in the present Appeal is in respect
of the interpretation of the newly inserted provision Section 17A,
let us regurgitate the basic principles of Statutory interpretation as
propounded by this Court from time to time. It is well known rule
of interpretation of statutes that the courts must look to the object
which the Statute seeks to achieve while interpreting any of the
provisions of the Act. A purposive approach for interpreting the Act
is necessary9. The purport and object of the Act must be given its
full effect10. The text and the context of the entire Act must be
looked into while interpreting any of the expressions used in the
Statue. If two views are possible, the view which most accords
the object of the Act, and which makes the Act workable must
necessarily be the controlling view. Even penal Statutes are
governed not only by their literal language, but also by the object
sought to be achieved by Parliament11. Even if the words
occurring in the Statute are plain and unambiguous, they have to
be interpreted in a manner which would fit in the context of the
9 S. Gopal Reddy Vs. State of A.P.; 1996 (4) SCC 596.
10 Indian Handicrafts Emporium & Ors. Vs. Union of India & Ors.; 2003 (7) SCC
589.
11 Asian Resurfacing of Road Agency Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. Vs. Central Bureau of
Investigation; 2018 (16) SCC 299. other provisions of the Statutes and bring about the real intention
of the legislature12.
13. Although not specifically mentioned in the Statement of Objects
and Reasons of the Amendment Act, 2018, the object of inserting
Section 17A in the PC Act, which is in pari materia with the
provisions contained in Section 6A of the Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act 1946, is to protect the honest public servants
from the harassment by way of inquiry or investigation in respect
of the decisions taken or acts done in bonafide performance of
their official functions or duties. Whereas Section 19 bars the
courts from taking the cognizance of an offence punishable under
the PC Act, alleged to have been committed by public servants
except with the prior sanction of the concerned authorities
mentioned therein, Section 17A bars the police officer from
conducting any enquiry or inquiry or investigation of offences
relatable to recommendations made or decision taken by public
servant in discharge of official functions or duties, without the
previous approval of the concerned authorities mentioned therein.
From the bare reading, it is discernible that Section 17A has the
following main four facets. 
(I) Enquiry or inquiry or investigation of offences under the PC
Act.
12 R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla & Anr. Vs. Union of India & Anr; AIR 1957 SC 628.

(ii) Alleged offences should be relatable to the recommendation
made or decision taken by a public servant.
(iii) Such recommendation made or decision taken by a public
servant should be in discharge of official functions or duties
and
(iv) Previous approval of the authorities mentioned therein.
14. Though the word ‘Enquiry’ as contained in Section 17A has
neither been defined in the PC Act nor in the CrPC, as per the
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) issued by the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of
Personnel& Training) dated 3rd September, 2021 for processing
of cases under Section 17A, “Enquiry” means any action taken,
for verifying as to whether the information received by the Police
Officer pertains to the commission of an offence under the Act
(Para 4.2 of the said SOPs). The meaning of the words ‘inquiry’
and ‘investigation’ for the purposes of Section 17A could be
imported from the definitions contained in Section 2(g) & Section
2(h) respectively of Cr.PC, the same being made applicable
subject to certain modifications in view of Section 22 of the PC
Act.
15. As stated earlier, the provisions pertaining to the offences under
the PC Act particularly the offences under Section 7, 8, 9, 10 and
13, have been substantially amended, and the new offence under

Section 7(A), has been inserted by the Amendment Act 16/2018.
Such substitution in place of existing provisions and such
insertion of new provisions in the PC Act, have created new set of
rights and liabilities under the Act. Section 17A having been newly
inserted simultaneously with such amendments in the provisions
pertaining to the offences, in my opinion, Section 17A could be
made applicable only to the said amended/ newly inserted
offences under the PC Act. Section 17A having been introduced
as a part of larger legislative scheme, and the other offences
under the PC Act having been redefined or newly inserted by way
of Amendment Act, 2018, Section 17A is required to be treated as
a substantive and not merely a procedural in nature. Such a
substantive amendment could not be made applicable
retrospectively to the offences like Section 13(1)(c) and 13(1)(d),
which have been deleted under the Amendment Act, 2018. 
16. The submission of ld. Senior Advocate Mr. Salve that since
Section 17A constitutes a legal bar to the very initiation of enquiry,
inquiry or investigation into the offence alleged to have been
committed by a public servant, without the previous approval of
the functionaries specified in the said provision, such a provision
is procedural in nature, and therefore the mandate of Section 17A
should be made retroactively applicable i.e. even to the pending

enquiry, inquiry or investigation, if not made applicable
retrospectively, also can not be accepted. The cardinal principle
of construction is that every statute would have prospective
operation, unless it is expressly or by necessary implication made
to have a retrospective operation. There could not be a
presumption against the retrospectivity. In the instant case, the
Amendment Act, 2018, by which Section 17A was inserted, was
specifically made applicable with effect from 26.07.2018 by the
Central Government vide the Notification of the even date. Hence,
the intention of the Legislature was also to make the amendments
applicable prospectively from a particular date and not
retrospectively or retroactively. In Vineeta Sharma vs. Rakesh
Sharma and Others13, a three-judge bench has very aptly
distinguished the effect of retrospective statute, retroactive statute
and prospective statute, and has observed as under: -
“61. The prospective statute operates from the date of
its enactment conferring new rights. The retrospective
statute operates backwards and takes away or impairs
vested rights acquired under existing laws. A
retroactive statute is the one that does not operate
retrospectively. It operates in futuro. However, its
operation is based upon the character or status that
arose earlier. Characteristic or event which happened
in the past or requisites which had been drawn from
antecedent events. Under the amended Section 6,
since the right is given by birth, that is, an antecedent
event, and the provisions operate concerning claiming
rights on and from the date of the Amendment Act.
13 2020 (9) SCC 1

62. The concept of retrospective and retroactive statute
was stated by this Court in Darshan Singh v. Ram Pal
Singh [Darshan Singh v. Ram Pal Singh, 1992 Supp (1)
SCC 191], thus: (SCC pp. 211-13, paras 35-37)
“35. Mr Sachar relies on Gokal Chand v. Parvin
Kumari [Gokal Chand v. Parvin Kumari, (1952): AIR 1952 SC 231], Garikapati
Veeraya v. N. Subbiah Choudhry [Garikapati
Veeraya v. N. Subbiah Choudhry, AIR 1957 SC
540], Jose Da Costa v. Bascora Sadasiva
Sinai Narcornim [Jose Da Costa v. Bascora
Sadasiva Sinai Narcornim, (1976) ], Govind Das v. CIT [Govind Das v. CIT,
(1976): 1976 SCC (Tax)
133], Henshall v. Porter [Henshall v. Porter,
(1923) 2 KB 193], United Provinces v. Atiqa
Begum [United Provinces v. Atiqa Begum,: AIR 1941 FC 16], in
support of his submission that the Amendment
Act was not made retrospective by the
legislature either expressly or by necessary
implication as the Act itself expressly provided
that it shall be deemed to have come into force
on 23-1-1973; and therefore there would be no
justification to giving it retrospective operation.
The vested right to contest which was created
on the alienation having taken place and which
had been litigated in the court, argues Mr
Sachar, could not be taken away. In other
words, the vested right to contest in appeal
was not affected by the Amendment Act.
However, to appreciate this argument we have
to analyse and distinguish between the two
rights involved, namely, the right to contest and
the right to appeal against the lower court's
decision. Of these two rights, while the right to
contest is a customary right, the right to appeal
is always a creature of statute. The change of
the forum for appeal by enactment may not
affect the right of appeal itself. In the instant
case we are concerned with the right to contest
and not with the right to appeal as such. There
is also no dispute as to the propositions of law
regarding vested rights being not taken away
by an enactment which is ex facie or by
implication not retrospective. But merely
because an Act envisages a past act or event
in the sweep of its operation, it may not

necessarily be said to be retrospective.
Retrospective, according to Black's Law
Dictionary, means looking backward;
contemplating what is past; having reference to
a statute or things existing before the Act in
question. Retrospective law, according to the
same dictionary, means a law which looks
backwards or contemplates the past; one
which is made to affect acts or facts occurring,
or rights occurring, before it came into force.
Every statute which takes away or impairs
vested rights acquired under existing laws, or
creates a new obligation, imposes a new duty,
or attaches a new disability in respect to
transactions or considerations already past.
Retroactive statute means a statute which
creates a new obligation on transactions or
considerations already past or destroys or
impairs vested rights.”
17. Thus, whereas the prospective statute operates from the date of
its enactments conferring new rights, the retrospective statute
operates backwards and takes away or impairs vested rights
acquired under the existing laws. A retroactive statute is one that
does not operate retrospectively, however depending upon the
status and nature of the events or transactions, the operation of
the statute is extended or given effect from the date prior to its
enactment. So far as the Amendment Act, 2018 is concerned, it
has been made applicable specifically from the date of its
notification i.e. 26.07.2018.
18. In Hitendra Vishnu Thakur and Others vs. State of
Maharashtra and Others14, it was held by this Court that a
14 (1994) 

statute which not only changes the procedure but also creates
new rights and liabilities shall be construed to be prospective in
operation unless otherwise provided either expressly or by
necessary implication. The ratio of the said judgment in Hitendra
Vishnu Thakur was also followed in G.J. Raja vs. Tejraj
Surana15.
19. In State of Telangana vs. Managipet angipet Sarveshwar
Reddy16, this Court rejected the arguments that the amended
provisions of the PC Act would be applicable to an FIR registered
before the said amendment came into force.
20. In a very recent decision in the case of State of Rajasthan vs.
Tejmal Choudhary17, this Court set-aside the interim order
passed by the High Court which had quashed the proceedings
only on the ground that the approval was not obtained under
Section 17A of the PC Act, by observing inter alia that the
legislative intent in the enactment of a statute is to be gathered
from the express words used in the statute, unless the plain
words literally construed give rise to absurd results. It has been
further observed therein that this Court has to go by the plain
words of the statute to construe the legislative intent, and that it
could not possibly have been the intent of the legislature that all
15 (2019) 
16 (2019) 
17 (2021) SCC OnLine SC 3477

pending investigations up to July 2018 should be rendered
infructuous.
21. Apart from the afore-stated legal position, it is also required to be
noted that while passing the Amendment Act 2018 by which the
then existing offences under the PC Act were deleted and
redefined, and by which some new offences were inserted, the
Legislature had simultaneously introduced Section 17A. It was
also stated in the Amendment Act that the same shall come into
force from the date as may be notified by the Central
Government. Therefore, it is required to be presumed that the
intention of the legislature was to make Section 17A applicable
only to the new offences as amended by Amendment Act, 2018
and not to the offences which existed prior to the coming into
force of the Amendment Act 2018. Any other interpretation may
lead to an anomalous situation resulting into absurdity in as much
as there could not be prior approval of the authorities as
contemplated under Section 17A for the offences which have
been deleted by the Amendment Act, 2018. If the submission of
Mr. Salve that Section 17A is retroactive in operation is accepted,
then all the pending proceedings of enquiry, inquiry and
investigation as on 26.7.2018, carried out in respect of the

offences which existed prior to the amendment would become
infructuous, frustrating the very object of the Act. 
22. As stated earlier, the very object of the PC Act is to combat the
corruption, and the object of Section 17A is to protect the honest
and innocent public servants from undergoing the harassment by
the police for the recommendations made or decisions taken in
discharge of official functions or duties. It cannot be the object of
Section 17A to give benefit to the dishonest and corrupt public
servants. If any enquiry or inquiry or investigation carried out by a
police officer in respect of the offence committed by a public
servant is held to be non est or infructuous by making Section
17A retrospectively or retroactively applicable, the same would
not only frustrate the object of the PC Act but also would be
counter-productive. It is axiomatic that no proceeding could stand
vitiated or could become infructuous on account of the
subsequent amendment in the Act. The well-known and well
accepted rule of interpretation of statute is that the courts should
take into consideration the other provisions of the Act also while
interpreting a particular provision, and should avoid such
interpretation as would lead to an anomalous situation or to
frustration of the object of the Act.

23. As held in Subramanian Swamy vs. Manmohan Singh and
Another18, in case of two possible constructions of a provision in
the PC Act, it would be the duty of the court to accept the one that
seeks to eradicate corruption to the one which seeks to
perpetuate it. In Subramanian Swamy vs. Director, Central
Bureau of Investigation and Another19, the Constitution Bench
had observed while dealing with Section 19 of the P.C. Act that
the protection against malicious prosecution which is extended in
public interest, cannot become a shield to protect corrupt officials.
24. The judgment in case of Yashwant Sinha and Others vs.
Central Bureau of Investigation (supra), relied upon by Mr.
Salve also would not be of any help to the appellant. Mr. Salve
has relied upon the observations made by Hon’ble Justice Joseph
in his concurring judgment, which according to Mr. Rohtagi was a
discordant note in variance with the main judgment of two judges.
Be that as it may, what has been observed by Justice Joseph is
that Section 17A constitutes a bar of any enquiry, inquiry or
investigation without the previous approval of the concerned
authority. The said observation nowhere states that Section 17A
shall operate retrospectively or retroactively. 
18 (2012) 
19 (2014) 

25. Even otherwise, absence of approval before conducting any
enquiry or inquiry or investigation into an offence alleged to have
been committed by a public servant, as contemplated in Section
17A could never be the ground for quashing the FIR registered
against the public servant or the proceedings conducted against
him, more particularly when he is also charged for the other
offences under the IPC in respect of the same set of allegations.
As stated earlier, there are other important facets contained in
Section 17A, like whether the alleged offence is relatable to the
recommendation made or decision taken by the public servant or
not, and whether such recommendation or decision was made or
taken in discharge of his official functions or duties or not etc.
Such facets could be examined only when the evidence is led
during the course of trial. The alleged acts which prima facie
constitute the offences, though done under the purported exercise
of official function or duty, could not fall within the purview of
Section 17A. The Protection sought to be granted to a public
servant under Section 17A could not be extended to his acts
which prima facie were not in discharge of his official functions or
duties. Any other interpretation would certainly tantamount to
scuttling the investigation at a very nascent stage. Such could
neither be the intention of the legislature nor could such provision

be interpreted in the manner which would be counter productive
or frustrating the very object of the PC Act.
26. In response to the court’s query as to how an FIR could have
been registered in 2021 for the offences under Section 13(1)(c)
and 13(1)(d) which have already been deleted by the Amendment
Act 2018, Mr. Rohtagi submitted that though the old provision of
Section 13 has been substituted by the new provision, and though
Section 13(1)(c) and 13(1)(d) are no more offences under the
amended provision of Section 13, the right of the investigating
agency which had accrued to investigate the crime which took
place prior to the amended provision of Section 13, continues in
view of Clauses ‘c’ and ‘e’ of Section 6 of the General Clauses
Act. According to him, unless a different intention appears in the
Amendment Act 2018, the right of the investigating agency to
investigate the offences under Section 13(1)(c) and 13(1) (d)
could not be said to have been affected by the Amendment Act
2018. I find substance in the said submission of Mr. Rohtagi, in
view of the observations made by this Court in M.C. Gupta vs.
Central Bureau of Investigation, Dehradun20, which clinches
the issue.
“14. Viewed from this angle, clauses (c) and (e) of
Section 6 of the GC Act become relevant for the
20 (2012) 

present case. Sub-clause (c) says that if any Central
Act repeals any enactment, the repeal shall not affect
any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired,
accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed.
In this case, the right which had accrued to the
investigating agency to investigate the crime which
took place prior to the coming into force of the new Act
and which was covered by the 1947 Act remained,
unaffected by reason of clause (c) of Section 6. Clause
(e) says that the repeal shall not affect any
investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of
any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty,
forfeiture or punishment and Section 6 further states
that any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy
may be instituted, continued or enforced and such
penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if
the repealing Act had not been passed. Therefore, the
right of CBI to investigate the crime, institute
proceedings and prosecute the appellants is saved and
not affected by the repeal of the 1947 Act. That is to
say, the right to investigate and the corresponding
liability incurred are saved. Section 6 of the GC Act
qualifies the effect of repeal stated in sub-clauses (a) to
(e) by the words “unless a different intention appears”.
Different intention must appear in the repealing Act
(see Bansidhar [(1989) ] ). If the repealing
Act discloses a different intention, the repeal shall not
result in situations stated in sub-clauses (a) to (e). No
different intention is disclosed in the provisions of the
new Act to hold that the repeal of the 1947 Act affects
the right of the investigating agency to investigate
offences which are covered by the 1947 Act or that it
prevents the investigating agency from proceeding with
the investigation and prosecuting the accused for
offences under the 1947 Act. In our opinion, therefore,
the repeal of the 1947 Act does not vitiate or invalidate
the criminal case instituted against the appellants and
the consequent conviction of the appellants for
offences under the provisions of the 1947 Act.”
27. In view of the afore-stated legal position, unless a different
intention is disclosed in the new Act or repealing Act, a repeal of
an Act would not affect the right of the investigating agency to
investigate the offences which were covered under the repealed

Act. If the offences were committed when the repealed Act was in
force, then the repeal of such Act would neither affect the right of
the investigating agency to investigate the offence nor would
vitiate or invalidate any proceedings instituted against the
accused. In the instant case also the offences under Section
13(1)(c) and 13(1)(d) were in force when the same were allegedly
committed by the appellant. Hence, the deletion of the said
provisions and the substitution of the new offence under Section
13 by the Amendment Act, 2018 would not affect the right of the
investigating agency to investigate nor would vitiate or invalidate
any proceedings initiated against the appellant.
28. Having considered the different contours of Section 17A, I am of
the opinion that Section 17A would be applicable to the offences
under the PC Act as amended by the Amendment Act, 2018, and
not to the offences existing prior to the said amendment. Even
otherwise, absence of an approval as contemplated in Section
17A for conducting enquiry, inquiry or investigation of the offences
alleged to have been committed by a public servant in purported
exercise of his official functions or duties, would neither vitiate the
proceedings nor would be a ground to quash the proceedings or
the FIR registered against such public servant.
29. In the instant case, the Appellant having been implicated for the
other offences under IPC also, the Special Court was completely

within its jurisdiction to pass the remand order in view of the
powers conferred upon it under Section 4 and 5 of the PC Act.
There was no jurisdictional error committed by the Special Court
in passing the impugned order of remand. The impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court also does not
suffer from any illegality or infirmity which would warrant
interference of this Court.
30. In that view of the matter, the appeal being devoid of merits is
dismissed.
…………………………. J.
[BELA M. TRIVEDI]
NEW DELHI;
 
JANUARY, 16th 2024.

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.OF 2024
(Arising out of Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Criminal)
No.12289 of 2023)
NARA CHANDRABABU NAIDU 
      … APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

THE STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH 
& ANR.   
      … RESPONDENT(S)
ORDER
As we have expressed opinions taking different views
on the interpretation of Section 17A of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 as also its applicability to the
appellant in the subject-case, we refer the matter to the
Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India. The Registry to place
the papers before the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India
so that appropriate decision can be taken for the
constitution of a Larger Bench in this case for
adjudication on the point on which contrary opinions have
been expressed by us.
……………………….. J.
(ANIRUDDHA BOSE)
……………………….. J.
(BELA M. TRIVEDI)
NEW DELHI;
16TH JANUARY, 2024.