1| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURSIDICTION 
 
I.A. No.120219/2020 
IN 

BIJAY KUMAR MANISH KUMAR HUF … PETITIONER(S) 

VERSUS 

ASHWIN BHANULAL DESAI … RESPONDENT(S) 

With 
 
I.A. No.120227/2020 in SLP(C)No.4050/2020, 
I.A. No.120235/2020 in SLP(C)No.4051/2020 
& 
I.A. No.120248/2020 in SLP(C)No.4052/2020 

JUDGMENT 

SANJAY KAROL, J. 
 
1. 
These petitions for special leave to appeal seek to lay a challenge to the 
judgment and order dated 7th November 2019 passed in C.O.Nos.1582-85 of 2019 
by the High Court of Calcutta. The learned Single Judge while deciding the issue 
as to whether the West Bengal Tenancy Act, 19971 or the Transfer of Property 
 
1 Tenancy Act 

2| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

Act, 18822 was to be applied for framing of the issues in the instant landlord-
tenant dispute, held that the Tenancy Act would govern the same. 
2. 
Impugning the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the present Special 
Leave Petitions were filed before this Court. However, the reasoning adopted 
therein is not within the scope of the present adjudication. During the pendency 
of these Special Leave Petitions interlocutory applications have been filed 
seeking direction for payment of rent and other associated benefits in connection 
with the property which is the subject matter of the present dispute. It is these 
Interlocutory Applications that are sought to be disposed of by way of the present 
judgment. 
3. 
It would, however, be apposite to have a bird’s eye view of the controversy. 
It is not in dispute that the lis governs four different tenancies. Due to alleged 
non- payment of rent, the lease was forfeited, and the petitioner-applicant initiated 
proceedings for ejectment under the T.P. Act. Suit(s) were filed before the City 
Civil Court at Calcutta seeking inter alia, a) recovery of possession by eviction 
of defendant (respondent- tenant herein); b) permanent injunction against the 
present respondents and his agents, servants, employees or associates etc., from 
alienating, transferring or parting with possession of the property. The 
respondent-tenant, in opposition thereto, filed an application seeking the rejection 
of the plaint, on the grounds of jurisdiction, and for the premises to be governed 
under the Tenancy Act alleging particularly that, possession has been sought in 
 
2 T.P. Act 

3| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

respect of a lease that is yet undetermined; the claim is bad in law, illegal and 
arbitrary; the suit has been misvalued and the plaint is insufficiently stamped, 
among others. The same came to be rejected by the concerned Court by order 
dated 3rd February 20153. It was observed: – 
 
“…Without a full-fledged trial and evidence the court cannot come 
to conclusion that the averments made in the plaint are false and 
frivolous or that there is any suppression of material fact. Notice of 
determination of lease, if not at all served upon the defendant and if 
it is mandatory, then the suit may fill in future. But that cannot come 
under the ambit of the provision of O 7 R 11 CPC. This court cannot 
take the view for rejection of plaint without giving or affording 
opportunity to the parties to bring evidence justifying their plea. On 
the other hand, because of action of the suit has to be found out on 
the conjoint reading of all paragraphs of the plaint. Because of action 
does not mean only a date. Above all, the Plaintiff has specifically 
mentioned cause of action in paragraph 15 of the plaint. The 
allegations or the averments made in the plaint has to be proved by 
the Plaintiff had the time of trial by producing evidence and it is the 
duty of the Plaintiff to prove that the lease has been determined 
properly or not.” 

Allowing the matter not to rest there, the respondent-tenant pursued the 
matter further. The High Court, in its Civil Revisional Jurisdiction under Article 
227 of the Constitution of India, vide order dated 31st March 20154 upheld the 
dismissal of the application under Order VII Rule 11. Eventually, this Court vide 
judgment and order dated 12th December 20185 directed the remand of the matter, 
observing thus: – 
 
“9. Taking into consideration the peculiar facts and circumstances of 
the case, since the suit is still in the preliminary stage, we dispose of 
the appeal is directing the trial court to frame the issue, relating to 
the maintainability of the suit and applicability of enactments, as 
 
3 Annexure P 11 of the paper book at page 132 
4 Annexure P 12 of the paper book at page 138 
5 Annexure P -29 of paper book 

4| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

mentioned supra and decide the same in accordance with law as a 
preliminary issue as expeditiously as possible, preferably within a 
period of 6 months from the date of communication of this 
judgment.” 

4. The Trial Court thereafter framed the following issues:- 
 
“1. Is the suit triable under the provisions of the W.B.P.T Act, 1997 
 or the Transfer of Property Act 1882? 
 
2. Whether the suit is maintainable as framed or at all?” 

5. 
The Trial Court in all four suits, answered the issues in favour of the 
plaintiff, primarily on the ground that since the tenancy, subject matter of the suit, 
was created with w.e.f. 20th November 1992 and the Tenancy Act came into force 
w.e.f. 10th July 2001. The agreement inter se the parties, therefore, was governed 
only by the T.P. Act. The observation of the trial court is extracted as under: – 
 
“… It is pertinent to mention here that the lease deed was executed 
on 20.11.1992 for the period of 99 years and the W. B. P. T. Act, 1997 
came into force on 10. 07. 01 i.e. much more earlier than the 
enforcement of the W. B. P. T. Act, 1997 and there is or was no 
express word in the W. B. P. T. Act, 1997 that alright accrued by any 
party from the prevailing any law will be extinguished since the W. 
B. P. T. Act, 1997 came into force on 10. 07.01. Therefore, it can be 
said that the present suit squarely governed by the T. P. Act and no 
under West Bengal Premises tenancy act, 1997 and in view of such 
factual aspect the present is perfectly maintainable…” 

6. 
 It is in appeal from such order of the Trial Court that the impugned 
judgment with particulars as noticed above, came to be passed. The High Court 
while upholding the jurisdictional issue in favour of the respondent-tenant, 
dismissed all the four suits of the plaintiff for the same not to be maintainable. 
Thus, the issue as already observed is as to whether the order passed by the High 

5| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

Court holding the respondent-tenant to be governed by the Tenancy Act, is legally 
sustainable or not. 
7. 
In these Special Leave Petitions preferred by the landlord, notice was 
issued on 17th February 2020. 
8. 
During the course of the hearing on 15th February 2024 petitioner-applicant 
(landlord) had offered time to the tenants to vacate the premises. Certain 
suggestions for amicably resolving the dispute for all times to come were 
exchanged, and as such the matters were adjourned. We are now informed that 
the petitioner-landlord’s offer of giving time to the tenant to hand over the vacant 
possession of the premises stands rejected. Thus, the landlord insisted on the 
disposal of the applications asking the tenant to pay the rent at the market rate for 
the lis to have been determined at the institution of the plaint. 
 
I.A. No.120219/2020 in SLP(C)No.4049/2020: 
 
9. 
The Interlocutory Application bearing the above particulars has been taken 
as the primary application for the sake of facts. It is noted that similar applications 
seeking similar prayer have been filed in other special leave petitions which shall 
be disposed of in accordance with this order. 
10. 
We notice that these applications in issue have been pending for almost 
three years. 
11. 
The applicant (petitioner in the SLP) seeks direction for payment of 
‘monthly occupational charges’ following the prevalent market rate. The prayer 
as made, is reproduced below:- 

6| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

“(a) Direct the Respondent to forthwith pay monthly occupational 
charges at the rate of INR 41/- (Indian Rupees Forty One) per Square 
feet, for 1208 Sq.ft = INR 49528/- since August, 2007 during the 
pendency of the present Special Leave Petition in respect of the 
present lease in dispute…” 
 
12. 
Certain facts are required to be taken note of. The property in question is 
situated in the Dalhousie area, which has been termed as a commercial hub in 
Kolkata. The lease Agreement inter se the parties was entered into on 23rd 
February 1991 executed by the predecessor-in-interest of the petitioner. It is 
alleged that the respondent has been in default on payment of rent since 2002 and 
in default on payment of his share of municipal tax since 1996. 
13. 
On account of non-payment of rent, the lease was forfeited/determined. 
However, the respondent has neither delivered the possession of the property nor 
paid the rent. The petitioner has submitted a report of an independent valuer dated 
12th March 2020. The assessment of the rentals, made by the valuer, it is 
submitted, is fair and reasonable 41/- per Sq.ft. 
14. 
It is submitted on behalf of the respondent that since no court has declared 
the end of the landlord-tenant relationship, the petitioner-applicant asking the 
respondent to pay occupational charges as opposed to contractual rent would 
amount to the re-writing of the tenancy Agreement. Further, it is argued that 
occupation charges are only payable after the lease is validly determined or after 
the decree of eviction. Since both these eventualities are yet to occur, no question 
of such payment arises. It is also urged that the petitioner-applicant accepted rent 

7| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

from the respondent till August 2002 but thereafter refused to do so. According 
to the respondent-tenant, a total amount of Rs,2,06,400/- is payable on their part 
to the petitioner-applicant in the following terms:- 
PARTICULARS 
 
ARREARS OF RENT 
FROM SEPTEMBER, 
2002 TO FEB, 2024 
INTEREST 
CALCULATED 
@10% 
TILL 
FEB, 2024 
TOTAL 
Tenancy 1 
(Car Parking) 
Rs.50/- X 258 months = 
Rs.12900/- 
Rs.14625/- 
Rs.27525/- 
Tenancy 2 

Rs.150/- X 258 months 
= Rs.38700/- 
Rs.43875/- 
Rs.82575/- 
Tenancy 3 
(Godown 2) 
Rs.250/- X 258 months 
= Rs.64500/- 
Rs.73125/- 
Rs.137625/- 
Tenancy 4 
(Office Space) 
Rs.350/- X 258 months 
= Rs.90300/- 
Rs.102375/- 
Rs.192675/- 
 TOTAL 2,06,400 + 2,34,400 = Rs.4,40,400/- 
 
15. 
On the other hand, the petitioner-applicant’s(landlord) calculation is 
tabulated as under:- 
SLP 
No. 
SLP(C) 
4049 of 

SLP(C) 4050 
of 2020 
SLP(C) 
4051 of 

SLP(C) 4052 
of 2020 
Date of 
Lease Deed 
23.02.1991 
20.11.1992 
20.11.1992 
20.11.1992 
Area 
1208 sqft 
2500 sqft. 
1650 sq.ft 
800 sq.ft 
Rent 
Amount 
per month 
Area * Rs.41 
per sq.ft 
 
=Rs.49,258/- 
Area * 
Rs.41 per 
sq.ft 
=Rs.1,02,500 
 
Area * 
Rs.41 per 
sq.ft 
=Rs.67,650 
Area * Rs.41 
per sq.ft 
 
 =Rs.32,800/- 
Rent due till 
date (from 
2007) 
Amount * 
(17 years * 
12 months) 
 
=Rs.1,01,03712 
Amount * 
 (17 years * 
12 months) 
 
=Rs.2,09,10,000/- 
Amount * 
(17 years 
* 12 
months) 
=Rs.1,38,00,600/
- 
Amount * (17 
years * 12 
months) 
 
=Rs.66,91,200 
TOTAL Rs.5,15,05,512/- 

8| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

16. 
Landlord-tenant disputes often make their way to this Court, and obviously, 
the payment of rent/mesne profit/occupation charges/damages becomes, more 
often than not a matter of high contest. Determination, as alleged to have taken 
place by the petitioner, can take place at the instance of both the landlord and the 
tenant. Halsbury’s Laws of England 3rd Edn. Vol.23 defines ‘determination by 
landlord’ as follows: 
“The tenancy is impliedly determined by the landlord when he does 
any act on the premises which is inconsistent with the continuance 
of tenancy; for example, when he re-enters to take possession (b), or 
puts in a new tenant (c), or cuts down trees or carries away stone (d), 
the trees and stone not being excepted from the demise (e), and also 
when he does an act off the premises which is inconsistence with the 
tenancy, as when he conveys the reversion (f), or grants a lease of 
the premises to commence forthwith (g). An act done off the 
premises, however, does not determine the tenancy until the tenant 
has notice of it (h).” 
 
16.1 According to the petitioner, as already taken note of above, the lease was 
‘forfeited’ due to non-payment of rent. Forfeiture, as defined by Corpus Juris 
Secundum is “the right of the lessor to terminate a lease because of lessee’s breach 
of covenant or other wrongful act”. Further, it mentions as under: 
“The word as used in a lease does not, strictly speaking, refer to any 
right given to the lessee to terminate the lease. Accordingly, it has 
been held that provisions for forfeiture, cancelation or termination of 
a lease are usually inserted for the benefit of the lessor and because 
of some default on the part of the lessee. A forfeiture is in the nature 
of a penalty of doing of failing to do a particular thing, and results 
from failure to keep an obligation.” 
 
16.2 It would also be useful to refer to the concept of tenant at sufferance. As 
defined in the very same treatise, such a tenant is a person who enters upon a land 

9| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

by lawful title,but continues in possession after the title has ended without 
statutory authority and without obtaining consent of the person then entitled. 
16.3 Wharton’s Law Lexicon Seventeenth Edn. discusses ‘tenancy at sufferance’ 
in the following terms: 
“Sufferance, Tenancy at, This is the least and lowest estate which 
can subsist in realty. It is in strictness not an estate, but a mere 
possession only it arises when a person after his right to the 
occupation, under a lawful title, is at an end, continues (having no 
title at all) in possession of the land, without the agreement or 
disagreement of the person in whom the right of possession resides. 
Thus if A is a tenant for yes, and his terms expires, or is a tenant at 
will, and his lessor dies, and he continues in possession without the 
disagreement of the person who is entitled to the same, in the one 
and the other of these cases he said to have the possession by 
sufferance – that is, merely by permission or indulgence, without any 
right: the law esteeming it just and reasonable, and for the interest 
of the tenant, and also of the person entitled to the possession, to 
deem the occupation to be continued by the permission of the person 
who has the right, till it is proved that the tenant withholds the 
possession wrongfully, which the law will not presume. As the party 
came to the possession by right, the law will esteem that right to 
continue either in point of estate or by the permission of the owner 
of the land till it is proved that the possession is held in opposition 
to the will of that person.” 

17. 
Before adverting to the present facts and claims advanced by the parties it 
would be appropriate to refer to certain pronouncements of this Court where 
mesne profit, which is the mainstay of the interlocutory application(s) before us, 
have been awarded. 
17.1 The respondent has referred to Atma Ram Properties (P) Ltd. v. Federal 
Motors (P) Ltd.6 to submit that the landlord’s claim for mesne profit is not 
 
6 (2005) 

10| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

maintainable, given that, no decree of ejectment stands passed by the concerned 
civil court. We may refer to the observations made in the said judgment, which 
are, thus: 
“9…….The power to grant stay is discretionary and flows from the 
jurisdiction conferred on an appellate court which is equitable in nature. 
To secure an order of stay merely by preferring an appeal is not a 
statutory right conferred on the appellant. So also, an appellate court is 
not ordained to grant an order of stay merely because an appeal has been 
preferred and an application for an order of stay has been made. 
Therefore, an applicant for order of stay must do equity for seeking 
equity. Depending on the facts and circumstances of a given case, an 
appellate court, while passing an order of stay, may put the parties on 
such terms the enforcement whereof would satisfy the demand for 
justice of the party found successful at the end of the appeal. In South 
Eastern Coalfields Ltd. v. State of M.P. [(2003) ] this Court 
while dealing with interim orders granted in favour of any party to 
litigation for the purpose of extending protection to it, effective during 
the pendency of the proceedings, has held that such interim orders, 
passed at an interim stage, stand reversed in the event of the final 
decision going against the party successful in securing interim orders in 
its favour; and the successful party at the end would be justified in 
demanding compensation and being placed in the same situation in 
which it would have been if the interim order would not have been 
passed against it. The successful party can demand (a) the delivery to it 
of benefit earned by the opposite party under the interim order of the 
High Court, or (b) compensation for what it has lost, and to grant such 
relief is the inherent jurisdiction of the court. In our opinion, while 
granting an order of stay under Order 41 Rule 5 CPC, the appellate court 
does have jurisdiction to put the party seeking stay order on such terms 
as would reasonably compensate the party successful at the end of the 
appeal insofar as those proceedings are concerned. x 

x 

x 

x 
18. That apart, it is to be noted that the appellate court while exercising 
jurisdiction under Order 41 Rule 5 of the Code did have power to put 
the appellant tenant on terms. The tenant having suffered an order for 
eviction must comply and vacate the premises. His right of appeal is 
statutory but his prayer for grant of stay is dealt with in exercise of 
equitable discretionary jurisdiction of the appellate court. While 
ordering stay the appellate court has to be alive to the fact that it is 
depriving the successful landlord of the fruits of the decree and is 
postponing the execution of the order for eviction. There is every 
justification for the appellate court to put the appellant tenant on terms 
and direct the appellant to compensate the landlord by payment of a 
reasonable amount which is not necessarily the same as the contractual 
rate of rent. In Marshall Sons & Co. (I) Ltd. v. Sahi Oretrans (P) 

11| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

Ltd. [(1999) ] this Court has held that once a decree for 
possession has been passed and execution is delayed depriving the 
judgment-creditor of the fruits of decree, it is necessary for the court to 
pass appropriate orders so that reasonable mesne profits which may be 
equivalent to the market rent is paid by a person who is holding over 
the property.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
17.2 A Bench of three learned Judges in State of Maharashtra & Anr. v. Super 
Max International Private Limited and Ors7 observed as under: 
“67. The way this Court has been looking at the relationship between 
the landlord and the tenant in the past and the shift in the Court's 
approach in recent times have been examined in some detail in the 
decision in Satyawati Sharma v. Union of India [(2008) ]. In that decision one of us (Singhvi, J.) speaking for the Court 
referred to a number of earlier decisions of the Court and (in para 12 
of the judgment) observed as follows: (SCC pp. 304-05) 
“12. Before proceeding further we consider it necessary to observe 
that there has been a definite shift in the Court's approach while 
interpreting the rent control legislations. An analysis of the 
judgments of 1950s to early 1990s would indicate that in majority 
of cases the courts heavily leaned in favour of an interpretation 
which would benefit the tenant—Mohinder Kumar v. State of 
Haryana [(1985) ], Prabhakaran Nair v. State of 
T.N. [(1987) ], D.C. Bhatia v. Union of India [(1995) ] and C.N. Rudramurthy v. K. Barkathulla Khan [(1998) ]. In these and other cases, the Court consistently held that 
the paramount object of every rent control legislation is to provide 
safeguards for tenants against exploitation by landlords who seek to 
take undue advantage of the pressing need for accommodation of a 
large number of people looking for a house on rent for residence or 
business in the background of acute scarcity thereof. However, a 
different trend is clearly discernible in the later judgments.” 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
68. The learned Judge then referred to some later decisions and (in 
para 14 at SCC p. 306 of the judgment) quoted a passage from the 
decision in Joginder Pal v. Naval Kishore Behal [(2002) ], to the following effect: (Joginder Pal case [(2002) ], SCC p. 404, para 9) 
“14. … ‘9. … The courts have to adopt a reasonable and balanced 
approach while interpreting rent control legislations starting with 
an assumption that an equal treatment has been meted out to both 
the sections of the society. In spite of the overall balance tilting in 
favour of the tenants, while interpreting such of the provisions as to 
take care of the interest of the landlord the court should not hesitate 
 
7 (2009) 

12| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

in leaning in favour of the landlords. Such provisions are engrafted 
in rent control legislations to take care of those situations where the 
landlords too are weak and feeble and feel humble.’ ” 
(emphasis in original) 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
79. Before concluding the decision one more question needs to be 
addressed: what would be the position if the tenant's appeal/revision 
is allowed and the eviction decree is set aside? In that event, 
naturally, the status quo ante would be restored and the tenant would 
be entitled to get back all the amounts that he was made to pay in 
excess of the contractual rent. That being the position, the amount 
fixed by the court over and above the contractual monthly rent, 
ordinarily, should not be directed to be paid to the landlord during 
the pendency of the appeal/revision. The deposited amount, along 
with the accrued interest, should only be paid after the final disposal 
to either side depending upon the result of the case.” 
 
17.3 It has been held that tenants shall be liable to pay a rent equivalent to mesne 
profit, from the date they are found not to be entitled to retain possession of the 
premises in question. In Achal Misra v. Ram Shanker Singh & Ors.8 this Court 
held - 
“23. From the material available on record it does not appear that 
any rate of rent was appointed at which rent would be payable by the 
respondents to the landlord. The respondents also do not seem to 
have taken any steps for fixation of rent of the premises in their 
occupation. They have been happy to have got the premises in a 
prime locality, occupying and enjoying the same for no payment. We 
make it clear that the respondents shall be liable to pay the rent 
equivalent to mesne profits with effect from the date with which they 
are found to have ceased to be entitled to retain possession of the 
premises as tenant and for such period the landlord's entitlement 
cannot be held pegged to the standard rent. Reference may be had to 
the law laid down by this Court in Atma Ram Properties (P) 
Ltd. v. Federal Motors (P) Ltd. [(2005) ].” 
 
This position was reiterated in Achal Misra (2) v. Rama Shankar Singh 
& Ors.9. 
 
8 (2005) 
9 (2006) 

13| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

17.4 The power to grant stay on the execution proceedings which would then 
result into an order for payment of mesne profit is what has been described as 
incidental or subject to the final outcome of the case. This Court has observed, 
in G.L. Vijain v. K. Shankar10 as under - 
“10. It must be borne in mind that incidental power is to be exercised 
in aid to the final proceedings. In other words an order passed in the 
incidental proceedings will have a direct bearing on the result of the 
suit. Such proceedings which are in aid of the final proceedings 
cannot, thus, be held to be on a par with supplemental proceedings 
which may not have anything to do with the ultimate result of the 
suit. 
11. Such a supplemental proceeding is initiated with a view to 
prevent the ends of justice from being defeated. Supplemental 
proceedings may not be taken recourse to in a routine manner but 
only when an exigency of situation arises therefor. The orders passed 
in the supplemental proceedings may sometimes cause hardships to 
the other side and, thus, are required to be taken recourse to when it 
is necessary in the interest of justice and not otherwise. There are 
well-defined parameters laid down by the Court from time to time as 
regards the applicability of the supplemental proceedings. 
12. Incidental proceedings are, however, taken recourse to in aid of 
the ultimate decision of the suit which would mean that any order 
passed in terms thereof, subject to the rules prescribed therefor, may 
have a bearing on the merit of the matter. Any order passed in aid of 
the suit is ancillary power.” 
 
17.5 This Court in Martin and Harris (P) Ltd. v. Rajendra Mehta11 speaking 
through one of us (J.K. Maheshwari, J.) observed that - 
“18. Thus, after passing the decree of eviction the tenancy terminates 
and from the said date the landlord is entitled for mesne profits or 
compensation depriving him from the use of the premises. The view 
taken in Atma Ram [Atma Ram Properties (P) Ltd. v. Federal 
Motors (P) Ltd., (2005) ] has been reaffirmed in State of 
Maharashtra v. Super Max International (P) Ltd. [State of 
Maharashtra v. Super Max International (P) Ltd., (2009): (2009) 3 SCC (Civ) 857] by three-Judge Bench of this Court. 
Therefore, looking to the fact that the decree of eviction passed by 
 
10 (2006) 
11 (2022) 

14| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

the trial court on 3-3-2016 has been confirmed in appeal; against 
which second appeal is pending, however, after stay on being asked 
the direction to pay mesne profits or compensation issued by the 
High Court is in consonance to the law laid down by this Court, 
which is just, equitable and reasonable. 
19. The basis of determination of the amount of mesne profits, in our 
view, depends on the facts and circumstances of each case 
considering the place where the property is situated i.e. village or 
city or metropolitan city, location, nature of premises i.e. commercial or residential area and the rate of rent precedent on 
which premises can be let out are the guiding factor in the facts of 
individual case.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
18. 
A perusal of the judgments extracted above as also other cases where Atma 
Ram Properties (supra) one common factor can be observed, i.e., the decree of 
eviction stands passed and the same having been stayed, gives rise to the question 
of payment of mesne profit. As observed above, the respondent contends that 
since, in the present case no decree of eviction is passed, and there is no stay 
awarded, the question of such payment does not arise. 
19. 
While the above-stated position is generally accepted, it is also within the 
bounds of law, that a tenant who once entered the property in question lawfully, 
continues in possession after his right to do so stands extinguished, is liable to 
compensate the landlord for such time period after the right of occupancy expires. 
In this regard, we may refer to Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. v. Sudera Realty 
Private Limited12, wherein this Court in para 64 observed as under: 
“64. A tenant continuing in possession after the expiry of the lease 
may be treated as a tenant at sufferance, which status is a shade 
higher than that of a mere trespasser, as in the case of a tenant 
continuing after the expiry of the lease, his original entry was lawful. 
But a tenant at sufferance is not a tenant by holding over. While a 
 
12 2022 SCC OnLine 1161 

15| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

tenant at sufferance cannot be forcibly dispossessed, that does not 
detract from the possession of the erstwhile tenant turning unlawful 
on the expiry of the lease. Thus, the appellant while continuing in 
possession after the expiry of the lease became liable to pay mesne 
profits.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
20. 
It is to be noted that the Court in Sudera Realty (supra) observed that 
mesne profits become payable on continuation of possession after ‘expiry’ of 
lease. In our considered view, the effect of the words ‘determination’, ‘expiry’, 
‘forfeiture’ and ‘termination’ would, subject to the facts applicable, be similar, i.e., 
when any of these three words are applied to a lease, henceforth, the rights of the 
lessee/tenant stand extinguished or in certain cases metamorphosed into weaker 
iteration of their former selves. Illustratively, Burton’s Legal Thesaurus 3rd Edn. suggests the following words as being similar to ‘expire’ - cease, come to an end; 
‘determine’ is similar to - come to a conclusion, bring to an end; ‘forfeiture’ is 
similar to – deprivation/destruction of a right, divestiture of property; and 
‘terminate’ is similar to – bring to an end, cease, conclude. Therefore, in any of 
the these situations, mesne profit would be payable. 
21. 
Having considered the submissions made across the Bar, we note that the 
disputed nature of the lease deed, in other words, its continuation or forfeiture on 
account of non-payment is heavily contested and stemming therefrom, so is the 
nature of payment to be made. We also note that the location of demised premises 
is in the heart of Kolkata and if the submissions of the petitioner are to be believed, 
they have been deprived of rent for a considerable period of time. Taking a lock 

16| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

stock and barrel view of the present dispute, the averments and the documents 
placed before us, we may record a prima facie view, that the respondent-tenant 
has for the reasons yet undemonstrated, been delaying the payment of rent and/or 
other dues, payable to the petitioner-applicant landlord. This denial of monetary 
benefits accruing from the property, when viewed in terms of the unchallenged 
market report forming part of the record is undoubtedly substantial and as such, 
subject to just exceptions, we pass this order for deposit of the amount claimed by 
the petitioner-applicant, to ensure complete justice inter se the parties, After all, 
we cannot lose sight of the fact that the very purpose for which a property is rented 
out, is to ensure that the landlord by way of the property is able to secure some 
income. If the income remains static over a long period of time or in certain cases, 
as in the present case, yields no income, then such a landlord would be within his 
rights, subject of course, to the agreement with their tenant, to be aggrieved by the 
same. The factors considered by us have been referred to in Martin and Harris 
(Supra). We are supported in our conclusion by the observations and guidelines 
issued by this Court in Mohammad Ahmed & Anr. v. Atma Ram Chauhan & 
Ors.13. We reproduce the ones relevant to the adjudication of the present dispute 
hereinbelow- 
“21. According to our considered view majority of these cases are 
filed because the landlords do not get reasonable rent akin to market 
rent, then on one ground or the other litigation is initiated… 
(i) The tenant must enhance the rent according to the terms of the 
agreement or at least by ten per cent, after every three years and 
enhanced rent should then be made payable to the landlord. If the 
rent is too low (in comparison to market rent), having been fixed 
 
13 (2011) 

17| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

almost 20 to 25 years back then the present market rate should be 
worked out either on the basis of valuation report or reliable 
estimates of building rentals in the surrounding areas, let out on rent 
recently. 
(ii) Apart from the rental, property tax, water tax, maintenance 
charges, electricity charges for the actual consumption of the 
tenanted premises and for common area shall be payable by the 
tenant only so that the landlord gets the actual rent out of which 
nothing would be deductible. In case there is enhancement in 
property tax, water tax or maintenance charges, electricity charges 
then the same shall also be borne by the tenant only. x 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
(v) If the present and prevalent market rent assessed and fixed 
between the parties is paid by the tenant then the landlord shall not 
be entitled to bring any action for his eviction against such a tenant 
at least for a period of 5 years. Thus for a period of 5 years the tenant 
shall enjoy immunity from being evicted from the premises. 
(vi) The parties shall be at liberty to get the rental fixed by the official 
valuer or by any other agency, having expertise in the matter. 
(vii) The rent so fixed should be just, proper and adequate, keeping 
in mind the location, type of construction, accessibility to the main 
road, parking space facilities available therein, etc. Care ought to be 
taken that it does not end up being a bonanza for the landlord.” 
 
22. 
Since the Special Leave Petitions are pending adjudication, we make it 
clear that directions made in the above-stated Interlocutory Applications herein 
are subject to the final outcome of the former. Keeping in view the location of the 
demised premises, the rent as agreed, the alleged non-payment of rent, the default 
in payment of interest, as alleged, and other such like factors we are inclined to 
accept the calculation of dues as made by the petitioner-applicant, submitted to 
this Court during hearing, as reproduced hereinabove. 
23. Consequently, keeping in view the observations made in Super Max 
International (supra) and G.L. Vijain (supra), we direct the respondent to deposit 
the above-stated amount of Rs.5,15,05,512/- with the Registry of this Court within 
four weeks from today. An affidavit of compliance shall be filed in the Registry 

18| SLP(C) 4049 of 2020 

of this Court within a week thereafter. Failure to comply with the aforementioned 
shall entail all consequences within the law, including wilful disobedience of the 
order. The Registry is directed to place the amount received in a short-term, 
interest-bearing fixed deposit. 
24. 
The Interlocutory Applications for directions seeking similar relief filed in 
SLP(C)Nos.4050 (I.A. No.120227/2020), 4051 (I.A. No.120235/2020), and 4052 
(I.A. No.120248/2020) of 2020 shall stand disposed of in the same and similar 
terms as the I.A. No.120219/2020 filed in SLP(C)No.4049/2020, discussed 
above. 
25. 
Let the Special Leave Petitions appear in the month of July, 2024. 

………………………..J. 
(J.K. MAHESHWARI) 

………………………..J. 
(SANJAY KAROL) 
 
New Delhi; 
May 17, 2024.