IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION NO. 414 OF 2023 
IN 

GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI 
THROUGH ITS SECRETARY, 
LAND AND BUILDING DEPARTMENT 
& ANOTHER 

 …APPLICANTS 
 
VERSUS 
 
M/S. K.L. RATHI STEELS LIMITED 
AND OTHERS 

 …RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 
MA No.808/2023 in C.A. No.12239/2016 
R.P.(C) No.882/2017 in C.A. No. 11846/2016 
MA No.159/2018 in C.A. No.11857/2016 
R.P.(C) No.396/2023 in C.A. No. 11857/2016 
R.P.(C) No.409/2023 in C.A. No. 8511/2016 
R.P.(C) No.410/2023 in C.A. No. 8925/2016 
R.P.(C) No.412/2023 in C.A. No. 12114/2016 

R.P.(C) No.414/2023 in C.A. No. 8898/2016 
R.P.(C) No.416/2023 in C.A. No. 4599/2016 
R.P.(C) No.419/2023 in C.A. No. 10206/2016 
R.P.(C) No.418/2023 in C.A. No. 8505/2016 
R.P.(C) No.425/2023 in C.A. No. 8929/2016 
R.P.(C) No.428/2023 in C.A. No. 8545/2016 
R.P.(C) No.1731/2023 in C.A. No. 9598/2016 
R.P.(C) No.429/2023 in C.A. No. 11256/2016 
R.P.(C) No.431/2023 in C.A. No. 9597/2016 
R.P.(C) No.432/2023 in C.A. No. 11841/2016 
CONMT.PET.(C) No.735/2018 in C.A. No. 
11857/2016 
R.P.(C) No.398/2023 in C.A. No. 8529/2016 
R.P.(C) No.399/2023 in C.A. No. 11857/2016 
R.P.(C) No.400/2023 in C.A. No. 8899/2016 
R.P.(C) No.401/2023 in C.A. No. 8527/2016 
R.P.(C) No.402/2023 in C.A. No. 8547/2016 
R.P.(C) No.403/2023 in C.A. No. 8952/2016 
R.P.(C) No.405/2023 in C.A. No. 8935/2016 
R.P.(C) No.406/2023 in C.A. No. 8954/2016 
R.P.(C) No.407/2023 in C.A. No. 9049/2016 
R.P.(C) No.408/2023 in C.A. No. 8559/2016 
R.P.(C) No.411/2023 in C.A. No. 9214/2016 
R.P.(C) No.413/2023 in C.A. No. 9595/2016 
R.P.(C) No.397/2023 in C.A. No. 8909/2016 
R.P.(C) No.417/2023 in C.A. No. 8921/2016 

R.P.(C) No.420/2023 in C.A. No. 8904/2016 
R.P.(C) No.421/2023 in C.A. No. 9719/2016 
R.P.(C) No.423/2023 in C.A. No. 8957/2016 
R.P.(C) No.424/2023 in C.A. No. 8922/2016 
R.P.(C) No.426/2023 in SLP(C) No. 17316/2016 
R.P.(C) No.430/2023 in C.A. No. 11854/2016 
C.A. No.1522/2023 
Diary No(s). 14831/2023 
Diary No(s). 15893/2023 
R.P.(C) No. 422/2023 in C.A. No. 12046/2016 
R.P.(C) No. 404/2023 in C.A. No. 12111/2016 
R.P.(C) No. 415/2023 in C.A. No. 11853/2016 
 
JUDGMENT 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
A. PREFACE... 4 
B. THE REFERENCE... 5 
C. JUDICIAL TRAJECTORY... 6 
D. FACTS GIVING RISE TO THE REVIEW PETITIONS... 13 
E. THE SPLIT VERDICT... 15 
F. SUBMISSIONS... 19 
G. QUESTIONS BEFORE US... 25 
H. LAW ON REVIEW JURISDICTION... 26 
I. PRECEDENTS CONSIDERING THE EXPLANATION... 36 
J. OTHER PRECEDENTS ON REVIEW... 41 
K. ANALYSIS... 45 
L. CONCLUSION... 79 

1. 
Day in and day out, as Judges of this Court, we are 
majorly addressed by learned counsel for the parties that the 
High Courts are either right or wrong; here, in view of a split 
verdict rendered by an Hon’ble Division Bench (“said Division 
Bench”, hereafter) comprising two Hon’ble Judges of this 
Court, we have been addressed by the parties that our 
distinguished colleagues on the Bench have been right and 
wrong at the same time. To complete the task that has been 
entrusted to us, one of the opinions of the Hon’ble Judges 
comprising the said Division Bench has to be held incorrect 
unless, of course, harmonization of the two opinions, in any 
manner, is possible. In the process of considering the rival 
claims, the exercise of declaring one view as correct and the 
other incorrect or to harmonize the two views, have 
necessarily taken us back to the basics of the substantive and 
procedural laws regulating review jurisdiction of this Court. 
The effort, we have no hesitation to say, has been really 
educative as well as rewarding because the erudite arguments 
advanced from the Bar opened up a new vista of thinking to 
appreciate points of debate that emerged not only from the 
facts of the petitions before us but also points arising from 

certain connected matters, decided by this Court. We record 
our sincere appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered 
by the members of the Bar who had the occasion to address 
this larger Bench. 
2. 
The two Hon’ble Judges comprising the said Division 
Bench were considering a clutch of review petitions (“RPs”, 
hereafter), presented either by the Delhi Development 
Authority or the Government of NCT, Delhi, or the Land and 
Building Department, etc. (“review petitioners”, hereafter). 
The RPs urged review of the judgments/orders passed by this 
Court on either Civil Appeals or Special Leave Petitions carried 
by the review petitioners from judgments and orders of the 
High Court of Delhi (“High Court”, hereafter), declaring land 
acquisition proceedings initiated under the Land Acquisition 
Act, 1894 (“1894 Act”, hereafter) as deemed to have lapsed 
under section 24(2) of the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency 
in 
Land 
Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation 
and 
Resettlement 
Act 
(“2013 
Act”, 
hereafter). 
By 
the 
judgments/orders under review, the said Civil Appeals/Special 
Leave Petitions stood dismissed. The RPs having been listed 
before the said Division Bench, the respondents therein (i.e., 

landowners) had questioned the maintainability of the same 
by referring to the Explanation to Rule 1 of Order XLVII, Code 
of Civil Procedure (“CPC”, hereafter). As noted earlier, a split 
verdict emerged in Govt. of NCT of Delhi v. K.L. Rathi 
Steels Limited and ors.1, being the lead matter. Briefly put, 
the Hon’ble Judge presiding over the Bench ruled in favour of 
maintainability of the RPs whereas the Hon’ble companion 
Judge on the Bench disagreed and held that the RPs were not 
maintainable. An order was, thus, made by the Bench on 17th 
March, 2023 requiring the papers of the RPs to be placed 
before the Hon’ble the Chief Justice. Such order has been the 
immediate reason for His Lordship to constitute this larger 
Bench and refer the RPs to resolve which of the two views on 
maintainability of the RPs is the correct view; hence, all such 
RPs are now before this larger Bench. 
3. 
Before delving deep into the intricacies presented by 
the reference, it would be apposite to trace the judicial 
trajectory of proceedings in this Court on interpretation of 
section 24(2) of the 2013 Act that preceded the split verdict. 

4. 
The 2013 Act was enforced with effect from 1st 
January, 2014. Soon thereafter, the interpretation of section 
24(2) of the 2013 Act fell for consideration before this Court. 
A three-Judge Bench (cor. Hon’ble R.M. Lodha, Hon’ble Madan 
B. Lokur and Hon’ble Kurian Joseph, JJ.) in Pune Municipal 
Corporation v. Harakchand Misirimal Solanki2 explained, 
in the light of section 31 of the 2013 Act what the expression 
“compensation has not been paid” occurring in section 24(2) 
meant. The verb “paid” in the same sub-section was also 
explained. Perhaps, since no argument was advanced, the 
Bench did not have the occasion to consider whether the 
conjunction “or” between the expressions “compensation has 
not been paid” and “possession has not been taken” in sub-
section (2) should be read as “or” as it is, or read as “and”. 
5. 
However, Pune Municipal Corporation (supra) was 
doubted by a two-Judge Bench (cor. Hon’ble Arun Mishra and 
Hon’ble Amitava Roy, JJ.) in Indore Development Authority 
v. Shailendra [2-Judge]3 wherein it was of the opinion that 
the issue should be considered by a larger Bench. 
 
2 (2014) 
3 (2018) 

6. 
Consequently, a Bench of three-Judges (cor. Hon’ble 
Arun 
Mishra, 
Hon’ble 
A.K. 
Goel 
and 
Hon’ble 
M. 
Shantanagoudar, JJ.) was constituted. The majority speaking 
through Hon’ble Arun Mishra, J. in Indore Development 
Authority v. Shailendra [3-Judge]4 held Pune Municipal 
Corporation (supra) per incuriam but deemed it not 
necessary to refer to a larger Bench. Relevant excerpts from 
such decision are set out hereunder: 
216. With respect to the decision of this Court in Pune 
Municipal Corpn. we have given deep thinking whether 
to refer it to further larger Bench but it was not 
considered necessary as we are of the opinion that 
Pune Municipal Corpn. has to be held per incuriam, 
inter alia, for the following reasons: 
*** 
217. The decision rendered in Pune Municipal Corpn., 
which is related to Question (i) and other decisions 
following, the view taken in Pune Municipal Corpn. are 
per incuriam. … The decisions rendered on the basis of 
Pune Municipal Corpn. are open to be reviewed in 
appropriate cases on the basis of this decision.” 
 
7. 
It is relevant to highlight that one of the Judges 
(Hon’ble M. Shantanagoudar, J.) partly dissented by recording 
the following observations: 
 
4 (2018) 

“295.2. …However, according to me the judgment in 
Pune Municipal Corpn. is not rendered per incuriam. In 
view of the above, the judgment in Pune Municipal 
Corpn. may have to be reconsidered by a larger Bench, 
inasmuch as Pune Municipal Corpn. was decided by a 
Bench of three Judges.” 
 
8. 
The aforesaid decision, as it was destined, gave rise to 
uncertainty rendered by two contradictory decisions by 
Benches of co-equal strength. Hence, a three-Judge Bench 
(cor. Hon’ble Madan B. Lokur, Hon’ble Kurian Joseph and 
Hon’ble Deepak Gupta, JJ.) in State of Haryana v. G.D. 
Goenka Tourism Corporation Limited5 while deferring a 
hearing as to whether the matter should at all be referred to a 
larger Bench directed that pending decision on the question of 
reference, the High Courts may not deal with any case relating 
to the interpretation of or concerning section 24 of the 2013 
Act. 
9. 
Two orders dated 22nd February, 2018 passed by 
different Benches of co-equal strength followed. While a Bench 
(cor. Hon’ble A.K. Goel and Hon’ble U.U. Lalit, JJ.) by an order 
passed in Indore Development Authority v. Shyam 
Verma6 directed the matters to be placed before an 
 
5 (2018) 
6 (2020) 

appropriate Bench the next day as per orders of the Hon’ble 
the Chief Justice of India, a similar order was passed by a 
coordinate Bench (cor. Hon’ble Arun Mishra and Hon’ble 
Amitava Roy, JJ.) vide its order in State of Haryana v. 
Maharana Pratap Charitable Trust (Regd)7. 
10. 
A five-Judge Constitution Bench (cor. Hon’ble Arun 
Mishra, Hon’ble Indira Banerjee, Hon’ble Vineet Saran, Hon’ble 
M.R. Shah and Hon’ble S. Ravindra Bhat, JJ.) was thereafter 
constituted. 
11. 
Ultimately, 
vide 
the 
judgment 
in 
Indore 
Development Authority v. Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse]8, 
the controversy was finally put to rest. The conclusions in 
Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] (supra) are recorded in 
paragraphs 365 and 366. However, paragraph 365 being 
relevant for a decision here, is quoted hereunder: 
“365. Resultantly, the decision rendered in Pune 
Municipal Corpn. is hereby overruled and all other 
decisions in which Pune Municipal Corpn. has been 
followed, are also overruled. The decision in Sree Balaji 
Nagar Residential Assn. cannot be said to be laying 
down good law, is overruled and other decisions 
following the same are also overruled. In Indore 
Development Authority v. Shailendra [3-judge], the 
aspect with respect to the proviso to Section 24(2) and 

8 (2020) 

whether ‘or’ has to be read as ‘nor’ or as ‘and’ was not 
placed for consideration. Therefore, that decision too 
cannot prevail, in the light of the discussion in the 
present judgment.” 
 
12. 
Ironically, during the hearing, a controversy was raised 
by the respondents therein regarding the composition of the 
Bench 
in 
Manoharlal 
[5-Judge, 
lapse] 
(supra). 
A 
preliminary objection for recusal of the presiding Judge of the 
said Constitution Bench was sought on the ground that His 
Lordship was a part of the three-Judge Bench in Shailendra 
[3-Judge] (supra) wherein the correctness of the three-Judge 
Bench decision in Pune Municipal Corporation (supra) was 
doubted and by 2:1 majority, held to be per incuriam. It was 
contended that in Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra), His 
Lordship did not merely express reservations about the 
precedent 
i.e., 
Pune 
Municipal 
Corporation 
(supra), 
instead, His Lordship effectively annulled the judgment by 
asserting that it held no legal value, departing thereby from 
established principles of stare decisis and judicial discipline. 
Rejecting the aforesaid arguments, a detailed order was 
rendered by His Lordship in Indore Development Authority 
v. Manoharlal [5-Judge, recusal]9. The plea of recusal was 
 
9 (2020) 

declined, and it was observed that “accepting the plea of 
recusal would sound a death knell to the independent system 
of justice delivery where litigants would dictate participation of 
judges of their liking in particular cases or causes”10. While the 
lead opinion was delivered by the concerned Judge, the four 
other member Judges on the Bench delivered a joint 
concurring opinion. 
13. 
For completing the narrative, it is to be noted that the 
ball did not stop rolling with Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] 
(supra). By an order dated 16th July, 2020 in Pune Municipal 
Corporation v. Harakchand Misirimal Solanki [Recall 
Order]11, a three-Judge Bench (cor. Hon’ble Arun Mishra, 
Hon’ble Vineet Saran and Hon’ble M.R. Shah, JJ.) allowed 
several applications, thereby recalling the judgment in Pune 
Municipal Corporation (supra). 
14. 
What is, therefore, laid bare by these facts is that 
firstly, Pune Municipal Corporation (supra) was doubted in 
Shailendra [2-Judge] (supra), whereafter it was declared 
per incuriam in Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra), followed by 
its overruling in Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] (supra) and 
 
10 (2020), Para 45 

ultimately recalled on 16th July, 2020 in Harakchand 
Misirimal Solanki [Recall Order] (supra). 
15. 
Immediately after Pune Municipal Corporation 
(supra) was decided, several writ petitions came to be 
instituted not only in the High Court but also in different high 
courts across the country seeking similar declaration, viz. owing to the requisite conditions mentioned in Section 24(2) 
of the 2013 Act being met, land acquisition proceedings 
initiated under the 1894 Act stood lapsed. These RPs arise out 
of writ proceedings on the file of the High Court, which have 
since attained finality by reason of the judgments and orders 
under review. 
16. 
The facts are noticed from the Review Petition arising 
out of the Writ Petition12 instituted by the first respondent, K.L. 
Rathi Steels Limited, which is the lead matter. Relying upon 
the decision of this Court in Pune Municipal Corporation 
(supra) and similar line of decisions, the High Court vide its 
judgment and order dated 7th July, 2015, allowed the writ 
petition taking a view that the necessary ingredients of section 
 
12 W.P. (C) No. 9200/2014 

24(2), as interpreted by this Court, having been met, the 
acquisition proceedings under challenge therein are deemed 
to have lapsed. Aggrieved, the first respondent carried such 
judgment and order in a Civil Appeal13 praying for it to be set 
aside. This Court, vide a common judgment and order dated 
29th November, 2016 concerning various civil appeals, 
dismissed the appeals and granted a period of one year to the 
appellants (review petitioners herein) to exercise liberty 
granted under section 24(2) of the 2013 Act for initiation of 
acquisition proceedings afresh. 
17. 
Availing what they call is a ‘liberty’ granted by this 
Court in Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra), the appellants in the 
Civil Appeal (review petitioners herein) approached this Court 
seeking a review of the aforesaid judgment and order dated 
29th November, 2016. Although the review petition suffered 
from substantial delay, the same stood condoned by the said 
Division Bench after the split verdict. 
18. 
It is relevant to mention at this stage that during the 
entire period of controversy, the observation in paragraph 217 
of Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) was construed as ‘liberty’ 

by not only the appellants in the Civil Appeal but also by other 
similarly placed appellants/special leave petitioners leading 
them to approach this Court seeking review of all those 
decisions 
whereby, 
relying 
upon 
Pune 
Municipal 
Corporation (supra) and similar line of cases, it was declared 
that land acquisition proceedings were deemed to have lapsed 
under section 24(2) of the 2013 Act. 
19. 
Heavy reliance was placed by the review petitioners 
before the said Division Bench on paragraphs 365 and 366 of 
Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] (supra) and paragraph 217 of 
Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra). They also relied on Board of 
Control for Cricket in India v. Netaji Cricket Club14 in 
support of the contention that a party for sufficient reason 
could urge the court to exercise its review jurisdiction. On 
behalf of the respondent landowners, various decisions were 
cited to contend that the Explanation to Rule 1 of Order XLVII, 
CPC would not permit a review of the judgments/orders under 
review. 
 
14 2005 

20. 
The 
presiding 
Judge 
allowed 
the 
review/recall 
petitions. Noting the specific overruling of Pune Municipal 
Corporation (supra) and all the decisions which were 
rendered following it by Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] 
(supra), and referring to paragraph 217 of the decision in 
Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra), the Hon’ble Judge felt that 
“some meaning” had to be given to such observations. The 
contention of the respondents that the case falls under Rule 1 
of Order XLVII, CPC and the subsequent overruling of Pune 
Municipal Corporation (supra) cannot be a ground to review 
the earlier judgments and orders was rejected by reasoning 
that “here is a peculiar case where the earlier decision in Pune 
Municipal Corporation (supra), upon which reliance has been 
placed earlier, was itself doubted in the subsequent decision 
in the case of … and that the matter was referred to the 
Constitution Bench and thereafter the Constitution Bench has 
declared the law as above, more particularly paragraphs 365 
and 366 of the judgment in the case of …”. 
21. 
Lastly, it was noted that in most of the cases that were 
sought to be reviewed, the lands had already been utilised by 
the beneficiaries of acquisition and in view of the orders passed 
declaring the deemed lapse of acquisition, “(T)he resultant 

effect would be to return the possession of the land/s which 
might have been used by the beneficiary authorities”. It was, 
therefore held that the RPs should be allowed in the larger 
public interest and the authorities should be given an 
opportunity to put forward their case afresh, “which shall be in 
the larger public interest”. 
22. 
In contrast, the Hon’ble companion Judge while 
dissenting with the Hon’ble presiding Judge proceeded to 
examine the RPs on the basis of their very maintainability, in 
the light of the Explanation to Rule 1 of Order XLVII, CPC. 
Multiple decisions of this Court, on the parameters on which a 
review petition could be entertained by this Court, were 
examined and it was held that in view of the specific bar that 
the Explanation creates on taking into consideration the 
subsequent overruling of a determinative judgment, the RPs 
could not be held to be maintainable. Pune Municipal 
Corporation (supra) being good law as on date when the 
impugned judgments were rendered, it was held that the said 
impugned judgments could not be reviewed on the ground of 
Pune Municipal Corporation (supra) being overruled, the 
course of action being expressly prohibited by the Explanation 
to Rule 1 of Order XLVII. It was further held that the decisions 

relying on Pune Municipal Corporation (supra) had attained 
finality and were binding on the parties, and that the decision 
to review such final decisions would fly in the face of the public 
policy underlining the Explanation i.e., interest reipublicae ut 
sit finis litium (it is in the interest of the State that there should 
be an end to a litigation). In thus rejecting the RPs on the 
ground of maintainability, the Hon’ble Judge was guided, inter 
alia, by decisions of this Court in Chajju Ram v. Neki15 and 
Haridas Das v. Usha Rani Banik16 wherein this Court had 
held that the grounds for review laid down by Rule 1 of Order 
XLVII, CPC do not include within their ambit, the rehearing of 
a dispute solely on the ground that the judgment on which the 
decision in the dispute had been relied upon, was overruled. 
Netaji Cricket Club (supra) was distinguished by observing 
that “exercise of review jurisdiction in that case, based on a 
subsequent event was confined to purely the facts of the said 
case 
involving 
a 
controversy 
between 
rival 
Cricket 
Associations” and hence could not be applied as a general 
ratio. 
 
 PC 112 
16 (2006) 

23. 
It is as a consequence of the split-verdict that the RPs 
were heard by the present three-Judge Bench to decide the 
point of maintainability of the RPs and to settle the ancillary 
issues raised in K.L. Rathi Steels Limited (supra). 
24. 
Though it may not be absolutely necessary to note the 
elaborate submissions advanced from the Bar by learned 
senior counsel/counsel for the parties since such submissions 
have been captured in the minutest detail in the split-verdict, 
for the sake of completeness, we shall briefly refer to the 
same. 
25. 
Ms. 
Bhati, 
learned 
Additional 
Solicitor 
General, 
appearing on behalf of the review petitioners (the Govt. of 
NCT, Delhi), with all the passion at her command, argued that 
the RPs are maintainable and advanced, in support of 
maintainability, the following submissions: 
a) The specific and categoric overruling of Pune 
Municipal Corporation (supra), and all other 
decisions in which Pune Municipal Corporation 
(supra) was followed, leads to the conclusion, in 
absolute terms, that land acquisition proceedings 

cannot be deemed to have lapsed under section 
24(2) 
unless 
the 
conditions 
enumerated 
in 
paragraph 366 of Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] 
(supra) are satisfied. b) Vide order dated 16th July, 2020 in Pune Municipal 
Corporation [Recall Order] (supra), the decision 
in Pune Municipal Corporation (supra) has been 
recalled and the position of law, as expounded 
therein, 
stands 
erased, 
leading 
the 
findings 
operating inter se the parties to cease. c) 
To 
dismiss 
the 
review/recall 
petitions 
at 
the 
threshold as not being maintainable will lead to a 
great injustice and undermine the public interest, 
particularly in the light of the ‘liberty’ granted by this 
Court in Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra). The RPs 
deserve to be decided on merits on a case-to-case 
basis on various parameters including the stage of 
litigation, the reason for incomplete acquisition by 
the State, stage of acquisition, status of possession 
and compensation, reasons for the delay in filing 

review/recall petitions, and the purpose of the 
acquisition. d) Urging this Court to equally weigh equitable 
considerations involved in the matter, Ms. Bhati 
prayed that the RPs may not be dismissed at the 
threshold. 
26. 
Mr. 
Kailash 
Vasdev, 
learned 
senior 
counsel, 
representing the Delhi Development Authority contended that 
having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances that 
have 
emerged 
since 
overruling 
of 
Pune 
Municipal 
Corporation (supra) by Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] 
(supra), public interest indeed is one of the factors requiring 
paramount consideration and, on the anvil thereof, the opinion 
of the Hon’ble presiding Judge of the said Division Bench ought 
to be accepted. According to him, it is justice that the courts 
are duty bound to dispense and it would not amount to 
dispensing justice if the respondent landowners’ objection to 
the maintainability of the RPs, based on an overruled 
judgment, were upheld. 
27. 
Mr. Sen, learned senior counsel, also appearing on 
behalf of the Delhi Development Authority, apart from 

adopting the submissions of Ms. Bhati and Mr. Vasdev, 
asserted the maintainability of the RPs by submitting as 
follows: 
a) Maintainability of the RPs ought not to be decided by 
a blanket order as the RPs have been filed not on the 
solitary ground of overruling of Pune Municipal 
Corporation (supra) but in terms of the ‘liberty’ 
granted by this Court in Shailendra [3-Judge] 
(supra), which has the force of law under Article 141 
of the Constitution. In arguendo, Article 137 comes 
to the rescue of the review petitioners granting them 
the liberty to file a review. b) Public interest must be given precedence over 
private interest in case of a conflict. The present 
lands are required for implementing residential 
schemes for low-income groups and significant 
construction had already been carried out in other 
acquired portions. c) 
The jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution 
ought to be invoked to ensure substantial justice 

considering the threat to public good involved in the 
matter. 
28. 
Urging that the RPs are maintainable and deserve a 
hearing on merits, Mr. Sen urged that the RPs be held 
maintainable and heard on its own merits. 
29. 
The landowner respondents, represented by Mr. Divan, 
Mr. Giri, Mr. Chib and Mr. Jain, learned senior counsel and by 
Ms. Swaraj, learned counsel, supported the opinion expressed 
by the Hon’ble companion Judge on the said Division Bench 
and urged this Bench to take the same recourse. The following 
submissions were advanced by them: 
a) The decision in Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] 
(supra) does not come to the rescue of the review 
petitioners, it must operate prospectively and cannot 
reopen claims which have attained finality. b) BSNL v. Union of India17 and Neelima Srivastava 
v. State of U.P.18 were relied upon to support the 
contention that overruling of Pune Municipal 
Corporation 

merely 
takes 
away 
the 
 
17 (2006) 

precedential value; it, however, does not affect the 
binding nature of a decision that has attained finality 
inter se the parties. c) 
This Court has limited jurisdiction available in review 
and in terms of the Explanation to Rule 1 of Order 
XLVII, CPC, overruling of earlier judgments would 
not constitute a ground for review. d) Further, the decision in Manoharlal [5-Judge, 
lapse] (supra) did not, in any manner whatsoever, 
endorse 
the 
purported 
liberty 
granted 
by 
Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) in paragraph 217 to 
the review petitioners to file the present RPs; on the 
contrary, 
it 
has 
been 
overruled. 
Moreover, 
Shailendra [3-Judge], having been decided by a 
Bench of co-equal strength, could neither have 
granted liberty to file the RPs, nor could have 
declared Pune Municipal Corporation (supra) per 
incuriam. e) Most of the RPs had been filed after periods of 
inordinate delay where no sufficient explanation had 
been 
provided 
for 
the 
same 
by 
the 
review 

petitioners. In any event, the present RPs were also 
filed belatedly after the purported liberty granted by 
this Court in Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra). 
30. 
Praying that the RPs are not maintainable, the learned 
counsel urged this Court to dismiss them in limine. 
31. 
The parties have been heard and the materials on 
record perused, in the light of the law regulating exercise of 
power 
by 
the 
Supreme 
Court 
to 
review 
its 
earlier 
judgment/order under the extant laws. We are of the opinion 
that on the rival contentions, the following questions arise for 
answers on the facts of these RPs: 
a) Can the review petitioners, on the basis of the 
pleadings 
in 
the 
RPs, 
be 
considered 
persons 
aggrieved? b) Whether the last sentence of paragraph 217 of 
Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) grants ‘liberty’ to 
any party to seek a review of Pune Municipal 
Corporation (supra)? c) If the answer to (b) is in the affirmative, did such 
‘liberty’ survive after the decision in Manoharlal [5-
Judge, lapse] (supra)? d) Can the RPs be held to be maintainable, giving due 
regard to the Explanation in Rule 1 of Order XLVII, 
CPC 
vis-à-vis 
Manoharlal 
[5-Judge, 
lapse] 
(supra)? e) If the answer to (d) is in the negative, do the RPs still 
deserve to be entertained on the other grounds 
urged therein? f) 
Are the miscellaneous applications maintainable? 
32. 
While answering the aforesaid questions, we feel 
obliged and, hence, intend to address certain ancillary issues 
too. 
33. 
The law regulating exercise of review jurisdiction by 
the Supreme Court is so well-settled that any detailed 
discussion would, in the first place, seem to be unnecessary. 
However, we cannot overlook the vociferous arguments on 
behalf of both the review petitioners and the respondents that 

the Hon’ble Judges of the said Division Bench have erred in 
their respective appreciation of the law relating to exercise of 
review jurisdiction by the Supreme Court. In view thereof and 
particularly in the light of the authorities considered in the split 
verdict and those which have been cited in course of the 
debate that unfolded before us, calls for a relook at the 
relevant provisions and the precedents bearing in mind the 
respective approaches of the Hon’ble Judges in the split 
verdict: one of them has given public interest paramount 
importance, no matter what the law ordains; while the other 
has stuck to the law, no matter what public interest demands. 
34. 
Power of the Supreme Court to review its own 
judgment and/or order has its genesis in Articles 137 and 145 
of the Constitution read with Order XLVII of the Supreme Court 
Rules, 2013 (“2013 Rules”, hereafter). Rule 1 of Order XLVII 
of the 2013 Rules, in no uncertain terms, lays down that no 
application for review in a civil proceeding will be entertained 
by this Court except on the ground mentioned in Rule 1 Order 
XLVII, CPC. Review in civil proceedings is governed by section 
114 of the CPC read with Order XLVII thereof. It would, 
therefore, not be inapt to read section 114 and Rule 1 of Order 
XLVII, CPC once again: 

114. Review.— Subject as aforesaid, any person 
considering himself aggrieved— 
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is 
allowed by this Code, but from which no appeal has 
been preferred, 
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is 
allowed by this Code, or 
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small 
Causes, may apply for a review of judgment to the 
Court which passed the decree or made the order, and 
the Court may make such order thereon as it thinks fit. 
 
ORDER XLVII 
1. Application for review of judgment.— (1) Any person 
considering himself aggrieved— 
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is 
allowed, but from which no appeal has been preferred, 
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is 
allowed, or 
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small 
Causes, 
and who, from the discovery of new and important 
matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due 
diligence, was not within his knowledge or could not be 
produced by him at the time when the decree was 
passed or order made, or on account of some mistake 
or error apparent on the face of the record, or for any 
other sufficient reason, desires to obtain a review of 
the decree passed or order made against him, may 
apply for a review of judgment of the Court which 
passed the decree or made the order. 

35. 
Read in conjunction with section 114 of the CPC, Order 
XLVII Rule 1 thereof has three broad components which need 
to be satisfied to set the ball for a review in motion – (i) ‘who’, 
means the person applying must demonstrate that he is a 
person aggrieved; (ii) ‘when’, means the circumstances a 
review could be sought; and (iii) ‘why’, means the grounds on 
which a review of the order/decree ought to be made. Finally, 
comes the ‘what’, meaning thereby the order the Court may 
make if it thinks fit. Not much attention is generally required 
to be paid to components (i) and (ii), because of the 
overarching difficulties posed by component (iii). However, in 
deciding this reference, component (i) would also have a 
significant role apart from the Explanation inserted by way of 
an amendment of the CPC. 
36. 
Let us now briefly attempt a deeper analysis of the 
provision. We are conscious that the provisions relating to 
review have been considered in a catena of decisions, but the 
special features of these RPs coupled with the fact that two 
Hon’ble Judges of this Court have delivered a split verdict 
make it imperative for us not to miss any significant aspect. 

37. 
A peep into the legislative history would reveal that 
Rule 1 of Order XLVII, CPC, which is part of the First Schedule 
appended thereto, bears very close resemblance to its 
predecessor statutes, i.e., Section 623 of the Codes of Civil 
Procedure of 1877 and 1882. The solitary legislative change 
brought about in 1976 in Order XLVII, CPC resulted in insertion 
of an Explanation at the foot of Rule 1, which is at the heart of 
the controversy here. 
38. 
The first and foremost condition that is required to be 
satisfied by a party to invoke the review jurisdiction of the 
court, whose order or decree, as the case may be, is sought 
to be reviewed, is that the said party must be someone who is 
aggrieved by the order/decree. The words “person aggrieved” 
are found in several statutes; however, the meaning thereof 
has to be ascertained with reference to the purpose and 
provisions of the statute. In one sense, the said words could 
correspond to the requirement of ‘locus standi’ in relation to 
judicial remedies. The need to ascertain the ‘locus standi’ of a 
review petitioner could arise, if he is not a party to the 
proceedings but claims the order or decree to have adversely 
affected his interest. In terms of Order XLVII of the 2013 Rules 
read with Order XLVII, CPC, a petition for review at the 

instance of a third party 
to the proceedings too 
is 
maintainable, the quintessence being that he must be 
aggrieved by a judgment/order passed by this Court. This is 
what has been held in Union of India v. Nareshkumar 
Badrikumar Jagad19. That is, of course, not the case here. 
Normally, in the context of Rule 1 of Order XLVII, CPC, it is 
that person (being a party to the proceedings) suffering an 
adverse order and/or decree who, feeling aggrieved thereby, 
usually seeks a review of the order/decree on any of the 
grounds outlined therein. The circumstances where a review 
would lie are spelt out in clauses (a) to (c). 
39. 
Order XVLII does not end with the circumstances as 
section 114, CPC, the substantive provision, does. Review 
power under section 114 read with Order XLVII, CPC is 
available to be exercised, subject to fulfilment of the above 
conditions, on setting up by the review petitioner any of the 
following grounds: 
(i) discovery of new and important matter or evidence; or 
(ii) mistake or error apparent on the face of the record; or 
 
19 (2019) 

(iii) any other sufficient reason. 
40. 
Insofar as (i) (supra) is concerned, the review 
petitioner has to show that such evidence (a) was actually 
available on the date the court made the order/decree, (b) 
with reasonable care and diligence, it could not be brought by 
him before the court at the time of the order/decree, (c) it was 
relevant and material for a decision, and (d) by reason of its 
absence, a miscarriage of justice has been caused in the sense 
that had it been produced and considered by the court, the 
ultimate decision would have been otherwise. 
41. 
Regarding (ii) (supra), the review petitioner has to 
satisfy the court that the mistake or error committed by it is 
self-evident and such mistake or error can be pointed out 
without any long-drawn process of reasoning; and, if such 
mistake or error is not corrected and is permitted to stand, the 
same will lead to a failure of justice. There cannot be a fit-in-
all definition of “mistake or error apparent on the face of the 
record” and it has been considered prudent by the courts to 
determine whether any mistake or error does exist considering 
the facts of each individual case coming before it. 

42. 
With regard to (iii) (supra), we can do no better than 
refer to the traditional view in Chhajju Ram (supra), a 
decision of a Bench of seven Law Lords of the Judicial 
Committee of the Privy Council. It was held there that the 
words “any other sufficient reason” means “a reason sufficient 
on grounds at least analogous to those specified immediately 
previously”, meaning thereby (i) and (ii) (supra). Notably, 
Chhajju Ram (supra) has been consistently followed by this 
Court in a number of decisions starting with Moran Mar 
Basselios 
Catholics 
v. 
Most 
Rev. 
Mar 
Poulose 
Athanasius20. 
43. 
There are recent decisions of this Court which have 
viewed ‘mistake’ as an independent ground to seek a review. 
Whether or not such decisions express the correct view need 
not detain us since the review here is basically prayed in view 
of the subsequent event. 
44. 
As noted above, the Explanation in Rule 1 Order XLVII 
was inserted in 1976. It reads: 
“Explanation.— The fact that the decision on a question 
of law on which the judgment of the Court is based has 
been reversed or modified by the subsequent decision 
 
 SC 526 

of a superior court in any other case, shall not be a 
ground for the review of such judgment.” 
 
45. 
The 
above 
insertion 
was 
preceded 
by 
a 
recommendation contained in the 54th report of the Law 
Commission. The decisions in Syed Liaqat Husain v. Mohd. 
Razi21, Lachhmi Narain Balu v. Ghisa Bihari22 and Patel 
Naranbhai Jinabhai v. Patel Gopaldas Venidas23 held that 
the fact that the view of the law taken in a judgment has been 
altered by a subsequent decision of a superior court in another 
case, is not a ground for review of such judgment. On the 
contrary, in Thadikulangara Pylee’s Son Pathrose v. 
Ayyazhiveettil Lakshmi Amma’s son Kuttan24 law was laid 
down that the fact that a subsequent binding authority took a 
different view of the law from what had been taken in the 
decision sought to be reviewed, was a good ground for review. 
Upon consideration of these decisions, the Law Commission 
had recommended as follows: 
“Recommendation 
It is felt that the position should be settled on this 
point. If the law is altered by judicial pronouncement 
 
 Oudh 198 
 Punjab 43 
 Gujarat 229 
 Kerala 186 

of a higher court, the party affected should not, in our 
opinion, have a right to get the judgment reviewed. 
An amendment adopting the Kerala view will create a 
serious practical problem. It will keep alive the 
possibility of review indefinitely. Under the Limitation 
Act, the period of limitation for an application for 
review has been prescribed, but the delay can, ‘for 
sufficient cause’, be condoned by the Court under that 
Act. Where an application for review is made on the 
ground of a later binding authority, the party applying 
for review will usually be able to plead ‘sufficient 
cause’, because it is only when the superior court has 
made a pronouncement that he will have a ground for 
review; and he can, therefore, argue with considerable 
force that there was ‘sufficient cause’ for his not 
making the application earlier. 
 
Recommendation 
We, 
therefore, 
recommend 
that 
the 
following 
Explanation should be added below Order 47/XLVII 
Rule 125.” 
 
46. 
A comparative study of the terms of the Explanation 
recommended by the Law Commission and the Explanation, 
which ultimately had the approval of the Parliament and came 
to be inserted in Order XLVII are not in variance except 
alteration of some words. 
47. 
It is of some worth to note that even prior to the 
decisions of the Oudh, Punjab and Gujarat High Courts 
 
25 “Explanation.— The fact that the view taken on a question of law in the 
judgment of a Court has been reversed or modified by the subsequent 
decision of a superior court in another case is not a ground for review of 
the judgment.” 

considered by the Law Commission in its 54th report, two 
chartered high courts of the country had taken the same view. 
The High Court at Calcutta way back on 15th February, 1927 
in Sudananda Moral v. Rakhal Sana26, considering the 
decision of the Privy Council in Rajah Kotagiri Venkata 
Subbamma Rao v. Raja Vellanki Venkatrama Rao27, 
opined that reversal of a relied-on decision subsequent to the 
decree in the suit was not a ground for review of the judgment. 
Also, the High Court of Madras in Ravella Krishnamurthy v. 
Yarlagadda28 observed that for review on the ground of 
discovery of new and important matter, such matter must be 
in existence at the date of the decree. The exposition of law 
on the point, therefore, dates back to almost a quarter and a 
century back. 
48. 
There are a few decisions of this Court where the 
Explanation to Rule 1 of Order XLVII, CPC has since been 
considered. 
 
26 XXXI CWN 822 = AIR 1927 Cal 920 
27 LR (1899-1900) 27 IA 197 
 Madras 485 

49. 
The earliest decision is Shanti Devi v. State of 
Haryana29 where the Court rejected the review petition by 
holding that the contention that the judgment sought to be 
reviewed was overruled in another case subsequently is no 
ground for reviewing the said decision. Explanation to Order 
XLVII Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure clearly rules out 
such type of review proceedings. 
50. 
Reference may next be made to the decision in Union 
of India v. Mohd Nayyar Khalil30. There, the impugned 
order had followed a three-Judge Bench judgment of this 
Court. Such judgment was admittedly pending consideration 
before a Constitution Bench. Taking note of such facts, it was 
held that: 
“2. *** Even if the question regarding the legality of 
the said three-Judge Bench decision is pending 
scrutiny before the Constitution Bench the same is not 
relevant for deciding the review petition for two 
obvious reasons — firstly, this was not pointed out to 
the Bench which decided the civil appeal; and 
secondly, by the time the impugned order was passed 
the three-Judge Bench judgment had not been upset 
and even in future if the Constitution Bench takes a 
contrary view it would be a subsequent event which 
cannot be a ground for review as is clear from the 
explanation to Order 47 Rule 1(2) of the Code of Civil 
Procedure ***”. 
 
29 (1999) 
30 (2000) 

 (emphasis supplied) 
The principle, thus, laid down is that a decision being upset in 
the future would be a subsequent event which could not be a 
ground to seek review. 
51. 
In Nand Kishore Ahirwar v. Haridas Parsedia31, a 
Bench of three Hon’ble Judges, while dismissing the review 
petitions before it, made pertinent observations reaching out 
to the very core of the said Explanation. This Court observed 
that simply because there has been a Constitution Bench 
decision, passed in the aftermath of the judgment impugned, 
would be no ground for a review of the said judgment. It also 
went on to observe that a reference to a Constitution Bench 
would stand on a still weaker footing (emphasis supplied). 
52. 
The question arising for decision in State of West 
Bengal v. Kamal Sengupta32 was whether a tribunal 
established under section 4 of the Administrative Tribunals 
Act, 1985 can review its decision on the basis of a subsequent 
order/decision/judgment rendered by a coordinate or larger 
Bench or any superior court or on the basis of subsequent 
 
31 (2001) 
32 (2008) 

event/development. It was contended on behalf of the State 
that any subsequent decision on an identical or similar point 
by a coordinate or larger Bench or even change of law cannot 
be made the basis for recording a finding that the order sought 
to be reviewed suffers from an error apparent on the face of 
the record. After considering a host of decisions with a fine-
tooth comb, the Court went on to cull out the principles of 
review in paragraph 35 of the decision which is extracted 
hereunder: 
“35. The principles which can be culled out from the 
abovenoted judgments are: 

The 
power 
of 
the 
Tribunal 
to 
review 
its 
order/decision under Section 22(3)(f) of the Act is 
akin/analogous to the power of a civil court under 
Section 114 read with Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. 
(ii) The Tribunal can review its decision on either of the 
grounds enumerated in Order 47 Rule 1 and not 
otherwise. 
(iii) The expression ‘any other sufficient reason’ 
appearing in Order 47 Rule 1 has to be interpreted in 
the light of other specified grounds. 
(iv) An error which is not self-evident and which can 
be discovered by a long process of reasoning, cannot 
be treated as an error apparent on the face of record 
justifying exercise of power under Section 22(3)(f). 
(v) An erroneous order/decision cannot be corrected in 
the guise of exercise of power of review. 
(vi) A decision/order cannot be reviewed under Section 
22(3)(f) on the basis of subsequent decision/judgment 

of a coordinate or larger Bench of the tribunal or of a 
superior court. 
(vii) While considering an application for review, the 
tribunal must confine its adjudication with reference to 
material which was available at the time of initial 
decision. The happening of some subsequent event or 
development cannot be taken note of for declaring the 
initial order/decision as vitiated by an error apparent. 
(viii) Mere discovery of new or important matter or 
evidence is not sufficient ground for review. The party 
seeking review has also to show that such matter or 
evidence was not within its knowledge and even after 
the exercise of due diligence, the same could not be 
produced before the court/tribunal earlier.” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
53. 
This Court, in Subramanian Swamy v. State of 
Tamil Nadu33, has read the Explanation as follows: 
“52. *** The Explanation to Order XLVII, Rule 1 of 
Code of Civil Procedure 1908 provides that if the 
decision on a question of law on which the judgment of 
the court is based, is reversed or modified by the 
subsequent decision of a superior court in any other 
case, it shall not be a ground for the review of such 
judgment. Thus, even an erroneous decision cannot be 
a ground for the court to undertake review, as the first 
and foremost requirement of entertaining a review 
petition is that the order, review of which is sought, 
suffers from any error apparent on the face of the order 
and in absence of any such error, finality attached to 
the judgment/order cannot be disturbed.” 

33 (2014) 

54. 
The final one is a decision of the Constitution Bench in 
Beghar Foundation v. K.S. Puttaswamy34. The majority 
was of the following view: 
“2. The present review petitions have been filed 
against the final judgment and order dated 26-9-2018. 
We have perused the review petitions as well as the 
grounds in support thereof. In our opinion, no case for 
review of judgment and order dated 26-9-2018 is 
made out. We hasten to add that change in the law or 
subsequent decision/judgment of a coordinate or 
larger Bench by itself cannot be regarded as a ground 
for review. The review petitions are accordingly 
dismissed.” 
 
55. 
Precedents on the aspect of review are legion and we 
do not wish to burden this judgment by tracing all the 
decisions. However, only a few that were considered in the 
split verdict, some which were cited by the parties before us 
and some that have emerged on our research on the subject 
and considered relevant, are discussed/referred to here. 
56. 
Two 
of 
these 
decisions, 
viz. 
A.C. 
Estates 
v. 
Serajuddin35 and Raja Shatrunji v. Mohd. Azmat Azim 
Khan36 were rendered prior to introduction of the Explanation 
 
34 (2021) 
35 (1966) 
36 (1971) 

in Rule 1 of Order XLVII, CPC. Significantly, even without the 
Explanation, substantially the same view was expressed. 
57. 
In A.C. Estates (supra), a bench of three Hon’ble 
Judges of this Court, while dismissing the civil appeal and 
upholding the order of the High Court at Calcutta, held as 
follows: 
“Our attention in this connection is drawn to Section 
29(5) of the Act which gives power to the Controller to 
review his orders and the conditions laid down under 
Order 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure. But this cannot 
be a case of review on the ground of discovery of new 
and important matter, for such matter has to be 
something which exist at the date of the order and 
there can be no review of an order which was right 
when made on the ground of the happening of some 
subsequent 
event 
(see 
Rajah 
Kotagiri 
Venkata 
Subbamma Rao v. Raja Vellanki Venkatrama Rao37). 
 (emphasis supplied) 
 
58. 
The next is the decision of a Bench of two Hon’ble 
Judges of this Court in Raja Shatrunji (supra). While 
dismissing an appeal and upholding the order of the Allahabad 
High Court, reference was made to “any other sufficient 
reason” in Rule 1 of Order XLVII, CPC and the decision in 
 
37 LR (1899-1900) 27 IA 197 

Rajah 
Kotagiri 
Venkata 
Subbamma 
Rao 

whereupon it was held: 
“13. *** the principles of review are defined by the 
Code and the words ‘any other sufficient reason’ in 
Order 47 of the Code would mean a reason sufficient 
on grounds analogous to those specified immediately 
previously in that order. The grounds for review are the 
discovery of new matters or evidence which, after the 
exercise of due diligence, was not within his knowledge 
or could not be produced by him at the time when the 
decree was passed or order made, or the review is 
asked for on account of some mistake or error 
apparent on the face of the record. In Rajah Kotagiri 
Venkata Subbamma Rao v. Rajah Vellanki Venkatrama 
Rao Lord Davey at p. 205 of the Report said that ‘the 
section does not authorise the review of a decree which 
was right when it was made on the ground of the 
happening of some subsequent event’.” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
 
59. 
What was laid down in Netaji Cricket Club (supra), 
upon reading Order XLVII, CPC, can be better understood in 
the words of the Hon’ble Judge authoring the judgment. The 
relevant passages are quoted hereunder: 
“88. *** Section 114 of the Code empowers a court to 
review its order if the conditions precedent laid down 
therein are satisfied. The substantive provision of law 
does not prescribe any limitation on the power of the 
court except those which are expressly provided in 
Section 114 of the Code in terms whereof it is 
empowered to make such order as it thinks fit. 
89. Order 47 Rule 1 of the Code provides for filing an 
application for review. Such an application for review 

would be maintainable not only upon discovery of a 
new and important piece of evidence or when there 
exists an error apparent on the face of the record but 
also if the same is necessitated on account of some 
mistake or for any other sufficient reason. 
90. Thus, a mistake on the part of the court which 
would include a mistake in the nature of the 
undertaking may also call for a review of the order. An 
application for review would also be maintainable if 
there exists sufficient reason therefor. What would 
constitute sufficient reason would depend on the facts 
and circumstances of the case. The words ‘sufficient 
reason’ in Order 47 Rule 1 of the Code are wide enough 
to include a misconception of fact or law by a court or 
even an advocate. An application for review may be 
necessitated by way of invoking the doctrine ‘actus 
curiae neminem gravabit’.” 
 
In the next paragraph, Their Lordships quoted a portion of 
paragraph 32 from the Larger Bench decision in Moran Mar 
Basselios Catholics (supra) but held that “the said rule is not 
universal”. 
60. 
Netaji 
Cricket 
Club 

was 
followed 
in 
Jagmohan Singh v. State of Punjab38. It was held there 
that Rule 1 of Order XLVII, CPC does not preclude the High 
Court or a court to take into consideration any subsequent 
event and that if imparting of justice in a given situation is the 
 
38 (2008) 

goal of the judiciary, the court may take into consideration (of 
course on rare occasions) the subsequent events. 
61. 
This Court, in paragraph 20 of the decision in Kamlesh 
Verma v. Mayawati39, after surveying previous authorities 
and following Chhajju Ram (supra) and Moran Mar 
Basselios Catholics (supra) summarized the principles of 
review and illustrated when a review would be and would not 
be maintainable. Despite the observation in Netaji Cricket 
Club (supra) limiting Moran Mar Basselios Catholics 
(supra), Kamlesh Verma (supra) thought it fit to agree with 
the latter decision. 
62. 
Recently, in S. Madhusudhan Reddy v. V. Narayana 
Reddy40, a Bench of three Hon’ble Judges has accepted the 
meaning of the ground “for any other sufficient reason” as 
explained in Chhajju Ram (supra), Moran Mar Basselios 
Catholics (supra) and Kamlesh Verma (supra). 
63. 
Before answering question (a), we take up questions 
(b), (c) and (d) first with (b) and (c) together for answers. 
 
39 (2013) 

64. 
It was with more than sufficient intensity, force, 
vehemence and seriousness that learned senior counsel 
appearing on behalf of the review petitioners argued, based on 
their understanding of paragraph 217 of Shailendra [3-
Judge] (supra) that, irrespective of anything else, the same 
did grant them ‘liberty’ to apply for review, that availing such 
‘liberty’ granted by this Court the RPs were filed, and that this 
Bench being of co-equal strength, instead of taking a different 
view, ought to read the last sentence of paragraph 217 in the 
manner they (learned senior counsel) understood it, and to 
accept the same for holding the RPs maintainable. 
65. 
For reasons more than one, the decision in Shailendra 
[3-Judge] (supra) cannot come to the rescue of the review 
petitioners. 
66. 
The first reason is that the submission of a ‘liberty’ 
being granted by Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) makes it 
abundantly clear that but for such ‘liberty’, the review 
petitioners would not have even thought of applying for review 
since the law on the point was no longer res integra. It is, 
therefore, an admission on their part that the judgments and 
orders 
under 
review, 
as 
on 
the 
dates 
they 
were 

delivered/made, were neither erroneous (which is a possible 
ground for appeal, if an appeal were allowed by law) nor 
suffering from any error apparent on the face of the record (a 
possible ground for review). Therefore, merely based on 
Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra), a subsequent event, the 
review jurisdiction of this Court which is a limited jurisdiction 
could not have been invoked. 
67. 
Next, we need to consider whether the last sentence of 
paragraph 217 of Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) can at all be 
read and understood to have granted a ‘liberty’ of the nature 
claimed by the review petitioners. 
68. 
This Court sitting in a combination of five-Hon’ble 
Judges in Vikramjit Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh41 
had the occasion to consider an appeal where the facts were 
quite alike. A learned Judge (Varma, J.) of the Madhya Pradesh 
High Court had granted bail to the appellant. While the 
appellant was enjoying the concession of bail and such order 
had not been challenged, a co-accused moved for bail. 
Noticing the earlier order granting bail in favour of the 
appellant, another learned Judge (Gupta, J.) in his order 
 
41 1992 Supp (3) SCC 62 

observed that the appellant did not deserve to be enlarged on 
bail, and that it was “a fit case where the State should apply 
for cancellation of bail of all the accused persons”. In view of 
this observation, the State filed a petition for cancellation of 
the bail order passed by Varma, J. In this application, neither 
any additional fact was stated nor any allegation was made 
against the appellant which could be relevant for cancellation 
of the earlier bail order. The prayer for cancellation was 
founded only on the observations in the order of Gupta, J., 
which was verbatim quoted in the application. The same was 
listed before Gupta, J. who by the impugned order cancelled 
the earlier order of Varma, J. and while so doing made strong 
remarks against grant of bail in cases like the one under 
consideration. This order of cancellation was carried in appeal 
before this Court. The Constitution Bench observed that no 
bench can comment on the functioning of a co-ordinate bench 
of the same court, much less sit in judgment as an appellate 
court over its decision (emphasis supplied). While allowing the 
appeal, it was further observed that the State not having filed 
any appeal against the order of Varma, J. granting bail to the 
appellant, the same had become final so far as the high court 
was concerned and that in the absence of any allegation of 

misuse of the concession of bail by the appellant, Gupta, J. had no authority to upset the earlier order of Varma, J 
(emphasis supplied). In conclusion, it was also observed as 
follows: 
“2. *** That which could not be done directly could 
also not be done indirectly. Otherwise a party 
aggrieved by an order passed by one bench of the High 
Court would be tempted to attempt to get the matter 
reopened before another bench, and there would not 
be any end to such attempts. Besides, it was not 
consistent with the judicial discipline which must be 
maintained 
by 
courts 
both 
in 
the 
interest 
of 
administration of justice by assuring the binding nature 
of an order which becomes final, and the faith of the 
people in the judiciary ***.” 
 
69. 
We do believe that what was said of a high court in this 
decision, would squarely apply to this Court. The Supreme 
Court of India, a revered institution, is one Court which 
operates through separate Benches owing to administrative 
exigency and practical expedience. These Benches are 
essential to efficiently manage the diverse and voluminous 
cases that come before the Court and to discharge the solemn 
judicial duty for which the Court exists. It would be an 
erroneous perception to regard this division as a cause for din 
within the Court. When faced with a peculiar circumstance as 
before us presently, one might just be compelled to ask 

whether one voice of this Court is louder than another? The 
answer to this is that this Court, as one, might speak through 
a singular voice or several voices as the occasion might 
demand. In any event, these voices, though marked by their 
individual tone(s), enjoin to form a collective melody, akin to 
a choir of justice. It cannot be forgotten that no matter the 
strength, all these voices bear the symbol of the Supreme 
Court of India. While we may have our specific functions and 
jurisdictions, the collective objective is to find our bearings 
towards धर्म (duty) and न्याय (justice). In this sense, it can be 
said that each Bench speaks for the Court as a whole, 
contributing to the intricate symphony of justice that defines 
the Supreme Court of India. 
70. 
It is here that the need arises for a Bench to be careful, 
cautious, and circumspect while being critical of a precedent 
of a previous Bench. Every Bench is supposed to bear in mind 
two overriding considerations. The first is that of deference to 
the views expressed by a Bench in a primary decision and the 
other is maintaining judicial discipline and propriety if, upon 
threadbare consideration, it is found difficult to assent to the 
justification for such primary decision. In such an eventuality, 
dignity and decency would demand disagreement voiced by 

the subsequent Bench and reference of the matter to the 
Hon’ble the Chief Justice for constitution of a larger Bench in a 
tone that does not sound like critical observations and adverse 
comments in respect of the primary decision rendered by a 
coordinate Bench. 
71. 
Here too, the grounds of the RPs refer to the ‘liberty’ 
granted by the decision in Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra). 
The question, as noted above, is whether the Bench while 
deciding Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) could have granted 
any ‘liberty’ to the review petitioners to apply for review, 
assuming that the words “open to be reviewed in appropriate 
cases” did mean ‘liberty to apply’. 
72. 
Prior to attempting an answer to that question, it would 
also be apposite to note what the dicta in Central Board of 
Dawoodi Bohra Community v. State of Maharashtra42 is, 
as laid down by another Constitution Bench of this Court. The 
legal position summed up in paragraph 12 reads as follows: 
 “12. Having carefully considered the submissions 
made by the learned Senior Counsel for the parties and 
having examined the law laid down by the Constitution 
Benches in the abovesaid decisions, we would like to 
sum up the legal position in the following terms: 
 
42 (2005) 

(1) The law laid down by this Court in a decision 
delivered by a Bench of larger strength is binding on 
any subsequent Bench of lesser or coequal strength. 
(2) A Bench of lesser quorum cannot disagree or 
dissent from the view of the law taken by a Bench of 
larger quorum. In case of doubt all that the Bench of 
lesser quorum can do is to invite the attention of the 
Chief Justice and request for the matter being placed 
for hearing before a Bench of larger quorum than the 
Bench whose decision has come up for consideration. 
It will be open only for a Bench of coequal strength to 
express an opinion doubting the correctness of the 
view taken by the earlier Bench of coequal strength, 
whereupon the matter may be placed for hearing 
before a Bench consisting of a quorum larger than the 
one which pronounced the decision laying down the law 
the correctness of which is doubted. 
(3) The above rules are subject to two exceptions: (i) 
the abovesaid rules do not bind the discretion of the 
Chief Justice in whom vests the power of framing the 
roster and who can direct any particular matter to be 
placed for hearing before any particular Bench of any 
strength; and (ii) in spite of the rules laid down 
hereinabove, if the matter has already come up for 
hearing before a Bench of larger quorum and that 
Bench itself feels that the view of the law taken by a 
Bench of lesser quorum, which view is in doubt, needs 
correction or reconsideration then by way of exception 
(and not as a rule) and for reasons given by it, it may 
proceed to hear the case and examine the correctness 
of the previous decision in question dispensing with the 
need of a specific reference or the order of the Chief 
Justice constituting the Bench and such listing. ***” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
73. 
Although the larger Bench in Shailendra [3-Judge] 
(supra) appears to have considered in excess of 250 decisions, 
the above opinions of the Constitution Benches do not seem 

to have been presented before it. It is, thus, clear as crystal 
from the majority opinion delivered by Hon’ble Arun Mishra 
and Hon’ble A.K. Goel, JJ. that recourse was taken to declare 
Pune Municipal Corporation (supra) per incuriam without 
having the benefit of the caution sounded by this Court in 
Vikramjit Singh (supra) and Central Board of Dawoodi 
Bohra Community (supra). 
74. 
Having 
regard 
to 
the 
opinions 
expressed 
by 
Constitution Bench decisions of this Court, there is absolutely 
no scope for a Bench of three-Hon’ble Judges to declare a 
previous decision of a Bench of co-equal strength per incuriam. 
Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra), at the highest, could have 
doubted Pune Municipal Corporation (supra) and referred 
it for decision by a yet larger Bench but could not have, by any 
stretch of reasoning, declared it per incuriam. But, the same 
logic applies to this Bench too. Respectfully following the 
binding dictum in Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra 
Community (supra) and also having regard to our sense of 
judicial discipline and propriety, we restrain ourselves from 
declaring Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) as per incuriam 
notwithstanding our firm conviction in this behalf. 

75. 
However, nothing much turns on our restraint for there 
are weightier reasons to reject the contention of the review 
petitioners; and this, we say, to specifically answer question 
(c). 
76. 
In paragraph 365 of Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] 
(supra) itself, it has been held by the Constitution Bench that 
Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) did not have the occasion to 
consider certain aspects for which that decision cannot prevail. 
Learned senior counsel for the respondents, based on such 
statement, contended that Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) 
stands overruled. This submission has been disputed by 
learned senior counsel for the review petitioners. According to 
them, Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) has not been expressly 
overruled; only because of aspects referred to in paragraph 
365 and the discussion preceding, it ceases to be a precedent. 
77. 
We have not held Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) to 
be per incuriam for the reason indicated above but the 
statement in paragraph 365 of Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] 
(supra) has to be given some meaning. Although it is true that 
Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) was not expressly overruled 
by Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] (supra), what stands out 

as a direct impact of paragraph 365 thereof is that Shailendra 
[3-Judge] (supra), not having considered certain vital 
aspects and more particularly as to how the conjunction ‘or’ in 
sub-section (2) of section 24 of the 2013 Act has to be read 
as well as the proviso thereto, the very basis for Shailendra 
[3-Judge] (supra) to declare Pune Municipal Corporation 
(supra) per incuriam stands removed. Since the reasoning for 
Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) to declare Pune Municipal 
Corporation (supra) per incuriam does not survive, it would 
be 
unreasonable 
and 
inappropriate 
to 
hold 
that 
the 
consequential 
observation 
would 
nevertheless 
survive. 
Significantly, in Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] (supra), one 
does not find any observation of like nature as in paragraph 
217 of Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra). 
78. 
That apart, being members of a larger Bench of co-
equal strength as in Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra), we are 
not precluded by any law from interpreting the last sentence 
of paragraph 217 of the said decision and to say what the 
Court exactly intended even if it is assumed notwithstanding 
what has been said in paragraph 365 of Manoharlal [5-
Judge, lapse] (supra) that the observation in paragraph 217 
survives. In our humble understanding, what the majority in 

Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) intended to say is that if 
review petitions were pending on the date of the decision, i.e., 
8th February, 2018, seeking review of decisions which had 
been rendered relying on the decision in Pune Municipal 
Corporation 
(supra), 
such 
review 
petitions 
could 
be 
entertained and considered on the basis of the discussion in 
Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) declaring Pune Municipal 
Corporation 

per 
incuriam 
and 
the 
decisions 
reviewed; nothing more, nothing less. We do not think that 
the majority in Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) could have and 
did, in fact, give a carte blanche to the land acquiring 
authorities to apply for review of decisions already made by 
courts 
relying 
on 
the 
decision 
in 
Pune 
Municipal 
Corporation (supra), even though the remedy of appeal or 
review had not been pursued earlier and without the successful 
landowners being on record before the court. 
79. 
The role of the Court, it is needless to observe, is to 
adjudicate; it cannot, in the absence of exercising its advisory 
jurisdiction under Article 143 of the Constitution, take upon 
itself the role of the advisor to any party to the proceedings, 
to wit, the land acquiring authorities. The maxim heavily relied 
on by the review petitioners, i.e., actus curiae neminem 

gravabit, in such a situation would kick in to prevent any 
harmful act being perpetrated. 
80. 
There is another perspective which cannot be lost sight 
of. If the understanding of learned senior counsel for the 
review petitioners of the relevant sentence in paragraph 217 
of Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) is accepted, it would result 
in utter chaos and confusion in the justice delivery system 
apart from disturbing the principle of finality of judicial 
decisions. Should we read “open to be reviewed” as connoting 
a ‘liberty’ granted to apply for review, any number of review 
petitions could be filed based on such liberty for review of 
decisions between parties which have attained finality not only 
in this Court but also in the high courts. From the practical 
point of view, the results could be pernicious. A landowner, 
satisfied with a final decision of a court, could find himself 
requiring to contest a review petition filed on the basis of the 
‘liberty’ granted by none other than the Supreme Court of 
India in proceedings where such landowner was not even 
noticed. We would be inclined to the thought that no court, 
much less the Supreme Court (because of its status as the 
apex court), should pass any judicial order affecting the right 
of a party who has not been put on notice. If such an order is 

passed, there cannot be a more egregious violation of 
principles of natural justice. 
81. 
Notably, if a judgment and/or order has attained 
finality because a judicial remedy is either not available in law 
or even if available, such remedy has been lost, it is not open 
for a higher court of law by a judicial fiat either to create a 
remedy for the party on the losing side to pursue or to grant 
liberty to him to pursue an otherwise available remedy - which 
by passage of time might have been lost - behind the back of 
a party who would obviously be seriously affected if he were 
compelled to contest the proceedings once again. Such an act 
of court would be without the authority of law, and this is 
precisely what Vikramjit Singh (supra) has held. 
82. 
Moreover, as on the dates the RPs were filed, the 
decision in Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] (supra) had not 
seen the light of the day. A review petition, under the law, 
cannot be filed in anticipation of a favourable judgment in the 
future. 
83. 
For the reasons discussed above, we cannot be 
persuaded to accept that the phrase “open to be reviewed in 
appropriate cases” occurring in paragraph 217 of the decision 

in Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) could have been perceived 
by the review petitioners as opening up an avenue for them to 
apply for review. Assuming arguendo that the contention 
touching ‘liberty’ granted by Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) 
is correct, the plinth thereof crumbles by reason of paragraph 
365 of Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] (supra) and, therefore, 
is rendered non-existent. 
84. 
All these aspects, we say so with respect, escaped the 
attention of the Hon’ble Judge presiding over the said Division 
Bench. His Lordship’s opinion on the observations made in 
Manoharlal [5-Judge, lapse] and Shailendra [3-Judge] 
(supra) are erroneous. 
85. 
Questions (b) and (c) are answered accordingly, 
against the review petitioners. 
86. 
Let us now move on to question (d) to answer it. 
87. 
The 
decision 
in 
Manoharlal 
[5-Judge, 
lapse] 
(supra), according to the respondents, did not afford a ground 
for maintainability of the RPs while the contrary is argued by 
the review petitioners. According to Ms. Bhati, an aggrieved 
party can seek a review “for any other sufficient reason” and 
overruling of Pune Municipal Corporation (supra) followed 

by recall thereof brings the claims of the review petitioners 
within the coverage of this particular ground. That apart, it has 
been urged that when miscarriage of justice occasioned due to 
an earlier flawed decision is brought to the notice of this Court 
and when public interest would be a casualty resulting from 
the operation of such earlier decision, it ought to be the Court’s 
duty to pass appropriate orders to set things right. 
88. 
It has been noted that prior to the Explanation being 
inserted in Rule 1 Order XLVII, with the sole exception of the 
Kerala High Court, there were decisions of the Privy Council 
dating back to the commencement of the twentieth century 
and at least of five High Courts, starting from 1927, to the 
effect that a subsequent judgment of a higher court reversing 
the judgment relied on in the order under review would not 
afford a ground for review. There are also at least half a dozen 
precedents of this Court reiterating such position of law, albeit 
with the aid of the Explanation. 
89. 
The relevant principles deducible from the precedents 
on the Explanation to Rule 1 that we have considered, for the 
purpose of deciding the present reference, are as follows: 

a) in case of discovery of a new or important matter or 
evidence, such matter or evidence has to be one 
which existed at the time when the decree or order 
under review was passed or made; and 
b) Order XLVII would not authorize the review of a 
decree or order which was right when it was made 
on the ground of some subsequent event. 
What follows is that Order XLVII of the CPC does not authorize 
a review of a decree, which was right, on the happening of 
some subsequent event (emphasis supplied). 
90. 
With the introduction of the Explanation, there seems 
to be little room for any serious debate on the point under 
consideration. Parliament, in its wisdom, has accepted what 
the Law Commission recommended. Resultantly, what the 
statute prohibits, cannot be permitted by the Court. If 
permitted, the Court would be acting contrary to law. What the 
Parliament has done, the Court cannot undo unless the law 
enacted by the Parliament is declared ultra vires. The vires of 
the Explanation not being under challenge during more than 
four decades of its existence, it is not for the Court to ignore 
the Explanation. 

91. 
It is worthwhile to also note at this stage the decision 
dated 3rd November, 2020 in Shri Ram Sahu and others v. 
Vinod Kumar Rawat43. Upon consideration of the decisions 
in Moran Mar Basselios Catholics (supra), Haridas Das 
(supra), Kamal Sengupta (supra), etc., this Court speaking 
through the Hon’ble presiding Judge of the said Division Bench 
was of the opinion that the court of review has a limited 
jurisdiction, it cannot overstep such jurisdiction and has to 
strictly adhere to the grounds mentioned in Rule 1 of Order 
XLVII. It is a pity that the respondent landowners did not cite 
the aforesaid decision before the Hon’ble presiding Judge 
where the law has been correctly laid down by His Lordship. 
92. 
Concededly, the Constitutional courts have inherent 
powers and this Court is also vested by Article 142 of the 
Constitution with powers to pass such decree or make such 
order as is necessary to do complete justice in any cause or 
matter pending before it. 
93. 
Insofar as inherent powers are concerned, it has been 
held by this Court in Indian Bank v. Satyam Fibres44 that: 
 
43 (2021) 
44 (1996) 

“22. The judiciary in India also possesses inherent 
power, specially under Section 151 CPC, to recall its 
judgment or order if it is obtained by fraud on court. 
In the case of fraud on a party to the suit or 
proceedings, the court may direct the affected party to 
file a separate suit for setting aside the decree obtained 
by fraud. Inherent powers are powers which are 
resident in all courts, especially of superior jurisdiction. 
These powers spring not from legislation but from the 
nature and the constitution of the tribunals or courts 
themselves so as to enable them to maintain their 
dignity, secure obedience to its process and rules, 
protect its officers from indignity and wrong and to 
punish unseemly behaviour. This power is necessary 
for the orderly administration of the court’s business.” 
 
94. 
A superior court, in exercise of its inherent power, is 
authorized to do such justice that the cause before it demands. 
Upon satisfaction being reached by a court that a mistake has 
been committed by it, which is gross and palpable, it is not the 
law that the mistake has to be corrected by exercising the 
power of review only. Such power can be exercised, only if the 
person aggrieved by the order or decree applies therefor. On 
its terms, section 114 of the CPC read with Order XLVII thereof 
does not conceive of a suo motu power of review being 
exercised by the court. The words “court on its own motion” 
are absent in the statutory provision. However, once the court 
is satisfied that a mistake committed by it needs to be 
rectified, it is always open to exercise the inherent powers to 

achieve the desired result. As has been held by the 
Constitution Bench in A.R. Antulay v. R.S. Nayak45, an order 
of court – be it judicial or administrative – which is made per 
incuriam or in violation of certain Constitutional limitations or 
in derogation of principles of natural justice can always be 
remedied by the court ex debito justitiae. It can do so in 
exercise of its inherent jurisdiction in any proceeding pending 
before it without insisting on the formalities of a review 
application. After all, “to err is human” is the oft-quoted saying 
and courts including the apex court are no exception. To own 
up the mistake when judicial satisfaction is reached does not 
militate against its status or authority; perhaps, it would 
enhance both. On the other hand, when it involves invocation 
of the power of review and such power is traceable in a statute, 
which also has provisions regulating the exercise of the review 
power, it has to be held that the power of review is not an 
inherent power. That power of review is not an inherent power 
has 
been 
held 
in 
Patel 
Narshi 
Thakershi 
v. 
Pradyumansinghji Arjunsinghji46. If a power of review is 
statutorily 
conferred, 
it 
would 
be 
inappropriate, 
nay 
incompetent, for the court exercising review power to travel 
 
45 (1988) 
46 (1971) 

beyond the contours of the provision conferring the very 
power. A statutorily conferred power to review is not to be 
confused with the inherent power of the court to recall any 
order. The said power inheres in every court to prevent 
miscarriage of justice or when a fraud has been committed on 
court or to correct grave and palpable errors. 
95. 
In any event, in the present case, we have not found 
exercise of inherent power under section 151, CPC or under 
Article 142 by the Hon’ble presiding Judge of the said Division 
Bench. 
96. 
It was urged that a court may recall or review any 
order exercising its inherent power saved by section 151, CPC 
to meet the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of the process 
of the Court. This argument, however, need not detain us for 
long in the light of the law, which stands well-settled by this 
Court. It is no longer res integra that inherent powers of the 
court under section 151, CPC cannot be invoked if there exists 
a remedy made available by the CPC itself. 

97. 
A three-Judge Bench of this Court in Padam Sen v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh47 laid down the law in the following 
words: 
“8. …The inherent powers of the Court are in addition 
to the powers specifically conferred on the Court by the 
Code. They are complementary to those powers and 
therefore it must be held that the Court is free to 
exercise them for the purposes mentioned in Section 
151 of the Code when the exercise of those powers is 
not in any way in conflict with what has been expressly 
provided in the Code or against the intentions of the 
Legislature. It is also well recognized that the inherent 
power is not to be exercised in a manner which will be 
contrary to or different from the procedure expressly 
provided in the Code.” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
 
98. 
Another three-Judge Bench of this Court in My Palace 
Mutually Aided Co-operative Society v. B. Mahesh & 
others48 held thus: 
“27. In exercising powers under Section 151 of the 
CPC, it cannot be said that the civil courts can exercise 
substantive jurisdiction to unsettle already decided 
issues. A Court having jurisdiction over the relevant 
subject matter has the power to decide and may come 
either to a right or a wrong conclusion. Even if a wrong 
conclusion is arrived at or an incorrect decree is passed 
by the jurisdictional court, the same is binding on the 
parties until it is set aside by an appellate court or 
through other remedies provided in law. 
 
28. Section 151 of the CPC can only be applicable if 
there is no alternate remedy available in accordance 
with the existing provisions of law. Such inherent 
power cannot override statutory prohibitions or create 
 
47 (1961) 

remedies which are not contemplated under the Code. 
Section 151 cannot be invoked as an alternative to 
filing fresh suits, appeals, revisions, or reviews. A party 
cannot find solace in Section 151 to allege and rectify 
historic wrongs and bypass procedural safeguards 
inbuilt in the CPC.” 
 (emphasis supplied) 

99. 
An alternative remedy, carved out by Rule 1 of Order 
XLVII, already exists which the review petitioners have 
pursued. Recourse to section 151, CPC, therefore, would not 
be available, the object of which is to supplement and not 
replace the remedies provided under the CPC. 
100. 
Moving on further, we find that the attempt of the 
review petitioners has been to draw inspiration from the 
ground “any other sufficient reason” appearing in Rule 1. 
There have been decisions of this Court which have construed 
the words “any other sufficient reason” expansively, like 
Netaji Cricket Club (supra) and Jagmohan Singh (supra), 
whereas there are decisions, including Moran Mar Basselios 
Catholics (supra), Raja Shatrunji (supra), Kamlesh Verma 
(supra) and S. Madhusudhan Reddy (supra), that have 
followed Chhajju Ram (supra) explaining that the ground 
“any other sufficient reason” means “a reason sufficient on 

grounds at least analogous to those specified immediately 
previously”. 
101. 
However, with utmost respect, we do not find any of 
those decisions, which have taken an expansive view, looking 
at such ground in the manner we propose to look, for recording 
our concurrence with the view in Chhajju Ram (supra) that 
has unhesitatingly been followed over the years. If indeed “any 
other sufficient reason” were to take within its embrace any 
situation not analogous to “discovery of new matter or 
evidence” and “on account of some mistake or error apparent 
on the face of the record”, we wonder why the legislature 
chose to keep “any other sufficient reason” immediately after 
the aforesaid two grounds. If “any other sufficient reason” 
were to be read independent of the said two grounds, we 
believe the long line in Rule 1 after clauses (a) to (c) need not 
have been drafted in the manner it presently reads. In lieu of 
referring to the said two grounds as grounds on which a review 
could be sought, the legislature could well have kept it open- 
ended as in section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963 where it is 
provided, without any strings attached, that any appeal or any 
application may be admitted after the prescribed period of 
limitation if the appellant or applicant satisfies the court that 

he had “sufficient cause” for not preferring the appeal or the 
application earlier. If the intention of the legislature were to 
give an expanded meaning, Order XLVII Rule 1 would have 
read somewhat like this: any person considering himself 
aggrieved by a decree or order or decision of the nature 
indicated in clauses (a), (b) and (c) for any sufficient reason 
desires to obtain a review of the decree or order made against 
him, may apply for a review. But that is not what the provision 
says and means. Reading Order XLVII Rule 1 in juxtaposition 
to section 5 of the Limitation Act drives us to accept the view 
in Chhajju Ram (supra) as having interpreted the law 
correctly and acceptance of the same by this Court and high 
courts over the years, coupled with the fact that the Parliament 
did not consider it necessary to amend Rule 1 when it inserted 
the Explanation in 1976. Giving a wider meaning to the ground 
“any other sufficient reason” in Netaji Cricket Club (supra) 
and Jagmohan Singh (supra), therefore, must have been 
intended and necessitated by this Court because the justice of 
the cases so demanded but the same would have no 
application in a case of this nature. 
102. 
Having regard to the aforesaid distinction in the 
exercise of review power and the power that inheres in every 

court, we are unable to be ad idem with the decision in Netaji 
Cricket Club (supra) as well as the decision in Jagmohan 
Singh (supra), which followed the former decision. The said 
two decisions are by benches of two Hon’ble Judges, with a 
common author. With the deepest of respect and reverence 
we have for His Lordship, we find limiting the application of 
the principles regarding exercise of the power of review, as 
expounded in Moran Mar Basselios Catholics (supra) (a 
decision rendered by a Bench of three Hon’ble Judges, which 
has stood the test of time), to be against established principles 
flowing from Article 141 of the Constitution by which the 
Supreme Court is also bound. Also, laying down as a matter of 
principle that subsequent events could be considered while 
hearing a review petition, is unprecedented. The Court in 
Netaji Cricket Club (supra) and Jagmohan Singh (supra) 
read something in the statute which apart from being 
unnecessary, is seen to run contrary to the terms of Order 
XLVII, CPC as expounded in A.C. Estates (supra) (decision of 
a Bench of three Hon’ble Judges) and Raja Shatrunji (supra). 
To save Netaji Cricket Club (supra) and Jagmohan Singh 
(supra) from being declared as decisions rendered per 
incuriam, we prefer to hold, as the Hon’ble companion Judge 

on the said Division Bench did, that such decisions turned on 
the very special facts and circumstances of the cases and 
cannot guide us in the present endeavor. 
103. 
Ms. Bhati put forth the dissent authored by Hon’ble Dr. 
D.Y. Chandrachud, J. (as the Chief Justice then was) in 
Beghar Foundation (supra) to argue that the Explanation 
could not be a bar to the maintainability of the RPs in the 
present case. However, when a view is expressed by a 
member-Judge of a Constitution Bench which turns out to be 
the minority view, judicial discipline demands that a Bench of 
lesser strength does not accept the minority view in preference 
to the majority view. In any event, on a closer reading of the 
dissent itself, more particularly paragraph 18, it is revealed 
that the RPs had already been filed and were pending on the 
date when reference was made to a larger Bench for which His 
Lordship did not consider it necessary even to consider the 
Explanation. The issue before us, as held earlier, cannot be 
resolved without looking at the Explanation and, thus, the 
contention advanced by Ms. Bhati is rejected. 
104. 
We, thus, hold that no review is available upon a 
change or reversal of a proposition of law by a superior court 

or by a larger Bench of this Court overruling its earlier 
exposition of law whereon the judgment/order under review 
was based. We also hold that notwithstanding the fact that 
Pune Municipal Corporation (supra) has since been wiped 
out of existence, the said decision being the law of the land 
when the Civil Appeals/Special Leave Petitions were finally 
decided, the subsequent overruling of such decision and even 
its recall, for that matter, would not afford a ground for review 
within the parameters of Order XLVII of the CPC. 
105. 
Question (d) is, therefore, answered in the negative. 
106. 
Let us now turn to question (a), which incidentally 
arises, and answer it. 
107. 
Reverting to the facts, these cases would not call for 
ascertainment of the ‘locus standi’ of the review petitioners, 
since they were parties to the proceedings from which the RPs 
have arisen. However, in the context of a review, a distinction 
can yet be drawn between a person who, not being a party to 
the original proceedings, has the ‘locus standi’ to invoke the 
review jurisdiction and a person who, despite being a party to 
the proceedings, can be considered as not aggrieved by the 
judgment/order of which he seeks a review. This question 

would obviously require a deep scrutiny, having regard to the 
materials on record and the objection to the maintainability of 
the RPs specifically raised by the respondent landowners. In 
the eyes of an unsuspecting person, obviously the review 
petitioners are persons aggrieved because of declaration of 
land acquisition proceedings initiated by them as deemed to 
have lapsed. But, as is evident from the factual narrative, the 
dates on which the High Court had disposed of the writ 
petitions by declaring that the land acquisition proceedings 
were deemed to have lapsed, it is the law laid down by a 
binding authority, i.e., Pune Municipal Corporation (supra) 
that was holding the field at the relevant time and which the 
High Court applied in reaching its conclusions. This Court too 
had dismissed the Civil Appeals and the Special Leave Petitions 
bearing in mind that the issue raised was no longer res integra 
in view of Pune Municipal Corporation (supra). If indeed 
the judgments and orders were right, could the review 
petitioners be categorized as aggrieved persons? 
108. 
For the reason that the judgments and orders under 
review were right on the dates they were rendered, we do not 
consider the review petitioners as persons aggrieved who can 
maintain a review petition citing either Manoharlal [5-

Judge, lapse] and Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra). We, 
however, hold that the review petitioners can yet be 
considered persons aggrieved for what we proceed to say and 
hold immediately hereafter. 
109. 
Insofar as question (e) is concerned, which has been 
framed based on the arguments of Mr. Sen, it is true that the 
RPs include under the caption ‘GROUNDS’ reference to points 
which, according to the review petitioners, are sufficient to 
review the judgments/orders under review, apart from 
reference to the so-called ‘liberty’ granted by this Court vide 
Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra). Mr. Sen thus argued that 
even if the RPs are held not to be maintainable based on 
Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra) and Manoharlal [5-Judge, 
lapse] (supra), the same ought to be decided upon 
consideration of such other grounds; and, for such purpose, 
the larger Bench may remit the RPs for being considered by 
an appropriate Bench on such other grounds. Viewed in the 
light of such contention, the review petitioners are persons 
aggrieved and the RPs cannot be shut out on the ground that 
the same are not maintainable for reasons discussed above. 
However, this finding does not take the cause of the review 
petitioners any forward. 

110. 
We have perused the ‘GROUNDS’ in each of the RPs 
opposed by Mr. Divan and Mr. Giri. All such grounds are factual 
in nature. In fact, the review petitioners have raised 
‘GROUNDS’ without even averring what was pleaded in their 
counter affidavits filed before the High Court and what were 
the defences raised which, because of non-consideration by 
this Court, could be said to amount to an error apparent on 
the face of the record. The RPs are silent as to on which specific 
ground referrable to Rule 1 of Order XLVII the review has been 
asked for. Even then, having considered such ‘GROUNDS’, we 
are of the considered opinion that the judgments/orders under 
review do not suffer from any error apparent on the face of 
the record. 
111. 
Thus, we have no hesitation to reject Mr. Sen’s 
contention and answer question (e) against the review 
petitioners. 
112. 
As we approach the end, we need to address question 
(f) regarding the maintainability of several miscellaneous 
applications in the present batch that seek recall of certain 
orders of this Court, whereby some of the land acquisition 
proceedings were declared to have lapsed. 

113. 
Notably, while these have been filed in the form of 
miscellaneous applications, they are in essence akin to the RPs 
as they also seek reconsideration of this Court’s orders. Since 
these miscellaneous applications also rely on Manoharlal [5-
Judge, lapse] (supra) as a ground for review/reconsideration 
of the previous orders, they are squarely covered by the 
foregoing analysis in this judgment. If we were to hold 
otherwise, we would be permitting the review petitioners to do 
something 
indirectly—i.e., 
seeking 
review 
through 
miscellaneous applications, which they could not have done 
directly—i.e., seeking review through RPs. This would open the 
law to being misused and lead to by-passing the legislative 
intent behind introduction of Explanation 1 to Rule 1 of Order 
XLVII, CPC which, as noticed in paragraph 91 of this judgment, 
cannot be permitted by the Court. 
114. 
In this regard, we find sufficient support in the decision 
in Delhi Administration v. Gurdip Singh Uban and 
others49, where this Court held: 
“17. We next come to applications described as 
applications for ‘clarification’, ‘modification’ or ‘recall’ 
of judgments or orders finally passed. We may point 
out that under the relevant Rule XL of the Supreme 
Court Rules, 1966 a review application has first to go 
before the learned Judges in circulation and it will be 
 
49 (2000) 

for the Court to consider whether the application is to 
be rejected without giving an oral hearing or whether 
notice is to be issued. […] However, with a view to 
avoid this procedure of ‘no hearing’, we find that 
sometimes applications are filed for ‘clarification’, 
‘modification’ or ‘recall’ etc. not because any such 
clarification, modification is indeed necessary but 
because the applicant in reality wants a review and also 
wants a hearing, thus avoiding listing of the same in 
chambers by way of circulation. Such applications, if 
they are in substance review applications, deserve to 
be rejected straight away inasmuch as the attempt is 
obviously to bypass Order XL Rule 3 relating to 
circulation 
of 
the 
application 
in 
chambers 
for 
consideration without oral hearing. By describing an 
application as one for ‘clarification’ or ‘modification’, — 
though it is really one of review — a party cannot be 
permitted to circumvent or bypass the circulation 
procedure and indirectly obtain a hearing in the open 
court. What cannot be done directly cannot be 
permitted to be done indirectly. [See in this connection 
a detailed order of the then Registrar of this Court in 
Sone Lal v. State of U.P. (1982) deprecating 
a similar practice.]”. 
 
115. 
Similarly, and more recently, this Court in Supertech 
Ltd. v. 
Emerald 
Court 
Owner 
Resident 
Welfare 
Association and others50 held: 
“13. The hallmark of a judicial pronouncement is its 
stability and finality. Judicial verdicts are not like sand 
dunes which are subject to the vagaries of wind and 
weather [See, Meghmala v. G. Narasimha Reddy, 
(2010) ]. A disturbing trend has emerged in 
this 
Court 
of 
repeated 
applications, 
styled 
as 
miscellaneous applications, being filed after a final 
judgment has been pronounced. Such a practice has 
no legal foundation and must be firmly discouraged. It 
reduces 
litigation 
to 
a 
gambit. 
Miscellaneous 
 
50 (2023) 

applications are becoming a preferred course to those 
with 
resources 
to 
pursue 
strategies 
to 
avoid 
compliance 
with 
judicial 
decisions. 
A 
judicial 
pronouncement cannot be subject to modification once 
the judgment has been pronounced, by filing a 
miscellaneous application. Filing of a miscellaneous 
application 
seeking 
modification/clarification 
of 
a 
judgment is not envisaged in law. Further, it is a settled 
legal principle that one cannot do indirectly what one 
cannot do directly (‘Quando aliquid prohibetur ex 
directo, prohibetur et per obliquum’)”. 
 
116. 
We must clarify that our statement does not imply an 
absolute prohibition against filing of miscellaneous applications 
seeking 'clarification,' 'modification,' or 'recall' following the 
initial disposal of a matter. We are only emphasizing the need 
for the Court to exercise prudence and ascertain whether such 
an application is, in substance, in the nature of a RP. In case 
such an application is found to be nothing but a disguised 
version of a RP, it ought to be treated in similar manner a RP 
is treated. 
117. 
In 
the 
light 
of 
the 
foregoing 
discussion, 
the 
miscellaneous applications are not maintainable. 

118. 
To sum up, our answers to all the questions [(b), (c), 
(d), (e) and (f)] are in the negative while (a) is partly negative 
and partly affirmative. 
119. 
We respectfully concur with the opinion expressed by 
the Hon’ble companion Judge on the said Division Bench and 
record our inability to be ad idem with the Hon’ble presiding 
Judge. 
120. 
The reference is answered accordingly. 
121. 
Under the circumstances, dismissal of the RPs and 
miscellaneous applications would have been logical and we 
could have ended our judgment here by ordering so. However, 
there is something more of a balancing act that needs to be 
done having regard to the disclosures that were made in 
course of progress of other proceedings before us, which 
followed immediately after judgment on this set of RPs and 
miscellaneous 
applications 
was 
reserved. 
Such 
other 
proceedings arose out of appeals carried from orders of the 
High Court declaring land acquisition proceedings as lapsed 
based on the decision in Pune Municipal Corporation 

as 
distinguished 
from 
RPs 
and 
miscellaneous 
applications of the nature under consideration. Since all such 
proceedings have more or less a common genesis and have 
followed similar trajectory, it would be eminently desirable to 
find a solution that benefits all. We may hasten to add here 
that the exercise of inherent powers conferred on this Court 
by Article 142, in such circumstances, is not just inevitable but 
also pivotal for disposal of the matters at hand, given their 
impact on public interest at large as well as to secure 
uniformity and consistency in our decisions; hence, we 
consider it expedient to pass such orders or directions for 
ensuring complete justice in the matters under consideration 
before us. Notwithstanding our discussion on the reference 
which was necessitated to answer the question of law on which 
there was a disagreement between the Hon’ble Judges of the 
Division Bench, taking an overall and holistic view of the 
matter and in the light of the larger public interest that is 
involved, in each of the RPs and miscellaneous applications 
that have been dealt with by this judgment (except those 
remanded to the High Court and those de-tagged for separate 
listing infra), we issue the following directions: 

a) The time limit for initiation of fresh acquisition 
proceedings in terms of the provisions contained in 
section 24(2) of the 2013 Act is extended by a year 
starting 
from 
01st 
August, 

whereupon 
compensation to the affected landowners may be 
paid 
in 
accordance 
with 
law, 
failing 
which 
consequences, also as per law, shall follow; 
b) The parties shall maintain status quo regarding 
possession, change of land use and creation of third-
party rights till fresh acquisition proceedings, as 
directed above, are completed; 
c) Since the landowners are not primarily dependent 
upon the subject lands as their source of sustenance 
and most of these lands were/are under use for other 
than agricultural purposes, we deem it appropriate 
to invoke our powers under Article 142 of the 
Constitution and dispense with the compliance of 
Chapters II and III of the 2013 Act whereunder it is 
essential to prepare a Social Impact Assessment 
Study Report and/or to develop alternative multi-
crop irrigated agricultural land. We do so to ensure 

that the timeline of one year extended at (a) above 
to complete the acquisition process can be adhered 
to by the appellants and the GNCTD, which would 
also 
likely 
be 
beneficial 
to 
the 
expropriated 
landowners; 
d) Similarly, compliance with sections 13, 14, 16 to 20 
of the 2013 Act can be dispensed with as the subject-
lands are predominantly urban/semi-urban in nature 
and had earlier been acquired for public purposes of 
paramount importance. In order to simplify the 
compliance of direction at (a) above, it is further 
directed that every Notification issued under section 
4(1) of the 1894 Act in this batch of cases, shall be 
treated as a Preliminary Notification within the 
meaning of section 11 of the 2013 Act, and shall be 
deemed to have been published as on 01st January, 
2014; 
e) The Collector shall provide hearing of objections as 
per section 15 of the 2013 Act without insisting for 
any Social Impact Assessment Report and shall, 
thereafter, proceed to take necessary steps as per 

the procedure contemplated under section 21 
onwards of Chapter-IV of 2013 Act, save and except 
where compliance of any provision has been 
expressly or impliedly dispensed with; 
f) 
The landowners may submit their objections within a 
period of four weeks from the date of pronouncement 
of this order. Such objections shall not question the 
legality of the acquisition process and shall be limited 
only to clauses (a) and (b) of section 15(1) of the 
2013 Act; 
g) The Collector shall publish a public notice on his 
website and in one English and one vernacular 
newspapers, within two weeks of expiry of the period 
of four weeks granted under direction (f) above; 
h) The Collector shall, thereafter, pass an award as 
early as possible but not exceeding six months, 
regardless of the maximum period of twelve months 
contemplated under section 25 of the 2013 Act. The 
market value of the land shall be assessed as on 01st 
January, 2014 and the compensation shall be 
awarded along with all other monetary benefits in 

accordance with the provisions of the 2013 Act 
except the claim like rehabilitation etc.; 
i) 
The Collector shall consider all the parameters 
prescribed under section 28 of the 2013 Act for 
determining the compensation for the acquired land. 
Similarly, the Collector shall determine the market 
value of the building or assets attached with the land 
in accordance with section 29 and shall further award 
solatium in accordance with section 30 of the 2013 
Act; 
j) 
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, 
since it is difficult to reverse the clock back, the 
compliance 
of 
Chapter 

pertaining 
to 
“Rehabilitation and Resettlement Award” is hereby 
dispensed with; and 
k) The expropriated landowners shall be entitled to seek 
reference for enhancement of compensation in 
accordance with Chapter-VIII of the 2013 Act. 
122. 
Before we part, we must address a minor task that 
remains unfinished. Specifically, we are currently handling two 
sets of RPs. The first set pertains to landowners who continue 

to maintain their status as landowners from the date of 
Notification under section 4(1) of the 1894 Act. The second set 
includes landowners who, subsequent to the aforementioned 
Notification under section 4(1), have transferred their 
properties—the 
subject 
of 
acquisition—to 
purchasers 
(“subsequent purchasers”, hereafter) through methods such 
as executing sale deeds, deeds of assignment, or even via 
power of attorney. In addition to the allegations regarding 
fraud 
by 
landowners 
by 
suppressing 
subsequent 
sale 
transactions, the second set may also involve ownership title 
disputes, etc. 
123. 
The cases falling under the second set are listed below: 
a) DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY v. TARUN KAPAHI 
[R.P.(C) No. 425/2023]; 
b) GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI v. NARENDER SHARMA 
[R.P.(C) No. 426/2023]; 
c) DELHI 
DEVELOPMENT 
AUTHORITY 
v. 
M/S. 
RUNWEELL 

PVT. 
LTD. 
[R.P.(C) 
No. 
428/2023]; 

d) DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY v. MAHARAJ 
SINGH [R.P.(C) No. 429/2023]; and 
e) DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY v. SURENDER 
SINGH [R.P.(C) No. 409/2023]. 
124. 
As a fact-finding inquiry is necessary to ascertain the 
rightful claimant for receiving the compensation, which is to 
be determined as directed in paragraph 121 supra, we hereby 
set aside the orders of the High Court that were under 
challenge in the Civil Appeals out of which the aforementioned 
RPs have arisen. We revive the relevant writ petitions [W.P. 
(C) No. 5107/2015, W.P. (C) No. 5063/2014, W.P. (C) No. 
4780/2014, 
W.P. 

No. 
1637/2015, 
W.P. 

No. 
6897/2014], which shall stand restored on the file of the High 
Court for this limited purpose on remand being ordered. The 
Chief Justice of the High Court is requested to constitute a 
dedicated bench to decide these writ petitions in the manner 
indicated hereafter. The nominated bench will accord an 
opportunity to the landowners/subsequent purchasers, the 
GNCTD, and the DDA to submit additional documents on 
affidavits whereupon such bench shall embark on an exercise 
to decide who between the landowner(s) and the subsequent 

purchaser(s) is the rightful claimant to receive compensation. 
The nominated bench will have the authority to obtain 
independent 
fact-finding 
enquiry 
reports, 
if 
deemed 
necessary. The inquiry could include determination as to 
whether after the Notification under section 4(1) of the 1894 
Act, any transfer could have been effected and even if 
effected, whether such transfer is permitted by any law. Once 
compensation is determined, the relevant authority in the land 
acquisition department shall deposit the same with the 
reference court. The reference court shall then invest the 
deposited amount in a short-term interest-bearing fixed 
deposit account with a nationalized bank, ensuring its 
periodical renewal until the relevant writ petition is disposed 
of by the nominated bench. Release of the invested amount 
together with accrued interest to the rightful claimant will be 
contingent upon the decision of the High Court. Upon enquiry 
being completed, the High Court shall decide the relevant writ 
petitions in accordance with law. 
125. 
The directions issued in paragraph 121 supra do not 
extend to eight miscellaneous matters that were erroneously 
included in the present batch. These cases shall be listed 

separately in the week commencing 22nd July, 2024. The 
details of the cases are as follows: 
a) In these two cases outlined below, no notice has 
been issued by this Court for condonation of delay 
and/or otherwise; hence, they need to be de-tagged 
and listed separately: 
i. GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI v. M/S. K.L. 
RATHI STEELS LTD. [M.A. No. 414/2023 in C.A. 
No. 11857/2016]; and 
ii. DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY v. HARI 
PRAKASH [R.P. (C) No. 432/2023 in C.A. No. 
11841/2016]. b) The following are three cases where neither a RP nor 
a miscellaneous application has been filed. These 
cases are Special Leave Petitions filed before this 
Court and thus necessitate separate hearing: 
i. GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI v. M/S BEADS 
PROPERTIES PVT. LTD. [C.A. No. 1522/2023]; 
ii. LAND AND BUILDING DEPARTMENT v. RAM 
SINGH [Diary No. 14831/2023]; and 

iii. LAND AND BUILDING DEPARTMENT v. SUMIT 
BANSAL [Diary No. 15893/2023]. c) The following two cases, although RPs, were filed 
before the change in law, i.e., prior to the decision in 
Shailendra [3-Judge] (supra). Consequently, they 
need to be de-tagged to be assessed based on their 
individual merits: 
i. DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY v. SWARN 
SINGH CHAWLA [R.P. (C) No. 882/2017 in C.A. 
No. 11846/2016]; and 
ii. GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI v. M/S. K.L. RATHI 
STEELS LTD. [M.A. No. 159/2019 in C.A. No. 
11857/2016]. d) The following case concerns a contempt petition, viz. 
M/S K.L. RATHI STEELS LTD v. ANSHU PRAKASH 
[Conmt. 
Pet. 

No. 735/2018 
in 
C.A. 
No. 
11857/2016]. The same needs to be de-tagged to be 
assessed on its individual merits. 

126. 
All other RPs and miscellaneous applications stand 
disposed of, without order for costs. Pending applications, if 
any, shall also stand disposed of. 
 
…………………………………J 
 (SURYA KANT) 

…………………………………J 
 (DIPANKAR DATTA) 

…………………………………J 
 (UJJAL BHUYAN) 

New Delhi; 
17th May, 2024.