IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS.6509-6510 OF 2024 
( SLP(C)Nos.16671-16672 of 2015) 

M/S. HINDUSTAN PETROLEUM 
CORPORATION 
LIMITED & ORS. … APPELLANT(S) 

VERSUS 

DHARAMNATH SINGH & ORS. … RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 

SANJAY KAROL, J. 
 
Leave granted. 
2. 
These appeals by special leave impugn judgment and order dated 
05th May 2015, passed in FMA 653 with 654 of 2012 which upheld the 
order of the Learned Single Judge in W.P.No.22993(W) of 2007 
whereby the action of the instant appellant(s) in terminating the license 
of the instant respondent, was quashed and set aside. 

Background facts 
 
3. 
A brief review of facts is necessary to adjudicate the present 
controversy. 
3.1 The respondent was appointed a dealer for petrol/diesel/motor 
oil/grease and other such products of the appellant(s) by way 
Dealership Agreement1 dated 1st February 1997. 
3.2 On 18th August 2007, certain officials of one SGS India2 
claiming to be an agency appointed by the appellant(s) arrived 
at the respondent’s petrol pump and took samples of High 
Speed Diesel (HSD) and Motor Spirit (MS). 
3.3 The appellant issued show cause notice against the respondent 
dated 20th August, 2007, wherein the respondent was asked to 
submit a response to the alleged irregularities within a period 
of 7 days. 
 
3.4 On the basis of the Preliminary Test Report, the Senior Sales 
Officer, Durgapur Sales Area informed the respondent of the 
suspension of supply with immediate effect. 
3.5 The authorities of the appellant(s) conducted Joint Marker 
Test and the sample failed on such re-test as well. This is 
evident from the Analysis Report3. 
 
1 ‘Agreement’ 
2 ‘Agency’ 
3 At page 164 of the paper book 

3.6 The authority of the Agency to conduct such collection of 
samples was questioned by the respondent at the Regional 
Office of the appellant(s). However, it is alleged that without 
considering the same Marker Test was conducted on such 
samples. 
3.7 Being aggrieved by the order of suspension of supply, the writ 
petition which eventually gave rise to the present proceedings 
was filed. 
4. 
In allowing the writ petition filed on behalf of the present 
respondent, the Learned Single Judge observed as under:- 
 
“…it appears that there are specific provisions 
under Clause 7 of the aforesaid order of 2005 wherein 
the Gazetted Officer of both the Central Government 
and the State Government and also the police officer not 
below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police or 
the authorized officer of the Company itself duly 
authorized, can take sample and get it tested. But it 
appears that in the instant case that was not done by the 
respondent authorities. The aforesaid officers only have 
the competence to collect the sample and get the same 
tested. Since the respondents did not follow the 
aforesaid procedure there is clear violation of the rules 
and regulation applicable in the cases. xxx xxx xxx 
 
In my view, the entire action on the part of the 
respondent authorities in suspending the supply as well 
as cancellation of the dealership of the writ petitioner is 
contrary to law, arbitrary and violative of principle of 
natural justice…” 

5. 
On appeal, the learned Division Bench relied on the judgment of 
this Court in Allied Motors Limited v. Bharat Petroleum Corporation 
Ltd4. It was held that the Agency had “absolutely no authority to take 
samples or to make any seizure of any product” in violation of Clause 7 
of the Control Order as also Section 100 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure. Therefore, it was held that while the appellant(s) had the 
power to appoint agents for the purposes of administrative convenience, 
such agents cannot be allowed to flout the provisions of law, which they 
had in the present case. As such, no reason was found to interfere with 
the order of the Learned Single Judge and the same was upheld. 
6. 
Hence, the present appeals. 
7. 
We have heard Mr. N. Venkataraman, learned Additional 
Solicitor General for the appellants, and Mr. Rana Mukherjee, learned 
senior counsel for the respondent. The submissions made, are recorded 
briefly as under:- 
A. 
Appellant 

It was submitted that Clause 4 of the Agreement provides that a 
license was terminable immediately on (a) the termination of the 
Agreement; (b) breach of any of the terms thereof which are 
described in Clause 58; 
 
4 (2012) 

(ii) The tests conducted by the Agency as also the officials of the 
appellant(s) found the respondent to be in breach of Clause 58(h), 
(i), (m); 
(iii) The appellant(s) found the respondent to have violated in total, 
five clauses of the Agreement – Clauses 26, 27, 44, 58(i) and (m) 
and as such the same was terminated; 
(iv) It was contended that the Agency had the authority to conduct 
the tests in question as Clause 2.2.2.3 of Marketing Discipline 
Guidelines5 dated 1st August 2005 issued by the Government of 
India, provides that apart from oil company officials, mobile labs 
and ‘agencies authorized by oil companies’ were permitted to 
draw samples. 
(v) It was in furtherance of such guidelines that vide Circular dated 
3rd November 2006 the Agency was appointed to carry out audits 
and Market Tests. 
(vi) The provisions of the Control Order do not apply to the present 
case as the respondent is not prosecuted for its violation and 
instead, the Agreement stands terminated for breach of the terms 
and conditions of the Agreement. 
 
5 MDG 

(vii) It is also submitted that Clause 8 of the Control Order makes clear 
that there is no bar to appoint an outside 
agency to conduct the Marker Test. 
(viii) Reliance is placed on Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. v. R.M. 
Service Centre6, and more specifically para 14 thereof. 
B. 
Respondent 

The MDG are issued under Section 3 of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 and therefore possess statutory force. 
The suspension of supply to the respondent was in terms of the 
aforesaid. It cannot choose to follow only those portions of the 
law that suit its position. The termination of the Agreement could 
not be carried out without adhering to the inspection guidelines 
as per the Control Order. 
(ii) Clause 39 of the Agreement uses the term “duly authorized 
representative” which is not defined in the Agreement. The 
Control Order under Clause 2(b) defines an “authorized officer” 
and it states that only such a person shall have power of search 
and seizure as per Clause 7. 
(iii) As per the quality control measures in Clause 27 of the 
Agreement, the opinion of the Chief General Manager on the 
 
6 (2019) 

contamination of products is slated to be final, however, 
termination of the respondent’s license was issued by the Senior 
Regional Manager. 
(iv) The agreement does not prescribe any procedure for collection of 
samples, testing or any other procedure of alleged adulteration of 
products. The Control Order (2005) was preceded by a similar 
order of 1998 and both would be binding on an oil manufacturing 
company. As such the procedure mentioned in Clause 7 of the 
Control Order would be required to be followed. 
(v) The process of drawing the sample by the agency was improper. 
The sample collected was in the absence of an authorized officer 
of the appellant. The blank space for the signatures of ‘OMC 
Field Officer’ was left blank. 
(vi) Due to non-compliance with the provisions of the Control Order, 
the drawing of samples is without basis. 
(vii) R.M. Service Centre (supra) does not support the case of the 
appellant. The action sought to be taken by the appellant is penal 
in nature and therefore, there cannot be two procedures 
prescribed for the action. A third party cannot be permitted to 
collect samples in violation of the control order by stating that 
prosecution has not been launched thereunder and instead 
prosecuting the dealer for violation of MDG. 

(viii)No power has been conferred upon the oil manufacturing 
company to bypass the procedure of drawing of samples. Section 
100 Cr.P.C. was made applicable to ensure the sanctity of the 
investigation as the outcome thereof could result in penal 
consequences. Grant of such powers to a third party (agency) 
would be illegal. 
(ix) The said judgment does not lay down the correct position in law 
and non-adherence to the control order would vitiate the entire 
process. 
(x) In furtherance of the above submissions, the learned senior 
counsel for the respondent further relies on Harbanslal Sahnia 
v. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.7; Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation & Ors. v. Super Highway Services & Anr.8; Allied 
Motors Ltd. v. Bharat Petroleum Corporation9; and Nazir 
Ahmad v. The King Emperor10, and certain other decisions. 
8. 
It is necessary to refer to certain Rules, Regulations/provisions of 
documents for being part of the record to examine the issue in the present 
lis. For ease of reference, they are extracted hereunder: 
Provisions of the Agreement and other relevant documents 
 
7 (2003) 
8 (2010) 
9 (2012) 

 I. 
Agreement inter se parties 
Certain clauses of the agreement between the parties dated 1.2.1997, 
relevant to the present dispute: 
“4. The licence and permission granted as aforesaid for the use of the 
outfit shall terminate immediately on the termination of this Agreement 
or on any breach of any of the terms thereof. x 
 
x 

x 

x 
 
26. 
The dealer shall be responsible for all loss, contamination, 
damage or shortage of or to the products whether partial or entire, and 
no claim will be entertained by the corporation therefor under any 
circumstances except in cases where the corporation is satisfied that 
loss arose from leakage from underground tanks or pipes which the 
dealer could not reasonably have discovered and of which the dealer 
gave immediate notice in writing to the corporation on discovery. 
Corporation will consider compensation only from the date of receipt 
of notice till leakage is rectified. 
 
27. 
All the products supplied by the Corporation to the dealer 
hereunder shall be in accordance with the specifications laid down by 
the Corporation from time to time. The dealer shall take every possible 
precaution against contamination of the corporation’s products by 
water, dirt or other things injurious to their quality and shall not in any 
way directly or indirectly alter the specifications of the said products as 
delivered. The Corporation shall have the right to exercise at its 
discretion at any time and from time to time quality control measures 
for products marketed by the corporation and lying with the dealer the 
opinion of the Chief Regional Manager for the time being at the 
corporation’s Regional Office at Calcutta as to whether any product of 
the corporation has been contaminated shall be final and binding upon 
the dealer, in the event of the said Chief Regional Manager finding that 
the contamination has been due to any Act or default of the dealer or of 
his servants or Agents, the corporation shall have the right, without 
being bound to do so, to remove the contaminated product and to 
destroy or otherwise deal with the same without making any payment 
therefor to the dealer and without prejudice to the corporation’s right to 
terminate this Agreement forthwith. x 

x 

x 

x 
 
39. 
The Corporation will be entitled to all times to enter into the 
premises and inspect the management of the retail outlet by the said 
dealer in all respects and the dealer shall be bound to render all 
assistance and give all information to the corporation and its duly 
authorized representatives in that behalf and produce to the corporation 

and/or its duly authorised representatives in that behalf whenever 
required to do so, receipts, for all payments which it is dealer’s duty to 
make whether under the terms of this agreement or otherwise. x 

x 

x 

x 
 
44. 
The dealer undertakes faithfully and promptly to carry out, 
observe and perform all dir4ections, or rules given or made from time 
to time by the corporation for the proper carrying on of the dealership 
of the corporation. The dealer shall scrupulously observe and comply 
with all laws, rules regulations and requisitions of the central/state 
government and of all authorities appointed by them or either of them 
including in particular the chief controller of explosives, government of 
India, and/or municipal and/or any other local authority with regard to 
the storage and sale of such petroleum products. x 

x 

x 

x 
 
58. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein contained, 
the Corporation shall also be at liberty to terminate this Agreement 
forthwith on or at any time after the happening of any of the following 
events, namely: 
 
x 

x 

x 

x 
 
H) 
If the dealer does not adhere to the instructions issued from 
time to time by the corporation in connection with safe practices to be 
followed by him in the supply/storage of the Corporation’s products or 
otherwise. 
 
I) 
If the dealer shall contaminate or tamper with the quality of 
any of the products supplied by the Corporation. 
 
M) 
If the dealer shall either by himself or by his servants or agents 
commit or suffer to be committed any act, in the opinion of the Chief 
Regional Manager of the Corporation on the time being at Calcutta 
whose decision shall be final, is prejudicial to the interest or good name 
of the Corporation or its products the Chief Regional Manager shall not 
be bound to give reason for such decision.” 
 
II. 
The Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel (Regulation of 
Supply, Distributor and Prevention of Malpractices) Order, 

“2. Definitions - in this order, unless the context otherwise requires: 
 
(a) "adulteration" means " [presence of marker in motor spirit and 
high speed diesel and/or] the introduction of any foreign 
substance into motor spirit or high speed diesel illegally or 

unauthorisedly with the result that the product does not conform 
to the requirements of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
specifications number IS 2796 and IS 1460 for motor spirit and 
high speed diesel respectively or any other requirement notified 
by the Central Government from time to time; 
(b) "authorized officer" means an officer authorized under the 
provisions of clause 7;” 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
 
“7. 
Power of search and seizure - (1) any Gazette Officer of the 
Central Government or a State Government or any Police Officer not 
below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police duly authorized, 
by general or special order of the Central Government or a State 
Government, as the case may be, or any officer of the oil company, 
not below the rank of sales officer, may, with a view to securing 
compliance with the provisions of this Order, or for the purpose of 
satisfying himself that this Order or any order made thereunder has 
been complied with or there is reason to believe that all or any of the 
provisions of this Order have been and are being or are about to be 
contravened, - 
 
(a) enter and search any place or premises of a dealer, 
transporter, consumer or any other person who is an 
employee or agent of such dealer or transporter or 
consumer; 
(b) stop and search any person or vehicle or receptacle used or 
intended to be used for movement of the product; 
(c) take samples of the product and seize any of the stocks of 
the product and the vehicle or receptacle or any other 
conveyance used or suspected to be used for carrying such 
stocks and thereafter take or authorize the taking all 
measures necessary for securing the production of stocks or 
items so seized before the Collector or District Magistrate 
having jurisdiction under the provisions of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 and for their safe custody pending 
such production; 
(d) inspect, seize and remove with, such aid or assistance as 
may be necessary, books, registers, any other records or 
documents of the dealer, transporter, consumer or any other 
person suspected to be an employee or agent of the dealer, 
transporter or consumer; 

While exercising the power of seizure provided under sub-
clauses (c) and (d) above, the authorized officer shall record in 
writing the reasons for doing so and a copy of such recording shall 

be provided to the dealer, transporter, consumer or any other 
concerned person, as the case may be. 

The provisions of S. 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974), relating to search and seizure shall, as far as may be, apply to searches and 
seizures under this Order. 
III. 
Marketing discipline guidelines, 2005 
“Chapter – 2 
INDUSTRY GUIDELINES FOR SAMPLE COLLECTION AND 
TESTING (3-TIER) SAMPLING SYSTEM) 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
2.2.2 
AT RETAIL OUTLETS 
At the Retail outlets, samples are required to be drawn by the 
following: 
 
2.2.2.1 By the dealer/his representative on receipt of each 
supply through tank lories at the retain outlet. 
 
2.2.2.2 Oil companies have to draws the samples from all 
tanks of retail outlets as given below: 
 
a) 
From 1% of total No. of retail outlets under each 
divisions/controlling office every month till 
31.12.05. b) 
From 10% p.m. of the total number of retail 
outlets w.e.f. 01.01.2006 which will be 
progressively increased to 20% p.m. from 
01.01.2007 and 50% p.m. from 01.01.2008. 
 
2.2.2.3 Persons/agencies authorized to draws samples are: 

Oil company officials 
 
Mobil labs 
 
Agencies authorized by oil companies. 
 
However, in case of stock variation beyond permissible limits, density, 
failure, filter paper test failure and during special drives/campaigns or 
in case of specific complaint against the retail outlets. Company 
officials are to draw samples and forward them for testing as per laid 
down procedure. 

Samples are to be drawn from nozzle (s) of the dispensing units from 
all tanks of both MS and HSD by the persons/agencies as referred 
above. 
 
All the inspecting officials shall bring their own aluminum containers 
for drawing samples. They will pay the cost of samples collected by 
them and obtain cash memo for the same.” 

Consideration and Conclusion 
9. 
As we have referred to earlier, the appellant(s) have placed strong 
reliance on the judgment of this Court in R.M. Service Centre (supra). 
The relevant extracts are as under:- 

 “14. The first issue required to be examined is whether the 
appellants were required to follow the procedure under the Control 
Order read with Section 100 of the Code. The Control Order has been 
issued under Section 3 of the Act. Such Act has been enacted for 
control of the production, supply and distribution and trade and 
commerce, of certain commodities. In respect of high speed diesel 
and motor spirit, the Control Order is issued for regulation of supply 
and distribution and prevention of the malpractices. Section 6-A of 
the Act provides for confiscation of the essential commodity 
whereas, Section 7 of the Act makes any person who contravenes 
any order made under Section 3 liable for criminal prosecution. 
Therefore, we find that the effect of issuance of the Control Order is 
that in the event of violation of such Control Order, any person who 
contravenes any order made under Section 3 of the Act i.e. the 
Control Order, he is liable to be punished by a court. Therefore, the 
violation of the Control Order has penal consequences leading to 
conviction. The provisions of search and seizure contained in Clause 
7 read with Section 100 of the Code will come into play only in the 
event a person is sought to be prosecuted for violation of the 
provisions of the Control Order. Admittedly, in the present case, the 
dealer is not sought to be prosecuted for the violation of the 
Guidelines, therefore, the procedure for drawing of samples which 
is a necessary precondition under the Control Order for prosecuting 
an offender does not arise for consideration. 
 
15. The dealer has entered into an agreement on 20-12-1995. It is not 
disputed that the dealer is bound by the Guidelines issued by the 
Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies. Clause 2.4.4 of the 
Guidelines provides for procedure for drawing of samples. Note (2) 

provides that the samples drawn should reach the laboratory for 
testing “preferably within ten days of the collection of the samples”. 
Similarly, sub-clause (A) of Clause 2.5 of the Guidelines provides 
that all samples should be suitably coded before sending them to the 
laboratory for testing “preferably” within ten days of drawing the 
samples. Sub-clause (I) of Clause 2.5 of the Guidelines is that the 
purpose of mentioning time-frame for various activities such as 
sending samples to the laboratory preferably within ten days is to 
streamline the system and is in no way related to quality/result of the 
product. In view of the language of the Guidelines, the findings 
recorded by the High Court that the timeline is to be strictly adhered 
to cannot be sustained. 
 
16. The Guidelines as mentioned in sub-clause (I) of Clause 2.5 of 
the Guidelines is to streamline the functioning i.e. the oil companies 
should not arbitrarily or without any justification send the sample for 
testing at their sweet will. ….” 

10. 
What falls from the extract quoted above is that any person who 
contravenes the Control Order is liable to be punished by the Court. 
Therefore, for a person to be prosecuted for violating the provisions 
relating to search and seizure contained in Clause (7) thereof, such a 
person will have to be brought to the book, particularly, for having 
violated the said Control Order. 
11. 
In contrast, as has been submitted by the learned counsel for the 
appellants, the respondent was sought to be prosecuted only for the 
violation of the terms of the agreement inter se the parties and not for 
any other alleged violation, if any.11 
12. 
Keeping in view the aforesaid, the submission of the respondents 
that R.M. Service Centre (supra) does not aid the case of the appellants, 
 
11 Page 2 of written submission of the appellants 

cannot be accepted. As already noticed above, the respondent has not 
been prosecuted for violation of the Control Order. Reliance on Allied 
Motors (supra) in our considered opinion, does not help the case of the 
respondent, for therein, what was alleged and ultimately held proved that 
the dealership was terminated without a show cause notice and in 
violation of principles of natural justice. That is not the pleaded case of 
the respondent herein. 
13. 
In Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited & Ors. v. Super 
Highway Services & Anr.12 this Court observed as under: 
“31. The cancellation of dealership agreement of a party is a serious 
business and cannot be taken lightly. In order to justify the action taken 
to terminate such an agreement, the authority concerned has to act fairly 
and in complete adherence to the rules/guidelines framed for the said 
purpose. The non-service of notice to the aggrieved person before the 
termination of his dealership agreement also offends the well-
established principle that no person should be condemned unheard. It 
was the duty of the petitioner to ensure that Respondent 1 was given a 
hearing or at least serious attempts were made to serve him with notice 
of the proceedings before terminating his agreement. x 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
 
x 
33. The guidelines being followed by the Corporation require that the 
dealer should be given prior notice regarding the test so that he or his 
representative also can be present when the test is conducted. The said 
requirement is in accordance with the principles of natural justice and 
the need for fairness in the matter of terminating the dealership 
agreement and it cannot be made an empty formality. Notice should be 
served on the dealer sufficiently early so as to give him adequate time 
and opportunity to arrange for his presence during the test and there 
should be admissible evidence for such service of notice on the dealer. 
Strict adherence to the above requirement is essential, in view of the 
possibility of manipulation in the conduct of the test, if it is conducted 
behind the back of the dealer.” 

12 (2010) 

14. 
The crux of the above decision is that when a dealership 
agreement is to be cancelled, it has to be so done strictly in consonance 
with Rules/Guidelines framed in that regard. When a sampling test is 
being conducted a dealer is to be given prior notice so as to ensure his or 
his representative’s presence can be secured. In the present facts, the 
respondents have taken issue with the process of collection of samples, 
being aggrieved by the fact that a third party, namely, SGS India was 
appointed to take samples and not with the lack of service of notice or 
any other such non-compliance of the principles of natural justice as 
discussed in the said judgment. 
15. 
We have also perused the decision in Harbanslal Sahnia & Anr. v. Indian Oil Corporation & Ors.13. This judgment deals with the 
correctness of writ proceedings in respect of contractual matters. It was 
observed the petitioner’s dealership which was their “bread & butter” 
came to be terminated for an irrelevant and non-existent cause. As such, 
a writ petition would be maintainable. The maintainability is not an issue 
before us. Therefore, this judgment is not applicable to the present case. 
16. 
That apart, the observations in National Insurance Company 
Ltd. v. Pranay Sethi,14 tell us that in deference to judicial discipline and 
decorum, the judgments/orders passed by a coordinate Bench are to be 
 
13 (2003) 
14 (2017) 

respected by another Bench of co-equal strength. As such, we follow the 
holding in R.M. Service Centre (supra). 
17. 
It stands clarified that we have taken note of and considered all 
contentions raised across the Bar, however, in view of the above 
discussions, no other point survives for consideration. Consequentially, 
the appeals are allowed keeping in view that the termination of the 
agreement inter se the parties was only based on the contravention of the 
terms of the dealership agreement. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
18. 
No costs. 

………………………… J. 

[ J.K. MAHESHWARI ] 

………………………… J. 

[ SANJAY KAROL ] 
New Delhi; 
May 17, 2024.