IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

RAJESH KUMAR 

…. APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 

ANAND KUMAR & ORS....RESPONDENTS 

JUDGMENT 

PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J. 

The appellant/plaintiff has called in question the 
judgment rendered by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh dated 
01.09.2016 in First Appeal No. 340 of 2003 allowing the appeal 
preferred by the respondent nos. 1 to 3/defendant nos. 12 to 
14 thereby setting aside the judgment and decree dated 
25.04.2003 passed by the Trial Court in Civil Suit No. 38-A of 
2000. 

2. 
 
The facts of the case briefly stated, are that the 
appellant/plaintiff entered into an agreement to sell with 
respondent no. 4 (acting as Power of Attorney holder of 
respondents/defendant nos. 2 to 11) for purchase of land 
admeasuring 145.60 acres bearing Khasra No. 214 to 233 
(except Khasra No. 225) and Khasra Nos. 67/1 to 212 situated 
at village Khirsau, Tehsil Sihora, District Jabalpur, M.P for sale 
consideration at the rate of Rs. 3,000/- per acre, totalling Rs. 
4,41,000/-. The appellant/plaintiff paid earnest money of Rs. 
41,000/- on the date of agreement to sell and the balance 
amount was to be paid on the date of registration of the sale 
deed which was to be done within six months from the date of 
agreement. 
2.1 
On 22.05.1996, the appellant/plaintiff paid an 
additional amount of Rs. 20,000/- for which an endorsement 
was made on the backside of the agreement. Further amount of 
Rs. 40,000/- was paid on 30.06.1996 which too was endorsed 
on the backside of the agreement. On 26.12.1996, another 
agreement was executed between the appellant/plaintiff and 
the Power of Attorney Holder extending the execution of the 

sale deed till 31.03.1997, remaining terms being the same. The 
date was further extended to 31.05.1997 vide entry made in 
the subsequent agreement dated 26.12.1996. Another entry 
was made on 23.04.1997 mentioning that the agreement to 
sell shall come to an end on 31.05.1997. 
2.2 
However, the respondent/defendant no. 1 being the 
Power of Attorney Holder of respondents/defendant nos. 2 to 
11 executed the sale deed of the suit land on 14.05.1997 in 
favour of respondent nos. 1 to 3/defendant nos. 12 to 14 even 
though the said respondents were aware of the earlier sale 
agreement and its extensions. The sale deed dated 14.05.1997 
was executed behind the back of the appellant/plaintiff which 
came to his notice subsequently on which a legal notice was 
sent on 30.05.1997 calling upon the respondents/defendant 
nos. 1 to 11 to be present in the Registrar’s office at Sihora on 
31.05.1997 to carry out the formalities for execution of the sale 
deed. Despite receipt of this notice, the respondents/defendant 
nos. 1 to 11 did not attend the Registrar Office. On 
31.05.1997, the appellant/plaintiff was informed by the sub-

Registrar that the suit land has been sold in favour of 
respondent nos. 1 to 3/defendant nos. 12 to 14. 
2.3 
According 
to 
the 
appellant/plaintiff, 
he 
is 
in 
possession of the suit land, therefore, he objected to the 
application 
dated 
20.08.1997 
moved 
by 
the 
respondents/defendant nos. 12 to 14 for mutation of their 
names. The Gram Panchayat assured the appellant/plaintiff in 
its meeting dated 06.12.1997 that defendant nos. 12 to 14 will 
execute a sale deed in favour of the appellant/plaintiff, 
therefore, legal action was not initiated. The present suit was 
filed on 19.06.2000. 
2.4 
The 
respondents/defendants 
in 
joint 
written 
statement averred that the suit land is in possession of the 
respondent nos. 1 to 3/defendant nos. 12 to 14 being the bona 
fide purchasers for value paid vide registered sale deed dated 
14.05.1997. It was pleaded that the respondents/defendants 
were not aware of any agreement to sell between the 
appellant/plaintiff and respondent nos. 1 to 11 and that the suit 
is barred by limitation. It was also pleaded that time was the 
essence of the contract and the sale deed was to be executed 

within six months from the date of the agreement and that the 
appellant/plaintiff did not have sufficient funds with him for 
payment of the sale consideration and the advance amount of 
Rs. 40,000/- was also returned to the appellant/plaintiff 
through 
one 
Subhash 
Chandra 
Bansal. 
The 
respondents/defendant nos. 2A to 2F filed their separate joint 
written statement stating that their late father Raghvendra 
Kumar Bakshi has never executed or agreed to execute the sale 
agreement. Similar was the plea in the written statement filed 
by the respondent/defendant no. 5. 
2.5 The Trial Court decreed the suit upon finding that the 
agreement 
to 
sell 
has 
been 
executed 
between 
the 
appellant/plaintiff and defendant no. 1 as a Power of Attorney 
Holder of defendant nos. 2 to 11. Non-examination of the 
appellant/plaintiff as a witness was held not having any adverse 
impact on plaintiff’s case. The Trial Court also found that the 
time allowed for execution of sale deed was extended twice and 
he 
had 
also 
paid 
earnest 
money, 
therefore, 
the 
appellant/plaintiff was ready and willing to perform his part of 
the contract and the suit is not barred by limitation. Since the 

extended time for registration of sale deed was till 31.05.1997 
and the suit was to be filed on or before 30.05.2000. However, 
on the said date, the Court was closed for summer vacation 
which ended on 18.06.2000 and the suit was filed on 
19.06.2000. Therefore, the suit was within limitation, having 
been filed on the last date of limitation. 
2.6. 
In appeal preferred by the respondent nos. 1 to 
3/defendant nos. 12 to 14, the High Court has passed the 
impugned judgment allowing the appeal to set aside the 
judgment and decree of the Trial Court consequently dismissing 
the appellant/plaintiff’s suit. Hence this appeal. 
3. 
 
Mr. Dhruv Agrawal, learned senior counsel appearing 
for the appellant would submit that the High Court has 
committed serious error of law and fact by setting aside the 
well reasoned judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court. 
According to him, the execution of sale agreement by 
defendant no. 1 as a Power of Attorney Holder of Defendant 
Nos. to 

having 
been 
duly 
proved 
and 
the 
appellant/plaintiff having paid the earnest money and filing the 
suit within time, the First Appellate Court ought not to have set 

aside the judgment of the Trial Court. It is further submitted 
that the High Court is not correct in holding that the defendant 
nos. 2 to 11 had not signed the agreement because defendant 
no. 1 was their Power of Attorney Holder. The High Court has 
also erred in holding that Power of Attorney Holder cannot 
depose in a civil suit on behalf of the plaintiff. According to him, 
non-appearance of the appellant/plaintiff as a witness would 
not have any adverse impact in a suit of this nature and that 
the readiness and willingness can be proved by the Attorney 
Holder. 
4., Mr. Gagan Gupta, learned senior counsel 
for 
the 
respondents/defendants 
would 
submit 
that 
the 
agreement dated 26.09.1995 is void ab initio because it was 
not executed by all the owners of the suit land. It was then 
argued that in a suit for specific performance non-appearance 
of plaintiff as a witness is fatal to his case because it is he who 
has to plead and prove the readiness and willingness. He would 
submit that the High Court has rightly set aside the judgment 
and decree of the Trial Court which is based on perverse finding 
and incorrect application of settled legal principles. 

5. 
 
The High Court has non-suited the appellant/plaintiff 
on two counts. Firstly, that defendant no. 1 is not the sole 
owner of the property which was the coparcenary property and 
the other coparceners did not sign the initial agreement and 
secondly, that the appellant/plaintiff having failed to appear in 
the witness box, the testimony of his Power of Attorney Holder 
cannot be read as statement of the plaintiff in a civil suit of this 
nature. 
6. 
 
Admittedly, the initial agreement dated 26.09.1995 
was executed by Defendant no. 1-Gajay Bahadur Bakshi. It is 
the case of the appellant/plaintiff that Gajay Bahadur Bakshi 
was the Power of Attorney Holder of Defendant nos. 2 to 11, 
the other co-owners/coparceners of the suit property. However, 
the agreement itself no where states that Gajay Bahadur 
Bakshi has executed the agreement as Attorney Holder of 
Defendant nos. 2 to 11. On the contrary, it is mentioned in the 
agreement that Gajay Bahadur Bakshi would be responsible for 
getting the sale deed executed and registered by all the co-
owners or co-khatedars at the time of registration. Neither the 
names of all the co-owners/coparceners/co-khatedars are 

mentioned in the agreement, thus, the High Court is right in 
finding that all the co-owners have not signed the agreement. 
The subsequent endorsement of receipt of additional amount of 
Rs. 40,000/- is also not signed by all the co-parceners. The 
same is the condition with the 3rd agreement dated 26.12.1996 
and the extension endorsement dated 27.03.1997 and 
23.04.1997. Significantly, the so-called power of attorney 
pleaded in the plaint through which the defendant nos. 2 to 11 
authorised defendant no. 1 to execute the agreement, have not 
been produced and proved in the Trial Court. Thus, neither in 
the agreement nor in course of trial the power of attorney is 
proved by tendering the same in evidence. Hence, in the 
absence of evidence, the High Court rightly held that the 
agreement is not signed by all the co-owners. 
7. 
In the matter of Shanmughasundaram & Ors. Vs. 
Diravia Nadar (dead) by Lrs. & Anr.1, this Court has held 
that in the event all the co-sharers of the property have not 
executed the sale agreement, a suit for specific performance 
cannot be decreed. The following is held in paras 29,30 & 31: 
 
 SC 1836 

“29. The facts in present case are distinguishable. 
Admittedly, the property has been jointly inherited 
by two brothers and three sisters. As heirs under 
the Hindu Succession Act, they inherited the 
property as co-owners. In the absence of partition 
between them, the two brothers together had 
undivided share in the property, and they could not 
have agreed for sale of the entire property. They 
were competent to execute agreement to the 
extent only of their undivided share in the property. 
In the event of sale of such undivided share, the 
vendee would be required to file a suit for partition 
to work out his right in the property. The left out 
three sisters as co-owners having undivided share 
in the whole property, the two brothers are 
incompetent to abide by the award. 
 
30. Learned counsel makes a reference to Section 
12 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 and submits that 
the arbitration agreement and consequent award 
should be allowed to be enforced to the extent of 
share of two brothers leaving the vendee to work 
out his right, if necessary, in case the sisters object 
to the sale, by a suit in accordance with Section 12 
of the Specific Relief Act. 
 
31. Section 12 of the Specific Relief Act, in our 
considered opinion, would be of no assistance in 
the situation obtaining here. In the absence of 
sisters being parties to the agreement, the vendee 
can at best obtain undivided interest of two 
brothers in the property. Section 12 of the Specific 
Relief Act cannot be invoked by the vendee to 
obtain sale of undivided share of the two brothers 
with a right to force partition on the sisters who 
were not parties to the agreement of sale. Such a 
relief under Section 12 cannot be obtained by a 
vendee, on purchase of an undivided share of the 
property of some of the co-owners, against other 

co-owners who were not parties to the sale 
agreement.” 
 
8. 
 
Undisputedly, in the present case, the plaintiff failed 
to appear in the witness box. Instead, his Power of Attorney 
Holder – Parmod Khare has got himself examined as PW-1. This 
witness was examined on 05.09.2002 and the power of 
attorney was executed on 26.08.2002. It is not a case where 
the suit itself was filed by a Power of Attorney Holder. He 
appeared subsequently only for recording his evidence as the 
Special Power of Attorney Holder of the plaintiff. The legal 
position as to when the deposition of a Power of Attorney 
Holder can be read in evidence has been dealt with by this 
Court in several decisions. 
9. 
In Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani & Anr. vs. Indusind Bank 
Ltd. & Ors.2, it is held that a Power of Attorney Holder cannot 
depose for principal in respect of matters of which only 
principal can have personal knowledge and in respect of which 
the principal is liable to be cross-examined. It is also held that 
if the principal to the suit does not appear in the witness box, a 
 
2 (2005) 

presumption would arise that the case set up by him is not 
correct. This Court has discussed the legal position in the 
following words in paras 13 to 22: 
“13. Order 3 Rules 1 and 2 CPC empower the 
holder of power of attorney to “act” on behalf of the 
principal. In our view the word “acts” employed in 
Order 3 Rules 1 and 2 CPC confines only to in 
respect of “acts” done by the power-of-attorney 
holder in exercise of power granted by the 
instrument. The term “acts” would not include 
deposing in place and instead of the principal. In 
other words, if the power-of-attorney holder has 
rendered some “acts” in pursuance of power of 
attorney, he may depose for the principal in respect 
of such acts, but he cannot depose for the principal 
for the acts done by the principal and not by him. 
Similarly, he cannot depose for the principal in 
respect of the matter of which only the principal 
can have a personal knowledge and in respect of 
which the principal is entitled to be cross-examined. 
 
14. Having regard to the directions in the order of 
remand by which this Court placed the burden of 
proving on the appellants that they have a share in 
the property, it was obligatory on the part of the 
appellants to have entered the box and discharged 
the burden. Instead, they allowed Mr Bhojwani to 
represent them and the Tribunal erred in allowing 
the power-of-attorney holder to enter the box and 
depose instead of the appellants. Thus, the 
appellants have failed to establish that they have 
any independent source of income and they had 
contributed for the purchase of the property from 
their own independent income. We accordingly hold 
that the Tribunal has erred in holding that they 
have a share and are co-owners of the property in 

question. The finding recorded by the Tribunal in 
this respect is set aside. 
 
15. Apart from what has been stated, this Court in 
the case of Vidhyadhar v. Manikrao [(1999) ] observed at SCC pp. 583-84, para 17 that: 
“17. Where a party to the suit does not appear in 
the witness box and states his own case on oath 
and does not offer himself to be cross-examined by 
the other side, a presumption would arise that the 
case set up by him is not correct….” 
 
16. In civil dispute the conduct of the parties is 
material. The appellants have not approached the 
Court with clean hands. From the conduct of the 
parties it is apparent that it was a ploy to salvage 
the property from sale in the execution of decree. 
 
17. On the question of power of attorney, the High 
Courts 
have 
divergent 
views. 
In 
the 
case 
of Shambhu 
Dutt 
Shastri v. State 
of 
Rajasthan [(1986) 2 WLN 713 (Raj)] it was held 
that a general power-of-attorney holder can appear, 
plead and act on behalf of the party but he cannot 
become a witness on behalf of the party. He can 
only appear in his own capacity. No one can 
delegate the power to appear in the witness box on 
behalf of himself. To appear in a witness box is 
altogether a different act. A general power-of-
attorney holder cannot be allowed to appear as a 
witness on behalf of the plaintiff in the capacity of 
the plaintiff. 
 
18. The aforesaid judgment was quoted with 
approval 
in 
the 
case 
of Ram 
Prasad v. Hari 
Narain [AIR 1998 Raj 185: (1998) 3 Cur CC 183]. 
It was held that the word “acts” used in Rule 2 of 
Order 3 CPC does not include the act of power-of-
attorney holder to appear as a witness on behalf of 

a party. Power-of-attorney holder of a party can 
appear only as a witness in his personal capacity 
and whatever knowledge he has about the case he 
can state on oath but he cannot appear as a 
witness on behalf of the party in the capacity of 
that party. If the plaintiff is unable to appear in the 
court, a commission for recording his evidence may 
be issued under the relevant provisions of CPC. 
 
19. In 
the 
case 
of Pradeep 
Mohanbay 
(Dr.) v. Minguel Carlos Dias [(2000) 1 Bom LR 908] 
the Goa Bench of the Bombay High Court held that 
a power of attorney can file a complaint under 
Section 138 but cannot depose on behalf of the 
complainant. He can only appear as a witness. 
 
20. However, 
in 
the 
case 
of Humberto 
Luis v. Floriano Armando Luis [(2002) 2 Bom CR 
754] on which reliance has been placed by the 
Tribunal in the present case, the High Court took a 
dissenting view and held that the provisions 
contained in Order 3 Rule 2 CPC cannot be 
construed to disentitle the power-of-attorney holder 
to depose on behalf of his principal. The High Court 
further held that the word “act” appearing in Order 
3 Rule 2 CPC takes within its sweep “depose”. We 
are unable to agree with this view taken by the 
Bombay High Court in Floriano Armando [(2002) 2 
Bom CR 754]. 
 
21. We hold that the view taken by the Rajasthan 
High 
Court 
in 
the 
case 
of Shambhu 
Dutt 
Shastri [(1986) 2 WLN 713 (Raj)] followed and 
reiterated in the case of Ram Prasad [AIR 1998 Raj 
185: (1998) 3 Cur CC 183] is the correct view. The 
view taken in the case of Floriano Armando 
Luis [(2002) 2 Bom CR 754] cannot be said to have 
laid down a correct law and is accordingly 
overruled. 

22. In the view that we have taken, we hold that 
the appellants have failed to discharge the burden 
that they have contributed towards the purchase of 
property at 38, Koregaon Park, Pune from any 
independent source of income and failed to prove 
that they were co-owners of the property at 38, 
Koregaon Park, Pune. This being the core question, 
on this score alone, the appeal is liable to be 
dismissed.” 
 
10. Thereafter, in Man Kaur vs. Hartar Singh Sangha3, this 
Court referred to its earlier decisions including Janki Vashdeo 
Bhojwani (supra) and concluded thus in paras 17 & 18: 
“17. To succeed in a suit for specific performance, 
the plaintiff has to prove: (a) that a valid 
agreement of sale was entered into by the 
defendant in his favour and the terms thereof; (b) 
that the defendant committed breach of the 
contract; and (c) that he was always ready and 
willing to perform his part of the obligations in 
terms of the contract. If a plaintiff has to prove 
that he was always ready and willing to perform 
his part of the contract, that is, to perform his 
obligations in terms of the contract, necessarily he 
should step into the witness box and give evidence 
that he has all along been ready and willing to 
perform his part of the contract and subject 
himself to cross-examination on that issue. A 
plaintiff cannot obviously examine in his place, his 
attorney-holder 
who 
did 
not 
have 
personal 
knowledge either of the transaction or of his 
readiness 
and 
willingness. 
Readiness 
and 
willingness refer to the state of mind and conduct 
of the purchaser, as also his capacity and 
preparedness on the other. One without the other 
 
3 2010 (10) SCC 512 

is not sufficient. Therefore a third party who has 
no personal knowledge cannot give evidence about 
such readiness and willingness, even if he is an 
attorney-holder of the person concerned. 
 
18. We may now summarise for convenience, the 
position as to who should give evidence in regard 
to matters involving personal knowledge: 
(a) An attorney-holder who has signed the 
plaint and instituted the suit, but has no personal 
knowledge of the transaction can only give formal 
evidence about the validity of the power of 
attorney and the filing of the suit. 
(b) If the attorney-holder has done any act or 
handled any transactions, in pursuance of the 
power of attorney granted by the principal, he may 
be examined as a witness to prove those acts or 
transactions. If the attorney-holder alone has 
personal knowledge of such acts and transactions 
and not the principal, the attorney-holder shall be 
examined, if those acts and transactions have to 
be proved. 
(c) The attorney-holder cannot depose or give 
evidence in place of his principal for the acts done 
by the principal or transactions or dealings of the 
principal, of which principal alone has personal 
knowledge. 
(d) Where the principal at no point of time had 
personally handled or dealt with or participated in 
the transaction and has no personal knowledge of 
the transaction, and where the entire transaction 
has 
been 
handled 
by 
an 
attorney-holder, 
necessarily the attorney-holder alone can give 
evidence in regard to the transaction. This 
frequently happens in case of principals carrying 
on 
business 
through 
authorised 
managers/attorney-holders or persons residing 
abroad managing their affairs through their 
attorney-holders. 

(e) Where the entire transaction has been 
conducted through a particular attorney-holder, 
the principal has to examine that attorney-holder 
to prove the transaction, and not a different or 
subsequent attorney-holder. 
(f) Where different attorney-holders had dealt 
with the matter at different stages of the 
transaction, if evidence has to be led as to what 
transpired at those different stages, all the 
attorney-holders will have to be examined. 
(g) Where the law requires or contemplated the 
plaintiff or other party to a proceeding, to 
establish or prove something with reference to his 
“state of mind” or “conduct”, normally the person 
concerned alone has to give evidence and not an 
attorney-holder. A landlord who seeks eviction of 
his tenant, on the ground of his “bona fide” need 
and a purchaser seeking specific performance who 
has to show his “readiness and willingness” fall 
under this category. There is however a recognised 
exception to this requirement. Where all the affairs 
of a party are completely managed, transacted 
and looked after by an attorney (who may happen 
to be a close family member), it may be possible 
to accept the evidence of such attorney even with 
reference 
to 
bona 
fides 
or 
“readiness 
and 
willingness”. Examples of such attorney-holders 
are a husband/wife exclusively managing the 
affairs 
of 
his/her 
spouse, 
a 
son/daughter 
exclusively managing the affairs of an old and 
infirm 
parent, 
a 
father/mother 
exclusively 
managing the affairs of a son/daughter living 
abroad.” 

11. 
In a more recent judgment of this Court in the matter 
of A.C. Narayanan vs. State of Maharashtra & Anr.4, this 
Court again considered the earlier judgments, particularly, 
Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani (supra) and having noticed that 
Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani relates to Power of Attorney Holder 
under CPC whereas in the matter of (A.C. Narayanan) the 
Court was concerned with a criminal case. It was observed that 
since criminal law can be set in motion by anyone, even by a 
stranger or legal heir, a complaint under Section 138 of the 
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 preferred by the Power of 
Attorney Holder is held maintainable and also that such Power 
of Attorney Holder can depose as complainant. 
12. 
Having noticed the three judgments of this Court in 
Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani (supra), Man Kaur (supra) & A.C. 
Narayanan (supra), we are of the view that in view of Section 
12 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963, in a suit for specific 
performance wherein the plaintiff is required to aver and prove 
that he has performed or has always been ready and willing to 
perform the essential terms of the contract, a Power of Attorney 
Holder is not entitled to depose in place and instead of the 
 
4 (2014) 

plaintiff (principal). In other words, if the Power of Attorney 
Holder has rendered some ‘acts’ in pursuance of power of 
attorney, he may depose for the principal in respect of such 
acts, but he cannot depose for the principal for the act done by 
the principal and not by him. Similarly, he cannot depose for 
the principal in respect of the matter of which only the principal 
can have personal knowledge and in respect of which the 
principal is entitled to be cross-examined. If a plaintiff, in a suit 
for specific performance is required to prove that he was always 
ready and willing to perform his part of the contract, it is 
necessary for him to step into the witness box and depose the 
said fact and subject himself to cross-examination on that 
issue. A plaintiff cannot examine in his place, his attorney 
holder who did not have personal knowledge either of the 
transaction or of his readiness and willingness. The term 
‘readiness and willingness’ refers to the state of mind and 
conduct 
of 
the 
purchaser, 
as 
also 
his 
capacity 
and 
preparedness, one without the other being not sufficient. 
Therefore, a third party having no personal knowledge about 
the transaction cannot give evidence about the readiness and 
willingness. 

13. 
In the light of above settled legal position, we are of 
the view that in the instant case, the plaintiff/appellant has 
failed to enter into the witness box and subject himself to 
cross-examination, he has not been able to prove the pre-
requisites of Section 12 of the Specific Relief Act,1963 and 
more so, when the original agreement contained a definite time 
for registration of sale deed which was later on extended but 
the suit was filed on the last date of limitation calculated on the 
basis of the last extended time. 
 
14. 
The effect of filing a suit for specific performance 
after long delay, may be at the fag end of period of limitation 
fell for consideration before this Court in K.S. Vidyanadam vs. 
Vairavan5 wherein this Court held thus in para 10: (2009) 
“10. It has been consistently held by the courts in 
India, following certain early English decisions, that 
in the case of agreement of sale relating to 
immovable property, time is not of the essence of 
the contract unless specifically provided to that 
effect. The period of limitation prescribed by the 
Limitation Act for filing a suit is three years. From 
these two circumstances, it does not follow that any 
and every suit for specific performance of the 
agreement (which does not provide specifically that 
time is of the essence of the contract) should be 
 
5 (1997) 

decreed provided it is filed within the period of 
limitation notwithstanding the time-limits stipulated 
in the agreement for doing one or the other thing 
by one or the other party. That would amount to 
saying that the time-limits prescribed by the parties 
in the agreement have no significance or value and 
that they mean nothing. Would it be reasonable to 
say that because time is not made the essence of 
the contract, the time-limit(s) specified in the 
agreement have no relevance and can be ignored 
with impunity? It would also mean denying the 
discretion vested in the court by both Sections 10 
and 20. As held by a Constitution Bench of this 
Court in Chand Rani v. Kamal Rani [(1993) ]: (SCC p. 528, para 25)………………” 
 
15. 
In Azhar Sultana vs. B. Rajamani & Ors.6, this 
Court held thus in para 28: 
“28. ……….The court, keeping in view the fact that it 
exercises a discretionary jurisdiction, would be 
entitled to take into consideration as to whether the 
suit had been filed within a reasonable time. What 
would be a reasonable time would, however, 
depend upon the facts and circumstances of each 
case. No hard-and-fast law can be laid down 
therefor. The conduct of the parties in this behalf 
would also assume significance.” 

16. 
In Saradamani Kandappan vs. S. Rajalakshmi & 
Ors.7, this Court held that every suit for specific performance 
need not be decreed merely because it is filed within the period 
of limitation by ignoring time limits stipulated in the agreement. 
 
6 (2009) 
7 (2011) 

The courts will also frown upon suits which are not filed 
immediately after the breach/refusal. The fact that limitation is 
three years does not mean that a purchaser can wait for one or 
two years to file a suit and obtain specific performance. 
 
17. 
In Atma Ram vs. Charanjit Singh8, this Court has 
observed in para 9 thus: 
“9. ……..No explanation was forthcoming from the 
petitioner for the long delay of three years, in filing 
the suit (on 13-10-1999) after issuing a legal notice 
on 12-11-1996. The conduct of a plaintiff is very 
crucial in a suit for specific performance. A person 
who issues a legal notice on 12-11-1996 claiming 
readiness and willingness, but who institutes a suit 
only on 13-10-1999 and that too only with a prayer 
for a mandatory injunction carrying a fixed court 
fee relatable only to the said relief, will not be 
entitled to the discretionary relief of specific 
performance.” 

18. 
In the case in hand, the plaintiff entered into an 
agreement with only one of the co-owners and thereafter 
sought extensions for execution of the sale deed but did not 
prefer any suit though he was aware of the sale deed dated 
14.05.1997 executed in favour of defendant nos. 12 to 14 and 
sent a legal notice on 30.05.1997 and even objected to the 
 
8 (2020) 

subsequent purchasers’ application for mutation of their names 
in the revenue records on 20.08.1997 and refers to a meeting 
of the Gram Panchayat dated 06.12.1997, yet the suit was 
preferred, on 09.05.2000 on the last date of limitation. Thus, 
on the strength of observations made by this Court in K.S. 
Vidyanadam (supra), Azhar Sultana (supra), Saradamani 
Kandappan (supra) & Atma Ram (supra), the suit having 
been preferred after a long delay, the plaintiff is not entitled for 
specific performance on this ground also. 
 
19. 
For the foregoing, we uphold the judgment and 
decree dated 01.09.2016 passed in FA No. 340 of 2003 by the 
High Court. The appeal lacks substance and is hereby 
dismissed. The parties shall bear their own costs. 
 
………………………………………J. 

(PANKAJ MITHAL)...……………………………….J. 

 (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 
NEW DELHI; 
MAY 17, 2024