T.C. ( Etc. 1 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
SHAJI POULOSE 

 ….. PETITIONER 

VERSUS 
INSTITUTE OF CHARTERED 
ACCOUNTANTS OF INDIA & OTHERS ….. RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 

T.C. ( Etc. 2 

T.C. ( Etc. 3 

T.C. ( Etc. 4 

T.C. ( Etc. 5 

JUDGMENT 
NAGARATHNA, J. 
Table of Contents 
 
S.No. 
Particulars 
Page No. 

Bird’s Eye View of the Controversy 

Historical Perspective 

Submissions 

Submissions of the Petitioners 

Submission of the Respondents 

Points for Consideration 

Legal Framework 

Discussion 

Re: Point No.1: Whether the Council of the respondent-
Institute, under the 1949 Act, was competent to 
impose, by way of Guidelines, a numerical restriction 
on the maximum number of tax audits that could be 
accepted by a Chartered Accountant, under Section 
44AB of the 1961 Act, in a Financial Year by way of a 
Guideline? 

Re: Point No. 2: Whether the restrictions imposed are 
unreasonable and therefore, violative of the right 
guaranteed to Chartered Accountants under Article 
19(1)(g) of the Constitution? 

Re: Point No.3: Whether the restrictions imposed are 
arbitrary and illegal and therefore, impermissible 
under Article 14 of the Constitution? 

Re: Point No.4: Whether exceeding such specified 
number of tax audits can be deemed to be ‘professional 
misconduct’? 

Conclusion 

T.C. ( Etc. 6 
 
The petitioners herein are Chartered Accountants who 
have challenged the validity of Clause 6 of Guidelines No.1-
CA(7)/02/2008 dated 08.08.2008 issued by the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of India (hereinafter referred as, 
“respondent-Institute”), under powers conferred by the 
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (hereinafter referred to as 
“the 1949 Act”) on the ground that the same is illegal, arbitrary 
and violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India. 
 
1.1 Some of the present writ petitions have been filed before 
this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution while others 
were filed before various High Courts invoking Article 226 
thereof. By order dated 09.12.2020, this Court transferred the 
writ petitions pending before various High Courts to this Court. 
That is how, these cases have been clubbed and were heard 
together and are being disposed of by this common order. 
 
1.2 The petitioners are, specifically, aggrieved by the 
mandatory ceiling limit imposed by Clause 6.0, Chapter VI of 
said Guidelines on the number of tax audits that a Chartered 
Accountant can accept in a financial year under Section 44AB 
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as, “IT Act, 

T.C. ( Etc. 7 
 
1961”). Additionally, and importantly, the petitioners seek a 
direction for quashing and/or setting aside of the disciplinary 
proceedings initiated by the respondent-Institute in pursuance 
of the Impugned Guideline. Clause 6.0, Chapter VI of 
Guidelines dated 08.08.2008 provides that a member of the 
Institute in practice shall not accept, in a financial year, more 
than the “specified number of tax audit assignments” under 
Section 44AB of the IT Act, 1961. It further provides that in the 
case of a firm of Chartered Accountants, the “specified number 
of tax audit assignments” shall be construed as the specified 
number of tax audit assignments for every partner of the firm. 
 
1.3 At the outset, we find it pertinent to note that the ceiling 
limit, that is the subject of controversy has not been stagnant 
but has, on the basis of several factors, been increased by the 
Council of respondent-Institute during the passage of time. 
Initially, the Council of respondent-Institute vide Notification 
No.1/CA(7)/3/88 dated 13.01.1989 set a limit of thirty audits, 
in exercise of powers conferred on it under Clause (ii), Part II, 
Second Schedule of the 1949 Act. Further, in February 2014, 
vide resolution adopted at the 331st Meeting of the Council of 

T.C. ( Etc. 8 
 
respondent-Institute, the ceiling limit in question was specified 
as sixty and presently stands the same. 
Bird’s Eye View of the Controversy: 
2. The controversy that has arisen in these petitions is two-
fold: firstly, whether the respondent-Institute, constituted 
under the 1949 Act, had the competency to impose a restriction 
of the nature and effect herein? If the answer is in the 
affirmative, secondly, whether a Chartered Accountant’s right 
“to practice any profession” as provided under Article 19(1)(g) of 
the Constitution, is unreasonably restricted by a ceiling limit 
imposed by respondent-Institute on the number of tax audits, 
under Section 44AB, that can be accepted by a Chartered 
Accountant in a financial year? In other words, whether a 
Chartered Accountant can be restricted from undertaking more 
tax audits than specified by the respondent-Institute? Whether 
the impugned Guideline is saved under Article 19(6) of the 
Constitution of India? 
Historical Perspective: 
 
3. It is apposite for us, at this juncture, to preface the origin of 
Section 44AB in the IT Act, 1961, popularly known as the 

T.C. ( Etc. 9 
 
compulsory audit provision and the ceiling limit imposed by the 
respondent-Institute on the Chartered Accountants by way of 
a Guideline, violation of which would result in a misconduct. 
 
3.1 With the aim of examining and suggesting legal and 
administrative measures for countering evasion and avoidance 
in direct taxation in the country, the Government of India on 
02.03.1970, constituted a High Power Committee of Experts, 
namely, the Direct Taxes Enquiry Committee, under the 
chairmanship of Justice K.N. Wanchoo, retired Chief Justice of 
India. In December 1971, the Wanchoo Committee submitted 
its Final Report to the Government of India. A bare perusal of 
Chapter 1 – Introduction, Direct Taxes Enquiry Committee-Final 
Report elucidates that the Wanchoo Committee was asked to 
examine and recommend: 
(a) concrete and effective measures (i) to unearth black money 
and prevent its proliferation through further evasion; (ii) to 
check avoidance of tax through various legal devices, 
including the formation of trusts; and (iii) to reduce tax 
arrears, 

T.C. ( Etc. 10 
 
(b) examine various exemptions allowed by the tax laws with 
a view to their modification, curtailment or withdrawal, and 
 
(c) indicate the manner in which tax assessment and 
administration may be improved for giving effect to all its 
recommendations. 
 
3.2 In order for the tax administration to become more 
efficient, the Committee, inter alia, made other extensive 
recommendations, in Chapter 2 – Black Money and Tax Evasion 
and recommended insertion of a statutory provision for 
compulsory audit of accounts. The Committee noted that 
mandatory 
audit, 
simultaneously 
with 
compulsory 
maintenance of accounts, would ensure that books and records 
are properly maintained; the taxpayer’s income is faithfully 
presented, and proper presentation is facilitated before the 
Assessing Officer. It was further understood that information 
furnished by the Auditor along with his certificate would enable 
building up of information for cross-verification leading to 
prevention of tax evasion and identification of new assessees. 
At para 2.145, it was interestingly noted that earlier 
Committees and Working Groups had also deliberated on a 

T.C. ( Etc. 11 
 
provision providing for compulsory audit. In furtherance, it was 
noted that the Working Group of the Administrative Reforms 
Commission had favoured compulsory audit by Chartered 
Accountants of persons with income over Rs.50,000 but it was 
finally decided that due to limited number of Chartered 
Accountants at that point in time, it may not be possible for all 
assesses to secure their services, except at heavy cost and 
delay. Noting, at para 2.148, that an auditor can devote more 
time to examination and verification of accounts than an 
Income-Tax Officer, the Wanchoo Committee recommended 
insertion of a provision for mandatory presentation of audited 
accounts and if found necessary, in practice, future evolution 
of proforma for furnishing of information by auditors. 
 
3.3 It is pertinent to highlight that by the Taxation Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1975, Section 142(2A) was inserted to the IT 
Act, 1961 conferring special power of audit by a Chartered 
Accountant in certain cases where so sought by the Assessing 
Officer. 
 
3.4 Thereby, only a few of the recommendations of the 
Wanchoo Committee were accepted in the first instance and 

T.C. ( Etc. 12 
 
legislated upon by the Parliament. As per the respondent-
Institute, this conspicuously reflects that the Parliament did 
not favour compulsory tax audit provision of all sizeable cases 
by Chartered Accountants and as a necessary corollary, the 
opportunity to conduct tax audits must be seen as a privilege 
extended by a statute. 
 
3.5 Later, the provision for compulsory audits found favour 
with the Parliament and was inserted by the Parliament 
through Finance Act, 1984. The then Finance Minister, while 
introducing the budget through the Finance Bill, 1984 stated 
in Parliament as under: 
“With the reduction in rates and expeditious disposal 
of assessments, I believe there will now be no excuse 
for any leniency to be shown to those who abuse our 
laws, such cases will necessarily have to be dealt with 
severely. In order to discourage tax avoidance and tax 
evasion, I am also introducing some further measures. 
In all cases where the annual turnover exceeds Rs. 20 
lakhs or where the gross receipts from a profession 
exceed Rs. 10 lakhs, I am providing for a compulsory 
audit of accounts. This is intended to ensure that 
the books of account and other records are 
properly maintained and faithfully reflect the true 
income of the taxpayer. …” 
(emphasis supplied) 

T.C. ( Etc. 13 
 
3.6 The relevant portion of the Memorandum explaining the 
provisions in Finance Bill, 1984, which proposed to introduce 
Section 44AB, reads as under: 
“16. A proper audit for tax purposes would ensure that 
the books of account and other records are properly 
maintained and that they faithfully reflect the 
income of the tax payer and claims for deductions 
are correctly made by him. Such audit would also 
help in checking fraudulent practices. It can also 
facilitate the administration of tax laws by proper 
presentation of the accounts before the tax authorities 
and considerably saving the time of the assessing 
officers in carrying out routine verifications, like 
checking correctness of totals and verifying whether 
purchases and sales are properly vouched or not. The 
time of the assessing officers thus saved could be 
utilized 
for 
attending 
to 
more 
important 
investigational aspects of a case.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

3.7 Finally, Clause No. 11 of the Finance Bill, 1984 (Bill No. 
11 of 1984), was introduced in Parliament to give effect to the 
proposals of the Central Government. Resultantly, Section 
44AB of the IT Act, 1961 was inserted and came into force w.e.f. 
01.04.1985, providing for compulsory audit. Section 44AB, as 
it stood then, provided that every person carrying on business, 
if his total sale, turnover or gross receipts exceed Rs.40 Lakhs 
and every person carrying on a profession, if his gross receipts 
exceed Rs.10 Lakhs, in any previous year, is required to get his 

T.C. ( Etc. 14 
 
accounts of such previous year audited by an Accountant and 
obtain before the specified date, a report of the audit in the 
prescribed form duly signed and verified. Explanation (i) to the 
Section 44AB clarified that the word ‘accountant’ shall have the 
meaning as in the Explanation to sub-section (2) of Section 
288. The present position is that a tax audit, under Section 
44AB, can be undertaken only by a Chartered Accountant. For 
immediate reference, Section 44AB when it was introduced is 
extracted as under: 
“44AB. Audit of accounts of certain persons 
carrying 
on 
business 
or 
profession.—Every 
person,— 
(a) carrying on business shall, if his total sales, 
turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be, in 
business exceed or exceeds forty lakh rupees in 
any previous year or years relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of 
April, 1985 or any subsequent assessment year; 
or 
(b) carrying on profession shall, if his gross receipts 
in profession exceed ten lakh rupees in any 
previous year or years relevant to the assessment 
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1985 or 
any subsequent assessment year, 
get his accounts of such previous year or years audited 
by an accountant before the specified date and obtain 
before that date the report of such audit in the 
prescribed form duly signed and verified by such 
accountant and setting forth such particulars as may 
be prescribed: 

T.C. ( Etc. 15 
 
Provided that in a case where such person is 
required by or under any other law to get his accounts 
audited by an accountant, it shall be sufficient 
compliance with the provisions of this section if such 
person gets the accounts of such business or 
profession audited under such law before the specified 
date and obtains before that date the report of the 
audit as required under such other law and a further 
report in the form prescribed under this section. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 
(i) “accountant” shall have the same meaning as in 
the Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 
288; 
[(ii) "specified date", in relation to the accounts of the 
previous year or years relevant to an assessment 
year, means the date of the expiry of four months 
from the end of the previous year or, where there 
is more than one previous year, from the end of 
the previous year which expired last before the 
commencement of the assessment year, or the 
30th day of June of the assessment year, 
whichever is later.'.” 
 
3.8 Pragmatically, the insertion of Section 44AB meant that 
persons covered by the provision must compulsorily get their 
accounts of relevant assessment year audited by a Chartered 
Accountant before the specified date and obtain a report of 
such audit in the prescribed form duly signed and verified by 
the Chartered Accountant furnishing the particulars stipulated 
in the rules made by the Central Board of Direct Taxes (for 
short, “CBDT”) and annex them to their returns filed in 

T.C. ( Etc. 16 
 
accordance with Section 139 of the IT Act, 1961. Consequently, 
Rule 6G to the Income Tax Rules, 1962 was inserted. 
 
3.9 At this chronological juncture, a perusal of relevant 
material indicates that the objective of the insertion of Section 
44AB was multifold: firstly, it was intended that compulsory 
audit will discourage tax avoidance and tax evasion by allowing 
faithful reflection of income of the taxpayer and only 
appropriate claims for deductions. Secondly, and importantly, 
as Chartered Accountants can devote more time to examination 
and verification of accounts than an Assessing Officer, it was 
believed that a compulsory audit would save considerable and 
precious time of assessing officers. Thirdly, it was hoped that 
proper presentation of income and records in a structured and 
presentable manner will be facilitated by compulsory audit. 
Comprehensively, it is apparent that the intent behind Section 
44AB was not to codify an essential extant practice of the 
Chartered Accountant’s profession but to mandate tax audits 
to prevent evasion of taxes, plug loopholes leading to tax 
avoidance and also facilitate tax administration, thereby 

T.C. ( Etc. 17 
 
ensuring that the economic system does not result in 
concentration of wealth to the common detriment. 
 
3.10 Post insertion of Section 44AB in the statute book and in 
pursuance of its operation, CBDT noted that the quality of tax 
audits was deteriorating as some Chartered Accountants were 
completing fifty tax audits a month. It is apparent on the face 
of the material perused that such a finding would run counter 
to the long sought and deliberated goal of plugging the 
loopholes in tax administration and saving considerable and 
precious time of assessing officers by presentation of quality 
audit reports. To remedy this, authorities in tax administration 
were of the view that the Government could impose a ceiling on 
maximum number of audits an auditor could undertake. Vide 
letter dt. 19.01.1988, CBDT sought comments from the 
Secretary, Institute of Chartered Accountants of India on 
possibly restricting the number of tax audits a Chartered 
Accountant may be permitted to complete in a year. The 
contents of the CBDT letter dated 19.01.1988 are reproduced 
as under: 

T.C. ( Etc. 18 
 
“F.No.225/2/88-IT.ALL 
Government of India 
Ministry of Finance 
Department of Revenue 
(C.B.D.T.) 
 
New Delhi, Dated the 19th January, 1988. 
 
Shri R.L. Chopra, 
Secretary, 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, 
I.P. Estate, 
New Delhi. 
 
Sub: Fixation of number of tax audit per auditor. 
 
Dear Sir, 

As per the provisions of Section 44AB of the 
Income Tax Act, a class of assesses have to get their 
accounts audited by auditor. This audit has to be 
completed by a particular date as provided in Section 
44AB of the Act. It has been represented that some of 
the auditors are completing around 50 audits in a 
month which result in the deterioration of the quality 
of audit. It has, therefore, been that the Government 
may fix the maximum number of audits which an 
auditor may be allowed to undertake under the 
provisions of Section 44AB of the Income Tax Act. In 
this connection reference has also been invited to 
Section 224 of the Companies Act whereby the 
number of company audits which a Chartered 
Accountant can do has been restricted to 20. 
 
2. 
You are requested to kindly send your 
comments regarding the suggestion of restricting the 
number of audits under Section 44AB of the Income 
Tax Act which a Chartered Accountant may be 
permitted to complete. The number of audits as in the 
case of Section 224 of the Companies Act may also be 

T.C. ( Etc. 19 
 
indicated. I would request you to kindly forward the 
comments of the Institute at the earliest. 
 
Yours faithfully, 
Sd/- 
(M.G.C. Goyal) 
Officer on Special Duty (IT.ALL) 
Central Board of Direct Taxes." 

3.11 After consideration of the aforesaid letter, the Professional 
Development Committee of the respondent-Institute at its 90th 
Meeting held on 22.02.1988 recommended that every 
Chartered Accountant be permitted to conduct a maximum of 
twenty tax audits of non-corporate assessees every year in 
addition to entitlement of audits conducted under the 
Companies 
Act 
and 
other 
statutes. 
Considering 
the 
recommendation of the Professional Development Committee, 
on 28.04.1988–30.04.1988, the Council of the respondent-
Institute in its 133rd Meeting decided to issue a Notification 
under Clause (ii) of Part II of the Second Schedule of the 1949 
Act specifying that w.e.f. 01.04.1989 a member of the 
respondent-Institute in practice shall be deemed guilty of 
professional misconduct, if he accepts in a financial year more 
than thirty assignments of tax audit, be they in respect of 
corporate or non-corporate assessees. It was further decided 

T.C. ( Etc. 20 
 
that in case of a partnership firm, the number of tax audits 
shall be counted at the rate of thirty assignments per partner 
of thirty tax audit. In pursuance of this decision, Notification 
No.1/CA(7)/3/88 dated 13.01.1989 was issued by the Council, 
setting the limit of thirty tax audits. Admittedly, at this point, 
the ceiling limit was intended as only a self-regulatory 
mechanism to be followed by all members. 
 
3.12 The vires and constitutionality of aforesaid Notification 
No. 1/CA(7)/3/88, dated 13.01.1989 was the subject of much 
litigation before several High Courts. In fact, the Notification 
was successfully challenged by a practicing Chartered 
Accountant, in before the Madras 
High Court. The legality and validity of the Notification 
No.1/CA(7)/3/88, dated 13.01.1989 as also Notification No.1-
CA(7)/15887 dated 25.05.1987 was also assailed in Writ 
Petition No.5926 of 1989. The central challenge in both writ 
petitions was to the Notifications being violative of Article 
19(1)(g) of the Constitution. Of imminent interest is the 
constitutional challenge to the ceiling limit in Writ Petition 
No.5925/1989. 
The 
Madras 
High 
Court 
observed 

T.C. ( Etc. 21 
 
that ‘accepting a legitimate professional engagement by a 
professional can never be considered unprofessional and be 
made a misconduct’. It was further noted that, once a person 
acquires the requisite qualifications to be a Chartered 
Accountant, he would be free to engage himself in the 
profession restricted only by conduct marred with dishonesty 
and inviting condemnation. Therefore, it was observed that the 
Act and the Rules could bring in restrictions or provisions only 
for the purpose of attaining the aforesaid professional 
standards. The judgment in was 
affirmed by the Division Bench in Writ Appeal Nos.1452-1453 
of 1998, on 24.03.2005. Furthermore, in SLP(C) Nos. 14370-
14371/2005 preferred by respondent-Institute, this Court vide 
Order dated 29.07.2005, issued notice and granted a stay on 
the operation of the judgment of learned Division Bench of 
Madras High Court. The aforesaid captioned Special Leave 
Petitions were admitted as Civil Appeal Nos. 7208-7209 of 
2005. 

3.13 Certain other High Courts dismissed the challenge to the 
vires and constitutionality of the Notification dated 13.01.1989. 

T.C. ( Etc. 22 
 
Amongst others, four such petitions filed before the Madhya 
Pradesh High Court have been brought to our attention, being 
Miscellaneous Petition No.2844 of 1989 – Prem Chand vs. 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India; Miscellaneous 
Petition No.2792 of 1990 – Ram Narain vs. Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of India; Miscellaneous Petition No.4202 of 1992 – 
Arun Grover vs. Institute of Chartered Accountants of India; and 
Miscellaneous Petition No.3307 of 1993 – Anil Kumar Gupta vs. 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India. The challenge in all 
the above captioned petitions was to the validity and legality of 
the Notification dated 13.01.1989. By way of a common 
judgment dated 18.04.1995 passed by the Division Bench of 
the Madhya Pradesh High Court, the aforesaid writ petitions 
were dismissed holding that the Notification does not take away 
the right of petitioners to carry on their profession but only 
placed a ceiling limit for purposes of effective and business-like 
audit. Furthermore, the Division Bench of the High Court 
found that public interest was met by distribution of work 
amongst many Chartered Accountants. Against the aforesaid 
judgment of the Division Bench of Madhya Pradesh High Court, 
leave was granted by this Court in Special Leave Petition (Civil) 

T.C. ( Etc. 23 
 
No.21988 of 1995 but the Civil Appeal was dismissed as 
withdrawn by order dated 04.05.1999. Before the Madhya 
Pradesh High Court, in another 
– Prakash Mehta vs. ICAI, the validity and legality of the 
Notification dated 13.01.1989 was challenged. However, the 
said writ petition was dismissed by the said High Court by its 
order dated 16.05.2005. 
 
3.14 Further, a challenge to Notification dated 13.01.1989 was 
dismissed by the High Court of Kerala vide judgment dated 
25.02.2003 in O.P. No. 3775 of 1991. Dismissing the challenge, 
it was noted that Section 30(2)(k) of the 1949 Act vests power 
on the Council to make regulations for regulating and 
maintaining the status of members of the Institute and 
standard of professional qualifications of members of the 
Institute. It was noted that the restriction therein, as it does 
here, confined the ceiling limit only to tax audit assignments 
accepted under Section 44AB and not to any other audit work, 
unless otherwise restricted under any law. Noting the 
importance attributed to a certificate of audit issued by a 
Chartered Accountant and its concomitant serious public 

T.C. ( Etc. 24 
 
interest, it was further noted that audit is a time-bound work 
demanding precision and that the intent of the restriction was 
to ensure quality and accuracy in execution. It was further 
noted that on recommendation of the Professional Development 
Committee, the Notification had been issued by the Council of 
Chartered Accountants, which is composed of its members, by 
its members and for its members. Observing that under Section 
15 of the 1949 Act, it is the duty and function of the Council to 
make provision for regulating and maintaining the status of 
members of the Institute and that Section 30(2)(k) empowers 
the Council to frame regulations in that regard, the restriction 
was held to be reasonable. It is also pertinent to highlight that 
the judgments in writ petitions before the Madras High Court 
and Madhya Pradesh High Court were considered and the latter 
High Court found itself in disagreement with the Madras High 
Court on the ground that the restriction had been imposed by 
a competent statutory body of professionals in the interest of 
the profession. It was reasoned that no interference was 
warranted when the statutory body had taken a decision within 
its powers in the interest of the profession. Against the 
aforesaid judgment of the High Court of Kerala, Writ Appeal 

T.C. ( Etc. 25 
 
No.1116/2003 was filed before the Division Bench of the Kerala 
High Court but was dismissed as infructuous on 14.01.2016 
on account of the death of the writ petitioner therein. 
 
3.15 At the 184th Meeting of the Council in the year 1997, it 
considered the issue of certain Chartered Accountants 
exceeding the prescribed limit and proceeded to refer the 
matter to the Committee for Ethical Standards and Unjustified 
Removal of Auditors (CESURA) for a detailed review on the limit 
of thirty tax audits in a year and also to examine the issue of 
developing a suitable mechanism for the purpose of monitoring 
such limit. CESURA, in its 58th Meeting held on 25.02.1997 
recommended that the Council, before developing a suitable 
mechanism for the purpose of monitoring such limit, should 
ask members to submit a report on the number of tax audits 
carried out by them in a prescribed format. At its 186th Meeting, 
the Council took up the recommendation of the CESURA and 
asked members to submit a report on the number of tax audits 
carried out by them, as per the prescribed format appearing at 
pages 61 to 63 of the Guidance Note on Tax under Section 44AB 
of the IT Act, 1961. In pursuance of the decision of the Council 

T.C. ( Etc. 26 
 
taken at the 186th Meeting, an announcement was published 
in April, 1998 whereby members were requested to furnish the 
reports on number of tax audits carried out by them in the 
financial year corresponding to the assessment year 1997-98. 
 
3.16 After several iterations of the announcement calling for 
the reports from members, the Council at its 197th Meeting, 
held on 16.01.1999-18.01.1999, considered the matter of 
review of limit of thirty tax audits in a year. It is important to 
note that members, even in the year 1999, were of the view that 
the objective of calling the information was only to review the 
limit and not to take disciplinary action and requested the 
President to suitably publish the view of the Council. In 
pursuance thereof, an announcement was published in the 
Institute’s Journal in March, 1999, the relevant portion of it is 
reproduced as under: 
“Dear Colleague, 
 
March is a month of marching ahead. 
X X X 

T.C. ( Etc. 27 
 
Ceiling on Tax Audit Under Section 44AB 
The revision of ceiling on tax audit under Section 44AB 
of the Income Tax Act is under consideration of the 
Council. In order to enable the Council to take an 
appropriate decision in the matter, members are 
requested to comply with the requirements called for 
in the format published in the Journal. The 
information is being collected only for statistical 
purposes and will be treated as confidential. 
X X X 
Yours in professional fellowship 
 
New Delhi 

S.P. Chhajed, 
March 1, 1999 

 President” 
 
3.17 At the 66th Meeting of the CESURA, held on 08.09.1999 
and 05.10.1999, 12,196 reports received from members/firms 
were examined and it was concluded that the average number 
of Tax Audits done by a member came out to be about 14-15 
audits per partner/proprietor. Reviewing the same at the 205th 
Meeting of the Council held from 15.12.1999-17.12.1999, it 
was decided that since the average number of tax audits done 
by a member/partner of a firm came to be about 14 to 15 
audits, therefore, no change was warranted. Notably, the 
minutes of 205th Meeting of the Council record the Institute’s 
President’s reference to a relevant paper presented in CAPA 

T.C. ( Etc. 28 
 
Conference at Korea in 1989. The minutes of the said Meeting 
describe the paper discussed in the Meeting of the Council as 
under: 
“The main thrust of the Korean paper was that when 
there was ceiling on audit, there was less competition. 
When less competition was there, the audit reports 
were qualified. When there was no ceiling, a member 
was free to accept any number of Tax Audits as a 
result of which there was more competition finally 
resulting in unqualified audit reports.” 
 
3.18 Considering that fourteen years had passed since the last 
ceiling limit was fixed in 1989 and that the number of persons 
eligible to tax audit had considerably increased due to the 
change in limits prescribed under Section 44AB, IT Act, 1961, 
the Financial Law Committee meeting of the respondent-
Institute, held on 12.09.2003, recommended that the Council 
may increase the ceiling limit for tax audit assignments to fifty. 
However, the Council at its 236th Meeting decided against 
increasing the limit from thirty to fifty tax audits per member. 
 
3.19 In exercise of powers conferred on the respondent-
Institute by clauses (c) and (d) of Sub-section (2) of Section 29A, 
read with Sub-section (4) of Section 21 and Sub-sections (2) 
and (4) of Section 21B of the 1949 Act, the Central Government 

T.C. ( Etc. 29 
 
notified 
the 
Chartered 
Accountants 
(Procedure 
of 
Investigations of Professional and Other Misconduct and 
Conduct of Cases) Rules, 2007. The said Rules came into effect 
from 27.02.2007. 
 
 3.20 At the 268th Meeting, held on 30.04.2007 – 02.05.2007, 
the Council discussed whether it should revise the ceiling limit 
on number of tax audits. The Council was divided on the issue 
whether the Council should increase the ceiling limit of tax 
audits although factors such as the increased permeation of 
access to technology and consequential increased professional 
competence of auditors, dynamic and increasing economy, 
growth of new and specialized areas of practices, and such 
other factors prevailed. The Council, finally authorized its 
President to decide upon an appropriate increase in the ceiling 
on number of tax audits after taking into consideration the 
views expressed by its members. In pursuance thereof, on 
11.05.2007, the respondent-Institute increased the limit on 
number of tax audits from thirty to forty-five per Chartered 
Accountant per year. 

T.C. ( Etc. 30 
 
3.21 At this stage it is pertinent to note that the respondent-
Institute was of the opinion that the extant self-regulatory 
mechanism was ineffective in ensuring compliance of the 
maximum limit. Therefore, the 1949 Act was amended by the 
Parliament by the Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Act, 
2006 (hereinafter referred to as “Amendment Act, 2006”) by 
which the erstwhile Notifications were superseded by 
Guidelines 
dated 
08.08.2008. 
In 
view 
of 
the 
above 
development, this Court by order dated 01.04.2013 dismissed 
the Civil Appeal Nos.7208-7209 of 2005 as having become 
infructuous. For ease of reference, the said order is extracted 
as under: 
“Civil Appeal No(s). 7208-7209 of 2005 
Decided on April 1, 2013 
ORDER 
These appeals have been preferred against the 
impugned judgment and order dated 24.3.2005 
passed in Writ Appeal No.1452 & 1453/1998 by the 
High Court of Madras quashing the notifications 
issued by the appellant by which it has quashed the 
notifications dated 25.5.1987 and 13.1.1989 by which 
certain regulatory measures have been taken by the 
appellant against its members. 
Mr. N.K. Poddar, learned senior counsel appearing 
for the appellant stated that both these notifications 
do not survive. They have been withdrawn and 
subsequently two guidelines have been issued by the 

T.C. ( Etc. 31 
 
appellant on 8th August, 2008 for regulating the 
business of its members. However, subsequently one 
of them had also been withdrawn in 2011 and today 
only one guidelines is issued for which the appellant 
has not received any representation, ventilation or any 
grievance from any member of the appellant 
association in respect of the existing guidelines which 
deals with Section 44 A(b) of the Income Tax Act, 1961. 
Mr. Poddar further submitted that in case, the 
appellant receives any representation against such 
existing guidelines, the highest body of the appellant 
will consider it and will take a decision as to whether 
such guidelines would continue or require any kind of 
modification. 
In view of the above, we do not propose to hear the 
appeals on merit and the same are dismissed as 
having become infructuous. However, in case any 
member is aggrieved of the existing guidelines and files 
a representation before the appellant, the appellant 
shall consider it and pass appropriate order, and if any 
member is aggrieved thereof whether he has made 
representation or not, would have right to challenge it 
before the appropriate forum. 
With the aforesaid observations, the appeals stand 
dismissed. Before parting with the case, we express 
our thanks to Shri K.V. Vishwanathan, learned senior 
counsel, Amicus Curiae, for rendering assistance in 
the instant case.” 

3.22 In a further exercise of review of the limit, at the 331st 
Meeting of the Council held in February 2014, it was again 
decided to increase the limit on accepting tax audits from forty-
five to sixty w.e.f. from the financial year 2014-15. 

T.C. ( Etc. 32 
 
3.23 In order to establish that the restriction has been 
incisively deliberated upon and the need of the restriction has 
been supported by expert practitioners over an extended period 
of time, the respondent-Institute has placed heavy reliance on 
the above-discussed CBDT letter dated 19.01.1988 and the 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (for 
short, “CAG”), being No. 32 of 2014, tiled “Performance Audit 
on Appreciation of Third Party (Chartered Accountant) 
Reporting in Assessment Proceedings”, presented to the 
Parliament on 19.12.2014. 
 
3.24 Our attention was drawn to ‘Section 3.6 Control on 
number of tax audit assignment’ of the CAG’s Report 
wherein pertinent observations were made on effectuating 
control on Chartered Accountants undertaking tax audit 
assignments under Section 44AB of the IT Act, 1961. 
Highlighting the relationship between the number of tax audits 
undertaken and the quality of tax audits, the CAG reported that 
there was no system in field offices of Income-Tax Department 
(for short, “ITD”) to monitor compliance by Chartered 
Accountants of ceiling limit set by respondent-Institute. The 

T.C. ( Etc. 33 
 
CAG was informed by the respondent-Institute, in September 
2014, that even though Chartered Accountants have been 
provided with Form of Tax Audit particulars to be maintained 
by members/Firm, maintenance of such records is a self-
regulatory mechanism and can be called upon by respondent-
Institute for checking adherence to the Guidelines. However, 
any formal complaint received by respondent-Institute was 
acted upon within the framework provided in the Chartered 
Accountants Act and the Misconduct Rules, 2007 framed 
thereunder. 
3.25 As per information provided by DGIT(Systems), ITD to the 
CAG in August, 2014: 
a. 65,898 Chartered Accountants submitted at least one Tax 
Audit Report (TAR) for AY 2013-14. Further, out of total 
65,898 records of Chartered Accountants: 
i. 
81.13% Chartered Accountants adhered to the 
limit of forty-five prescribed by ICAI (Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of India). ii. 
18.87% submitted more than forty-five TARs (Tax 
Audit Reports). 

T.C. ( Etc. 34 
 
iii. 
Excess number of tax audits ranged from 46 to 
2471. b. A table showing twenty-two Chartered Accountants who 
issued more than forty-five TARs for the annual year 2013-
2014 ranged from 401 TARs up to 2471 TARs. 
The CAG Report pointed out that the purpose of 
maintenance of quality audit work had suffered due to no 
monitoring mechanism of this crucial ceiling limit by either 
respondent-Institute or ITD as per the following statistics: 
Stratification of total TARs issued by Chartered 
Accountant for Assessment Year 2013-14 
(vide CAG Report No. 32/2014, Section 3.6) 
 
Range of TARs 
issued 
 
Total Number of 
Accountants 
 
Percentage of 
Total 
Accountants 
1-45 
53,463 
81.13 
46-100 
10,838 
16.45 
101-200 
1,364 
2.07 
201-300 

0.25 
301-400 

0.07 
401-500 

0.02 
501-1000 

0.02 
> 1000 

Total 
Accountants 
65,898 

Note: 81.13% adhered to the ceiling limit. 

T.C. ( Etc. 35 
 
Therefore, the CAG, at Section 3.11(d) Recommendations 
of the same Report recommended that the: 
d. Ministry 
may 
ensure 
limiting 
the 
tax 
audit 
assignments in order to ensure quality of Tax Audit. 
 
3.26 The Ministry replied contending that the respondent-
Institute, as an expert statutory body, would lay down 
restrictions on the number of tax audits and be capable of 
enforcing it. However, the CAG noted that Chartered 
Accountants have been assigned very crucial work of tax audit 
and therefore, the introduction of a suitable control mechanism 
in the IT system, by the Ministry, in consultation with 
respondent-Institute, was in the interest of the revenue for 
ensuring quality of tax audit. 
 
3.27 Respondent-Institute at its 339th Meeting held from 
23.12.2014 to 25.12.2014 discussed the report of the CAG and 
in pursuance thereof, a group of Council Members was 
constituted on 24.01.2015 to study the report of the CAG for 
the year ending March, 2014 and place its findings before the 
Council for appropriate direction. The Council decided to refer 
all cases, where ceiling was exceeded, to the Director 
(Discipline). 

T.C. ( Etc. 36 

3.28 It is averred that respondent-Institute had no mechanism 
to record exact data on number of tax audits undertaken by a 
Chartered Accountant until the respondent-Institute made it 
mandatory in 2019 that submission of all tax audit reports 
undertaken by a Chartered Accountants be marked with a 
‘Unique Document Identification Number (‘UDIN’). Lacking 
such a mechanism, the respondent-Institute, seeking to 
initiate 
disciplinary 
proceedings 
for 
professional 
misconduct for carrying out tax audits assignments under 
Section 44AB of the IT Act, 1961, treated data gathered by the 
CAG as complaints and issued communications to some 
petitioner-Chartered Accountants who accepted more than 
specified limit of tax audits for the Assessment Year 2013-14, 
namely, forty-five. 
 
3.29 It was submitted on behalf of respondent-Institute in the 
course of proceedings that it decided to issue communications 
to only those Chartered Accountants who had conducted more 
than 200 tax audits in a relevant Assessment Year. As of date, 
the respondent-Institute has issued only 276 notices although 

T.C. ( Etc. 37 
 
there has been violation by over ten thousand Chartered 
Accountants. 
 
3.30 Aggrieved by the aforesaid communications seeking 
initiation 
of 
disciplinary 
proceedings 
for 
professional 
misconduct, several petitioner-Chartered Accountants have 
challenged the impugned Guidelines dated 08.08.2008 as well 
as the communications initiated by the respondent-Institute 
before respective High Courts having jurisdiction. In some writ 
petitions pending before various High Courts, stay of the 
disciplinary proceedings initiated by the respondent-Institute 
has been granted. 
 
3.31 In order to avoid multiplicity of proceedings and 
conflicting decisions by various High Courts seized of identical 
issues, respondent-Institute filed Transfer Petition (Civil) Nos. 
2849-2859 of 2019 and 727-728 of 2020 before this Court 
seeking transfer of the various Writ Petitions pending in the 
High Courts of Kerala, Madras and Calcutta to this Court. By 
order dated 09.12.2020, a three-Judge Bench of this Court, in 
T.P.(C) Nos. 2849-2859 of 2019, noting in paragraph 16 that 
the question involved was of public importance and 

T.C. ( Etc. 38 
 
necessitated a comprehensive settlement of the question of law, 
allowed the transfer petitions. Consequently, the writ petitions 
were withdrawn from the respective High Courts and 
transferred to this Court. Thereafter, by subsequent orders 
passed by this Court, all the identical writ petitions pending 
before various High Courts were transferred to this Court. That 
is why, all these transferred cases and the writ petitions filed 
under Article 32 of the Constitution of India have been heard 
together. The relief sought in these writ petitions are similar 
and hence the relief sought in 
before Kerala High Court [Transferred Case (Civil) No.29 of 
2021 before this Court] are extracted as under: 
“RELIEFS:- 
(a) Declare that the restriction imposed by Ext P2 
circular on the number of tax audits is 
discriminatory, unreasonable and violative of 
article 19(1)(g) of the Indian Constitution. 
(b) To call for records leading to Ext P2 guidelines 
2008 and issue a writ in the nature of certiorari or 
any other appropriate writ, order or direction and 
quash and set aside chapter VI of Ext P2, which 
deals with tax audit assignments under section 
44AB of the Income Tax Act 1961. 
(c) To call for records leading to Exhibit P3, Exhibit 
P7 and Exhibit P9 and issue a writ in the nature 
of certiorari or any other appropriate writ order or 
direction, setting aside Ext P3, P7 and P9 as the 
same is violative of fundamental rights guaranteed 

T.C. ( Etc. 39 
 
under Article 14 and l9(1)(g) and also against the 
direction in Ext Pl judgment. 
(d) To direct the highest body of the 1st respondent to 
pass orders on Ext P5 representation filed by the 
petitioner. 
(e) To grant such other appropriate reliefs to the 
Petitioner as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and 
proper in the interest of justice.” 
 
Hence, this Court has now come to be seized of the present 
petitions and questions involved therein. 
Submissions: 
4. We have heard learned senior counsel Sri V. Giri, Sri P.S. 
Patwalia, Sri Preetesh Kapur, Sri Rajashekhar Rao, Sri Tapesh 
Kumar Singh and learned counsel Sri Manish K. Bishnoi, Sri 
Pai Amit, Sri Goutham Shivshankar, Sri Nirmal Kumar 
Ambastha, Sri Ashwin Kumar Das, Sri B. Ramana Kumar and 
other learned counsel for the petitioners and learned senior 
counsel for the respondents Sri Arvind P. Datar ably assisted 
by Sri Nikunj Dayal, Advocate and learned counsel for the 
intervenors Sri Wills Mathews. 
Submissions of the Petitioners: 
4.1 Leading the arguments, Sri V. Giri submitted that the 
primary case of the petitioners is that the impugned Chapter 

T.C. ( Etc. 40 
 
VI 
of the Guidelines dated 08.08.2008 
imposing an 
unreasonable restriction on a Chartered Accountant duly 
qualified to practice the profession of Chartered Accountancy 
in India is violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. 
Furthermore, the impugned Guidelines are arbitrary and lack 
any rational nexus with the objects sought to be achieved by 
the 1949 Act, namely, the regulation and maintenance of the 
status and standard of professional qualifications of the 
members of the Institute. 
 
4.2 Learned 
senior 
counsel 
appearing 
for 
petitioners 
submitted that the intention of the 1949 Act was to provide for 
a rigorous test and exemplary qualification to enter into the 
sphere of the profession of accountants in practice and once in 
possession of requisite qualification, such a person is entitled 
to follow a profession which is exclusive and special on its own 
merit without any kind of restriction except for a conduct 
amounting to misconduct within the rigours of the 1949 Act. 
As a consequence, petitioners contended that accepting a 
legitimate professional engagement by a professional can never 
be considered unprofessional or be considered a misconduct. 

T.C. ( Etc. 41 

4.3 To highlight the arbitrariness of the restriction, it was 
contended on behalf of the petitioners that the restriction lacks 
any reasonable classification and reasonable nexus with the 
objects sought to be achieved. If the ceiling limit has been 
imposed on audits under Section 44AB, to achieve purity and 
quality of work, the restriction should have been imposed on 
the volume of work, as evidenced from the number of 
transactions and not on the number of audits. It was argued 
that a single audit work itself could be voluminous and occupy 
significant amount of a Chartered Accountant’s time, whereas 
another audit work itself could be completed with relative ease 
and within a limited time. 
 
4.4 Furthermore, it was contended that the impugned 
Guidelines lack any reasonable classification or reasonable 
differentia on putting a ceiling limit on the number of tax audits 
under Section 44AB, IT Act, 1961 insofar as no maximum cap 
is placed on other audit assignments under the IT Act, 1961 
that are carried out by Chartered Accountants with similarly 
taxing reporting requirements, such as Sections 44AD, 44AE, 
44AF of the IT Act, 1961. In furtherance of the above, it was 

T.C. ( Etc. 42 
 
also urged that the impugned Guidelines, in effect, also 
discriminate between Chartered Accountants practicing in 
smaller cities and towns as they are not in a position to charge 
the fee for each tax audit assignment in the same manner 
which can be charged by a Chartered Accountant practicing in 
big metropolitan cities. In effect, it was contended that the 
restriction will cause a more significant drop in the income of 
Chartered Accountants practicing in mofussil areas. As a result 
of this uneven restriction, an efficient Chartered Accountant 
may be able to complete the entire audit work within a short 
duration and remain unemployed for the rest of the year, was 
the submission made. 
 
4.5 As further contended by the petitioners, the main object 
of the 1949 Act, is to regulate the conduct of the members of 
the respondent-Institute in carrying out their professional 
duties and the exercise of agency by a Chartered Accountant in 
choosing his own volume of work cannot be considered 
professional misconduct. Furthermore, where the Act and 
Rules made thereunder would be entitled to bring restrictions 
or provisions only for the purpose of attaining the prescribed 

T.C. ( Etc. 43 
 
professional standards, a mere choice of work could not be 
considered professional misconduct. 
 
4.6 During the course of arguments, analogies were often 
drawn to the legal profession to argue that, it is, firstly, 
inconceivable that a cap could be put on the number of cases 
that an advocate can take up and, secondly, there is no norm, 
custom, or practice of the profession that would require the 
rule-making body to ensure equitable distribution of work to 
younger Chartered Accountants. Relatedly, it was contended 
that the equitable distribution of work cannot automatically 
lead to betterment of the standards of chartered accountancy 
profession in the country. 
 
4.7 It was further submitted on behalf of the petitioners that 
a Chartered Accountant’s fundamental right to practice the 
profession is unreasonably restricted as there is no sanctity in 
the ceiling limit prescribed by the respondent-Institute. 
According to the petitioners, such a restriction ignores the 
differentiation 
in 
professional 
competence, 
sincerity, 
experience, ability and other factors that would enable a 
Chartered Accountant to complete more than the specified limit 

T.C. ( Etc. 44 
 
while simultaneously ensuring compliance with all quality 
standards. The petitioners also vehemently argued that all 
auditors cannot be assumed to take equal time in completing a 
tax audit and the consequential conclusion that a Chartered 
Accountant would be able to satisfactorily fulfil his obligations 
only up to specified tax audit assignments under Section 44AB 
of the IT Act, 1961 would be fallacious. Furthermore, according 
to petitioners, by classifying both in the same category, the 
Guidelines fail to acknowledge the difference in competency 
between a senior Chartered Accountant who has years of 
experience, reputation, facility of ten articled clerks and 
availability of other audit staff with a fresh Chartered 
Accountant who has no articled clerk and no audit staff. 
Reliance in this regard was placed on Raja Video Parlour vs. 
State of Punjab, (1993) (“Raja Video Parlour”), 
wherein this Court held that limiting the maximum seating 
capacity to 50, irrespective of the size of the screen in a cinema 
hall was unconstitutional and violative of Article 19(1)(g). 
 
4.8 Learned counsel for the petitioners have vehemently 
argued that in the absence of any statistics or data supporting 

T.C. ( Etc. 45 
 
the restriction on the number of tax audits and a related 
reasonable explanation justifying such a cap, this restriction 
could not be justified under Article 19(6) of the Constitution. 
Thereby, the petitioners have contended, that the limit on the 
number of tax audits a Chartered Accountant could accept has 
no reasonable nexus with the provisions of Section 44AB. 
 
4.9 The petitioners have also drawn our attention to allegedly-
identical Notification No.1/CA(7)/3/88 dated 13.01.1989 
issued by the Council of the respondent-Institute in exercise 
of powers conferred under Clause (ii) of Part II of Second 
Schedule to the 1949 Act. It was highlighted that said 
Notification brought a restriction of the exact nature, function 
and importantly, restrictive effect wherein a ceiling limit of 
thirty tax audits was imposed under Section 44AB of the IT Act, 
1961. The petitioners have placed most significant reliance on 
the fact that the said Notification was quashed and held to be 
ultra vires the Constitution by a judgment of the Madras High 
Court dated 13.07.1998 in 
and the same was affirmed by a Division Bench of the same 
Court. 

T.C. ( Etc. 46 

4.10 The contention is that the respondent-Institute issued 
impugned Guidelines dated 08.08.2008 during the pendency of 
the challenge to the Madras High Court judgment before this 
Court, solely to negate the binding dictum of judgment of the 
Madras High Court. Neither was any permission of this Court 
sought by respondent-Institute nor was this Court informed on 
01.04.2013 that new Guidelines were of identical nature as the 
Notification impugned therein. Importantly, the argument of 
the petitioners is that the respondent-Institute could not have 
issued notices or instituted disciplinary proceedings, as doing 
so would be in teeth of the dictum laid by the Madras High 
Court which had not been reversed on merits by this Court. 
Reliance was placed by learned counsel for the petitioners on 
Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd. vs. Union of India, (2004) (“Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd.”), to contend that 
when the Madras High Court had quashed an identical 
Notification dated 13.01.1989, the same was in effect 
throughout the territory of India. It was held in Kusum Ingots 
& Alloys Ltd. as under: 

T.C. ( Etc. 47 
 
“22. The Court must have the requisite territorial 
jurisdiction. An order passed on a writ petition 
questioning the constitutionality of a parliamentary 
Act, whether interim or final keeping in view the 
provisions contained in clause (2) of Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India, will have effect throughout the 
territory of India subject of course to the applicability 
of the Act.” 
 
4.11 Challenge to procedural impropriety in issuance of the 
impugned Guidelines was also advanced by the petitioners. It 
was highlighted that impugned Guidelines were not issued in 
compliance with provisions of the 1949 Act as the Regulations 
made by the Council of the respondent-Institute were not 
notified in the official Gazette of India and despite the 
requirements of Section 30B of the Act, Impugned Guidelines 
were not laid before both Houses of Parliament. Thereby, it was 
contended, that the impugned Guidelines do not have the 
sanction of law. Therefore, learned senior counsel and learned 
counsel for the petitioners contended that the Guidelines dated 
08.08.2008 may be struck down as running foul of Articles 
19(1)(g) and 14 of the Constitution of India. 
 
4.12 Learned senior counsel for petitioner in Writ Petition(C) 
No.1360 of 2021, Sri P.S. Patwalia relied upon the judgment of 
this Court in Institute of Chartered Financial Analysts of 

T.C. ( Etc. 48 
 
India vs. Council of the Institute of Chartered Accountants 
of India, (2007), (“Institute of Chartered 
Financial Analysts of India”) to contend that undertaking 
more tax audits could not possibly classify as professional 
misconduct. According to the learned senior counsel, the 
aforesaid case assists their submissions insofar as it was held 
that classification of an activity must be looked at 
pragmatically and within the structural context and realities. 
Therein, it was held that acquiring a qualification could not be 
construed as a professional misconduct and consequentially, 
such a restriction was held to be violative of Articles 14 and 
19(1)(g). On a similar ground, emphasizing the sanctity of a 
right guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g), reliance was placed on 
paras 14 and 15 of the judgment in B.P. Sharma vs. Union of 
India, (2003), (“B.P. Sharma”), wherein this Court 
held as unconstitutional, a ban on carrying on a private 
profession or self-employment on attaining a certain age 
specified by the State in the absence of any reasons therefor. 
 
4.13 Learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners in 
 argued that by no stretch of 

T.C. ( Etc. 49 
 
imagination could the restriction as sought to be imposed 
herein could be achieved simply through a resolution – a 
delegated legislation not specifically provided for by the 
Parliament to impose a quantitative restriction. It was further 
contended that the Guidelines are ultra vires the provisions of 
the Act inasmuch as there is no power at all under the Act to 
lay down a maximum limit on the number of tax audits. 
Learned senior counsel focused on the language of the 
Preamble of the 1949 Act to argue that the Act was sought by 
the Parliament to ‘make provisions’ to regulate the profession. 
Thereby, any regulation made has to relate to a specific 
provision and no omnibus power to regulate has been granted 
to the Council. 
 
4.14 Learned senior counsel Sri Patwalia further contended 
that the power to issue Guidelines has been conferred for the 
first time by the Amendment Act, 2022 by way of insertion of 
sub-clause (fa) and hence the impugned Guideline issued 
earlier in the year 2008 is without authority of law. 
Furthermore, it was contended that where Section 30B of the 
1949 Act provides for power to make Regulations “for the 

T.C. ( Etc. 50 
 
purpose of carrying out the objects of the Act”, subject to the 
following conditions: (i) prior approval of the Central 
Government under Sub-section (3) of Section 30 and (ii) the 
requirement under Section 30-B of laying the same before 
Parliament. The Council could not have circumvented the 
aforesaid mandatory safeguards by resorting to power under 
Section 15, especially when creating penal consequences. 
Reliance in this regard was placed on Municipal Corporation 
of Greater Mumbai vs. Anil Shantaram Khoje, (2016), (“MCGM”) to contend that a regulation comes into 
operation only after promulgation in the official gazette. 
 
4.15 Furthermore, learned senior counsel Sri Preetesh Kapur 
submitted that a restriction of this nature, to be found good in 
law, must have a legitimate nexus to the object sought and 
also, necessarily satisfy the proportionality test elucidated by 
this Court in Modern Dental College and Research Centre 
vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2016), (“Modern 
Dental College and Research Centre”). Learned counsel 
contended that where a fundamental right of an individual is 
abridged, justification of the restriction needs more than mere 

T.C. ( Etc. 51 
 
demonstration of power; that the aforesaid position forms a 
part of our jurisprudence. 
 
4.16 Learned senior counsel elucidated that a significant effect 
of the present restriction would be that a structural advantage 
is accrued to partnership firms over sole practitioners as a 
partnership firm of Chartered Accountants will be able to take 
up more multiples of tax audits than an individual practitioner 
permissibly can under the Guidelines. Learned counsel 
contended that a Chartered Accountant has a fundamental 
right to carry out tax audit, guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g) 
and such a right could not be bartered away to colleagues in a 
partnership firm. 
 
4.17 Learned senior counsel also argued that the impugned 
Guideline is hit from the vice of excessive delegation as a 
resolution, by itself, could not penalize as misconduct for 
taking on more clients. Also, reliance was placed on V. 
Sasidharan vs. Peter and Karunakar, (1984), 
(“V. Sasidharan”) wherein this Court had held that the office 
of a lawyer is not a commercial establishment under the Shop 
& Establishments Act, 1968 (Kerala Act). Relying on the 

T.C. ( Etc. 52 
 
aforesaid, it was contended by learned counsel that a technical 
profession stands on a different footing to other professions and 
while a prescription for technical qualification would be a 
reasonable restriction under Article 19(6), any other restriction 
on a profession must be carefully construed. 
 
4.18 It was argued by learned senior counsel Sri Singh that 
professions have existed even before the Constitution came into 
being. Prior to the enforcement of the Constitution, an attempt 
to move a legislation to restrict the practice of a profession was 
subject to seeking the assent of Governor-General, in case of 
Federal Legislature, and the Governor in case of provincial 
legislature. Importantly, the Governor-General could not have 
given sanction, if a legislation was framed to restrict lawful 
practice of the profession, except in ‘public interest’. As per 
learned counsel, the position could not have been said to be 
worse off after the coming into force of our Constitution, i.e. after repeal of the Government of India Act, 1935. That even if 
there were some safeguards and guardrails, the same could 
only be further emboldened. To buttress his submissions, 
learned counsel Sri Singh also laid emphasis on the judgment 

T.C. ( Etc. 53 
 
of a Constitution Bench of this Court in Aswini Kumar Ghose 
vs. Arabinda Bose, (1952), (“Aswini Kumar 
Ghose”) and Devata Prasad Singh Chaudhuri vs. Chief 
Justice and Judges of Patna High Court, (1962), 
(“Devata Prasad Singh Chaudhuri”), to contend that a rule 
made by an authority to deny the right to exercise essential 
part of a function would be a serious invasion on the statutory 
right to practice. 
 
4.19 Learned senior counsel, Sri Rajshekhar Rao, appearing 
for some of the petitioners submitted on the importance of 
professional identity of a Chartered Accountant. He also argued 
that the object of attaining quality has no nexus with the 
imposed restriction which, effectively restricts both the 
practitioner and the client in making a choice. It was pressed 
that the consequences of a punishment being imposed by the 
respondent-Institute are grave insofar as besides the 
punishment imposed, various audit works namely, Bank Audit 
etc. have a requirement that the auditor must not have suffered 
any kind of punishment for professional misconduct. 

T.C. ( Etc. 54 
 
4.20 According to learned senior counsel, the Council of 
respondent-Institute, under powers conferred on it by the 1949 
Act, deems a member to be qualified and competent to dutifully 
practice the services required of a Chartered Accountant and 
thereby, imposition of a blanket ban by the same Council 
without any qualitative assessment imposes an onerous 
penalty on the rights of a Chartered Accountant. More so, to 
attach a label of professional misconduct without any 
qualitative assessment, simply due to exceeding the maximum 
limit, would be incongruous with the object sought and damage 
future potential prospects without any established relationship 
between numerical benchmark and quality. 
 
4.21 Reliance was placed by the petitioners on a judgment of 
the High Court of Delhi in Shri R. Nanabhoy vs. Union of 
India, 1982 SCC Online Del. 210: CWP No. 2398/81, (“Shri 
R. Nanabhoy”). It was held by Wad, J. therein that Section 
233(B) and Section 637(A) of the Companies Act, 1956 did not 
empower the Central Government to impose any restriction on 
the number of cost audits which a cost accountant may 
undertake. Noting that there was no material to base such a 

T.C. ( Etc. 55 
 
restriction, he further found that such a cap on maximum 
number of audits was arbitrary and in violation of Article 14 of 
the Constitution. 
 
4.22 It was also canvassed on behalf of the petitioners that 
where the challenge to an erstwhile in pari materia Notification 
was not decided on merits the respondent-Institute erred in 
initiating disciplinary proceedings and imposing punishments, 
especially where a stay on the operation of the judgment of 
Madras High Court had been granted. Reliance was placed on 
Shree Chamundi Mopeds Ltd. vs. Church of South India 
Trust Association CSI CINOD Secretariat, Madras, (1992) 
 (‘Chamundi Mopeds’). Petitioners therefore sought 
the reliefs as noted above by allowing the writ petitions. 
Submission of the Respondents: 
5., learned senior counsel Sri Arvind Datar, ably 
assisted by learned counsel Sri Nikunj Dayal, contended that 
the Guideline with regard to exceeding the specified number of 
tax audits being a misconduct was inserted pursuant to the 
communication received from the CBDT and with the aim of 
maintaining quality in tax audits. According to learned senior 

T.C. ( Etc. 56 
 
counsel, putting a cap on the tax audits to be undertaken by 
the Chartered Accountants under Section 44AB of the IT Act, 
1961, would not in any way restrict the freedom envisaged 
under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India. The said cap 
has been envisaged in public interest and therefore saved 
under Article 19(6) of the Constitution of India. 
 
5.1 Learned senior counsel Shri Datar submitted that all writ 
petitioners herein have breached the Guideline and undertaken 
more than the specified number of tax audits as envisaged, 
thereby clearly committing a misconduct. Therefore, they 
would have to face the disciplinary proceedings initiated by the 
respondent-Institute and cannot assail the validity of the 
Guideline by either questioning the competence of the 
respondent-Institute in making such a Guideline or the 
manner in which the said Guideline was introduced on the 
statute book. 
 
5.2 That, the Guidelines dated 08.08.2008 were issued in 
exercise of powers under clause (i) of Part II of the Second 
Schedule of the 1949 Act and in its role as the only statutory 
body for regulating and governing the profession of Chartered 

T.C. ( Etc. 57 
 
Accountants, the respondent-Institute can define misconduct 
to ensure quality and professional good conduct. Further, the 
object is not to prohibit practice of but only to maintain quality 
in audit work, which is wholly in the interest of the general 
public including the ITD. It was further contended that the 
objects of both, the instant Guidelines dated 08.08.2008 and 
the erstwhile Notification dated 13.01.1989 have been to 
ensure efficiency, improve quality service, ensure maintenance 
of high standards of performance and to have equitable 
distribution of tax audit work amongst members of the 
respondent-Institute. 
 
5.3 Learned senior counsel for the respondent-Institute 
submitted that the notified limit on tax audits has been decided 
by the Council, an expert body, on consideration of all 
pragmatic limitations and other work undertaken by a 
Chartered Accountant besides tax audit under Section 44AB, 
IT Act,1961. Section 139 of the IT Act, 1961 mandatorily 
requires every assessee, governed by provisions of Section 
44AB of the IT Act, 1961, to file tax audit report along with his 
return before the due date – presently, 30th September of every 

T.C. ( Etc. 58 
 
year. That being the case, the respondent-Institute contended 
that a Chartered Accountant cannot conceivably complete 
more than the specified number of audits in a period of 25-30 
weeks, i.e., from April-September of the relevant assessment 
year. 
 
5.4 Learned senior counsel sought to repel the argument that 
the petitioners’ right under Article 19(1)(g) is violated by the 
restriction. Instead, it was argued that the right of an Indian 
citizen under the Constitution to practice any profession is not 
an absolute right but can be appropriately limited under Article 
19(6). It was submitted that the right to practice as a Chartered 
Accountant is conferred by the 1949 Act and the same may be 
limited by conditions and limitations stipulated under the Act 
or Regulations or Guidelines framed thereunder. The 
contention of the respondent-Institute was that under Article 
19(1)(g), what is available is a right to practice as a Chartered 
Accountant in accordance with the 1949 Act and the 
Guidelines or regulations made thereunder which is subject to 
reasonable restrictions. 

T.C. ( Etc. 59 
 
5.5 Sri Datar took us through a wide variety of professional 
work that can be undertaken by a Chartered Accountant in 
practice such as statutory corporate audit, representation 
before tax authorities, consultation, audits under Section 
44AF, audits under Section 141(3)(g) of the Companies Act, etc. 
It was contended that the ceiling has been imposed only in 
respect of the statutory tax audits under Section 44AB of the 
IT Act, 1961, which form a class by themselves as they involve 
more time and effort and are significantly more onerous. 
 
5.6 On the question of professional misconduct, respondent-
Institute sought to argue that the expression ‘professional 
misconduct’ cannot be construed to mean only an irregularity 
or an act of lowering of dignity of the profession. Rather, the 
respondent-Institute being a regulatory body of professionals 
can define misconduct to control and penalize a deviation from 
the quality compliance standards, inter alia, for which the 
respondent-Institute has been established by the Parliament to 
ensure. Reliance was placed on Section 30 of the 1949 Act, read 
with clause (i) of Part II of the Second Schedule of the 1949 Act, 

T.C. ( Etc. 60 
 
to act effectively for ensuring compliance with standards of the 
Institute by penalizing a deviation as a misconduct. 
 
5.7 Learned 
senior 
counsel 
for 
the 
respondent-
Institute argued that a serious public purpose involved behind 
the Notification is visible under the 1949 Act which seeks to 
regulate the profession, hence the impugned Guidelines are 
issued to ensure maintenance of quality and standards in the 
work done and services rendered by Chartered Accountants. 
This would also aid in better and equitable distribution of work 
amongst 
the 
Chartered 
Accountants 
and 
to 
avoid 
concentration of professional work in a few hands, to ensure 
which is also a duty cast upon the Council in furtherance of its 
regulatory functions under the said Act. As per the respondent-
Institute, the Council is in the best position to have definite 
information about deterioration in the quality of work, as also 
monopolization – both relevant factors in taking a decision on 
the maximum number of tax audits to be accepted. 
 
5.8 It was also contended that a reduction in income and/or 
client base is not a ground in itself to say that fundamental 

T.C. ( Etc. 61 
 
rights of a professional are affected. Nor can there by a 
comparison with the Advocate’s profession. 
 
5.9 To contravene the contention raised by petitioners that 
neither does the 1949 Act contemplate distribution of available 
work amongst Chartered Accountants, nor is there any 
obligation to provide work for young Chartered Accountants, it 
was contended that under the 1949 Act, the respondent-
Institute has a responsibility to regulate the profession and 
hence, the Guidelines have been made to ensure quality work 
and equitable distribution of work amongst Chartered 
Accountants which objects are indisputably in furtherance of 
that statutory duty. 
It was also submitted that the Division Bench of Madras 
High Court did not consider the judgment of the learned Single 
Judge of the Kerala High Court in B.K. Kamath vs. The 
Institute of Chartered Accountants, (2003) 2 KLJ 21, (“B.K. 
Kamath”). However, the judgment of learned Single Judge of 
the Madras High Court was considered and dealt with by the 
Kerala High Court. 
5.10 Learned senior counsel, Sri Datar placed reliance on a 
judgment of this court in Pathumma vs. State of Kerala, 

T.C. ( Etc. 62 
 
(1978), (“Pathumma”), in support of his contention 
that a just balance between the fundamental rights and the 
larger and broader interest of society must be struck by this 
Court while trying to protect fundamental rights. Furthermore, 
it was argued that this Court should defer to the Legislature in 
appreciating the needs of the people and interfere only when 
the statute is clearly violative of the right conferred on the 
citizens under Part III of the Constitution. In addition to the 
foregoing, reliance was also placed on M/s Laxmi Khandsari 
vs. State of U.P., (1981), (“M/s Laxmi 
Khandsari”), to submit that if the restrictions imposed appear 
to be consistent with the Directive Principles of State Policy in 
Part IV of the Constitution they would have to be upheld as the 
same would be in public interest and reasonable. Further, 
according 
to 
learned 
senior 
counsel, 
in 
judging 
the 
reasonableness, this Court should bear in mind that the 
present restriction is imposed in furtherance of Part IV of the 
Constitution. 
5.11 Further reliance was also placed on Minerva Talkies, 
Bangalore vs. State of Karnataka, AIR 1988 SC 526 
(“Minerva Talkies”), in support of the contention that 

T.C. ( Etc. 63 
 
Chartered Accountants have no unrestricted fundamental right 
to carry on the profession unregulated by the provisions of the 
the 1949 Act, including the regulations made and the 
Guidelines issued thereunder in the interest of general public 
and the society at large. In Minerva Talkies, this Court had 
upheld the restriction to limit the number of cinema shows to 
four in a day. This Court had further held that no law can be 
held to be unreasonable merely because it results in reduction 
in the income of the citizen. 

5.12 Learned senior counsel, Sri Datar, also argued that the 
power to regulate a particular business or profession implies 
the power to prescribe and enforce all such just and reasonable 
rules and regulations, as may be deemed necessary for conduct 
of business or profession in a proper and orderly manner vide 
Deepak Theatre, Dhuri vs. State of Punjab, 1992 Suppl. (1) 
SCC 684, (“Deepak Theatre”). Reliance was further placed by 
the respondents on T. Velayudhan Achari vs. Union of 
India, (1993), (“T. Velayudhan Achari”), wherein 
it was held that limiting the number of depositors that can be 
accepted by an individual, firm or unincorporated associations 
under Section 45S(1) of the Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, 

T.C. ( Etc. 64 
 
1983 is not violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution, as it 
is in public interest that larger interests of the depositors are 
protected. 

5.13 The judgment of Delhi High Court in Shri R. Nanabhoy, 
was sought to be distinguished from the present case by citing 
the presence of both legislative sanction and expert opinion, 
vide CBDT Letter dated 19.01.1988 and CAG Report No.32 of 
2014, supporting the utility of the measure in achieving the 
objects sought, namely, quality and accuracy in such audits. 
5.14 Therefore, it was prayed by the respondent-Institute that 
all the writ petitions/transferred cases filed before various High 
Courts and this Court challenging the validity of Chapter VI of 
the Council Guidelines No.1-CA(7)/02/2008 dated 08.08.2008 
issued by the respondent-Institute be held to be devoid of any 
merits and thereby dismissed. 
Points for Consideration: 
6. Having heard learned senior counsel and learned counsel 
appearing for the respective parties and upon perusal of the 
record, the following points would arise for our consideration: 

T.C. ( Etc. 65 

Whether the Council of the respondent-Institute, under the 
1949 Act, was competent to impose, by way of Guidelines, 
a numerical restriction on the maximum number of tax 
audits that could be accepted by a Chartered Accountant, 
under Section 44AB of the IT Act, 1961, in a Financial Year 
by way of a Guideline? 
(ii) Whether the restrictions imposed are unreasonable and 
therefore, violative of the right guaranteed to Chartered 
Accountants under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution? 
(iii) Whether the restrictions imposed are arbitrary and illegal 
and therefore, impermissible under Article 14 of the 
Constitution? 
(iv) Whether exceeding such specified number of tax audits can 
be deemed to be ‘professional misconduct’? 
(v) What order? 
 
Legal Framework: 
 
7. At this stage, the relevant provisions of the 1949 Act must 
be perused. The Government of India framed the Auditors 
Certificate Rules in 1932 in exercise of the powers conferred by 
Section 144 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913. While the 
accountancy profession in India was regulated under those 

T.C. ( Etc. 66 
 
Rules, in order to have a permanent regulation of accountancy 
profession, it was found necessary to have a body to secure and 
maintain 
all 
the 
requisite 
standards 
of 
professional 
qualifications, discipline and conduct of the accountancy. 
 
7.1 In the above context, of particular relevance is the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the 1949 Act (see Gazette 
of India, 11-09-1948, Pt. V, p. 709), which is reproduced 
hereunder:- 
“STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
1. The accountancy profession in India is at present 
regulated by the Auditors Certificates Rules framed in 
1932 in exercise of the powers conferred on the 
Government of India by Section 144 of the Indian 
Companies Act, 1913, and the Indian Accountancy 
Board advises Government in all matters relating to 
the profession and assists it in maintaining the 
standards of the professional qualifications and 
conduct required of the members of the profession. 
The majority of the Board’s members are elected by 
Registered Accountants members of the profession 
from all parts of India. These arrangements have, 
however, all long been intended to be only transitional, 
to lead up to a system in which such accountants 
will, in autonomous association of themselves, 
largely assume the responsibilities involved in the 
discharge of their public duties by securing 
maintenance 
of 
the 
requisite 
standard 
of 
professional 
qualifications, 
discipline 
and 
conduct, the control of the Central Government being 
confined to a very few specified matters. 
 
2. The Bill seeks to authorise the incorporation by 
statute of such an autonomous professional body and 

T.C. ( Etc. 67 
 
embodies a scheme which is largely the result of a 
detailed examination of the whole position by an ad 
hoc expert body constituted for the purpose, after 
taking into account the views expressed by the various 
Provincial Governments and public bodies concerned.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Therefore, the 1949 Act was enacted with the object of 
incorporating an autonomous professional body of accountants 
that would, in respect of discharge of their public duties, 
provide for uniform regulation of the profession. Thereby, it is 
apparent that the relationship of the profession to public duty 
is closely present even in the earliest statutory prescription. 
7.2 It is pertinent to note that the long title and preamble of 
the 1949 Act was amended, w.e.f. 10.05.2022, vide the 
Chartered Accountants, the Cost and Works Accountants and 
the Company Secretaries (Amendment) Act, 2022, to substitute 
“regulation 
and 
development” 
instead 
of 
the 
extant 
“regulation”. 
 The amended long title and preamble of the 1949 Act 
reads as under: 
“An Act to make provision for the regulation and 
development 
of 
the 
profession 
of 
Chartered 
Accountants.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

T.C. ( Etc. 68 

7.3 Section 2 of the 1949 Act deals with interpretation and 
the relevant clauses of Section 2 are extracted as under: 
“2. Interpretation.- (1) In this Act, unless there is 
anything repugnant in the subject or context,− 
x x x 
(b) “chartered accountant” means a person who is a 
member of the Institute; 
(c) “Council” means the Council of the Institute; 
x x x 
(e) “Institute” means the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of India constituted under this Act; 
x x x 
(2) A member of the Institute shall be deemed “to be in 
practice”, when individually or in partnership with 
chartered accountants in practice, or in partnership 
with members of such other recognised professions as 
may 
be 
prescribed, 
he, 
in 
consideration 
of 
remuneration received or to be received,− 
(i) engages himself in the practice of accountancy; or 
(ii) offers to perform or performs services involving the 
auditing or verification of financial transactions, 
books, accounts or records, or the preparation, 
verification or certification of financial accounting 
and related statements or holds himself out to the 
public as an accountant; or 
(iii) renders professional services or assistance in or 
about matters of principle or detail relating to 
accounting 
procedure 
or 
the 
recording, 
presentation or certification of financial facts or 
data: or 
(iv) renders such other services as, in the opinion of 
the Council are or may be rendered by a chartered 
accountant in practice; 

T.C. ( Etc. 69 
 
and the words “to be in practice” with their 
grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall 
be construed accordingly. 
Explanation.− An associate or a fellow of the 
Institute who is a salaried employee of a chartered 
accountant in practice or a firm of such chartered 
accountants or firm consisting of one or more 
chartered accountants and members of any other 
professional body having prescribed qualifications 
shall, notwithstanding such employment, be deemed 
to be in practice for the limited purpose of the training 
of articled assistants.” 
 
7.4 Section 3 deals with incorporation of Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of India while Section 7 states that 
every member of the Institute is to be known as Chartered 
Accountant. Vide Section 9, the Council of the Institute is 
constituted for the management of the affairs of the 
Institute and for discharging the functions assigned to it 
under the Act and its functions are delineated in Section 
15. The above-mentioned Sections are extracted as under: 
“3. Incorporation of the Institute.- 
(1) All persons whose names are entered in the 
Register at the commencement of this Act and all 
persons who may hereafter have their names entered 
in the Register under the provisions of this Act, so long 
as they continue to have their names borne on the said 
Register, are hereby constituted a body corporate by 
the name of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
India, and all such persons shall be known as 
members of the Institute. 

T.C. ( Etc. 70 
 
(2) The Institute shall have perpetual succession and 
a common seal and shall have power to acquire, hold 
and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, 
and shall by its name sue or be sued. x x x 
7. 
Members 
to 
be 
known 
as 
Chartered 
Accountants.- Every member of the Institute in 
practice shall, and any other member may, use the 
designation of a chartered accountant and no member 
using 
such 
designation 
shall 
use 
any 
other 
description, whether in addition thereto or in 
substitution therefor: 
 Provided that nothing contained in this Section 
shall be deemed to prohibit any such person from 
adding any other description or letters to his name, if 
entitled thereto, to indicate membership of such other 
Institute of accountancy, whether in India or 
elsewhere, as may be recognised in this behalf by the 
Council, or any other qualification that he may 
possess, or to prohibit a firm, all the partners of which 
are members of the Institute and in practice, from 
being known by its firm name as Chartered 
Accountants. x x x 
9. Constitution of the Council of the Institute.- (1) 
There shall be a Council of the Institute for the 
management of the affairs of the Institute and for 
discharging the functions assigned to it under this Act. 
(2) The Council shall be composed of the following 
persons, namely:− 
(a) not more than thirty-two persons elected by the 
members of the Institute from amongst the fellows 
of the Institute chosen in such manner and from 
such regional constituencies as may be specified: 
Provided that a fellow of the Institute, who has been 
found guilty of any professional or other misconduct 
and whose name is removed from the Register or has 

T.C. ( Etc. 71 
 
been awarded penalty of fine, shall not be eligible to 
contest the election,− 
(i) in case of misconduct falling under the First 
Schedule of this Act, for a period of three years; 
(ii) in case of misconduct falling under the Second 
Schedule of this Act, for a period of six years, 
from the completion of the period of removal of 
name from the Register or payment of fine, as the 
case may be; 
(b) not more than eight persons to be nominated in 
the specified manner, by the Central Government. 
(3) No person holding a post under the Central 
Government or a State Government shall be eligible for 
election to the Council under clause (a) of sub-section 
(2). 
(4) No person who has been auditor of the Institute 
shall be eligible for election to the Council under 
clause (a) of sub-section (2), for a period of three years 
after he ceases to be an auditor. x x x 
15. Functions of Council.- 
(1) The Institute shall function under the overall 
control, guidance and supervision of the Council and 
the duty of carrying out the provisions of this Act shall 
be vested in the Council. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing powers, the duties of the 
Council shall include – 
(a) to approve academic courses and their contents; 
(b) the examination of candidates for enrolment and 
the prescribing of fees therefor; 
(c) the regulation of the engagement and training of 
articled and audit assistants; 
(d) the prescribing of qualifications for entry in the 
Register; 

T.C. ( Etc. 72 
 
(e) the recognition of foreign qualifications and 
training for the purposes of enrolment; 
(f) the granting or refusal of certificates of practice 
under this Act; 
(g) the maintenance and publication of a Register of 
persons 
qualified 
to 
practice 
as 
chartered 
accountants; 
(h) the levy and collection of fees from members, 
examinees and other persons; 
(i) subject to the orders of the appropriate authorities 
under the Act, the removal of names from the 
Register and the restoration to the Register of 
names which have been removed; 
(j) the regulation and maintenance of the status and 
standard 
of 
professional 
qualifications 
of 
members of the Institute; 
(k) the carrying out, by granting financial assistance 
to persons other than members of the Council or 
in any other manner, of research in accountancy; 
(l) the maintenance of a library and publication of 
books and periodicals relating to accountancy; 
(m) to enable functioning of the Director (Discipline), 
the 
Board 
of 
Discipline, 
the 
Disciplinary 
Committee 
and 
the 
Appellate 
Authority 
constituted under the provisions of this Act; 
(n) to enable functioning of the Quality Review Board; 
(o) consideration of the recommendations of the 
Quality Review Board made under clause (a) of 
Section 28B and the details of action taken 
thereon in its annual report; and 
(p) to ensure the functioning of the Institute in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and in 
performance of other statutory duties as may be 
entrusted to the Institute from time to time.” 

T.C. ( Etc. 73 
 
7.5 Clause (fa) was inserted by the ‘Chartered Accountants, 
the Cost and Works Accountants and the Company Secretaries 
(Amendment) Act, 2022’ and the same reads as under: 
“15. Functions of Council.- 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing powers, the duties of the 
Council shall include – 
x x x 
(fa) to issue guidelines for the purpose of carrying out 
the objects of this Act;” 
 
7.6 Chapter V of the 1949 Act deals with Misconduct. Section 
22 defines professional or other misconduct as under: 
“22. Professional or other misconduct defined.- For 
the purposes of this Act, the expression “professional 
or other misconduct” shall be deemed to include any 
act or omission provided in any of the Schedules, but 
nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit or 
abridge in any way the power conferred or duty cast 
on the Director (Discipline) under sub-section (1) of 
Section 21 to inquire into the conduct of any member 
of the Institute under any other circumstances.” 
 
Section 22 of the 1949 Act defines “professional or other 
misconduct” to include any act or omission provided in any of 
the Schedules to the Act. Clause (1) of Part II of the Second 
Schedule to the Act stipulates that a member of the Institute, 
whether in practice or not, shall be deemed to be guilty of 

T.C. ( Etc. 74 
 
professional misconduct if he contravenes any of the provisions 
of the Act or the regulations made thereunder or any Guidelines 
issued by the Council of the respondent-Institute. For 
immediate reference the same reads as under: 
“PART II: Professional misconduct in relation to 
members of the Institute generally 
A member of the Institute, whether in practice or 
not, shall be deemed to be guilty of professional 
misconduct, if he – 
(1) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act 
or the regulations made thereunder or any 
guidelines issued by the Council;” 
Therefore, if a member of the Institute contravenes the 
provisions of the aforesaid Chapter VI of the Guidelines dated 
08.08.2008, he shall be deemed to be guilty of professional 
misconduct under the 1949 Act. Clause 6 is extracted as 
under: 
“Chapter VI 
Tax Audit assignments under Section 44AB of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961 
6.0 
A member of the Institute in practice shall not 
accept, in a financial year, more than the 
“specified number of tax audit assignments” 
under Section 44AB of the Income-tax Act, 
1961. 
Provided that in the case of a firm of 
Chartered 
Accountants 
in 
practice, 
the 
“specified number of tax audit assignments” 
shall be construed as the specified number of 

T.C. ( Etc. 75 
 
tax audit assignments for every partner of the 
firm. 
Provided further that where any partner of 
the firm is also a partner of any other firm or 
firms of Chartered Accountants in practice, the 
number of tax audit assignments which may be 
taken for all the firms together in relation to 
such partner shall not exceed the “specified 
number of tax audit assignments” in the 
aggregate. 
Provided further that where any partner of 
a firm of Chartered Accountants in practice 
accepts one or more tax audit assignments in 
his individual capacity, the total number of 
such assignments which may be accepted by 
him shall not exceed the “specified number of 
tax audit assignments” in the aggregate. 
Provided also that the audits conducted 
under Section 44AD, 44AE and 44AF of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961 shall not be taken into 
account for the purpose of reckoning the 
“specified number of tax audit assignments”. 
6.1 Explanation: 
For the above purpose, “the specified number of 
tax audit assignments” means – 
(a) in the case of a Chartered Accountant in 
practice or a proprietary firm of Chartered 
Accountant, 45 tax audit assignments, in 
a financial year, whether in respect of 
corporate or non-corporate assesses. 
(b) in 
the 
case 
of 
firm 
of 
Chartered 
Accountants in practice, 45 tax audit 
assignments per partner in the firm, in a 
financial year, whether in respect of 
corporate or non-corporate assesses. 

T.C. ( Etc. 76 
 
6.1.1 In computing the “specified number of tax audit 
assignments” each year’s audit would be taken 
as a separate assignment. 
6.1.2 In computing the “specified number of tax audit 
assignments”, the number of such assignments, 
which he or any partner of his firm has accepted 
whether singly or in combination with any other 
Chartered Accountant in practice or firm of 
such Chartered Accountants, shall be taken 
into account. 
6.1.3 The audit of the head office and branch offices 
of a concern shall be regarded as one tax audit 
assignment. 
6.1.4 The audit of one or more branches of the same 
concern by one Chartered Accountant in 
practice shall be construed as only one tax audit 
assignment. 
6.1.5 A Chartered Accountant being a part time 
practicing partner of a firm shall not be taken 
into account for the purpose of reckoning the 
tax audit assignments of the firm. 
6.1.6 A Chartered Accountant in practice shall 
maintain a record of the tax audit assignments 
accepted by him relating to each financial year 
in the format as may be prescribed by the 
Council.” 
 
The Council at its 331st meeting held from 10th to 12th 
February, 2014 decided to increase the “specified number of 
tax audit assignments” for practicing Chartered Accountants, 
as an individual or as a partner in a firm, from forty-five to 

T.C. ( Etc. 77 
 
sixty. The said limit will be effective for the audits conducted 
during the financial year 2014-15 and onwards. 
 
7.7 Section 21 refers to Disciplinary Directorate, while 
Section 21A deals with Board of Discipline and Section 21B 
deals with Disciplinary Committee. Section 21C states that the 
Authority, the Disciplinary Committee, Board of Discipline and 
the Director (Discipline) shall have the powers of a Civil Court. 
These provisions have to be read with the Schedules to the 
1949 Act. The First Schedule of the 1949 Act deals with 
professional misconduct in relation to Chartered Accountants 
in practice and it enumerates various types of misconduct. It 
has four Parts. Part I deals with professional misconduct in 
relation to Chartered Accountants in practice. Part II deals with 
professional misconduct in relation to members of the Institute 
in service. Part III deals with professional misconduct in 
relation to members of the Institute generally. Part IV deals 
with other misconduct in relation to members of the Institute 
generally. Part I of the Second Schedule speaks about 
professional misconduct in relation to Chartered Accountants 
in practice while Part II deals with professional misconduct in 

T.C. ( Etc. 78 
 
relation to members of the Institute generally. Part III thereof 
refers to other misconduct in relation to members of the 
Institute generally. 
 
7.8 The First Schedule has to be read as part of Sections 
21(3), 21A(3) and 22, while the Second Schedule has to be read 
as part of Sections 21(3), 21B(3) and 22. 
In particular, what is relevant is with regard to a member 
of the Institute, whether in practice or not, contravening any of 
the provisions of the Act or the regulations made thereunder or 
any Guideline issued by the Council, who shall be deemed to 
be 
guilty 
of 
professional 
misconduct. 
What 
falls 
for 
interpretation in this batch of cases is the expression “any 
Guidelines issued by the Council”. The Institute issued, inter 
alia, the Guidelines by Notification dated 08.08.2008. 
 
7.9 According to the petitioners, the object of ensuring quality 
of audits would be served better by frequent reviews by the 
Quality Review Board established under Section 28A. The said 
section is reproduced as under: 

T.C. ( Etc. 79 
 
“28A. Establishment of Quality Review Board 

The Central Government shall, by notification, 
constitute a Quality Review Board consisting of 
a Chairperson and ten other members. 

The Chairperson and members of the Board 
shall be appointed from amongst the persons of 
eminence having experience in the field of law, 
economics, business, finance or accountancy. 

Five members of the Board shall be nominated 
by the Council and other five members shall be 
nominated by the Central Government.” 
 
7.10 Section 30 gives the Council of respondent-Institute the 
power to make regulations to fulfil its functions and duties. For 
ease of reference, relevant portions of Section 30 read as under: 
“30. Power to make regulations 

The Council may, by notification in the “Gazette 
of India”, make regulations for the purpose of 
carrying out the objects of this Act. 

In particular, and without prejudice to the 
generality 
of 
the 
foregoing 
power, 
such 
regulations may provide for all or any of the 
following matters:− 
(a) the standard and conduct of examinations 
under this Act; 
(b) the qualifications for the entry of the name 
of any person in the Register as a member 
of the Institute; 
(c) the 
conditions 
under 
which 
any 
examination or training may be treated as 

T.C. ( Etc. 80 
 
equivalent to the examination and training 
prescribed for members of the Institute; 
(d) the conditions under which any foreign 
qualification may be recognised; 
(e) the manner in which and the conditions 
subject to which applications for entry in 
the Register may be made; 
(f) the fees payable for membership of the 
Institute and the annual fees payable by 
associates and fellows of the Institute in 
respect of their certificates; 
x x x 
(k) the regulation and maintenance of the 
status 
and 
standard 
of 
professional 
qualifications of members of the Institute; 
x x x 
(t) any other matter which is required to be or 
may be prescribed under this Act. 

All regulations made by the Council under this 
Act shall be subject to the condition of previous 
publication and to the approval of the Central 
Government. 

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub- 
sections (1) and (2) the Central Government may 
frame the first regulations for the purposes 
mentioned in this Section, and such regulations 
shall be deemed to have been made by the 
Council, and shall remain in force from the date 
of the coming into force of this Act, until they 
are amended, altered or revoked by the 
Council.” 

T.C. ( Etc. 81 
 
7.11 Section 30B deals with laying procedure before the 
Parliament and the same is extracted as under: 
“30B. Rules, regulations and notifications to be 
laid before Parliament 
Every rule and every regulation made and every 
notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made or issued, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, 
regulation or notification, or both Houses agree that 
the rule, regulation or notification should not be made 
or issued, the rule, regulation or notification, shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule, regulation or notification.” 
 
7.12 Chapter VIII of the Chartered Accountants Regulations, 
1988, framed under the provisions of the 1949 Act, relates to 
‘Meetings and Proceedings of the Council’. Regulation 163 
provides that the President of the respondent-Institute will 
assume the Chairmanship of the Council. Regulation 166 
prescribes the manner of passing of resolution at a meeting. 
The aforesaid regulations are reproduced as under: 

T.C. ( Etc. 82 
 
“163. Chairman of meeting 
At a meeting of the Council, the President, or in his 
absence the Vice-President, shall preside, or in the 
absence of both, a member elected from among the 
members who are present, shall preside. x x x 
166. Passing of resolution at a meeting 
At a meeting of the Council, a resolution shall be 
passed by a majority of the members present unless 
otherwise require by the Act or these Regulations, and 
in the case of equality of votes, the Chairman of the 
meeting shall have a casting vote.” 
 
7.13 The Council of the respondent-Institute, in exercise of its 
powers conferred by clause (ii) of Part II of the Second Schedule 
of the 1949 Act, issued a Notification bearing No.1/CA(7)/3/88 
dated 13.01.1989 specifying that a member of the Institute in 
practice shall be deemed to be guilty of professional 
misconduct, if he accepts in a financial year, more than 
specified number of tax audit assignments under Section 44AB 
of the IT Act, 1961, the specified number being thirty (now 
sixty) in a financial year, whether in respect of corporate or 
non-corporate assesses. 
 
7.14 As for relevant provisions of the IT Act, 1961 is concerned, 
Section 44AB of the IT Act, 1961 was inserted in the statute 

T.C. ( Etc. 83 
 
book by the Finance Act, 1984 and the same came into force 
with effect from 01.04.1985. Presently, Section 44AB provides 
that every person carrying on business, whose total sale, 
turnover or gross receipts exceed Rs.10 crore, and every person 
carrying on a profession, if his gross receipts exceed Rs.50 
lakhs, in any previous year, is required to get his accounts of 
such previous year audited by a Chartered Accountant, and 
obtain before the specified date, a report of the audit in the 
prescribed form duly signed and verified by such Chartered 
Accountant. The said provision is popularly called “compulsory 
tax audits”. The object and purpose of Section 44AB is to 
prevent evasion of taxes, plug loopholes enabling tax avoidance 
and also facilitate tax administration, which would ensure that 
the economic system does not result in concentration of wealth 
to the common detriment. For immediate reference, Section 
44AB of the IT Act, 1961 as it stands presently is extracted as 
under: 
“44AB. Audit of accounts of certain persons 
carrying 
on 
business 
or 
profession.—Every 
person,— 
 
(a) carrying on business shall, if his total sales, 
turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be, in 

T.C. ( Etc. 84 
 
business exceed or exceeds one crore rupees in 
any previous year; 
 
Provided that in the case of a person whose- 
 
(a)aggregate of all amounts received including 
amount received for sales, turnover or gross 
receipts during the previous year, in cash, does 
not exceed five per cent of the said amount; and 
 
(b)aggregate of all payments made including 
amount incurred for expenditure, in cash, 
during the previous year does not exceed five per 
cent of the said payment, 
 
this clause shall have effect as if for the words “one 
crore rupees”, the words ten crore rupees had been 
substituted; or 
 
Provided further that for the purposes of this 
clause, the payment or receipt, as the case may be, by 
a cheque drawn on a bank or by a bank draft, which 
is not account payee, shall be deemed to be the 
payment or receipt, as the case may be, in cash. 
 
(b) carrying on profession shall, if his gross receipts 
in profession exceed fifty lakh rupees in any 
previous year; or 
 
(c) carrying on the business shall, if the profits and 
gains from the business are deemed to be the 
profits and gains of such person under section 
44AE or section 44BB or section 44BBB, as the 
case may be, and he has claimed his income to be 
lower than the profits or gains so deemed to be the 
profits and gains of his business, as the case may 
be, in any previous year; or 
 
(d) carrying on the profession shall, if the profits and 
gains from the profession are deemed to be the 
profits and gains of such person under section 
44ADA and he has claimed such income to be 

T.C. ( Etc. 85 
 
lower than the profits and gains so deemed to be 
the profits and gains of his profession and his 
income exceeds the maximum amount which is 
not chargeable to income-tax in any previous year; 
or 
 
(e) carrying on the business shall, if the provisions of 
sub-section (4) of section 44AD are applicable in 
his case and his income exceeds the maximum 
amount which is not chargeable to income-tax in 
any previous year, 
 
get his accounts of such previous year audited by an 
accountant before the specified date and furnish by 
that date the report of such audit in the prescribed 
form duly signed and verified by such accountant and 
setting forth such particulars as may be prescribed: 
 
Provided that this section shall not apply to a person, 
who declares profits and gains for the previous year in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of 
section 44AD or sub-section (1) of Section 44ADA: 
 
Provided further that this section shall not apply to the 
person, who derives income of the nature referred to 
in section 44B or section 44BBA, on and from the 1st 
day of April, 1985, or, as the case may be, the date on 
which the relevant section came into force, whichever 
is later: 
 
Provided also that in a case where such person is 
required by or under any other law to get his accounts 
audited, it shall be sufficient compliance with the 
provisions of this section if such person gets the 
accounts of such business or profession audited 
under such law before the specified date and furnishes 
by that date the report of the audit as required under 
such other law and a further report by an accountant 
in the form prescribed under this section. 

T.C. ( Etc. 86 
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 
 
(i) “accountant” shall have the same meaning as in 
the Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 
288; 
 
(ii) “specified date”, in relation to the accounts of the 
assessee of the previous year relevant to an 
assessment year, means date one month prior to 
the due date for furnishing the return of income 
under sub-section (1) of section 139.” 
 
Discussion: 
8. 
We have heard the matter at length and perused the 
compilations submitted by learned senior counsel and learned 
counsel and perused the material on record. 
 
9. 
During the course of submissions, we observed that the 
catalyst for filing these writ petitions was the issuance of the 
communications/notices to the petitioners herein pursuant to 
the Guideline dated 08.08.2008, violation of which is a 
misconduct. Although by an amendment made to the said 
Guidelines, a new type of misconduct was envisaged, since the 
respondent-Institute had initially not taken any steps vis-à-vis 
the said misconduct, there was no challenge as such to the 
Guideline as well as amendment thereto in question by any of 
the petitioners herein. Admittedly, the writ petitioners have 

T.C. ( Etc. 87 
 
undertaken audits under Section 44AB of the IT Act, 1961 over 
and above the number of tax audits specified as per the 
Guidelines dated 08.08.2008. Thereby, it is in the guise of 
challenging the disciplinary proceedings initiated by the 
respondent-Institute 
against 
the 
petitioners 
herein 
for 
conducting the audits over and above the specified number of 
tax audits that has led to the constitutional challenge to the 
Guidelines as well as to the disciplinary proceedings. 
 
10. This challenge is on three grounds: first, the manner in 
which the Guideline was brought about was not in accordance 
with law; second, that the Guideline is violative of Article 
19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India and not protected by Article 
19(6) thereof and third, the Guideline which constitutes a 
misconduct within Clause (c) of Part II of the Second Schedule 
to the 1949 Act has not at all been enforced until very recently 
and it has been enforced only selectively, and therefore, there 
is non-compliance of the equality clause envisaged under 
Article 14 of the Constitution of India. 
 
11. During the course of submissions, learned senior counsel 
Sri Datar submitted that although a little over ten thousand 

T.C. ( Etc. 88 
 
Chartered Accountants had violated the Guideline in question, 
notices for initiation of disciplinary proceedings were at first 
issued only in respect of a few of them, including writ 
petitioners herein and those who had undertaken more than 
two hundred tax audits. In regard to others, who had exceeded 
the specified number of tax audits, no disciplinary proceedings 
have been initiated as yet. 
 
12. At the outset, we consider it useful to examine the 
privilege conferred under the 1949 Act to practise the 
profession of a Chartered Accountant. Reference to the 
observation of this Court in All-India Federation of Tax 
Practitioners vs. Union of India, (2007), (“All-
India Federation of Tax Practitioners”), is helpful in this 
regard. In answering the question of whether the Parliament 
was competent to levy service tax on services rendered by 
Chartered Accountants, this Court observed at para 34 that a 
Chartered Accountant or a Cost Accountant obtains a license 
or a privilege from the competent body to practise. We find 
ourselves in agreement with this observation. Reading along 
with Section 2(1)(b) of the 1949 Act which defines a Chartered 

T.C. ( Etc. 89 
 
Accountant as a person who is a member of the respondent-
Institute, we find it right to infer that a member of the 
respondent-Institute is conferred with the privilege of being 
able to practise as a Chartered Accountant. 
 
12.1 As held by this Court in Kerala Ayurveda Paramparya 
Vaidya Forum vs. State of Kerala, (2018), 
(“Kerala Ayurveda Paramparya Vaidya Forum”) a right to 
practice a profession is indeed an acknowledged fundamental 
right, but not unrestricted and is subject to any law imposing 
regulatory measures aiming to ensure standards of the 
profession and nature of public interest involved in the practice 
of the profession. 
Re: Point No.1: Whether the Council of the respondent-
Institute, under the 1949 Act, was competent to impose, 
by way of Guidelines, a numerical restriction on the 
maximum number of tax audits that could be accepted by 
a Chartered Accountant, under Section 44AB of the IT Act, 
1961, in a Financial Year by way of a Guideline? 
 
13. We have perused the impugned Guideline dated 
08.08.2008 which is extracted above. The same has to be read 
in the context of the respondent-Institute functioning under 
the overall control, guidance and supervision of the Council 

T.C. ( Etc. 90 
 
which means the Council of the Institute has to carry out the 
duties so as to achieve the objects of the Act as delineated in 
its various provisions of the 1949 Act, vide Section 15. The 
power vested in the Council is general insofar as the carrying 
out the provision of the Act is concerned and in particular and 
without prejudice to the generality of the aforesaid powers, 
certain duties have been specifically delineated. This is evident 
on a reading of sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 15 of the 
1949 Act. One of the objects of the 1949 Act is to ensure that 
the profession of the Chartered Accountant in the country 
maintains high professional ethics and renders quality service 
inasmuch as Chartered Accountants are absolutely necessary 
for the efficient tax administration in the country. That on 
account of their services, the onerous duties cast on the 
assessing officer as well as the ITD is reduced. This would 
however depend upon the quality of service that is rendered by 
the Chartered Accountant as a professional for which 
regulation of the profession is necessary and the respondent-
Institute has been established for, inter alia, such regulation of 
the profession. 

T.C. ( Etc. 91 
 
13.1 In this context, Chapter V of the 1949 Act assumes 
importance. The said Chapter deals with misconduct. Section 
22 of the Act defines “professional or other misconduct” to 
deem to include any act or omission provided in any of the 
Schedules. However, nothing in Section 22 shall be construed 
to limit or abridge in any way the power conferred or duty cast 
on the Director (Discipline) under sub-section (1) of Section 21 
to inquire into the conduct of any member of the Institute 
under any other circumstances. The two prongs of Section 22 
are expansive and wide inasmuch as there is no limitation in 
any way on the power conferred or duty cast on the Director 
(Discipline) under Sub-section (1) of Section 21 to inquire into 
the conduct of any member of the Institute under 
circumstances other than what is stated in the Schedules. Also, 
professional or other misconduct is defined by a deeming 
provision which implies that the Schedules which have 
enumerated various kinds of misconducts are not exhaustive 
or static. With the passage of decades and with the emerging 
varieties of misdemeanour, omissions or commissions of 
Chartered Accountants which are not in consonance with 
professional ethics and would amount to misconduct can be 

T.C. ( Etc. 92 
 
defined under the Schedules so as to ensure quality service 
being rendered by the Chartered Accountants as professionals. 
Therefore, the deeming provision would imply that with the 
passage of time, there could be newer misconducts which could 
be included in the Schedules in the form of regulations or 
Guidelines. The Schedules are a part of the 1949 Act which has 
been passed by the Parliament. But bearing in mind the fact 
that in future, it may not always be possible for the Parliament 
to go on amending the Schedules to the Act so as to incorporate 
newer professional misconducts particularly with emerging 
technology and its applicability to the profession of Chartered 
Accountancy in India, Part II of Second Schedule by way of a 
foresight has delegated the power to the Council to make any 
regulation or Guideline, the breach of which would amount to 
a misconduct. This delegation to define and enumerate a 
misconduct by way of a regulation or a Guideline is a legislative 
device adopted by the Parliament so as to leave it to the 
discretion of the Council of the respondent-Institute to 
incorporate, define and insert a Guideline or a regulation, the 
breach of which would result in a misconduct committed by a 
Chartered Accountant. 

T.C. ( Etc. 93 

13.2 The delegation of this power under Part II of the Second 
Schedule of the 1949 Act made by Parliament in favour of the 
Council of the respondent-Institute cannot be faulted with. 
This is on account of the fact that the 1949 Act itself defines 
certain types of misconduct vis-à-vis a Chartered Accountant. 
But in the year 1949, the Parliament could not have envisaged 
every possible variety or type of commission or omission which 
could be a misconduct by a Chartered Accountant. Therefore, 
the delegation has been made by the Parliament to the Council 
of the respondent-Institute to make regulations or Guidelines, 
the breach of which would result in a professional misconduct. 
The aforesaid delegation of the Parliament to the Council of the 
respondent-Institute is clearly to define possible types of 
misdemeanours in the Second Schedule in the form of a 
regulation or a Guideline, the breach of which would result in 
a misconduct in futuro. This is in order to avoid the Parliament 
itself amending the Schedules to the 1949 Act every time a 
different type of misconduct is to be inserted to the Schedules 
by way of an amendment to the Act. Therefore, the regulation 
or Guideline issued by the Council, the breach of which would 

T.C. ( Etc. 94 
 
result in a professional misconduct, being a part of clause 1 of 
Part II of the Second Schedule have to be read as part and 
parcel of the 1949 Act itself. The delegation of powers to add 
newer types of misconducts by way of a regulation or a 
Guideline is neither excessive nor ultra vires under Section 22 
of the 1949 Act which deems any breach of a regulation or 
Guideline as a misconduct as per Clause 1 of part II of Schedule 
II to the 1949 Act. 
 
13.3 In the circumstances, we hold that the Council of the 
respondent-Institute had the legal competence to frame the 
impugned Guideline restricting the number of tax audits that 
a Chartered Accountant could carry out which was initially 
thirty and later raised to forty-five and thereafter to sixty in an 
assessment year. Therefore, the Council of the respondent-
Institute having the legal competence to frame the Guidelines, 
the breach of which would result in professional misconduct, 
in terms of clause 1 of Part II of the Second Schedule of the 
1949 Act cannot be held to be vitiated on account of there being 
lack of competency or powers to frame the impugned Guideline 
by the Council of the respondent-Institute. The argument 

T.C. ( Etc. 95 
 
advanced by the petitioners regarding the issuance of the 
Guidelines dated 08.08.2008 by the respondent-Institute is hit 
by the vice of excessive delegation, is hence without substance. 
Accordingly, we answered the point No.1. 
 
Re: Point No. 2: Whether the restrictions imposed are 
unreasonable and therefore, violative of the right 
guaranteed to Chartered Accountants under Article 
19(1)(g) of the Constitution? 

And, 
 
Re: Point No.3: Whether the restrictions imposed are 
arbitrary and illegal and therefore, impermissible under 
Article 14 of the Constitution? 

14. Before answering these points for ready reference and 
convenience, Article 19(1)(g) and (6) are reproduced as under: 
 
“19. Protection of certain rights regarding freedom 
of speech, etc.— 
 
(1) All citizens shall have the right— 
x x x 
(g) to practise any profession, or to carry on any 
occupation, trade or business. x x x 
6) Nothing in sub-clause (g) of the said clause shall 
affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it 
imposes, or prevent the State from making any law 
imposing, in the interests of the general public, 
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right 
conferred by the said sub-clause, and, in particular, 

T.C. ( Etc. 96 
 
nothing in the said sub-clause shall affect the 
operation of any existing law in so far as it relates to, 
or prevent the State from making any law relating 
to,— 
(i) the professional or technical qualifications 
necessary for practising any profession or carrying 
on any occupation, trade or business, or 
(ii) the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation 
owned or controlled by the State, of any trade, 
business, industry or service, whether to the 
exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or 
otherwise.” 
 
15. Firstly, Article 19(6) of the Constitution empowers the 
State to impose reasonable restrictions upon the freedom of 
trade, business, occupation or profession in the interest of the 
general public, which freedom is recognised under Article 
19(1)(g). Secondly, it empowers the State to prescribe 
professional 
and 
technical 
qualifications 
necessary 
for 
practising any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade 
or business. Thirdly, pursuant to the enactment of the 
Constitution (First) Amendment Act, 1951 — it enables the 
State to carry on any trade or business, either by itself or 
through a corporation owned or controlled by the State, to the 
exclusion of private citizens wholly or in part. It is trite law that 
restrictions imposed by the State upon the freedom guaranteed 

T.C. ( Etc. 97 
 
by Article 19(1)(g) cannot be justified on any ground outside 
Article 19(6) vide Nagar Rice and Flour Mills vs. N. 
Teekappa Gowda and Bros., (1970), (“Nagar 
Rice Milling”). 
 
16. The ambit of reasonable restrictions on the exercise of 
rights under Article 19(1)(g) in the interest of the general public 
under Article 19(6) was further explained in Hathising 
Manufacturing Co. Ltd. vs. Union of India, (1960) (“Hathising Manufacturing Co. Ltd.”), which concerned 
the challenge to the validity of Section 25FFF(1) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, which required the industries to 
pay compensation on closure of their undertakings: 
“10. …Whether an impugned provision imposing a 
fetter on the exercise of the fundamental right 
guaranteed by Article 19(1)(g) amounts to a reasonable 
restriction imposed in the interest of the general public 
must be adjudged not in the background of any 
theoretical standards or pre-determinate patterns, but 
in the light of the nature and incidents of the right the 
interest of the general public sought to be secured by 
imposing the restriction and the reasonableness of the 
quality and extent of the fetter upon the right.” 
 
17. On the scope of restrictions that may be imposed on 
fundamental rights, it is apposite to refer to Justice Holmes in 
Stephen Otis & Joseph F. Gassman vs. E. A. Parker, 187 

T.C. ( Etc. 98 
 
U.S. 606 (1903); 1903 SCC OnLine US SC 22, (“Stephen 
Otis & Joseph F. Gassman”), wherein it was held that if the 
State thinks that an admitted evil cannot be prevented except 
by prohibiting a calling or transaction not in itself necessarily 
objectionable, the courts cannot interfere, unless in looking at 
the substance of the matter they can see that it ‘is a clear, 
unmistakeable 
infringement 
of 
rights 
secured 
by 
the 
fundamental law.’ 
 
18. The respondent-Institute has placed reliance on the letter 
of CBDT and the CAG Report No. 32/2014 in order to satisfy 
us of the overwhelming need and appropriateness of the 
decision to place a ceiling limit as the best conceivable and 
practical measure at rectifying the targeted mischief. A perusal 
of the material on record reflects that the respondent-
Institute’s assertion that there is a probable link between the 
number of tax audits undertaken and the quality thereof is 
supported by concerns and suggestions shared by experts and 
practitioners over a span of time extending over thirty years. In 
fact, the preceding sentiment is evidenced by both CBDT’s 
letter dated 19.01.1988 seeking views of the respondent-

T.C. ( Etc. 99 
 
Institute on the imposition of a limit and the CAG’s Report 
presented to the Parliament on 19.12.2014 discussed above. 
 
19. Following the dicta of the Constitution Bench of this Court 
in Saghir Ahmad vs. State of U.P., (1954) 
(“Saghir Ahmad”), the burden to establish that the 
instantiation of the specified number of tax audit assignments 
was within the purview of the exception laid down in Article 
19(6) is on the respondent-Institute. We find that the 
respondent-Institute has placed ample material before this 
Court to establish that the legislation comes within the 
permissible limits of clause (6). But the factual matrix herein is 
dissimilar to Saghir Ahmad, wherein this Court had 
‘absolutely no materials’ before it to say in which way the 
establishment of State monopoly in road transport service 
would be conducive to the general welfare of the public. 
 
20. In this regard, we place reliance upon Sakhawant Ali vs. 
State of Orissa, (1954) (“Sakhawant Ali”), 
wherein this Court was seized of a challenge to a 
disqualification from electoral candidature of legal practitioners 
who were employed on payment, on behalf of the municipality 

T.C. ( Etc. 100 
 
or to act against the municipality. This Court emphasised upon 
the salutary object of the disqualification, i.e., the purity of 
public life, which would invariably be thwarted if there arose a 
situation where there was a conflict between interest and duty. 
This Court took note of the possibility of a conflict of interest 
and duty of a municipal councillor employed as a paid legal 
practitioner and was alive to the possibility that such a 
councillor may misuse his position to obtain municipal briefs, 
get unreasonable fees sanctioned or compromise the interests 
of the municipality while acting on behalf of private parties. 
What is of pertinence here is that this Court was alive to the 
fact that cases of misuse may be an exception because lawyers 
would be loathe to stoop to such tactics, yet, it upheld the 
restriction because it sought to prevent a possible abhorrent 
misconduct and malpractice that would be corrosive to public 
life. The reasoning in Sakhawant Ali was to the effect that 
disqualification of a legal practitioner from contesting elections 
did not prevent him from practising his profession of law and 
as such, the right to practice the profession of law under Article 
19(1)(g) did not imply the existence of a fundamental right in 

T.C. ( Etc. 101 
 
any person to stand as a candidate for election to the 
municipality. 
 
21. Therefore, the present petitioners’ assertion that the 
undertaking of more than a specified number of tax audit 
assignments would not imperil the integrity and quality of the 
tax audit does not persuade us because a reasonable possibility 
of the fall in quality owing to the surfeit of tax audit 
assignments exists. Therefore, we find it proper to trust the 
wisdom of the respondent-Institute as it has acted on bona fide 
and genuine recommendations of the CAG and the CBDT. We 
find no fault in the endeavour of the respondent-Institute to 
eliminate the possibility of the conduct of tax audits in an 
insincere, unethical or unprofessional manner. 
 
22. Keeping the aforesaid in mind, there is no difficulty in 
concluding that by virtue of being a licensee, a privilege is 
conferred on Chartered Accountants. An elaborate and 
extensive process of recommendations and policy-making 
preceded the insertion of Section 44AB in order to achieve the 
public interest of prevention of tax leakages and more 

T.C. ( Etc. 102 
 
efficient tax administration. It is in pursuance of this primary 
goal of public interest that a further privilege under Section 
44AB was extended to Chartered Accountants to conduct 
quality tax audits, so as to enable the interest of the public 
exchequer. 
 
23. The present discussion would be enriched by a 
comparative discourse on State regulation of licensed 
professions as under: 

Justice Powell, in Ohralik vs. Ohio State Bar 
Association, 436 U.S. 447 (1978), (“Ohralik”), held that the 
State’s interests implicated in the case of regulatory restriction 
on the practice of a licensed profession are particularly strong. 
The case pertained to the conviction of an attorney for 
misconduct on the basis of his in-person solicitation from 
accident victims. Repelling the attorney’s claims regarding the 
violation of the right to freedom, Justice Powell laid stress on 
the need for prophylactic regulation to safeguard the interests 
of the lay public. This is for the reason that the State bears a 
special responsibility for maintaining standards amongst 
members of the licensed professions. This view is strengthened 

T.C. ( Etc. 103 
 
by the reasoning in Williamson vs. Lee Optical Co., 348 U.S. 
483 (1955), (“Williamson”) and Semler vs. Oregon State 
Board of Dental Examiners, 294 U.S. 608 (1935), 
(“Semler”). 
(ii) On this point, the dicta from Goldfarb vs. Virginia State 
Bar, 421 U.S. 773, 792, (1975), (“Goldfarb”) is also 
instructive and the relevant portion of the judgment reads as 
follows: 
“….The interest of the States in regulating lawyers is 
especially great, since lawyers are essential to the 
primary governmental function of administering 
justice, and have historically been ‘officers of the 
courts.’” 
 
24. We now look at how this Court has understood public 
interest in matters pertaining to abridgment of Article 19(1)(g). 

A Constitution Bench of this Court, through JC Shah J, 
in Mohd. Faruk vs. State of M.P., (1969), held 
that the Notification issued by the State Government 
prohibiting the slaughter of bulls and bullocks in premises 
maintained by a local authority infringed upon the right to 
freedom of profession under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. 
This Court had emphasized that even though such a 
Notification may be issued under the authority of law that was 

T.C. ( Etc. 104 
 
enacted by a competent legislature, it would nevertheless be 
liable for directly infringing the fundamental right of the 
petitioner guaranteed by Article 19(1)(g) unless it is established 
that it seeks to impose reasonable restrictions in the interest of 
the general public and a less drastic restriction will not ensure 
the interest of the general public. It was reasoned that the 
judicial determination of the validity of the law imposing a 
prohibition on the carrying on of a business or profession 
should be informed by: 
a. an evaluation of the direct and immediate impact of the 
prohibition upon the fundamental rights of the citizens 
affected thereby; 
b. the larger public interest sought to be ensured in the light 
of the object sought to be achieved; 
c. the necessity to restrict the citizen's freedom; 
d. the inherently pernicious nature of the act prohibited or its 
capacity or tendency to be harmful to the general public; 
e. the possibility of achieving the object by imposing a less 
drastic restraint; and 
f. in the absence of exceptional exigent situations like the 
prevalence of a state of emergency national or local, the 

T.C. ( Etc. 105 
 
existence of a machinery to satisfy the administrative 
authority that no case for imposing the restriction is made 
out or that a less drastic restriction may ensure the object 
intended to be achieved. 

A reasonable restriction, within the meaning of Article 
19(6) must also be ‘in the interests of the general public.’ Our 
Constitution, by establishing a welfare State, emphasises a fine 
balance between the public interest of the community and the 
liberties of the individual. Indeed, this is not to say that 
individual rights and liberties are not a matter of vital public 
interest but any policy or law may not be struck down at the 
instance of an individual alone. In other words, there is a basic 
unity between fundamental rights and the public interest. The 
public interest inherent in the said individual’s exercise of a 
fundamental right under Part III would need to be delicately 
balanced with the imminent constitutional imperative of the 
‘ordered progress of society towards a welfare state,’ vide K. K. 
Kochuni vs. States of Madras and Kerala, 1958 SCC 
OnLine SC 12, Pr. 33. 
(iii) In Krishnan Kakkanth vs. Govt. of Kerala, (1997), (“Krishnan Kakkanth”), this Court held as under: 

T.C. ( Etc. 106 
 
“27. The reasonableness of restriction is to be 
determined in an objective manner and from the 
standpoint of the interests of general public and 
not from the standpoint of the interests of the 
persons upon whom the restrictions are imposed 
or upon abstract consideration. A restriction cannot 
be said to be unreasonable merely because in a given 
case, it operates harshly and even if the persons 
affected be petty traders (Mohd. Hanif v. State of 
Bihar [AIR 1958 SC 731] ). In determining the 
infringement of the right guaranteed under Article 
19(1), the nature of right alleged to have been 
infringed, the underlying purpose of the restriction 
imposed, the extent and urgency of the evil sought 
to be remedied thereby, the disproportion of the 
imposition, the prevailing conditions at the time, 
enter into judicial verdict (Laxmi Khandsari v. State of 
U.P. [(1981): AIR 1981 SC 873]; D.K. 
Trivedi and Sons v. State of Gujarat [1986 Supp SCC 
20] and Harakchand Ratanchand Banthia v. Union of 
India [(1969): AIR 1970 SC 1453] ). 
28. Under clause (1)(g) of Article 19, every citizen has 
a freedom and right to choose his own employment or 
take up any trade or calling subject only to the limits 
as may be imposed by the State in the interests of 
public welfare and the other grounds mentioned in 
clause (6) of Article 19. But it may be emphasised 
that the Constitution does not recognise franchise or 
rights to business which are dependent on grants by 
the State or business affected by public interest 
(Saghir Ahmad v. State of U.P. [(1955): AIR 
1954 SC 728] ).” 
(emphasis by us) 

Therefore, it follows that this Court must consider the 
public interest involved not only from the perspective of the 
Chartered Accountants but rather from the perspective of the 

T.C. ( Etc. 107 
 
general public. In the present cases, it has been contended that 
public interest manifests as a benefit to the public exchequer 
in terms of appropriate quality of tax audit reports under 
Section 44AB. 
 
25. At this juncture, it is useful to reiterate the thread of 
public interest visible in the 1949 Act since its inception. The 
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the 1949 Act makes it 
clear that the Act was brought in to ensure that accountants 
all over the country, in discharge of their public duties, are 
governed by a central body that is not transitional. Our words 
should not be mistakenly understood to suggest that the 
profession of Chartered Accountants is not a private enterprise 
and is concerned solely with rendering of public duties. We 
rather only highlight that it is a profession – licensed by the 
State – that also discharges public duties crucial in public 
interest. 
 
26. In our opinion, a perusal of the Wanchoo Committee 
Report, 
Finance 
Bill, 

and 
the 
accompanying 
Memorandum makes it explicitly clear that the intent of 
insertion of Section 44AB of the IT Act, 1961, was to facilitate 

T.C. ( Etc. 108 
 
the process of tax administration to the benefit of the public 
exchequer. The genesis of the opportunity to conduct tax audits 
was not regulation of a practice essential to the Chartered 
Accountant profession per se but rather to take assistance of 
auditors, in discharge of their public duties, for plugging tax 
leakage and thereby saving the time of the Assessment Officers 
on presentation of quality tax audit reports in a prescribed 
format. Therefore, it is for these intents and purposes, the 
privilege of conducting tax audits was extended to Chartered 
Accountants by creating a privilege to conduct such audits 
subject to reasonable restrictions. 
 
27. We must be careful in our delineation between a right and 
a privilege. As discussed above, the idea of compulsory tax 
audits was neither an inherent part of the practice of a 
Chartered Accountant nor an essential function which could be 
claimed as a fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g). 
Furthermore, an examination of the nature of the supposed 
right that was being enjoyed by Chartered Accountants reflects 
that in practice, an assessee, seeking to comply with the 
requirements of Section 44AB, would approach a Chartered 

T.C. ( Etc. 109 
 
Accountant to obtain a certificate of audit. We have already 
observed and noted that Section 44AB, IT Act, 1961 was 
inserted to assist the Revenue Department in public. Thereby, 
it is only through the extension of statutory privilege by the 
presence of Section 44AB, IT Act, 1961, that a Chartered 
Accountant gets the opportunity to undertake tax audits under 
the said section. If the Parliament, in its wisdom, at a certain 
future date, due to technological developments or any other 
reason, finds that expeditious and accurate assessments can 
be ensured without imposing on assessees the burden of 
additional requirement of tax audit report and thereby deletes 
Section 44AB from the IT Act, 1961, it could not be possibly 
argued that the right under Article 19(1)(g) has been abridged. 
What follows is that when a privilege is being granted, as a 
privilege by statute, which could be effaced completely, a 
reasonable restriction could also be imposed, the latter being a 
restriction of a lesser degree than a complete ban on an activity. 
 
28. On the scope of restrictions imposed to maintain quality 
of service where a privilege had been extended by the 
Government to medical officers, this Court, in Sukumar 

T.C. ( Etc. 110 
 
Mukherjee vs. State of W.B., (1993), (“Sukumar 
Mukherjee”), held that the restriction was reasonable where 
the State of West Bengal had, vide Section 9 of the West Bengal 
State Health Service Act, 1990, prohibited private practice by 
members of W.B. Medical Education Service who were also 
teaching in medical institutions. It was held that where the 
State Government had concluded that the regime of permitting 
private practice of those teaching in medical institutions led to 
a considerable decline in quality of teaching, such restriction 
was reasonable and in the interest of general public as the ban 
on private-practice would make available to the teachers-
doctors the time required for reading and research which was 
absolutely essential for maintaining quality in their main 
profession as teachers in medicine. Furthermore, where for a 
brief period, in the facts of that case, private practice by 
teaching post-holders was also permitted and then withdrawn, 
this Court held that such an extension was only a privilege 
extended on people who were regulated by the relevant Act and 
rules made thereunder and therefore, the revocation of that 
privilege was not the violation of any right. 

T.C. ( Etc. 111 
 
29. Where public interest was the genesis of a privilege being 
extended to Chartered Accountants and not a right, it is 
reasonable that the respondent-Institute, an expert body, 
would have the authority to regulate the privilege extended to 
Chartered Accountants in a reasonable manner deemed 
appropriate to serve public interest. That the public interest 
involved in the present petitions being pervasive is evidenced 
through CAG’s recommendation to the Government to insert a 
provision in the statute book putting a cap on the number of 
tax audits permissible. According to the CAG, in the matter of 
revenue, the IT Act, 1961 should have provision to prescribe for 
quality of tax audit assignments rather than relying on 
respondent-Institute. 
 
30. It would be apposite at this juncture to refer to the 
judgment in P.V. Sivarajan vs. Union of India, AIR 1959 SC 
556, (“P.V. Sivarajan”), delivered by a Constitution Bench of 
this Court. Petitioner therein was aggrieved by the rejection of 
his application as a registered exporter of coir products, on the 
ground that he had not already exported the minimum 
specified quantity of 500 Cwts. It was observed by this Court 

T.C. ( Etc. 112 
 
that Parliament had enacted the Coir Industry Act, 1953, 
finding it expedient in public interest that the Union should 
take under its control the coir industry as several malpractices 
had crept in the export trade such as non-fulfilment of 
contracts, supplying goods of inferior quality in an industry 
crucial to the repute of India’s products and national economy. 
With the intent of limiting these losses due to qualitative 
underperformance, the Central Government, under powers 
conferred by the statute, framed Rules in 1958. The Rules were 
assailed by the petitioner therein, contending that they 
erroneously prescribed a quantitative test for registration of 
established exporters, when in fact, a qualitative test would be 
more suitable. This argument was rejected, holding that once 
it is accepted that regulation of coir industry is in public 
interest, then it would be erroneous to assert that regulation 
must be introduced only on the basis of a qualitative test. This 
Court was mindful of the potential difficulties in introducing 
and effectively enforcing a qualitative test and thereby held that 
it would be for the rule-making authority to decide as to which 
test would meet the requirements of public interest and what 

T.C. ( Etc. 113 
 
method would be most expedient in controlling the industry for 
national good. This Court noted as under: 
“7. 
If it is conceded that the regulation of the coir 
industry is in the public interest, then it would be 
difficult to entertain the argument that the regulation 
or control must be introduced only on the basis of a 
qualitative test. It may well be that there are several 
difficulties in introducing and effectively enforcing 
the qualitative test. It is well known that granting 
permits or licences to export or import dealers on the 
basis of a quantitative test is not unknown in regard 
to export and import of essential commodities. It 
would obviously be for the rule-making authority to 
decide which test would meet the requirements of 
public interest and what method would be most 
expedient in controlling the industry for the 
national good. Besides, even the adoption of a 
qualitative test may tend to extinguish the trade of 
those who do not satisfy the said test; but such a 
result cannot obviously be treated as contravening the 
fundamental rights under Article 19. Control and 
regulation of any trade, though reasonable within 
the meaning of Article 19, sub-Article (6), may in 
some cases lead to hardship to some persons 
carrying on the said trade or business if they are 
unable 
to 
satisfy 
the 
requirements 
of 
the 
regulatory rules or provisions validly introduced; 
but once it is conceded that regulation of the trade 
and its control are justified in the public interest, 
it would not be open to a person who fails to satisfy 
the rules or regulations to invoke his fundamental 
right under Article 19(g) and challenge the validity 
of the regulation or rule in question. In our opinion, 
therefore, the challenge to the validity of the rules on 
the ground of Article 19 must fail. 
 
8. 
The challenge to the validity of the said rules on 
the ground of Article 14 must also fail, because the 
classification of traders made by Rules 18 and 19 is 

T.C. ( Etc. 114 
 
clearly rational and is founded on an intelligible 
differentia distinguishing persons falling under one 
class from those falling under the other. It is also clear 
that the differentia has a rational relation to the object 
sought to be achieved by the Act. As we have already 
pointed out, the export trade in coir commodities 
disclosed the existence of many malpractices 
which not only affected the volume of trade but 
also the reputation of Indian traders; and one of the 
main reasons which led to this unfortunate result was 
that exporters sometimes accepted orders far beyond 
their capacity and that inevitably led to non-fulfilment 
of contracts or to supply of inferior commodities. In 
order to remedy this position the trade had to be 
regulated and so the intending exporter was required 
to satisfy the test of the prescribed minimum capacity 
and to establish the prescribed minimum status 
before his application for registration is granted. In 
this connection it may also be relevant to point out 
that the rules seem to contemplate the granting of 
exemption from the operation of some of the relevant 
tests to cooperative societies; and that shows that the 
intention of the legislature is to encourage small 
traders to form co-operative societies and carry on 
export trade on behalf of such societies; and so it 
would not be possible to accept the argument that the 
impugned rules would lead to a monopoly in the trade. 
It is thus clear that the main object which the rules 
propose to achieve is to improve the anomalies and 
malpractices prevailing in the export trade of coir 
commodities and to put the said trade on a firm 
and enduring basis in the interest of national 
economy. We are, therefore, satisfied that the 
challenge to the impugned rules on the ground of 
infringement of Article 14 of the Constitution must 
also fail.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
31. The 
further 
contention 
that 
a 
quantitative 
test 
discriminates between persons carrying on business on a large 

T.C. ( Etc. 115 
 
scale and those who carry on business on a small scale as even 
the prescription of a qualitative test would also lead to hardship 
on those who cannot satisfy the test was rejected. 
 
32. We must also now consider further arguments advanced 
by learned senior counsel and counsel for the petitioners. 
Heavy reliance placed on Institute of Chartered Financial 
Analysts of India, in our considered opinion, is misplaced. 
This case concerned whether acquisition of an additional 
qualification of Chartered Financial Analyst (“CFA") by a 
Chartered Accountant could be termed as professional 
misconduct under Section 22 of the 1949 Act. Holding in the 
negative, this Court found that enhancement of knowledge, 
training and ability should be encouraged in an emerging 
economy and to term the same as professional misconduct 
would be violative of Articles 14 and 19(1)(g). That case is 
clearly distinguishable. Neither did this Court find that the 
restriction placed was in public interest, nor that the 
acquisition of an additional qualification hurt the quality of 
statutory responsibilities attributed to a Chartered Accountant. 

T.C. ( Etc. 116 
 
33. The argument advanced by learned counsel for the 
petitioners is that as a direct consequence and effect of the 
ceiling limit, an anomalous situation of discrimination between 
qualified professionals practicing in metropolitan cities as 
against those in mofussil areas, or those catering to small 
assessees as against those catering to bigger assessees, must 
be categorically rejected. The potential effect of the concerned 
restriction is that practitioners dealing in mofussil areas or 
catering to small assessees will face a reduction in their income 
which is violative of their right to freely engage in their 
profession. We find ourselves unable to agree with this 
contention. There is no material to suggest that this partial 
limitation on the practise of the profession would lead to a 
significant reduction in income. In any case, it is trite law that 
reduction of income cannot be a ground for holding a 
reasonable restriction unreasonable vide Minerva Talkies 
which we shall discuss later. Where the devolution of a privilege 
is justifiably restricted in public interest and such restriction 
has a rational nexus with the objects sought to be achieved, the 
restriction cannot be held unreasonable due to hardship faced 
by a certain section of professionals. 

T.C. ( Etc. 117 
 
34. The following judgments of this Court are also apposite: 
(a) In B.P. Sharma, clause 17 of the instructions issued in 
1979 by the Ministry of Tourism and Civil Aviation, Department 
of Tourism, Government of India prohibiting the renewal of 
identity cards to guides who were carrying on the job of 
conducting tourists to historical monuments and other places 
of interest and to explain the background and importance of 
such places as well as acquaint the tourists with the historical 
facts relating to the monuments and landmarks of the area 
after they attained the age of sixty years, was assailed. Clause 
17 stated that “when a guide attains the age of 60 years the 
identity card issued to him or her will not be renewed further”. 
This was unsuccessfully challenged by way of a writ petition 
under Article 226 of the Constitution before the Allahabad High 
Court. But, this Court observed that the freedom guaranteed 
under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution is valuable and cannot 
be violated on grounds which are not established to be in public 
interest or just on the basis that it is permissible to do so. For 
placing a complete prohibition on any professional activity, 
there must exist some strong reason for the same with a view 
to attain some legitimate object and non-imposition of such 

T.C. ( Etc. 118 
 
prohibition might result in jeopardizing or seriously affecting 
the interest of the people in general. Otherwise, it would not be 
a reasonable restriction. We do not have any contrary opinion 
to what has been observed by this Court in the aforesaid 
judgment but the facts of each case would ultimately decide 
whether, a complete prohibition, ban or restriction is a 
reasonable one or not depending upon the public interest it 
would seek to achieve. In the aforesaid case clause 17 of the 
instructions was held to be ultra vires Article 19(1)(g) and 
hence, quashed by this Court. 
 
(b) In Minerva Talkies, Rule 41-A of Karnataka Cinemas 
(Regulations) Rules, 1971 made under Section 19 of the 
Karnataka Cinemas (Regulation) Act, 1964 limiting the cinema 
shows to four per day was held to be neither ultra vires the said 
Act nor violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. It was 
observed that no licensee can claim to have an unrestricted 
right to exhibit cinematograph films for all the twenty-four 
hours of the day. Such a claim would obviously be against 
public interest. The right to exhibit cinematograph films is 
regulated by the provisions of the Act in the interest of the 

T.C. ( Etc. 119 
 
general public. The restriction to limit the number of shows to 
four in a day placed by Rule 41-A is regulatory in nature which 
clearly carries out the purposes of the Act. In the context of 
Article 19(1)(g), it was observed that the law placing restrictions 
on the citizens’ right to do business must satisfy two conditions 
set out in clause (6) of Article 19: firstly, the restrictions 
imposed by the law must be reasonable, and secondly, the 
restrictions must be in the interests of the general public. If 
these two tests are satisfied, the law placing restriction on the 
citizens’ right guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g) must be 
upheld. While considering the validity of Rule 41-A which had 
limited the number of films to be exhibit in a day to four shows, 
it was noted that holding of continuous five shows from 10 am 
in the morning caused great inconvenience to the incoming and 
outgoing cine-goers and endangered public safety. A short 
interval of fifteen minutes between two shows is too little time 
for cleaning the cinema halls and there was also rush by the 
cine-goers to occupy the seats. Moreover, licensees would start 
exhibiting approved films and slides before the cine-goers could 
occupy their seats, with the result they would not have the 
benefit of the same. The absence of interval between the shows 

T.C. ( Etc. 120 
 
resulted in denial of fresh air, ventilation and cleanliness in the 
cinema halls. In order to remove these maladies, the restriction 
on the number of shows to four per day was introduced. After 
analysing the inconvenience that would be caused to the cine-
goers and also the fact that if the five shows were exhibited from 
10 am to 1 am the next day, there would be great inconvenience 
caused to the public, the State Government had promulgated 
the restriction to only four shows in a day. Consequently, the 
said Rule was upheld by this Court by observing that it was 
intra vires the Act as it carried out the purposes of the Act and 
it did not place any unreasonable restriction in violation of 
Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. Consequently, this Court 
dismissed the appeals as well as the writ petitions. 
 
(c) In T. Velayudhan Achari, Section 45-S (1) as introduced 
by Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, 1983 limiting the number 
of depositors that can be accepted by individual, firm or 
unincorporated association, was held to be not violative of 
Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution as the said limitation 
protected larger interest of depositors. It was observed that a 
ceiling for acceptance of deposits and to require maintenance 

T.C. ( Etc. 121 
 
of certain liquidity of funds as well as not to exceed borrowings 
beyond a particular percentage of the net-owned funds had 
been provided in the corporate sector. But for these safeguards, 
the depositors would be left high and dry without any remedy. 
It was held that the restrictions were reasonable and were in 
the public interest. 
 
(d) In B.K. Kamath, Kurian Joseph J. (as a Judge of the Kerala 
High Court), observed that the Chartered Accountants Act was 
enacted for regulating the profession and in the process 
regulating and maintaining the status of the Chartered 
Accountants. Therefore, the measures taken, intended to 
maintain and improve the quality of work and ensure equitable 
distribution of work among the Chartered Accountants could 
not be held to be an unreasonable restriction since such 
restrictions are necessary for maintaining the status of the 
Chartered Accountants and also for ensuring the quality of the 
work by them. Comparing the said restriction to Section 224 of 
the Companies Act, 1956 wherein a Chartered Accountant is 
permitted to audit only twenty companies in a financial year 
since the introduction of the said provision in the year 1974, it 

T.C. ( Etc. 122 
 
was observed that such regulatory measures are provided in 
view of the onerous and time-consuming nature of the work of 
the Chartered Accountant requiring accuracy and perfection. 
The Income Tax Act attributes much importance to the 
certificate of audit by the Chartered Accountant and therefore, 
it is in public interest also to introduce certain restrictions on 
the volume of work lest it would affect professional standards 
apart from affecting the professional status. We are in complete 
agreement with the aforesaid observations. In our view, the 
comparison made between Chartered Accountants and 
Advocates by the petitioners is also inappropriate. 
 
35. It is also noted that under Section 224 of the Companies 
Act, 1956 which deals with appointment and remuneration of 
auditors, there is a bar with regard to appointment or 
reappointment of any person as an auditor of a company, if 
such person or firm of auditors is, at the date of such 
appointment or reappointment, holding appointment as 
auditor of specified number of companies or more than the 
specified number of companies. Explanation (1) to Section 224 
defines specified number to mean (a) in the case of a person or 

T.C. ( Etc. 123 
 
firm holding appointment as auditor of a number of companies 
each of which has paid-up share capital of less than rupees 
twenty-five lakh, twenty such companies; and (b) in any other 
case, twenty companies, out of which not more than ten shall 
be companies each of which has paid-up share capital of 
rupees twenty-five lakh or more. Explanation-II states that in 
computing the specified number, the number of companies in 
respect of which or any part of which any person or firm has 
been appointed as an auditor, whether singly or in combination 
with any other person or firm, shall be taken into account. 
 
36. The restriction placed under Section 224 of the 
Companies Act, 1956 with regard to the number of companies 
which could be audited by an auditor or firm of auditors is also 
an instance of regulation of the profession of Chartered 
Accountants intended by the Parliament so as to ensure that 
standard and quality in the audit of accounts of companies as 
defined under Section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 are 
maintained. This is to protect the rights and interest of the 
shareholders as well as the investors in the companies. Any 
omission or inadvertence in the auditing of such company 

T.C. ( Etc. 124 
 
accounts would inevitably have an adverse impact not only on 
the balance-sheets of the companies but also on the potential 
investments and growth of the companies. There has not been 
any challenge to the said regulation which is in the form of a 
restriction. Any breach of the restriction placed on the 
Chartered Accountants under Section 224 may lead to 
misconduct under the provision of 1949 Act. 
 
37. 
It is for the foregoing reasons that we find that questions 
(i), (ii) and (iii) ought to be held in favour of the respondent-
Institute. 
 
Re: Point No.4: Whether exceeding such specified number 
of tax audits can be deemed to be ‘professional 
misconduct’? 
 
38. During the course of submissions, an alternative plea 
raised by learned senior counsel and learned counsel for the 
petitioners 
was 
that 
the 
respondent-Institute 
initiated 
disciplinary proceedings only against a few Chartered 
Accountants, including petitioners herein, while a majority of 
the Chartered Accountants who had breached the Guideline 
are not facing any disciplinary proceeding and have not been 
proceeded against. Secondly, it was contended that it was only 

T.C. ( Etc. 125 
 
recently that notices have been issued to the writ petitioners 
herein to respond to the same and for conducting disciplinary 
proceedings. That there cannot be a discrimination, so to say, 
by the respondent-Institute in the matter. That, the impugned 
Guideline dated 08.08.2008 has been on the statute book, the 
disciplinary proceedings have been initiated only recently. The 
impugned Guideline has not been effectively given effect to. 
Therefore, the disciplinary proceeding may be quashed for the 
aforesaid reasons. In this regard, it was contended that when 
the respondent-Institute has remained silent and not acted 
upon the Guideline, since it was issued on 08.08.2008, all of a 
sudden there could not have been initiation of disciplinary 
proceedings only against the petitioners herein and possibly 
others who may not have approached any court of law, whereas 
many other Chartered Accountants have not been proceeded 
against and are virtually scot-free. Therefore, there is 
discrimination and violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of 
India herein in the implementation of the Guideline vide 
Notification dated 08.08.2008. Therefore, pending full and 
effective implementation of the Guideline impugned herein of 
the impugned proceedings against the petitioners herein for the 

T.C. ( Etc. 126 
 
alleged misconduct on their part for violating the Guideline may 
be dropped. 
 
39. It is observed that there has been an uncertainty in law 
due to a similar Guideline being successfully assailed and 
during the pendency of the matter before this Court the 
impugned 
Guideline 
being 
enforced 
and 
selective 
implementation of the same by the respondent-Institute. 
Relying on the dictum of this Court in Chamundi Mopeds, the 
petitioners contended that a stay on the judgment of Madras 
High Court was only on the operation of the judgment and not 
a declaration that the judgment was bad in law. As the special 
leave petition impugning the judgment of Madras High Court 
was dismissed as infructuous and any action taken by the 
respondent-Institute on the superseding Guideline dated 
08.08.2008 was taken only belatedly, we find force in the 
submission that there was uncertainty in law only in the 
context of the pendency of the matter before this Court on there 
being quashing of the Guideline by the Madras High Court and 
an interim stay of the said judgment by this Court. 

T.C. ( Etc. 127 
 
40. In this regard, we may refer to Halsbury Laws of England, 
[5th Edn. Volume 96 (2018)] dealing with the principle against 
doubtful penalisation: 
“774. Principle Against Doubtful Penalisation 
“It is a principle of legal policy that a person should not 
be penalised except under clear law, …” 

41. Francis Bennion on Statutory Interpretation (8th Edn, 
2020 at Section 26.4) deals with principle against doubtful 
penalisation in the following words: 
“It is a principle of legal policy that a person should not 
be penalised except under clear law. This principle 
forms part of the context against which legislation is 
enacted and, when interpreting legislation, a court 
should take it into account.” 
 
42. It was borne out during the course of arguments and 
through the submissions made in the Counter Affidavit that the 
tax audit monitoring mechanism was firstly, self-regulatory, 
wherein the disciplinary mechanism would kick in only on a 
complaint 
made/information 
received 
and 
not 
otherwise. Furthermore, the Tax Audit Monitoring Cell was 
created only after the CAG Report No. 32/2014, and even after 
that, initially notices were sent only selectively to Chartered 

T.C. ( Etc. 128 
 
Accountants who had completed more than two hundred 
audits not to all who had breached the impugned Guideline. 
 
43. As a rule of statutory interpretation, we find that the 
aforesaid principles, in an equitable legal system, should be 
applicable to the present circumstances. Thereby, for the 
limited period of uncertainty, the rule against doubtful 
penalization as a principle could, in the interest of justice and 
equity, be made applicable and the benefit of uncertainty be 
given to those subjected to misconduct proceedings in the 
instant writ petitions and to also those Chartered Accountants 
who may have received notices from the respondent-Institute 
and who may not have approached any court of law or to other 
similarly situated Chartered Accountants who may not have 
been proceeded against. 
 
44. Reference may also be made to judgment of this Court in 
Jindal Paper & Plastics vs. Union of India, (1997), (“Jindal Paper & Plastics”) wherein the question on 
merits was settled by a judgment of this Court in Kasinka 
Trading vs. Union of India, (1995), (“Kasinka 
Trading”), delivered on 18.10.1994 and a larger bench on 

T.C. ( Etc. 129 
 
20.12.1996 concluded that the judgment dated 18.10.1994 
was good law. This Court allowed the petitioner’s prayer therein 
that for the period of uncertainty in law, i.e., until the law, on 
merits, was settled by this Court on 18.10.1994, a lesser 
interest rate of 12% be charged instead of 17.5%, as ordered by 
the High Court. In these circumstances, this Court held as 
follows: 
“4. We are of the view that there was uncertainty 
about the law until the decision in the case 
of Kasinka Trading [(1995): JT (1994) 
7 SC 362] was rendered on 18-10-1994, and that, 
therefore, interest from the date it became payable 
until 18-10-1994, should be payable at the rate of 12% 
per annum. Interest for the further period should be 
at the rate of 17.5% per annum, as ordered by the High 
Court. Calculations shall be made accordingly and the 
balance and interest as aforesaid due by the 
appellants shall be paid to the respondents within 8 
weeks.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

45. We, therefore, find much force in the alternative plea 
made by the petitioners herein. In these circumstances, due to 
the uncertainty in law owing to quashing of the earlier 
Guideline and the pendency of the Special Leave Petition filed 
by the respondent-Institute before this Court and the 
enforcement of a fresh Guideline, we quash the disciplinary 

T.C. ( Etc. 130 
 
proceedings initiated against the petitioners herein. This is for 
the simple reason that only the writ petitioners have been 
proceeded against, while even according to the respondent-
Institute, there were around twelve thousand Chartered 
Accountants who had breached the Guideline and had 
undertaken tax audits over and above the specified number but 
no action whatsoever was initiated against of them. 
 
46. In conclusion, we must also note the dictum in Malpe 
Vishwanath Acharya vs. State of Maharashtra, (1998), (“Malpe Vishwanath Acharya”), wherein this Court, 
relying on Motor General Traders vs. State of A.P., (1984), (“Motor General Traders”), reiterated that a 
provision which was/is reasonable may with the passage of 
time become unreasonable. In the context of restriction on the 
specified audits under Section 44AB of IT Act, 1961, Minutes 
of the Council of the respondent-Institute reflect that with the 
passage of time, the number of tax audits to be permitted have 
been repeatedly deliberated, re-evaluated and increased, 
subject to final decision taken by the Council. However, it also 
becomes apparent that decisions of the Council on whether to 

T.C. ( Etc. 131 
 
increase or maintain the status quo have been ad-hoc, 
influenced 
by 
several 
factors 
such 
as 
technological 
development, number of practicing Chartered Accountants, 
etc. Since the last revision to sixty tax audits was made a 
decade ago, we direct the Council to consider if the time is ripe 
to enhance the specified number of tax audits and to delineate 
the factors that it may consider in taking such a decision. 
 
47. In that view of the matter, the respondent-Institute is at 
liberty to enhance the specified number of tax audits that could 
be undertaken by practicing Chartered Accountants under 
Section 44AB of the IT Act, 1961. For that purpose, liberty is 
reserved to the practising Chartered Accountants to make their 
suggestions to the respondent. 
 
48. We wish to make certain observations before parting with 
these writ petitions. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
India over a period of time, has received recognition as a 
premier accounting body, domestically and globally, for 
maintaining highest standards in technical, ethical areas and 
for 
sustaining 
stringent 
examination 
and 
educational 
standards. Since its inception in the year 1949, the profession 

T.C. ( Etc. 132 
 
of Chartered Accountancy and accounting has grown leaps and 
bounds in terms of the number of members, which now stands 
at over 3.5 lakhs. The respondent-Institute has also played a 
significant role in ensuring the dynamism of the Chartered 
Accountancy course curriculum and the credibility of the 
examinations. The financial skills of the aspirants are fairly 
consolidated, at the time of joining the profession itself- this is 
owing to the robust examination pattern. We commend that the 
respondent-Institute must be committed towards convergence 
of 
accounting, 
auditing 
and 
ethical 
standards 
with 
international practices and for its endeavour towards securing 
the highest standards of corporate governance. The true test 
however, lies in application and enforcement of these standards 
in the Indian context. 
 
49. The power to control and impose taxes is a cornerstone of 
State sovereignty. Welfare States impose taxes to generate 
revenue 
that 
enables 
investment 
in 
human 
capital, 
infrastructure and services for citizens and businesses. The 
Tax Law landscape in India has been one of the most dynamic 
areas of law and has witnessed several changes over the last 

T.C. ( Etc. 133 
 
few decades. The Taxation Systems in India have been 
periodically assessed and several changes have been brought 
about from time to time. Such changes have been introduced 
with a view to either widen the tax base; to simplify and 
rationalise laws and procedures; to bring about modernization 
through computerization of tax returns; to enhance efficiency 
of the tax administration; or to maintain progressivity at such 
levels as would not induce evasion. 
 
49.1 In relation to direct taxation, we believe that the taxation 
system must be one that not only incorporates the normative 
and 
prescriptive 
considerations 
of 
neutrality, 
fairness, 
certainty, efficiency etc. but one that also promotes the 
virtuous circle of increased trust between tax payers and the 
tax administration. We call this a “virtuous circle” because it 
seeks to achieve a dual purpose: it reinforces voluntary 
compliance while at the same time promoting good governance. 
Good governance is achieved in an attempt to secure the 
confidence of the taxpayer. Once a taxpayer is certain that tax 
revenue is being channelled in an efficient manner, consistent 
with the objectives of a welfare state, enhanced tax compliance 

T.C. ( Etc. 134 
 
is likely to follow. It is in this context that we stress on the 
significance of the role played by Chartered Accountants. They 
can serve as effective catalysts in securing this circle of trust 
between the taxpayer and the tax administration. This is 
because a large proportion of the tax payers in India seek 
advice of Chartered Accountants to understand the rules of the 
road. The integrity and standards of Chartered Accountants 
determine the efficiency in the functioning of the nation’s 
taxation system. 
 
49.2 There are many concepts and processes in the present 
taxation regime that rest, almost completely, on the vigilance 
of Chartered Accountants and auditors. The very concept of 
self-assessment carries with it the requirement of good faith 
practices. The most recent tax reforms seek to achieve 
transparent taxation by “Honouring the Honest taxpayer.” The 
success of such initiatives depends, to a very large extent, on 
the vigilance demonstrated by Chartered Accountants. 
 
49.3 Transparency in accounting is imperative to the economy 
in many ways. For instance, in the absence of accurate 
financial reporting, it would become difficult for banks to make 

T.C. ( Etc. 135 
 
informed decisions about credit allocation. It is the quality, 
reliability 
and 
objectivity 
of 
this 
information 
which 
stakeholders rely upon to make informed judgments and 
allocate 
resources 
efficiently. 
The 
role 
of 
transparent 
accounting is critical in lending credibility to the financial 
market transactions. Market participants, investors and 
shareholders look towards this community for accurate 
information, which ensures market discipline and fosters 
confidence of various stakeholders. The onus is on Chartered 
Accountants to ensure that our Nation’s businesses do indeed 
conform to high corporate governance standards. Further, 
while the quality of information has immediate and far-
reaching implications for a particular enterprise, it eventually 
permeates to the market and the economy as a whole. It is 
therefore not surprising to find that the accounting profession 
is being constantly challenged to meet the demands for quality 
information. As key providers and verifiers of information, the 
bottom-line is simple: the higher the quality and integrity 
maintained by the profession, the stronger and more resilient 
will our markets be. By providing the foundation for 
compilation of credible financial statements, the accounting 

T.C. ( Etc. 136 
 
profession facilitates market discipline, engenders confidence 
among various stakeholders and reduces the possibility of 
misleading information that can disrupt stability of financial 
systems. Therefore, the need for quality assessments 
particularly under Section 44AB of the IT Act, 1961. 
 
49.4 In the public discourse on governance, we find that the 
corporate governance agenda garners attention only during 
times when the Country is faced with the most notorious 
corporate scams. Shareholder democracy has come to stay and 
Chartered Accountants are the gatekeepers of this new 
corporate 
world 
which 
poses 
challenges 
as 
well 
as 
unprecedented opportunities. Thus, the importance of integrity 
of auditing functions for maintaining financial stability is now 
well-recognised. 
 
49.5 
More 
importantly, 
Chartered 
Accountants 
must 
themselves comply with the relevant laws and regulations and 
avoid any conduct that discredits the profession. Needless to 
specify that Chartered Accountants must refuse to represent 
clients who insist on resorting to unfair means. Chartered 

T.C. ( Etc. 137 
 
accountants are relevant not only in securing corporate 
governance, but governance in broader contexts too. 
 
49.6 Chartered 
Accountants 
face 
many 
different 
responsibilities: to the profession; to the tax administration; to 
the client and to the economy at large. In that context, we stress 
on the importance of preserving their independence of view and 
integrity; to separate their client-advisory role from their role 
as public citizens seeking to improve the functioning of the tax 
machinery of the Nation. Integrity, objectivity, professional 
competence and due care and confidentiality must be the 
doctrines guiding their work ethic. 
Conclusion: 
 
50. In the circumstances, we dispose of the writ petitions in 
the following manner: 
a) Clause 6.0, Chapter VI of the Guidelines dated 
08.08.2008 and its subsequent amendment is 
valid and is not violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the 
Constitution as it is a reasonable restriction on 
the right to practise the profession by a Chartered 
Accountant and is protected or justifiable under 
Article 19(6) of the Constitution. 

T.C. ( Etc. 138 

b) However, the said clause 6.0, Chapter VI of the 
Guidelines dated 08.08.2008 and its subsequent 
amendment is deemed not to be given effect to till 
01.04.2024. c) Consequently, all proceedings initiated pursuant 
to the impugned Guideline in respect of the writ 
petitioners and other similarly situated Chartered 
Accountants stand quashed. d) Liberty is reserved to the respondent-Institute to 
enhance the specified number of audits that a 
Chartered Accountant can undertake under 
Section 44AB of the IT Act, 1961, if it deems fit. e) Liberty is also reserved to the writ petitioners or 
any other member of the respondent-Institute to 
make a representation in the above context which 
may be taken into consideration in the event 
respondent-Institute 
intends 
to 
amend 
the 
Guideline as per point No.(d) above. f) The writ petitions as well as all the transferred 
cases are disposed of in the aforesaid terms. 

T.C. ( Etc. 139 
 
g) The Registry to intimate the concerned High 
Courts regarding disposal of the transferred cases 
accordingly. h) No costs......................... J. 

 [B.V. NAGARATHNA]....................... J. 
 [AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH] 

New Delhi; 
May 17, 2024.