1 | SLP(C)No.729/2020 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
( SLP(C)No.729/2020) 

ALIFIYA HUSENBHAI KESHARIYA … APPELLANT(S) 

VERSUS 

SIDDIQ ISMAIL SINDHI & ORS. … RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 

SANJAY KAROL J., 
1. Leave granted. 
At the outset, we may remind ourselves of what 
Krishna Iyer, J. had observed in State of Haryana v. 
Darshana Devi1 that 
 
“2. The poor shall not be priced out of the 
Justice market by insistence on court-fee 
and 
refusal 
to 
apply 
the 
exemptive 
provisions of Order 33, CPC.” 

2. The sole point for our consideration is whether a 
 
1 (1979) 

2 | SLP(C)No.729/2020 
 
person who is entitled to receive compensation by way of 
a claim before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal can be 
said to have given up its status as an ‘indigent person’, 
by virtue of the amount slated to be received. In other 
words, whether a person being an award holder, of 
monetary compensation without actual receipt thereof, 
would be disentitled from filing an appeal seeking 
enhanced compensation as an indigent? 
3. The factual scenario giving rise to this appeal 
is:- 
3.1 The appellant, who was the original claimant 
before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, [Court of 
Motor Accident Claims Tribunal (Auxiliary) & 10th 
(Adhoc) Addl. District Court Jude, Jamnagar]2 in 
M.A.C.P.No.255 of 2011, was injured in an accident 
on 4th July 2010, while riding pillion on a bike, 
which was hit by a truck. Having sustained injuries, 
she was admitted for medical treatment at a hospital 
for a period of fourteen days and subsequently she 
underwent plastic surgery. 
3.2 At the time of the accident, she was earning 
 
2 Hereafter, ‘Tribunal’ 

3 | SLP(C)No.729/2020 
 
Rs.3,000/- per month, but, post the accident, she 
sustained permanent disablement, and hence had not 
been able to work thereafter. A claim was filed for 
Rs.10 lakhs with 18% interest and costs. 
3.3 The Tribunal vide Award dated 17th October 2016, 
awarded a sum of Rs.2,41,745/- with 9% interest from 
the date of claim petition till the date of 
realization and proportionate cost(s). 
4. Dissatisfied 
thereby, 
the 
claimant-appellant 
approached the High Court of Gujarat by way of Regular 
First Appeal No.2611/2017. Misc. Civil Application 
No.3/2018 was filed therein by which the claimant-
appellant prayed for permission to file the said First 
Appeal as an indigent person. 
 
5. The High Court vide judgment and order dated 7th 
August, 2018 dismissed the Misc. Civil Application 
observing as under: 
 
“….3. It is a matter of record that the 
claimants filed claim petition before the 
Tribunal and claimed Rs.10,00,000/-, whereby 
the Tribunal by partly allowing the claim 
petition vide the impugned award, awarded a 
sum of Rs,2,41,745/- along with 9% interest 
from the date of claim petition till its 
realization. 
 
4. In light of the aforesaid, the applicant–
appellant 
cannot 
be 
considered 
to 
be 
indigent person and therefore, he has to pay 

4 | SLP(C)No.729/2020 
 
court fees first. 
 
5. Ms. Rana, learned counsel for the 
applicant, however, submits that, till date, 
no amount is received by the applicant. It 
is open for the applicant to pursue the said 
remedy before appropriate forum. 

In view of the above, present application 
is not entertained. Time to deposit Court 
fees is granted for 8 weeks from today.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
6. We may refer to this Court’s decision in Mathai M. 
Paikeday v. C.K. Antony3, wherein the concept of an 
indigent person has been discussed at length. Relevant 
extracts are reproduced as follows:- 
 
“16. The concept of indigent person has been 
discussed in Corpus Juris Secundum (20 CJS 
Costs § 93) as following: 
 
“§ 93. What constitutes indigency.—The right 
to sue in forma pauperis is restricted to 
indigent persons. A person may proceed as 
poor person only after a court is satisfied 
that he or she is unable to prosecute the 
suit and pay the costs and expenses. A person 
is indigent if the payment of fees would 
deprive one of basic living expenses, or if 
the person is in a state of impoverishment 
that substantially and effectively impairs 
or prevents the pursuit of a court remedy. 
However, a person need not be destitute. 
Factors considered when determining if a 
litigant is indigent are similar to those 
considered in criminal cases, and include 
the party's employment status and income, 
including income from government sources 
such as social security and unemployment 
benefits, the ownership of unencumbered 
assets, including real or personal property 
and money on deposit, the party's total 
indebtedness, and any financial assistance 
 
3 (2011) 

5 | SLP(C)No.729/2020 
 
received from family or close friends. Not 
only personal liquid assets, but also 
alternative sources of money should be 
considered.” 
 
17. The eligibility of person to sue in forma 
pauperis has 
been 
considered 
in American 
Jurisprudence (20 Am Jur 2d Costs § 100) as thus: 
 
“§ 
100. Eligibility 
to 
sue 
in 
forma 
pauperis; 
generally.—The 
burden 
of 
establishing indigency is on the defendant 
claiming 
indigent 
status, 
who 
must 
demonstrate not that he or she is entirely 
destitute and without funds, but that 
payments for counsel would place an undue 
hardship on his or her ability to provide 
the basic necessities of life for himself or 
herself and his or her family. Factors 
particularly relevant to the determination 
of whether a party to a civil proceeding is 
indigent are: (1) the party's employment 
status and income, including income from 
government sources such as social security 
and unemployment benefits; (2) the ownership 
of any unencumbered assets, including real 
or personal property and monies on deposit; 
and 
finally 

the 
party's 
total 
indebtedness and any financial assistance 
received from family or close friends. Where 
two 
people 
are 
living 
together 
and 
functioning as a single economic unit, 
whether married, related, or otherwise, 
consideration of their combined financial 
assets may be warranted for the purposes of 
determining a party's indigency status in a 
civil proceeding.” 

7. The Code of Civil Procedure, 19084 provides for 
mechanism by which a person who is indigent may file a 
suit or an appeal. Order XXXIII thereof pertains to 
filing of suits and Order XLIV deals with appeals by 
 
4 Hereinafter C.P.C. 

6 | SLP(C)No.729/2020 
 
such persons. 
8. In the present matter, we are concerned with an 
appeal envisaged under Section 173 of the Motor Vehicle 
Act, 19885. 
9. Rule 1 of Order XLIV dealing with appeal filed as 
an indigent person, reads as under: 
 
“1. Who may appeal 3[as an indigent person. 
— Any person entitled to prefer an appeal, 
who is unable to pay the fee required for 
the memorandum of appeal, may present an 
application accompanied by a memorandum of 
appeal, and may be allowed to appeal as an 
indigent person, subject, in all matters, 
including 
the 
presentation 
of 
such 
application, to the provisions relating to 
suits by indigent persons, in so far as those 
provisions are applicable.” 

10. The operation of the above two provisions has been 
noted by this Court in R.V. Dev v. Chief Secretary, Govt. of Kerala6, in para 8 whereof it was observed: 
 
“8……When an application is filed by a person 
said to be indigent, certain factors for 
considering as to whether he is so within 
the meaning of the said provision are 
required to be taken into consideration 
therefor. A person who is permitted to sue 
as an indigent person is liable to pay the 
court fees which would have been paid by him 
if he was not permitted to sue in that 
capacity, if he fails in the suit at the 
trial or without trial. Payment of court 
fees as the scheme suggests is merely 
deferred. It is not altogether wiped off.” 

5 Hereinafter the ‘MV Act’ 
6 (2007) 

7 | SLP(C)No.729/2020 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

In regard to the application of Order XXXIII of the 
Code, a perusal of the decision in Union Bank of India 
v. Khader International Construction & Ors.7 reveals the 
following principles: 

It is an enabling provision for filing of a 
suit by an indigent person without paying the 
court fee at the initial stage. 

If the suit is decreed for the plaintiff, the 
court fee would be calculated as if the 
plaintiff had not originally filed the suit 
as an indigent person. The said amount is 
recoverable by the State in accordance with 
who may ordered to pay the same in the 
decree. 

Even when a suit is dismissed, the court fee shall 
be recoverable by the State in the form of first 
charge on the subject-matter of the suit. 
It was further held that – 
 
“20…So there is only a provision for the 
deferred payment of the court fees and this 
benevolent provision is intended to help the 
poor litigants who are unable to pay the 
requisite court fee to file a suit because 
of their poverty.” 

7 (2001) 

8 | SLP(C)No.729/2020 
 
11. The 
intent 
of 
Orders 
XXXIII 
and 
XLIV 
is 
unmistakable. They exemplify the cherished principle 
that lack of monetary capability does not preclude a 
person from knocking on the doors of the Court to seek 
vindication of his rights. 
12. It is unquestioned that a person dissatisfied with 
the amount of compensation received can file an appeal. 
In the present case, for a claim of Rs.10 lakhs, the 
Tribunal awarded compensation which was less than Rs.2.5 
lakhs. Without commenting on the merits of the matter, 
we recognize the desire of the claimant-appellant to 
file an appeal. 
13. Once again turning to Darshana Devi (supra), we 
refer to certain observations made therein - 
 
“5……Our perspective is best projected by 
Cappelletti, quoted by the Australian Law 
Reform Commission: 
 
 “The right of effective access to 
justice has emerged with the new social 
rights. 
Indeed, 
it 
is 
of 
paramount 
importance among these new rights since, 
clearly, the enjoyment of traditional as 
well as new social rights presupposes 
mechanisms for their effective protection. 
Such protection, moreover, is best assured 
by a workable remedy within the framework of 
the judicial system. Effective access to 
justice can thus be seen as the most basic 
requirement — the most ‘basic human right’ — 
of a system which purports to guarantee legal 

9 | SLP(C)No.729/2020 
 
right.” [ M. Cappelletti, Rabels, (1976) 669 
at 672] 
 
 We should expand the jurisprudence of 
access to justice as an integral part of 
Social 
Justice 
and 
examine 
the 
constitutionalism of court-fee levy as a 
facet of human rights highlighted in our 
Nation's Constitution. If the State itself 
should travesty this basic principle, in the 
teeth of Articles 14 and 39-A, where an 
indigent widow is involved, a second look at 
its policy is overdue. The Court must give 
the benefit of doubt against levy of a price 
to enter the temple of justice until one day 
the whole issue of the validity of profit-
making through sale of civil justice, 
disguised as court-fee, is fully reviewed by 
this Court…” 
 
14. In the present case although the State is not the 
one in appeal, the observations in regard to the 
insistence upon court fees by the High Court to be taken 
from the meager amount awarded as compensation even 
after having recorded that she had not yet received the 
said amount, has prompted us to refer to the above 
extract. 
15. The ground, upon which the claimant-appellant’s 
application to file the appeal as an indigent person was 
rejected, was that she had received compensation by way 
of the Award of the Tribunal, and therefore, she was not 
indigent. We find this observation to be belied by the 
impugned order itself as the learned Single Judge has 

10 | SLP(C)No.729/2020 
 
recorded the submission of the counsel for the claimant-
appellant that no money stood paid to her at that point 
in time. So even though she had been awarded a sum, her 
indigency was not extinguished thereby. Any which way, 
in our considered view, the High Court was incorrect in 
rejecting the Misc. Application. 
16. There is a further ground on which we find that the 
High Court erred in not allowing the claimant-appellant 
to file the appeal. The language used in Orders XXXIII 
and XLIV so far as deferring of payment of court fees is 
concerned, as was observed in Khader International 
(supra), that if the suit so filed, as an indigent person 
succeeds, the Court fee shall be deductible from the 
amount received as a result thereof as if the person who 
files the suit is not an indigent. 
17. Order XLIV Rule 3(2) provides as under: 
 
“3. Inquiry as to whether applicant is an 
indigent person.-(1)…… 
(2) Where the applicant, referred to in rule 
11, is alleged to have become an indigent 
person since the date of the decree appealed 
from, the inquiry into the question whether 
or not he is an indigent person shall be made 
by the Appellate Court or, under the orders 
of the Appellate Court, by an officer of that 
Court unless the Appellate Court considers 
it necessary in the circumstances of the case 
that the inquiry should be held by the Court 
from 
whose 
decision 
the 
appeal 
is 
preferred.” 

11 | SLP(C)No.729/2020 

The Appellate Court, in accordance with the above, 
did not conduct any inquiry. The same was necessitated 
since nothing on record speaks of the claimant-appellant 
having filed the claim before the learned Tribunal as an 
indigent person, in which case she would be covered under 
Rule 3(1), which provides that no further inquiry would 
be required in respect of a person who was allowed to 
sue or appeal as an indigent person if they make an 
affidavit to the effect that they have not ceased to be 
an indigent unless the Government pleader objects or 
disputes such claim in which case an inquiry shall be 
held by the Appellate Court or under the orders thereof. 
18. On both counts, one, that she had not yet received 
the money and, therefore, at the time of filing the 
appeal she was arguably indigent; and second, that the 
statutory requirement under the C.P.C., as described 
above, was not met – the order of the learned Single 
Judge has to be set aside. 
19. Having observed as above, we allow the appeal and 
set aside the impugned judgment and order dated 7th 
August, 2018 of the learned Single Judge passed in Misc. in Regular First Appeal 

12 | SLP(C)No.729/2020 
 
No.2611/2017. It would have been ideal for us to have 
remanded the matter to the High Court for an inquiry to 
be conducted by its orders in accordance with Order XLIV, 
however, in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this 
case, keeping in view that considerable time has passed 
since the impugned order in the First Appeal, we grant 
liberty to the appellant to appeal as an indigent person 
observing that, at the relevant time, her application 
ought to have been looked into, verified and then ordered 
upon, which was not done. 
20. While recognizing that in ordinary circumstances 
this Court should not impose timelines for disposal of 
cases, but considering the facts of this case, in 
particular, that the Award of the Tribunal is dated 17th 
October, 2016, and the rejection of Misc. Civil 
Application seeking permission to file the appeal as an 
indigent person before the High Court, is dated 7th 
August, 2018, we request the High Court that the appeal 
filed 
by 
the 
claimant-appellant 
be 
decided 
expeditiously, and preferably within a period of six 
months from the date of receipt of the copy of this 
judgment. We direct the Registry to immediately 
transmit the same to the learned Registrar General of 

13 | SLP(C)No.729/2020 
 
the High Court of Gujarat for necessary follow-up 
action. 
 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed 
of. 

…………………………………………J. 

[J.K. MAHESHWARI] 

…………………………………………J. 

[SANJAY KAROL] 
New Delhi; 
May 27, 2024.