IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No.16451 of 2023)
Bombay Slum Redevelopment Corporation
Private Limited                                   
      … Appellant

VERSUS

Samir Narain Bhojwani
      
  … Respondent
with

(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No.20359 of 2023)
and

(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 14238 of 2024)
(Diary No.40494 of 2023)
JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.
The   application   for   permission   to   file   special   leave
petition is allowed.  Leave granted.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
2.
These appeals take exception to the same judgment and
order   dated   7th  July   2023   passed   by   the   High   Court   of, etc.
Page 1 of 35

Judicature at Bombay. Therefore, the same are being decided
together.  We are setting out a few factual aspects necessary
for deciding the appeals.  
3.
On 31st March 1993, the Maharashtra Housing and Area
Development Authority (MHADA) executed a lease agreement
in respect of the subject property in favour of Andheri Kamgar
Nagar Co­operative Housing Society Limited (for short, ‘the
Society’).   It is stated to be a society of slum dwellers.   The
Society, by the agreement dated 6th October 1996, appointed
M/s.   Aurora   Properties   and   Investments   (for   short,   ‘M/s.
Aurora’)   as   the   property   developer   to   implement   a   slum
rehabilitation scheme.   M/s. Aurora was to construct 237
rehabilitation tenements for slum dwellers and 40 tenements
for project­affected persons (PAPs) free of cost and develop the
property   using   the   available   Floor   Space   Index   (FSI)   and
dispose of the same.  It appears that M/s. Aurora could not
discharge its obligations.  Therefore, by the agreement dated
22nd  September  1999 (described  as  an  agreement  for  the
grant   of   sub­development   rights),   the   society   appointed
Bombay   Slum   Redevelopment   Corporation   Private   Limited
(the appellant) as the developer.  Apart from taking over the
obligations of M/s. Aurora under the development agreement
dated 6th October 1996, the appellant corporation agreed to
hand   over   15,000   square   feet   of   built­up   area   in   the
redeveloped   property   to   M/s.Aurora   against   M/s.   Aurora
paying the cost of construction at Rs.600 per square foot.
After   that,   the   appellant   started   the   development   of   the, etc.
Page 2 of 35

property.   On 10th  March 2003, an agreement was executed
by and between the appellant and one Samir Narain Bhojwani
(the respondent), under which the appellant retained 45% of
the   total   available   FSI   and   permitted   the   respondent   to
construct the free sale area by allotting him FSI to the extent
of the remaining 55%.  According to the appellant's case, the
respondent was appointed as a contractor to carry out the
construction activities of the said building on the site.  On 3rd
July 2004, a deed of confirmation was executed to register the
agreement   dated   10th  March   2003.     Thereafter,   on   11th
September   2009,   there   was   a   letter/tripartite   agreement
executed,   to   which   M/s.   Aurora,   the   appellant   and   the
respondent were parties under which it was agreed that the
appellant would provide 22,500 square feet of constructed
area to M/s. Aurora instead of 15,000 square feet, which was
agreed   to   be   allotted   under   the   agreement   dated   22nd
September 1999.
4.
The  dispute   began  on   22nd  March   2012   when   the
respondent, by his letter, alleged default against the appellant
as set out in the said letter.  After the letter was sent, there
was a prolonged correspondence, exchange of drafts of the
sale   agreements,   etc.     Ultimately,   the   respondent   filed   a
petition  before   the   High   Court   under   Section   11   of   the
Arbitration   and   Conciliation   Act,   1996   (for   short,   ‘the
Arbitration Act’).   An Arbitrator was appointed. The arbitral
proceedings concluded in the form of an award made by the
Arbitral   Tribunal   on   7th  September   2018   in   favour   of   the, etc.
Page 3 of 35

respondent (the claimant before the Arbitral Tribunal). Most
of   the   claims   made   by   the   respondent   were   granted.   The
counter­claim   made   by   the   appellant   was   rejected.     The
appellant filed a petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration
Act before the High Court to challenge the award.   By the
judgment   dated   13th  September   2019,   the   learned   Single
Judge of the High Court allowed the petition under Section 34
of the Arbitration Act and proceeded to set aside the award on
various grounds, such as perversity, patent illegality, etc.  The
respondent   filed   an   appeal   under   Section   37(1)(c)   of   the
Arbitration   Act   to   challenge   the   judgment   of   the   learned
Single Judge.   By the impugned judgment, which set aside
the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the Division Bench
of the High Court passed an order of remand to the learned
Single Judge on the ground that the learned Single Judge did
not consider several issues.   The Division Bench referred to
an application made by the third parties. It directed that the
interim   arrangements   made   earlier   by   making   an
appointment  of   the   Court   Receiver   shall   continue   for   four
weeks with a liberty to the parties to seek appropriate interim
orders   in   the   restored   petition   under   Section   34   of   the
Arbitration Act. Both the parties to the appeal under Section
37 have preferred these cross­appeals.
SUBMISSIONS
5.
We have heard the learned senior counsel appearing for
the   parties   in   these   appeals.     The   learned   senior   counsel, etc.
Page 4 of 35

representing the appellant submitted that an appeal under
Section 37 of the Arbitration Act is essentially a continuation
of the proceedings under Section 34. The scope of interference
in an appeal under Section 37(1)(c) is narrower than what is
available under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act.   Reliance
was placed on various decisions of this Court in support of
the   said   submissions.     Another   contention   is   that   while
deciding   the   appeal   under   Section   37(1)(c),   the   Court   can
either set aside the award or affirm the award but cannot
remand the petition under Section 34 for a fresh hearing.  The
submission is that the provisions of Order XLI of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short, ‘the CPC’) concerning remand
do not apply to an appeal under Section 37 of the Arbitration
Act as the provisions of the CPC do not apply to such an
appeal.  Inviting our attention to the findings recorded by the
learned Single Judge, the learned senior counsel submitted
that   while   allowing   the   petition   under   Section   34   of   the
Arbitration   Act,   the   learned   Single   Judge,   by   a   detailed
judgment,   has   dealt   with   all   the   issues   canvassed   by   the
parties.   Pointing out the findings recorded by the Division
Bench in the impugned judgment, he submitted that it cannot
be said that the reasons recorded by the learned Single Judge
are not elaborate.   The  reasons are very detailed and more
than elaborate.  In short, the submission is that the remand
order is wholly unwarranted, and the Division Bench ought to
have decided the appeal under Section 37 of the Arbitration
Act on merits., etc.
Page 5 of 35

6.
The appellant was the respondent before the Arbitral
Tribunal.     Even   the   claimant   Samir   Narain   Bhojwani
(described in this judgment as the respondent) has filed the

of   2023.   The   intervenor   before   the   Division   Bench   in   the
appeal under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act has preferred a
Civil   Appeal   arising   out   of   Special   Leave   Petition   (C)Diary
No.40494 of 2023.   The plea by the respondent is naturally
for restoration of the award of the Arbitral Tribunal.  We have
heard the detailed submissions of the learned senior counsel
representing   the   respondent   (the   claimant) 
and 
the
intervenors. We are not referring to the submissions made by
them  relating   to  the   merits  of  the   Award,   considering   the
limited scope of these appeals.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
7.
 After considering the submissions made across the Bar,
we   find   that   the   issue   revolves   around   the   power   of   the
Appellate Court dealing with the appeal under Section 37(1)(c)
of the Arbitration Act to pass an order of remand to Section
34 Court.  Before we address the issue regarding the power of
the Appellate Court, we will need to refer to the award made
by the Arbitral Tribunal.  There are six different parts of the
award by the Arbitral Tribunal.   The operative part of the
award of the Arbitral Tribunal reads thus:, etc.
Page 6 of 35

“..........................
203. In view of the foregoing discussion,
the following Award is made:
I
(a) It is declared that the Development
Agreement   dated  10th  March  2003  is
valid, subsisting and binding upon the
Claimant and the Respondent;
(b) It is declared that the Claimant is
entitled to retain possession of 15 Flats
in   Wing   A
 (earmarked   for   the
Respondent)  and  0.63  Flat   in  Wing   B
(earmarked for the Respondent),  till the
Respondent   complies   with   all   the
directions being given in this Award;
(c)  The   Respondent   is   directed   to
construct   at   its   own   cost   107   PAP
tenements   (or   any   higher   number   as
may be specified by SRA) at Shiv Shakti
Nagar,   Kandivali,   relatable   to   the
Andheri   Kamgar   Nagar   CHS   Scheme
and handover the same to SRA within 2
months from the date of this Award;
(d) The Respondent  is  further directed
to   obtain   from   SRA   a   certificate   of
discharge   of   the   Respondent   from   its
obligation of constructing 107 (or any
higher   number   of)   PAP   tenements
relatable to Andheri Kamgar Nagar CHS
Scheme, and handing over the same to
SRA, within 3 months from the date of
this Award;, etc.
Page 7 of 35

(e) The Respondent is directed to obtain
further   Commencement   Certificate   for
construction  of   6th   to  22nd  floors   of
Wing  C  (further CC  for Wing  C) on the
basis of sanctioned building plans dated
21st  October   2010,   within   4  months
from the date of this Award;
(f) In case SRA requires the Respondent
to comply with any condition under any
Letter of Intent or under any Regulation
or Circular, including payment of any
premium, before issuance of further CC
for   Wing   C,   the   Respondent   shall
comply with such condition or direction
with  utmost  expedition and within one
month from the date of receipt of such
communication;
(g) Once the Respondent obtains further
CC   for   Wing   C   as   aforesaid,   the
Claimant shall at its own cost construct
6th to 22nd floors of Wing C as per the
sanctioned  building  plans  dated   2ist
October  2010,  within  18 months from
the   date   of   receiving  further  CC   for
Wing   C   and   after   completion   of
construction of Wing C, give intimation
thereof to the  Respondent  for applying
to SRA for Occupation Certificate  (OC)
for Wing C; 
(h)   The  Respondent  shall  obtain  from
SRA OC for Wing  C, within 2 months
from  the  date  of  receipt  of  intimation
from   the   Claimant   as   per   the   above
direction;
(i) In case SRA requires the Respondent
to comply with any condition under any
Letter of Intent or under any Regulation, etc.
Page 8 of 35

or Circular,  including payment  of any
premium,   before   issuance   of   OC   for
Wing  C,  the Respondent  shall  comply
with  such  condition  or   direction   with
utmost   expedition   and   within   one
month from the date of receipt of such
communication;
II

 The   Respondent
 shall   pay   the
Claimant Rs.67,00,000/­ (Rupees Sixty
Seven lakhs) along with Rs.26,00,000/­
(Rupees   Twenty   Six   Lakhs)
 being
interest  @  18%  p.a.   from  19th  July,
2016  till  the   date   of  this  Award  and
further  interest  @  18%   p.a.   from   the
date   of   this   Award  till  the  date  of
payment / realization, within 3 months
from the date of this Award;
(k) The Respondent shall also pay the
Claimant
 
Rs.53,00,00,000/(Rupees
Fifty Three Crores) as compensation for
the period from 19th  July 2016 till the
date of this Award, being compensation
for   the   delay   on   the   part   of   the
Respondent in not obtaining further CC
for Wing C, within 4 months from the
date of this Award;
(I) The Respondent shall further pay the
Claimant
 
Rs.50,00,00,000/(Rupees
Fifty Crores) as compensation for delay
in obtaining further CC for Wing C for
the period of 24 months from the date
of   this   Award   till   issuance   of   OC   for
Wing C, within 4 months from the date
of issuance of OC for Wing C;
III, etc.
Page 9 of 35

(m)   The   Respondent   is   directed   to
remove   all   encroachments   from   9.15
mtr wide road to the South Side of the
property under the said project; (n) The
Respondent is also directed to obtain at
its own cost, all necessary permissions
for separate Lease and/or Assignment
from MHADA in respect of the free sale
component   area   in   favour   of   the
Andheri   Kamgar   Nagar   Society,   and,
thereafter, in favour of the purchasers
of the Apartments or their Association
under the Indenture of Lease dated 31st
March 1993 from MHADA;
(o) The Respondent is further directed to
pay   Stamp   Duty   on   the   Indenture   of
Lease dated 31st March 1993 executed
by   MHADA   and   on   the   Development
Agreement   for   Development   dated   6th
October 1996 between Andheri Kamgar
Nagar   CHS   and   Aurora   Properties  &
Investments and also on the Agreement
for Sub Development dated
22nd September 1999 between Aurora
Properties
 &
 Investments   and   the
Respondent;
IV
(p) Till the OC is received for Wing C,
neither   the   Claimant   nor   the
Respondent shall sell, or in any other
manner dispose of, encumber, or create
any third party rights in any flat or any
parking space in Wing C;
(q)  Till  the OC is received for Wing C
and  till  the Respondent  complies with
the other directions given  in  Part II of
the operative portion of this Award, the, etc.
Page 10 of 35

Respondent   and   the   persons   claiming
through the Respondent shall  not sell/
re­sell or  in  any other  manner  dispose
of or encumber or create any third party
rights in any of the 15 flats in Wing A
(earmarked for the Respondent) and the
parking spaces related thereto;
V
(r)  It  is  declared  that   the   Letters   of
Allotment   purportedly  issued  by  the
Respondent   in  respect  of   31   flats   in
Wings   A   and   B   (earmarked  for   the
Respondent)  are   sham,   bogus,   illegal
and  null   and   void   ab­initio   and  not
binding on the Claimant;
(s)  It  is   further   declared   that  the
Agreements for Sale of 15 flats in Wing
A   (earmarked   for   the   Respondent)
purportedly
 
executed
 by
 the
Respondent   in   favor  of   the   Managing
Director   and   Directors   of   the
Respondent Company and their family
members are also sham and null and
void  ab­initio  and  not   binding   on  the
Claimant;
(t) In case, within 4 months from the
date of this Award, the Respondent does
not  pay  the  Claimant  the  aforesaid
amount of Rs.54.03 crores or  does  not
surrender 3.63 flats in Wing B ( out of
those  earmarked  for  the   Respondent),
the   Claimant   shall   be   entitled   to  sell
0.63 flat in Wing
B (Flat No.4 on the pt floor) and 3 flats
in Wing B, out of the following 9 flats:­, etc.
Page 11 of 35

► 2 Flats purportedly transferred by
the   Respondent   to   Mr.
 Kiran
H.Hemani ­ M.D. of the Respondent,
► 7 flats purportedly transferred by
the   Respondent   to   Mr.   Priyank   K.
Hemani   ­   Director   of   the
Respondent;
(u)   The   Respondent   and   the   persons
claiming   through   the   Respondent   are
hereby restrained from selling/reselling,
or in any other manner disposing of or
encumbering or parting with possession
of or creating any third party rights, in
the   flats   in   Wing   B   purportedly
transferred to Mr. Kiran H. Hemani and
Mr. Priyank K. Hemai till identification
and intimation of 3 flats out of those 9
flats   in   Wing   B   is   conveyed   by   the
Respondent   to   the   Claimant   for   the
purpose of being available for sale by
the   Claimant   for   recovery   Rs.54.03
crores   as   directed   in   (h),   (i)  &  (r)
hereinabove   and   explained   in   detail
para 199 hereinabove;
(v)   In   case   the   Respondent   does   not
obtain further CC for Wing C within 4
months from the date of this Award, the
Claimant shall be entitled to sell the 15
flats   in   Wing   A   (earmarked   for   the
Respondent)   and   adjust   the   sale
proceeds   thereof   against   the   loss   of
profit from Wing C;
(w)   In   case   the   Respondent   obtains
further CC for Wing C and also obtains
OC for Wing C within the time limits
stipulated   in   this   Award,   but   the
Respondent does not pay the Claimant
Rs.50   crores,   as   directed   in   (j)  above, etc.
Page 12 of 35

within   4   months   from   the   date   of
obtaining OC for Wing C, or does not
surrender   3.37   flats   to   the   Claimant
and the parking spaces related thereto,
within   the   said   period,   the   Claimant
shall   be   entitled   to   sell   off   3.37   flats
earmarked for the Respondent in Wing
C   and   the   parking   spaces   related
thereto;
VI
(x)   The   Respondent   shall   pay   the
Claimant   costs   of   this   proceeding
quantified at Rs.1,50,00,000/­ (Rupees
One
 Crore
 Fifty   Lakhs),
 within

months   from   the   date   of   this   Award.
The Respondent shall bear its own costs
for this proceeding. 
205. The claims  made by the Claimant
for the other reliefs not granted in this
Award   are  hereby  rejected.   All   the
Counter   Claims
 made   by
 the
Respondent are also rejected. 
206. It is clarified that this Award does
not deal with any of the 5 flats in Wing
A, 3 flats in Wing B and 4 flats in Wing
C, earmarked for Aurora  Properties  &
Investments,   for   which   orders   of
injunction  were passed by the  Bombay
High Court on 3rd and 17th December
2013 in Notice of Motion 147 of 2013,
and which injunction orders have been
restored  by   the   Supreme   Court  by
judgment and order  dated  2ist  August
2018 in.......................................”, etc.
Page 13 of 35

8.
While  deciding   the   petition   under   Section   34   of   the
Arbitration Act, the learned Single Judge  has made an in­
depth discussion on the factual aspects and the submissions
of the learned counsel representing the parties. Paragraphs 1
to   35   of   his   judgment   deal   with   the   factual   aspects   and
details about the directions issued by the Arbitral Tribunal
under the award.  Paragraphs 36 to 125, spanning over 45
pages,   record   the   submissions   made   by   the   parties,   and
paragraphs 126 to 194, covering 37 pages, are the reasons
recorded by the learned Single Judge.  There is a discussion
about the oral and documentary evidence adduced by the
parties.   From paragraphs 140 onwards, the learned Single
Judge   discussed   the   issue   of   jurisdiction   of   the   Arbitral
Tribunal to pass the award against the third parties who
were not parties to the arbitral proceedings.   The learned
Single Judge referred to the finding of the Arbitral Tribunal
that 31 agreements/allotment letters for the sale of flats were
sham and bogus and were not binding on the respondent.
The learned Single Judge found that no persons shown as
purchasers   under   the   agreement   were   parties   to   the
proceedings before the Arbitral Tribunal.  The learned Single
Judge   also   noted   that   these   31   flats   were   mortgaged   in
favour   of   various   Banks   and   Financial   Institutions.
Therefore, the learned Single Judge held that even the Banks
and Financial Institutions would be affected by the finding of
the Arbitral Tribunal that 31 flats under the sale agreements
were sham, bogus, null, and void.   Therefore, the learned, etc.
Page 14 of 35

Single Judge held that the Arbitral Tribunal had exceeded its
jurisdiction.   The learned Single Judge also held that the
respondent before the Arbitral Tribunal (the appellant herein)
was entitled to sell the said 31 flats, and the purchasers
thereof were neither parties to the agreement containing the
arbitration clause nor claiming under the said agreement. 
9.
The learned Single Judge also referred to that part of
the arbitral award, which provided that there would be a
charge   over   the   flats   held   by   the   appellant   herein.     The
learned Single Judge held that the charge on the properties
could be either created by operation of law or by agreement
of   the   parties,   and   in   this   case,   there   was   no   such
agreement.  Therefore, the learned Single Judge held that the
direction   to   create   the   charge   was  ex­facie  without   the
jurisdiction.  Thereafter, the learned Single Judge referred to
the reliefs granted by the Arbitral Tribunal in clauses (c) to
(l), (m) to (q), (t), (u) and (v) of paragraph 203 of the award.
According to the learned Single Judge, some of the reliefs
could have been granted only in the execution of the award.
Further, the learned Single Judge held that under clauses (c)
to   (l)   and   (m)   to   (q)   of   paragraph   203   of   the   award,   the
appellant herein was directed to carry out various acts to
obtain multiple permissions from the authorities within the
prescribed   time   and   based   on   such   compliance,   further
directions   were   issued   for   the   execution   of  multiple
documents, etc.   The authorities from whom the appellant
was directed to obtain various permissions were admittedly, etc.
Page 15 of 35

not   parties   before   the   arbitral   proceedings.     The   learned
Single Judge also noted that the directions issued in the
abovementioned clauses required continuous supervision by
the Court.  Therefore, in view of the provisions of the Specific
Relief Act, 1963, such reliefs ought not to have been granted
by the Arbitral Tribunal.
10.
The learned Single Judge also held that though specific
performance   was   sought   in   the   claim   made   before   the
Arbitral   Tribunal   based   on   the   Letter   of   Intent   dated   7th
March   2012,   the   Arbitral   Tribunal   granted   specific
performance  based  on  the  Letter  of  Intent   of  2010.     The
learned Single Judge also held that the learned Arbitrator or
the  Court  could   not  supervise  whether   the   appellant  can
shift 107 PAPs in its other properties as directed under the
award.     Further,   it   was   observed   that   the   direction   to
construct the 6th to 22nd floors could be implemented only
upon   completing   the   entire   chain   of   events,   such   as
obtaining permissions, shifting of PAPs, etc.   The learned
Single Judge held that the grant of specific performance in
the present case would be hit by Section 14 of the Specific
Relief   Act,   1963,   as   the   enforcement   of   such   a   contract
involves continuous supervision by the Court.  On perusing
the material on record, the learned Single Judge also held
that the respondent herein had not proved his readiness and
willingness to perform his obligations.   The learned Single
Judge held that since the relief of specific performance is, etc.
Page 16 of 35

discretionary, the conduct of the respondent ought to have
been taken into consideration by the Arbitral Tribunal.  
11.
The   learned   Single   Judge   dealt   with   the   award   of
damages in the sum of Rs.53 crores for the period from 19th
July 2016 till the date of the award on account of the alleged
delay by the respondent.  The learned Single Judge held that
the evidence on record had been completely overlooked while
granting the relief of damages in the sum of Rs.53 crores.
The learned Single Judge recorded that the Arbitral Tribunal
referred to only a part of the depositions of the witnesses and
ignored the rest.  Further, the learned Single Judge held that
the delay on the part of the appellant in completing other
projects   was   neither   pleaded   nor   proved.     Moreover,   the
learned Single Judge held that even assuming that there was
a delay in completion of other projects on the part of the
appellant, that would be no ground for grant of relief for
specific   performance.     The   learned   Single   Judge   recorded
something about the approach of the Arbitral Tribunal in
paragraph 168.   The learned Single Judge objected to the
learned Arbitrator relying on the news report of some other
developer's project in the Times of India.  The learned Single
Judge noted that the news article was published after the
arguments were concluded.   Moreover,  the  learned  Single
Judge found that relying upon the material, not forming part
of   the   record,   amounts   to   a   breach   of   the   principles   of
natural   justice.     A   clear   finding   recorded   by   the   learned
Single   Judge   is   that   the   learned   Arbitrator   has   applied, etc.
Page 17 of 35

different yardsticks to the evidence adduced by both parties.
Therefore, the Arbitral Tribunal did not treat the parties as
equals.
12.
The learned Judge held that while dealing with the per
square feet rate of the flats for awarding a claim for damages,
the   Arbitral   Tribunal   completely   ignored   the   evidence   on
record, which showed that the respondent had sold the flats
at   much   lower   rates.     The   learned   Single   Judge   also
discussed   the   finding   recorded   while   rejecting   the
counterclaim.  The learned Single Judge held that though the
Arbitral Tribunal concluded that the building did not have a
load­bearing capacity  of 22 floors, the respondent neither
pleaded nor proved the load­bearing capacity of the building.
The learned Single Judge also held that awarding payment of
interest on interest­free deposit was contrary to the terms of
the contract, which shows patent illegality.   However, the
learned Single Judge rejected the allegation of bias made by
the appellant against the learned Arbitrator. 
13.
We   have   referred   to   only   material   findings   of   the
learned Single Judge by way of illustration to emphasise that
there is a very elaborate consideration of the merits of the
challenge to the award in the judgment of the learned Single
Judge.
14.
Now, we turn to the judgment of the Division Bench in
the appeal  under Section 37 of the Arbitration  Act.   The, etc.
Page 18 of 35

approach of the Division Bench is reflected in paragraph 4 of
the impugned judgment, which reads thus:
“4. Having heard the learned counsel
for   the  parties,  we   were   of   the
opinion  that  the  impugned order is
required   to   be   set   aside   and   the
matter  needs to  be  remanded  to the
learned  Single   Judge   for  de   novo
consideration. We had  put it  to the
counsel   for   the  parties  that   the
appeal  can   be   remanded,  without
detailed reasons, by consent, keeping
all contentions open. The Appellant
was  ready  but   the   Respondent   was
not ready. Therefore, we are required
to give elaborate reason why remand
is  necessary.  In this context, we have
briefly referred to the core facts of the
case, the rival contentions, the award
and   the   impugned   order.   The   factual
backdrop   leading  to   the   dispute   is
narrated in detail in the Award and by
the learned Single Judge. The summary
of the factual position is as follows...................................”
                   (emphasis added)
In paragraphs 42 and 43, the Division Bench held thus:
“42.  Even  otherwise,  question  would
arise  as to whether such a detailed
factual enquiry  can  be  made  to set
aside  the  award.  To  reach  such   a
conclusion   that   it
 suffers
 from
perversity,  the   Award  had   to  be
carefully  analyzed to rule out  other
possibilities.  It   is   not   enough   to
merely  state   a   conclusion.  Further,, etc.
Page 19 of 35

when such a conclusion can be reached
under  Section   34  of  the   Act  is   a
debatable  issue that also needs to  be
addressed.
43. 
In   the   impugned   order   in
paragraphs   161   and   162   reference   is
made to the principle of law governing
the discretion to be used for grant of
specific performance. In paragraph 163,
it is stated that 'perusal of  the  record'
will indicate that the Appellant has not
proved that he was ready and willing.
When   the   Appellant   sought   to   argue
that   the   Appellant   was   ready   and
willing,   the   same   was   dealt   with   in
paragraph 164. The submission of the
Appellant   that   unless   the   Respondent
would have fully satisfied the Appellant
that he had made appropriate provision
for shifting 107 PAPs to some other plot
the   Appellant   was   not   required   to
proceed   with   the   construction   of
building,   was   not   accepted.   However,
there is no discussion as to why this
stand of the Appellant was rejected.................................... …..”
                     (emphasis added)
In the impugned judgment, certain findings recorded by the
learned Single  Judge have been  criticised.   Ultimately, in
paragraphs   61   and   62   of   the   impugned   judgment,   the
Division Bench held thus:
“61.  Considering   that   the   impugned
order has not addressed several issues
raised   by   both   parties   before   setting
aside the Award, for the above reasons
we   are   inclined   to   set   aside   the, etc.
Page 20 of 35

impugned   order   to   remand   the
proceedings   to   the   learned   Single
Judge. Further under the Award itself. question now will remain for damages. 
62. Since we are of the opinion that the
petition filed by the Respondent needs
to   be   reconsidered,   we   refrain   from
going deeper into the controversy and in
our   discussion,   which   have   only
highlighted   as   to   why   the   impugned
order   is   unreasoned   and   therefore
needs
 
to
 
be
 
set  
aside
 
for
reconsideration...............................”
Thus, eventually, an order of remand was passed directing
the learned Single Judge to hear the petition under Section
34 afresh.
15.
We   need   not   dwell   on   the   limited   scope   of   the
interference   in   the   petition   under   Section   34   of   the
Arbitration Act.  That position is very well settled.  However,
as far as the appeal under Section 37(1)(c) of the Arbitration
Act is concerned, in the case of MMTC Limited v. Vedanta
Limited1, in paragraph 14, this Court held thus:
“14. As   far   as   interference   with   an
order made under Section 34, as per
Section 37,  is concerned,  it  cannot
be   disputed   that   such   interference
under   Section   37   cannot   travel
beyond   the   restrictions   laid   down
under Section 34. In other words, the
court
 
cannot
 
undertake
 
an
1 (2019), etc.
Page 21 of 35

independent   assessment   of   the
merits of the award, and must only
ascertain that the exercise of power
by   the   court   under   Section   34   has
not   exceeded   the   scope   of   the
provision.  Thus,   it   is   evident   that   in
case   an   arbitral   award   has   been
confirmed by  the  court  under  Section
34 and by the court in an appeal under
Section   37,   this   Court   must   be
extremely cautious and slow to disturb
such concurrent findings.”
                   (emphasis added)
In another decision of this Court in the case of UHL Power
Company   Limited   v.   State   of   Himachal   Pradesh2,  in
paragraph 16, it was held thus:
“16. As   it   is,   the   jurisdiction
conferred on courts under Section 34
of   the   Arbitration   Act   is   fairly
narrow, when it comes to the scope
of an appeal under Section 37 of the
Arbitration Act, the jurisdiction of an
appellate   court   in   examining   an
order, setting aside or refusing to set
aside   an   award,   is   all   the   more
circumscribed.
 In MMTC
Ltd. v. Vedanta
 
Ltd. [MMTC
Ltd. v. Vedanta Ltd., (2019):
(2019) 2 SCC (Civ) 293], the reasons for
vesting   such   a   limited   jurisdiction   on
the   High   Court   in   exercise   of   powers
under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act
have   been   explained   in   the   following
words: (SCC pp. 166­67, para 11)
2 (2022), etc.
Page 22 of 35

“11.   As   far   as   Section   34   is
concerned,   the   position   is   well­
settled by now that the Court does
not   sit   in   appeal   over   the   arbitral
award and may interfere on merits
on   the   limited   ground   provided
under Section 34(2)(b)(ii) i.e. if the
award is against the public policy of
India.   As   per   the   legal   position
clarified   through   decisions   of   this
Court  prior  to  the  amendments  to
the 1996 Act in 2015, a violation of
Indian   public   policy,   in   turn,
includes   a   violation   of   the
fundamental policy of Indian law, a
violation   of   the   interest   of   India,
conflict with justice or morality, and
the existence of patent illegality in
the arbitral award. Additionally, the
concept of the “fundamental policy
of   Indian   law”   would   cover
compliance   with   statutes   and
judicial   precedents,   adopting   a
judicial   approach,   compliance   with
the   principles   of   natural   justice,
and Wednesbury [Associated
Provincial
 
Picture
 
Houses
Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corpn., (1948) 1
KB   223   (CA)]   reasonableness.
Furthermore, “patent illegality” itself
has
 
been
 
held
 
to
 
mean
contravention of the substantive law
of India, contravention of the 1996
Act, and contravention of the terms
of the contract.”
                 (emphasis added), etc.
Page 23 of 35

In the decision of this Court in the case of Konkan Railway
Corporation   Limited   v.   Chenab   Bridge   Project
Undertaking3, in paragraph 18, it was held thus:
“18. At the outset, we may state that
the   jurisdiction   of   the   court   under
Section 37 of the Act, as clarified by
this   Court   in MMTC   Ltd. v. Vedanta
Ltd. [MMTC   Ltd. v. Vedanta   Ltd.,
(2019): (2019) 2 SCC (Civ)
293], is akin to the jurisdiction of the
court   under   Section   34   of   the   Act.
[Id, SCC p. 167, para 14:“14. As far as
interference with an order made under
Section   34,   as   per   Section   37,   is
concerned, it cannot be disputed that
such   interference   under   Section   37
cannot   travel   beyond   the   restrictions
laid  down  under  Section  34.  In  other
words, the court cannot undertake an
independent assessment of the merits of
the award, and must only ascertain that
the exercise of power by the court under
Section 34 has not exceeded the scope
of
 
the
 
provision.”]
 Scope
 
of
interference by a court in an appeal
under   Section   37   of   the   Act,   in
examining an order, setting aside or
refusing   to   set   aside   an   award,   is
restricted   and   subject   to   the   same
grounds   as   the   challenge   under
Section 34 of the Act.”
               (emphasis added)
16.
The jurisdiction of the Appellate Court dealing with an
appeal under Section 37 against the judgment in a petition
3 (2023), etc.
Page 24 of 35

under Section 34 is more constrained than the jurisdiction of
the Court dealing with a petition under Section 34.  It is the
duty of the Appellate Court to consider whether  Section 34
Court has remained confined to the grounds of challenge
that  are   available   in   a   petition   under   Section   34.     The
ultimate function of the Appellate Court under Section 37 is
to decide whether the jurisdiction under Section 34 has been
exercised rightly or wrongly. While doing so, the Appellate
Court   can   exercise   the   same   power   and   jurisdiction   that
Section 34 Court possesses with the same constraints.
17.
In the facts of the case in hand, while deciding the
petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act, the learned
Single Judge has made a very elaborate consideration of the
submissions made across the Bar, the findings recorded by
the Arbitral Tribunal and the issue of illegality or perversity
of the award.  Detailed reasons while dealing with the alleged
patent illegalities associated with the directions issued under
the   arbitral   award   have   been   recorded.     Considering   the
nature of the findings recorded by the learned Single Judge,
the job of the Appellate Court  was to  scrutinise the said
findings and to decide, one way or the other, on merits.  In
this   case,   the   finding   of   the   Appellate   Bench   that   the
impugned judgment of the learned Single Judge does not
address   several   issues   raised   by   the   parties   cannot   be
sustained at all., etc.
Page 25 of 35

18.
The   provisions   of   the   CPC   have   not   been   made
applicable to the proceedings before the learned Arbitrator
and the Court under Sections 34 and 37 of the Arbitration
Act.  The legislature's intention is reflected in Section 19(1) of
the Arbitration Act, which provides that an Arbitral Tribunal
is not bound by the provision of the CPC.  That is why the
provisions of the CPC have not been made applicable to the
proceedings under Sections 34 and 37(1)(c).  We are not even
suggesting that  because the provisions of the CPC are not
applicable, the Appellate Court dealing with an appeal under
Section 37(1)(c) is powerless to pass an order of remand. The
remedy of an appeal will not be effective unless there is a
power of remand vesting in the appellate authority. In the
Arbitration Act, there is no statutory embargo on the power
of the Appellate Court under Section 37(1)(c) to pass an order
of remand. However, looking at the scheme of the Arbitration
Act, the Appellate Court can exercise the power of remand
only   when   exceptional   circumstances   make   an   order   of
remand unavoidable.  There may be exceptional cases where
remand in an appeal under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act
may be warranted.   Some of the exceptional cases can be
stated by way of illustration:
a. Summary disposal of a petition under Section 34
of   the   Arbitration   Act   is   made   without
consideration of merits;, etc.
Page 26 of 35

b. Without service of notice to the respondent in a
petition under Section 34, interference is made
with the award; and
c. Decision   in   proceedings   under   Section   34   is
rendered when one or more contesting parties are
dead,   and   their   legal   representatives   have   not
been brought on record.
19.
Some of the objectives mentioned in the Statement of
Objects and Reasons of the Arbitration Act are very relevant
which are as follows:
“4. The main objectives of the Bill are as
under:­

to
 
comprehensively
 
cover
international   commercial   arbitration
and   conciliation   as   also   domestic
arbitration and conciliation;
(ii)  to make provision for an arbitral
procedure which is fair, efficient and
capable of meeting the needs of the
specific arbitration;
(iii) to provide that the arbitral tribunal
gives reasons for its arbitral award;
(iv) to ensure that the arbitral tribunal
remains   within   the   limits   of   its
jurisdiction;
(v)  to minimise the supervisory role
of courts in the arbitral process;
…………………………………”
                            (emphasis added), etc.
Page 27 of 35

While   coming   out   with   the   2015   Amendment   Bill,   the
legislature has noted in the objects and reasons that a lot of
delay is involved in concluding the arbitral proceedings. In
paragraphs 6 and 7 of the objects and reasons of the Bill, the
Legislature has stated thus:
“6.   It   is   proposed   to   introduce   the
Arbitration
 
and
 
Conciliation
(Amendment) Bill, 2015, to replace the
Arbitration
 
and
 
Conciliation
(Amendment)   Ordinance,   2015,   which
inter   alia,   provides   for   the   following,
namely—
(i) to amend the definition of “Court” to
provide that in the case of international
commercial   arbitrations,   the   Court
should be the High Court;
(ii) to ensure that an Indian Court can
exercise   jurisdiction   to   grant   interim
measures, etc., even where the seat of
the arbitration is outside India;
(iii)  an   application  for  appointment   of
an arbitrator shall be disposed of by the
High Court or Supreme Court, as the
case   may   be,   as   expeditiously   as
possible and an endeavour  should be
made to dispose of the matter within a
period of sixty days;
(iv)   to   provide   that   while   considering
any   application   for   appointment   of
arbitrator,   the   High   Court   or   the
Supreme   Court   shall   examine   the
existence   of   a   prima   facie   arbitration
agreement and not other issues;, etc.
Page 28 of 35

 to   provide   that   the   arbitral
tribunal shall make its award within
a period of twelve months from the
date it enters upon the reference and
that   the   parties   may,   however,
extend such period up to six months,
beyond   which   period   any   extension
can only be granted by the Court, on
sufficient cause;
(vi) to provide that a model fee Schedule
on the basis of which High Courts may
frame   rules   for   the   purpose   of
determination   of   fees   of   arbitral
tribunal, where a High Court appoints
arbitrator in terms of Section 11 of the
Act;
(vii)   to   provide   that   the   parties   to
dispute   may   at   any   stage   agree   in
writing   that   their   dispute   be   resolved
through  fast  track  procedure  and the
award   in   such   cases   shall   be   made
within a period of six months;
(viii)   to   provide   for   neutrality   of
arbitrators,   when   a   person   is
approached in connection with possible
appointment as an arbitrator;
(ix)  to   provide   that   application   to
challenge the award is to be disposed
of by the Court within one year.
7.  The amendments proposed in the
Bill   will   ensure   that   arbitration
process becomes more user friendly,
cost effective and lead to expeditious
disposal of cases.”
                               (emphasis added), etc.
Page 29 of 35

The object of the Arbitration Act is to provide an arbitral
procedure that is fair, efficient, and capable of meeting the
needs of specific arbitration. The object is to ensure that the
arbitral proceedings and proceedings filed for challenging the
award are concluded expeditiously. The proceedings have to
be cost­effective. The supervisory role of the Courts is very
restricted. Moreover, we cannot ignore that arbitration is one
of the modes of Alternative Disputes Redressal Mechanism
provided in Section 89 of the CPC.  If the Courts dealing with
appeals   under   Section   37   of   the   Arbitration   Act   start
routinely   passing   the   orders   of   remand,   the   arbitral
procedure will cease to be efficient. It will cease to be cost­
effective.   Such   orders   will   delay   the   conclusion   of   the
proceedings,   thereby   defeating   the   very   object   of   the
Arbitration Act. Therefore, an order of remand by Section 37
Court can be made only in exceptional cases where remand
is unavoidable.  As observed earlier, the scope of interference
in   a   petition   under   Section   34   is   very   narrow.     The
jurisdiction   under   Section   37   of   the   Arbitration   Act   is
narrower.  Looking to the objects of the Arbitration Act and
the limited scope available to the Courts to interfere with the
award of the Arbitral Tribunal, this Court, while dealing with
the decisions under Sections 34 and 37 of the Arbitration
Act, in its jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution
of India, has to be circumspect.   By their own volition,  the
parties choose to go before the Arbitral Tribunal instead of
availing remedy before the traditional civil courts.  Therefore,, etc.
Page 30 of 35

the   Courts   must   be   very   conservative   when   dealing   with
arbitral   awards   and   confine   themselves   to   the   grounds
strictly available under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. 
20.
In the facts of the case, the remand was completely
unwarranted. The reason is that the learned Single Judge
has elaborately dealt with the merits of the challenge in the
Section 34 petition. This Court should benefit from reasoned
judgment rendered by the Court under Section 37.  In this
case, we do not have the benefit of a decision of the Appellate
Court dealing with all the issues dealt with by the learned
Single Judge while deciding the petition under Section 34 of
the Arbitration Act.  Therefore, it will not be appropriate for
this Court to look at the arbitral award and the findings
recorded   by   the   Section   34   Court   and   exercise   the
jurisdiction of  the Section 37 Court.   If we do something
which Section 37 Court was required to do, it will be unjust
to the parties as the unsuccessful party before us will be
deprived of one forum of challenge. Therefore, we have no
option   but   to   set   aside   the   impugned   judgment   of   the
Division Bench and request the Division Bench to decide the
appeals on merits after considering the arbitral award and
the decision of Section 34 Court.  
21.
Before   we   part   with   the   judgment,   we   must   record
some   serious   concerns   based   on   our   judicial   experience.
Case after case, we find that the arbitral proceedings have
become synonymous with very bulky pleadings and evidence, etc.
Page 31 of 35

and very long, time­consuming submissions, leading to very
lengthy awards. Moreover, there is a tendency to rely upon a
large   number   of   precedents,   relevant   or   irrelevant.     The
result of all this is that we have very long hearings before the
Courts in Sections 34 and 37 proceedings.
22.
By way of illustration, we are referring to the factual
aspects of the present case.  The award runs into 139 pages.
The petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act runs into
93 pages and incorporates 151 grounds.   The judgment of
the   learned   Single   Judge   dealing   with   the   petition   under
Section 34 consists of 101 pages.   One of the contributing
factors is that more than 35 decisions were relied upon by
the parties before the learned Single Judge. On the same
point,   multiple  judgments   have   been   cited,  taking  similar
views.  As per the practice in the High Court of Judicature at
Bombay, a memorandum of appeal under Section 37 of the
Arbitration   Act   does   not   contain   the   facts   but   only   the
grounds   of   challenge.     In   the   memorandum   of   appeal
preferred   by   the   respondent   consisting   of   46   pages,   164
grounds have been incorporated.   Considering the narrow
scope   of   interference   under   Sections   34   and   37   of   the
Arbitration Act, we cannot comprehend how there could be
151 grounds in a petition under Section 34 and 164 grounds
in an appeal under Section 37. It is not surprising that this
appeal has a synopsis running into 45 pages, and it contains
as many as 54 grounds of challenge., etc.
Page 32 of 35

23.
In many cases, the proceedings under Sections 34 and
37 are being treated as if the same are appeals under Section
96 of the CPC.  When members of the bar take up so many
grounds in petitions under Section 34, which are not covered
by Section 34, there is a tendency to urge all those grounds
which are not available in law and waste the Court’s time.
The time of our Courts is precious, considering the huge
pendency. This is happening in a large number of cases. All
this makes the arbitral procedure inefficient and unfair. It is
high time that the members of the Bar show restraint by
incorporating only legally permissible grounds in petitions
under   Section   34   and   the   appeals   under   Section   37.
Everyone   associated   with   the   arbitral   proceedings   must
remember that brevity will make the arbitral proceedings and
the proceedings under  Sections  34 and 37 more effective.
All that we say is that all the stakeholders need to introspect.
Otherwise, the very object of adopting the UNCITRAL model
will   be   frustrated.   We   are   not   called   upon   to   consider
whether   the   arbitral   proceedings   are  cost­effective.   In  an
appropriate   case,   the   issue   will   have   to   be   considered.
Arbitration must become a tool for expeditious, effective, and
cost­effective dispute resolution. 
24.
As we are directing the rehearing of the appeal under
Section 37 of the Arbitration Act, it is necessary to extend the
interim relief that was operative during the pendency of these
appeals., etc.
Page 33 of 35

25.
Accordingly, we pass the following order:
a. The impugned judgment dated 7th  July 2023 in
Commercial Appeal no.31 of 2023 is, hereby, set
aside, and Commercial Appeal no.30 of 2023 is
restored to the file of the High Court of Judicature
at Bombay;
b. The  restored   appeal   shall  be  placed   before  the
roster Bench on 29th July 2024 at 10:30 a.m.  The
parties to the appeal before this Court shall be
under   an   obligation   to   appear   before   the
concerned Bench on that day, and no fresh notice
shall be served to the parties. The High Court will
permit   the   appellants   to   file   an   amended
memorandum   of   appeal   containing   only   the
relevant and permissible grounds.  The concerned
Division Bench shall fix a schedule for hearing of
the appeal;
c. The Registry of this Court shall forward a copy of
this   judgment   to   the   Prothonotary   and   Senior
Master of the High Court of Bombay, who shall
ensure that the appeal is listed before the roster
Bench as directed above;
d. The interim relief, granted by this Court on 11th
August 2023, shall continue to operate till the
disposal of the remanded appeal;, etc.
Page 34 of 35

e. We   make   it   clear   that   we   have   made   no
adjudication on the merits of the arbitral award
and the judgment of the learned Single Judge and
all the issues arising in the remanded appeal are
left open to be decided by the High Court; and
f. The appeals are, accordingly, partly allowed with
no orders as to costs.
……………………..J.
(Abhay S. Oka)
……………………..J.
(Pankaj Mithal)
New Delhi;
July 08, 2024, etc.
Page 35 of 35