IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

HAR NARAYAN TEWARI (D) THR. LRS. 

VERSUS 

CANTONMENT BOARD, RAMGARH 
CANTONMENT & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 

PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
Shri Manoj Goel, learned senior counsel for the appellants 
and Shri Manoj Swarup, learned senior counsel for the 
respondents were heard. 
2. 
The Title Suit No.9/89 of the plaintiff-appellant (Har 
Narayan Tewari) was decreed on 16.03.2000 by the court 
of first instance. In an appeal by the Cantonment Board, 
Ramgarh, the said decree was reversed by the First 
Appellate 
Court 
vide 
judgment 
and 
order 
dated 
28.06.2006; basically on the ground that the suit was hit 
by principle of res judicata in view of the decision in the 
earlier Title Suit No.8/64 instituted by Maharani Lalita 

Rajya Lakshmi1 (wife of Raja Bahadur Kamakshya 
Narayan Singh2) wherein the plaintiff-appellant was 
defendant No.32 and the Cantonment Board, Ramgarh 
was the main contesting defendant. The Second Appeal 
preferred by the plaintiff-appellant to the High Court was 
dismissed on 01.04.2009 simply stating that it does not 
raise any substantial question of law. 
3. 
Aggrieved by the judgment and order of the High Court 
dated 01.04.2009 dismissing the appeal; the plaintiff-
appellant has preferred this appeal and has also assailed 
the judgment and order dated 28.06.2006 of the First 
Appellate Court alleging that his suit was not barred by res 
judicata and that he has validly acquired title and 
possession over the disputed land. 
4. 
The plaintiff-appellant had filed the above referred Title 
Suit No.9/89 for declaration of his title over the properties 
mentioned in Schedule ‘A’ of the plaint with structures and 
buildings standing thereon and for confirmation of his 
possession over the same. In the alternative, a prayer was 
made that in case the plaintiff-appellant was not found in 
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as “Maharani” 
2 Hereinafter referred to as “Raja” 

possession of the said property, the Cantonment Board, 
Ramgarh, or any person claiming through it, be evicted 
and he be put in possession with the further direction that 
they be restrained by a decree of permanent injunction 
from dispossessing the plaintiff-appellant from the said 
property in future. 
5. 
According to Schedule ‘A’ of the plaint, the dispute is about 
two pieces of land: First, land measuring 0.12 acres out of 
2.04 acres of Plot No.432; and secondly land measuring 
0.18 acres out of 0.66 acres of Plot No.438 both situate in 
village Ramgarh, within the Cantonment Board, Ramgarh 
with boundaries as described in the Schedule. In short, the 
dispute in the suit is only regarding 0.12 acres of Plot 
No.432 and 0.18 acres of Plot No.438 i.e. total of 0.30 acres 
of the above two plots and the structures existing thereon. 
6. 
The plaintiff-appellant is claiming title and possession over 
the suit land alleging that the Raja, the proprietor of the 
village, had settled the aforesaid land measuring 0.30 
acres of the land comprising of Plot Nos.432 and 438 in his 
favour in the year 1942. 

7. 
The case of the plaintiff-appellant was that village 
Ramgarh was the part of the Estate of Raja. It was under 
the management of the Court of Wards and was released 
in Raja’s favour in the year 1937. During the period of its 
management by the Court of Wards, its manager acquired 
5.38 acres of additional land comprised in various plots 
including Plot Nos.432 and 438 in proceedings bearing 
Case No.1/1926-27 and came in possession thereof. 
8. 
The Raja in the year 1942 made a permanent raiyati 
settlement of the suit land in favour of the plaintiff-
appellant and also delivered its possession to him on 
payment of rent and salami of Rs.2,000/-. After vesting of 
the Estate of Ramgarh in the State of Bihar, the name of 
the plaintiff-appellant was mutated upon enhancement of 
rent s.2/- per decimal by an order dated 04.01.1963 of 
the Additional Collector, Ramgarh passed in Case 
No.115/62-63 
(Exh.13). 
The 
plaintiff-appellant 
had 
constructed certain structures on the said land which have 
been let out to various persons, all of whom are defendants 
in the suit. 

9. 
Upon the establishment of the Cantonment Board, 
Ramgarh, the ex-proprietor Raja handed over 2.55 acres of 
land (excluding the suit land) with the dispensary building 
etc. to 
the 
Cantonment 
Board 
temporarily. 
The 
Cantonment Board, as such, never came in possession of 
more than 2.55 acres of land that too which was other than 
the land settled and occupied by the plaintiff-appellant. 
10. In 1964, Maharani, the wife of the Raja, instituted a Title 
Suit No.8/64, inter alia, for declaration of her title over 
5.38 acres of the land of the village including 0.30 acres 
land of the plaintiff-appellant. The aforesaid claim was 
made on the basis of the maintenance grant allegedly 
made by the Raja in her favour. 
11. The aforesaid suit was contested by the plaintiff-appellant 
by filing a written statement and claiming 0.30 acres land 
on the basis of raiyati rights granted by the Raja in the 
year 1942. The Cantonment Board, Ramgarh, claimed 
distinct rights in different portions of the land to the extent 
of 2.55 acres only, comprising of dispensary building and 
quarters of the doctors on the basis of possessory rights 
granted by the Raja. 

12. In the aforesaid case, Maharani entered into a compromise 
with several defendants including the plaintiff-appellant 
(who was defendant No.32 in the said suit). According to 
the said compromise, Maharani admitted the possession 
of the plaintiff-appellant over the suit land to the extent of 
0.30 acres in Plot Nos.432 and 438 and it was agreed that 
she will have no concern with the same and that the 
plaintiff-appellant will remain in exclusive possession of it. 
The Cantonment Board, Ramgarh did not object to it or 
challenge the compromise. 
13. In the said suit, as many as nine issues were framed 
including the maintainability of the suit and about the 
right, title and possession of Maharani. The suit of the 
Maharani was dismissed vide judgment and order dated 
31.03.1984, primarily on the ground that it was not 
maintainable as the State of Bihar being a necessary party, 
was not made a party and that Maharani had not entered 
into the witness box to prove her case. She as such, was 
not found to be the owner in possession of the land claimed 
by her. The court in dismissing the suit clearly mentioned 
that the parties who have entered into the compromise 

with Maharani will not have any right on the basis of the 
compromise deed as she herself has failed to prove her 
independent rights over the land claimed by her. 
14. The second appeal filed by the plaintiff-appellant was 
dismissed by the High Court as it failed to raise any 
substantial question of law, which is mandatory for 
entertaining an appeal under Section 100 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure. Therefore, the first point which arises for 
consideration herein is - whether in the facts and 
circumstances of the case, any substantial question of law 
was involved in the second appeal. 
15. The submission is that the plaintiff-appellant was non-
suited by the First Appellate Court, on the ground that his 
suit was barred by res judicata. One of the essential 
conditions for the applicability of principle of res judicata 
as enshrined under Section 11 of the CPC is that the issue 
in the earlier suit and the subsequent suit ought to be 
directly and substantially the same. In the earlier Suit No. 
8/64 instituted by Maharani, her claim was that she is the 
lawful owner of the entire 5.38 acre of land of Village 
Ramgarh, on the basis of the maintenance grant made in 

her favour by the Raja. In the said suit, the plaintiff-
appellant was defendant no. 32 and the Cantonment 
Board, Ramgarh was defendant No. 1. The claim set up by 
Maharani was not accepted and ex-facie there was no 
adjudication regarding the rights of the co-defendants over 
the suit land viz 0.30 acres of land of plot Nos. 432 and 
438 as claimed by the plaintiff-appellant in the present 
suit. The limited issue therein was whether the Maharani 
had acquired any right in the above entire property on the 
basis of maintenance in grant alleged to be executed by the 
Raja in her favour. There was no issue as to whether the 
suit land as claimed by the plaintiff-appellant belonged to 
him or was settled or not settled in his favour as claimed. 
Thus, in the facts and circumstances of the case, a clear 
substantial question of law as to whether the present suit 
as filed by the plaintiff-appellant was barred under Section 
11 CPC on principle of res judicata inasmuch as there was 
no adjudication of the rights of the co-defendants in the 
previous suit with regard to the suit land and the issue 
therein was not directly or indirectly and substantially the 
same as in the present suit. 

16. In view of the above, we are of the opinion that the High 
Court manifestly erred in dismissing the second appeal in 
limine on the ground that there was no substantial 
question of law involved therein. 
17. As stated earlier, the substantial question of law arising in 
the second appeal was - Whether the suit as setup by the 
plaintiff-appellant was barred by principle of res judicata in 
view of the decision in the earlier Suit No. 8 of 64 wherein 
rights of the co-defendants in respect of the suit land were 
never adjudicated and non-acceptance of the claim of 
Maharani was not sufficient so as to decide the rights of the 
co-defendants. 
18. There are no factual disputes which may require 
consideration of any evidence so as to answer the above 
substantial question of law. Therefore, we consider it 
appropriate to decide the above substantial question of law 
ourselves instead of leaving it for the High Court to 
adjudicate it. 
19. It is an admitted position that the suit land i.e., portions 
of plot Nos. 432 and 438 were part of the Estate of Raja 
who had acquired about 5.38 acres of additional land of 

village Ramgarh. Maharani had claimed title over the 
entire aforesaid land of village Ramgarh but her claim was 
not accepted by the court in her Title Suit No.8/64. It 
means that she was unable to establish her right, title and 
interest over the said land on the basis of the alleged 
maintenance grant made in her favour by the Raja, but it 
does not mean that the suit land was not settled by the 
Raja in favour of the plaintiff-appellant or that the suit 
land had come to be settled with Cantonment Board, 
Ramgarh in any manner. 
20. The lis in the previous suit i.e. Suit No.8/64 was regarding 
ownership and entitlement of Maharani over the entire 
5.38 acres of land of village Ramgarh qua the Cantonment 
Board, Ramgarh; the plaintiff-appellant and other 
defendants in the said suit; whereas the controversy in the 
present suit is quite distinct with regard to only 0.30 acres 
of the suit land vis-à-vis the plaintiff-appellant and the 
Cantonment Board, Ramgarh. 
21. The judgment and order of the previous suit which is final 
and conclusive, in no specific terms adjudicates upon the 
right, title and interest of either of the plaintiff-appellant 

or of the Cantonment Board, Ramgarh with regard to the 
suit land. In the said suit, there was no issue with regard 
to the right, title and possession of either the plaintiff-
appellant or of the Cantonment Board, Ramgarh and no 
finding in this connection was returned by the court in 
dismissing the said suit. In simple words, the suit, as filed 
by Maharani claiming right, title and interest over 5.38 
acres of land of village Ramgarh was dismissed simpliciter 
without adjudication of any rights of the plaintiff-appellant 
over the suit land vis-à-vis the Cantonment Board, 
Ramgarh. 
22. It may also be pertinent to point out that the Cantonment 
Board, Ramgarh throughout had claimed rights over 2.55 
acres of land of village Ramgarh and not in respect of the 
entire 5.38 acres of land which was additionally acquired 
by the Raja. It is also not the case of the Cantonment 
Board, Ramgarh that the land which was temporarily 
settled in its favour by the Raja has been occupied by the 
plaintiff-appellant or that the plaintiff-appellant is 
claiming rights over the land which was settled in its 
favour. In other words, the land belonged to the Raja, part 

of which was settled in favour of the plaintiff-appellant to 
the extent of 0.30 acres of plot Nos. 432 and 438, whereas, 
another piece of land measuring 2.55 acres with certain 
structures but certainly excluding the suit land was settled 
in favour of Cantonment Board, Ramgarh. The right of the 
plaintiff-appellant to claim the suit land or the right of the 
Cantonment Board over the 2.55 acres of land settled in 
its favour never came to be adjudicated in previous Title 
Suit No. 8 of 64. 
23. The general policy behind the principle of res judicata as 
enshrined under Section 11 CPC is to avoid parties to 
litigate on the same issue which has already been 
adjudicated upon and settled. This is in consonance with 
the public policy so as to bring to an end the conflict of 
interest on the same issue between the same parties. One 
of the basic essential ingredients for applying the principle 
of res judicata, as stated earlier also, is that the matter 
which is directly and substantially in issue in the previous 
litigation ought not to be permitted to be raised and 
adjudicated upon in the subsequent suit. It is a settled law 
that the principle of res judicata is applicable not only 

between the plaintiff and the defendants but also between 
the co-defendants. In applying the principle of res judicata 
between the co-defendants, primarily three conditions are 
necessary to be fulfilled, namely, (i) there must be a conflict 
of interest between the co-defendants; (ii) there is necessity 
to decide the said conflict in order to give relief to plaintiff; 
and (iii) there is final decision adjudicating the said 
conflict. Once all these conditions are satisfied, the 
principle of res judicata can be applied inter se the co-
defendants. 
24. In context with the above settled principle, though 
reference can be made to several decisions starting from 
that of Privy Council, but we consider it appropriate to 
refer to only one of the latest decisions on the point 
rendered by this Court in the case of Govindammal (Dead) 
by Legal Representatives and Ors. vs. Vaidiyanathan 
and Ors.3, wherein after considering all previous decisions 
regarding application of principle of res judicata between 
co-defendants, this Court culled out the above three 
conditions for applying the same. 
 
3 (2019) 

25. In the light of the above legal position, we find that there 
was no conflict of interest between the co-defendants in 
the earlier Suit No. 8 of 64 inasmuch as the plaintiff-
appellant was independently claiming rights over 0.30 
acres of suit land whereas the Cantonment Board, 
Ramgarh was claiming rights over 2.55 acres of the land 
which formed part of the Estate of Raja without asserting 
that the land settled in its favour is the same as claimed 
by plaintiff-appellant or that there was any encroachment 
upon the land settled in its favour. Even assuming that 
there was some inter se conflicts between the co-
defendants with regard to the suit land, the adjudication 
of the said conflict was not necessary for granting any relief 
to Maharani who was the plaintiff in the suit. Since she 
was claiming the entire Estate of 5.38 acres of land and 
her claim was defeated as she was unable to prove the 
grant of the said land in her favour with no specific finding 
by the court regarding the claims set up by the co-
defendants, the inter se dispute of the co-defendants as 
raised in the present suit never came to be adjudicated. 
Thus, none of the conditions as laid down in Govindammal 

(supra) between co-defendants stood fulfilled for applying 
res judicata. In view of the aforesaid facts and 
circumstances, we are of the opinion that the principle of 
res judicata would not be attracted as the issue in the 
present suit was neither directly or indirectly in issue in 
the previous suit and there was no conflict of interest 
between the co-defendants in the said previous suit which 
if any never came to be adjudicated upon. Accordingly, the 
suit as filed by the plaintiff-appellant claiming title over the 
suit land against the Cantonment Board, Ramgarh is not 
barred under Section 11 CPC. 
26. Having said so, we proceed to examine the respective 
claims of the parties on merits, treating the suit as 
maintainable and not barred by res judicata. 
27. The plaintiff-appellant has set up his claim over the suit 
land as described in Schedule ‘A’ to the plaint. The said 
schedule mentions 0.12 acres of land of plot No.432 and 
0.18 acres of land of plot No.438 totaling 0.30 acres of land 
situate in village Ramgarh. There is no dispute that during 
the said period the Estate of the Raja was under the 
management of Court of Wards, its manager had acquired 

5.38 acres of additional land including the suit land and 
the same was added to the Estate of the Raja. In the year 
1942, the Raja had settled the aforesaid land in favour of 
the plaintiff-appellant on 18.10.1942. It was followed by 
Hukumnama dated 07.04.1943 (Exh.9) which confirmed 
the above settlement. 
28. The above settlement was confirmed by the Additional 
Collector, Hazaribagh on enhancement of rent s.2/- 
per decimal some time in the year 1963 and had started 
realizing rent from the plaintiff-appellant accordingly. 
29. There is no dispute by any person claiming rights under 
the Raja that the aforesaid land was not so settled in 
favour of the plaintiff-appellant. The Maharani had 
claimed the entire 5.38 acres of land on the basis of the 
maintenance grant executed by Raja in her favour but her 
aforesaid claim was not accepted. The Cantonment Board, 
Ramgarh on the other hand had staked its claim only in 
respect of 2.55 acres of land forming part of 5.38 acres of 
the land but has nowhere claimed any right, title and 
interest over the suit land as claimed by the plaintiff-
appellant. The Cantonment Board only on the basis of the 

judgment and order dated 16.03.2000 passed in Title Suit 
No.8/64 alleges that it has been recognized to be the owner 
of the entire 5.38 acres of land by adverse possession and, 
therefore, the plaintiff-appellant has no subsisting right in 
the suit land. The Cantonment Board further contends 
that the entire 5.38 acres of land was leased out by the 
Raja on 02.06.1931 for a period of 15 years to the Dublin 
University Mission and, therefore, no part of it could have 
been settled by him in favour of the plaintiff-appellant in 
the year 1942. 
30. In respect to the second aspect as raised on behalf of the 
Cantonment Board, it is necessary to note that no material 
or evidence was adduced by the Cantonment Board to 
establish that the entire 5.38 acres of land was transferred 
by way of lease to Dublin University Mission; not even any 
oral evidence was adduced to prove such a transfer 
restricting the right of the Raja to settle the land in favour 
of the plaintiff-appellant. Even otherwise assuming there 
was such a lease, it would have expired in June 1946 on 
completion of 15 year period in which case the settlement 
of 1942 and the Hukumnama of 1943 being valid would 

revive and continue in favour of the plaintiff-appellant, 
more particularly with its confirmation by the Additional 
Collector and mutation in 1963. 
31. In context with the first contention that in Title Suit 
No.8/64, possession of the Cantonment Board over the 
entire 5.38 acres was accepted by adverse possession, it 
would be pertinent to note that on perusal of the said 
judgment and order and decree would reveal that the court 
of first instance in the said suit has not given any finding 
with regard to the claim to the plaintiff-appellant (who was 
defendant No.32 in the said suit) nor with regard to the 
claim set up by the Cantonment Board. It is misconceived 
to contend that the said judgment and order accepts the 
title of the Cantonment Board by adverse possession on 
the entire 5.38 acres of land. In the said suit, the 
Cantonment Board had claimed rights only in respect of 
the part of the aforesaid 5.38 acres of land to the extent of 
2.55 acres and, therefore, any observation of the trial court 
regarding adverse possession of the Cantonment Board 
would be deemed to be in respect of the claim as set up by 
the Cantonment Board and would not be construed to be 

in connection with the entire 5.38 acres of land so as to 
include the land of the plaintiff-appellant. 
32. The written statement of the Cantonment Board itself as 
filed in Title Suit No.8/64 (Exh.12) makes it abundantly 
clear that upon the establishment of the Cantonment 
Board as a temporary measure in the year 1941, the Raja 
on being approached permitted it on 06.11.1941 to use 
2.55 acres of land consisting of the dispensary building 
and other structures along with adjoining land to be used 
by the Cantonment Board for a period of six months which 
was extended up to 31.12.1943. There was no other 
settlement of any land in favour of the Cantonment Board 
and the Cantonment Board was in permissive possession 
of only 2.55 acres of land out of the 5.38 acres of the entire 
land of village Ramgarh. The land settled in favour of the 
plaintiff-appellant and that in favour of the Cantonment 
Board by the Raja were distinct and as such there was no 
apparent conflict between them. 
33. The plaintiff-appellant by sufficient evidence has proved 
the settlement of the suit land by the Raja in his favour. It 
stands proved by the Amin report (Exh.8) dated 15.04.1942 

and the Hukumnama (Exh.9) dated 07.04.1943 as well as 
the Rent receipt (Exh.6, 6/A and 7). The order of the 
Additional 
Collector, 
Hazaribagh 
dated 
07.01.1963 
(Exh.16) directing realization of rent from the plaintiff-
appellant also confirms the above settlement and its 
subsequent approval by the State on enhancement of rent. 
All these documents have not been confronted by the other 
side. The fact that the name of the plaintiff-appellant was 
also mutated in the revenue records proves it beyond 
doubt, in the absence of any contrary evidence that he is 
in possession of the suit land. It may also be worth noting 
that in the earlier suit, the Cantonment Board has 
accepted that the plaintiff-appellant has been realizing 
rent of the shops existing over the suit land from the 
tenants. 
34. In view of the aforesaid overwhelming unconfronted 
evidence, the First Appellate Court manifestly erred in 
reversing the finding of the court of first instance that the 
plaintiff-appellant is in settled possession of the suit land 
and he has successfully proved his ownership rights over 
the same. 

35. Accordingly, the judgment and order of the High Court 
dated 01.04.2009 and that of the First Appellate Court 
dated 28.06.2006 are hereby set aside and the judgment 
and order dated 16.03.2000 passed by the trial court is 
restored decreeing the title suit of the plaintiff-appellant 
but with no order as to costs. 
36. The appeal is allowed. 

……………………………….. J. 
(ABHAY S. OKA) 

……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL)