IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
JOY DEVARAJ 

… APPELLANT 
VERSUS 
STATE OF KERALA 

…RESPONDENT 
JUDGMENT 
DIPANKAR DATTA J. 
1. This criminal appeal, by special leave, calls in question the judgment and 
order dated 28th September, 2011 of the Kerala High Court1 dismissing the 
appellant’s appeal2 under section 374(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
The impugned judgment upheld the conviction of the appellant by the 
Sessions Court, Thalassery3 under sections 143, 147, 148, and 302 of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“IPC”, hereafter) and, inter alia, the sentence of 
imprisonment for life together with fine. 
2. Bare reading of the impugned judgment reveals that the appellant, who 
was part of an unlawful assembly, murdered Bobby4 in the evening of 26th 
December, 1999 due to a dispute which arose on 24th December, 1999 
 
1 High Court, hereafter 

3 Sessions Court, hereafter 
4 “victim”, hereafter 

between Sufras inku5 and Bennet Ignatius6. Since we are considering 
this appeal which is at the instance of the appellant, being accused no.1, 
the discussion in this judgment is proposed to be confined to the role of the 
appellant only; however, the role of the other accused may be discussed 
tangentially, if required. 
3. The sequence of events preceding the death of the victim, according to the 
prosecution case, reveals that the victim and PW5 were members of an 
‘Anti-Liquor Movement’. They attempted to persuade the public to give up 
drinking alcohol. On 24th December, 1999, PW5 got into an altercation with 
A4 who allegedly was an illicit liquor vendor. The victim had supported PW5 
in that altercation and, thus, had a run-in with A4. During the course of the 
argument, A4 had threatened the victim with danger to his life and this, 
according to the prosecution, formed the genesis for the attack on the 
victim in the evening of 26th December 1999. On that day, Dikson Jerry7 
was standing near the victim’s house with K.T. Varghese8 and Byju9. At this 
time, the victim was standing on the street, at a distance of about 5 metres 
from PW1, talking to K.R. Rainold Suresh10 and Jerry Mariyadas11, when 
Renjith T.M.12 arrived on his scooter and joined the group of the victim. 
Around 7:40 PM, all the accused persons including the appellant armed 
with deadly weapons were seen approaching the victim. Sensing danger, 
the victim tried to flee on PW4’s scooter but the scooter was cut off 
 
5 “A4”, hereafter 
6 “PW5”, hereafter 
7 “PW1”, hereafter 
8 “PW2”, hereafter 
9 “CW2”, hereafter 
10 PW3 
11PW6 
12 “PW4”, hereafter 

immediately. The appellant, armed with a dagger, grabbed the victim, and 
pulled him to the ground and proceeded to stab him with the dagger on the 
left side of his lower chest. The other accused persons hit the victim with 
hockey sticks. Further, after the conclusion of the attack on the victim, the 
accused while retreating hurled a bomb at the door of PW1’s house. PW1, 
PW2 and CW2 rushed the victim to the hospital, where he was pronounced 
dead. 
4. An F.I.R.13 under sections 143, 147, 148, 324, 302 r/w 149 of IPC was 
registered at the behest of PW1 at around 22:45 PM at Kannur City Police 
Station. Investigation of the F.I.R. culminated in filing of charge-sheet 
against 15 (fifteen) accused persons and committal of the case to the 
Sessions Court where it was registered as Sessions Case No.201/2002. The 
accused persons stood trial whereupon the Sessions Court vide its 
judgment and order14 found, inter alia, the appellant guilty of murder and 
sentenced him to life in prison under section 302, IPC. The co-accused were 
found guilty of lesser crimes and suitably sentenced. 
5. The appellant has disputed the prosecution case and questioned the 
credibility of the prosecution witnesses. Learned counsel appearing on his 
behalf has presented the following arguments: 
I. 
The testimonies of the eye witnesses are wholly unreliable as they 
are full of material contradictions and gaps. The testimonies taken as 
a whole cannot lead one to conclude that the burden to prove murder 
was satisfied. The role of the appellant has been muddled in all three 
 
13 No. 131 of 1999 
14 dated 13th December 2006 in Sessions Case No. 201/2002 

eye-witness accounts and, thus, the benefit of doubt should be given 
to the appellant. 
II. 
PW1, who is also the first informant, has been inconsistent in his 
version about both the weapon as well as the overt act committed by 
the appellant. In the written complaint which was later converted into 
the FIR, PW1 stated that he saw the appellant along with other co-
accused approach the victim with a dagger. He has further expressed 
that other accused persons were armed with knives and hockey 
sticks. The victim upon noticing the group approaching him, tried to 
flee on the scooter of PW4 when the appellant together with Sanju15 
pulled him to the ground from the scooter and stabbed him on the 
left side of the stomach with the dagger. This version narrated in the 
FIR has changed when PW1 testified in court. The dagger became an 
axe, and there is no mention of A2 helping the appellant in pulling the 
victim from the scooter. Similarly, PW2 has stated that the appellant 
used a knife instead of a dagger or an axe as stated by PW1. 
III. PW4, one of the eyewitnesses, had turned hostile during the trial and 
did not support the case of the prosecution. His testimony is of 
significance as, by the prosecution’s own admission, he was present 
at the scene of the incident. The evidence of a witness cannot be 
discarded merely because he has turned hostile, and thus the 
testimony of PW4 raises serious questions about the chain of events 
which led to the death of the victim. This is a chink in the 
prosecution’s armour which clearly demonstrates that the prosecution 
 
15 “A2”, hereafter 

has not been able to prove the case against the appellant beyond 
reasonable doubt. 
IV. 
Arguendo, assuming that the prosecution established through 
evidence that the appellant did attack the victim with a knife, it was 
not able to prove that the appellant attacked the victim with an 
intention to cause death. The act cannot be placed within the confines 
of section 300, IPC as the injury caused to the victim was not 
sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. It has been 
submitted that a singular stab wound on the lower chest is not a life-
threatening injury and the appellant cannot be said to have 
possessed the intention or the knowledge that the harm inflicted 
would cause the death of the victim. Thus, the conviction under 
section 302 of IPC is altogether unsustainable. 
6. Accordingly, learned counsel urged us to reverse the impugned judgment 
and to set the appellant free. 
7., learned counsel for the respondent while defending the 
impugned judgment and referring to the evidence on record submitted that 
the concurrent findings and conviction recorded by both the Sessions Court 
and the High Court do not warrant interference. 
8. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and upon scrutiny of the 
materials on record, we are now tasked to determine whether the 
conviction of the appellant under section 302, IPC warrants interference by 
this Court. 
9. The present case is one of a premeditated attack carried out by a group 
of 15 (fifteen) people resulting in the victim’s death. To decide the 

sustainability of the conviction, we have to consider two issues: first, how 
far the evidence of the witnesses is credible and secondly, whether the 
nature of offensive act comes within the purview of section 300, IPC. 
10. The appellant has highlighted inconsistencies in the statements of the 
prosecution witnesses regarding the weapon used in the crime and the 
overt act that he was alleged to have committed. PW1 and PW2 both have 
deposed in Court that they witnessed the appellant pulling the victim down 
from the scooter and striking him with a sharp weapon. The discrepancy 
arises because PW1 stated that the appellant inflicted blow on the victim 
with an axe, whereas PW2 stated that the appellant stabbed the victim with 
a dagger. None has mentioned about any knife being used as the weapon of 
offence. 
11. At this stage, we find it crucial to look at a couple of decisions of this 
Court on credibility of a witness and what the requirements are to discredit 
or contradict a witness. 
12. This Court in Rammi v. State of M.P.16 held: 
“24. When an eyewitness is examined at length it is quite possible for 
him to make some discrepancies. No true witness can possibly escape 
from making some discrepant details. Perhaps an untrue witness who 
is well tutored can successfully make his testimony totally non-
discrepant. But courts should bear in mind that it is only when 
discrepancies in the evidence of a witness are so incompatible with 
the credibility of his version that the court is justified in jettisoning his 
evidence. But too serious a view to be adopted on mere variations 
falling in the narration of an incident (either as between the evidence 
of two witnesses or as between two statements of the same witness) 
is an unrealistic approach for judicial scrutiny.” 
(emphasis ours) 

16 (1999) 

13. The appellant has also pointed out that PW1’s statement recorded in 
the FIR has substantial variations with his testimony in court, and this 
would give rise to doubts as to the veracity of his testimony. Here, we find 
it expedient to excerpt a passage from Tahsildar Singh v. State of U.P.17 
which lays down the standard for “contradicting” a witness in the following 
words: 
“19. ‘Contradict’ according to the Oxford Dictionary means to affirm 
to the contrary. Section 145 of the Evidence Act indicates the manner 
in which contradiction is brought out. The cross-examining counsel 
shall put the part or parts of the statement which affirms the contrary 
to what is stated in evidence. This indicates that there is something in 
writing which can be set against another statement made in 
evidence. If the statement before the police officer — in the sense we 
have indicated — and the statement in the evidence before the court 
are so inconsistent or irreconcilable with each other that both of them 
cannot coexist, it may be said that one contradicts the other.” 
(emphasis ours) 
 
14. The excerpted passage crystalises the burden which is placed on a party 
seeking to discredit the testimony of a witness. 
15. During commission of the attack leading to the crime, there were 15 
(fifteen) people forming part of the unlawful assembly. We presume, it 
must have been a very chaotic situation leading to certain discrepancies 
having arisen in the statements of the witnesses. We cannot expect all the 
witnesses, when under attack by the accused persons seeking to terrorize 
those protesting against liquor trade, to possess stellar memories with an 
accurate recollection of the events. The appellant was required to 
demonstrate that the incongruities in the statements of the several eye 
witnesses shook the roots of their credibility. The threshold for disbelieving 
 
17 1959 Supp (2) SCR 875 

a witness is not mere discrepancy or inconsistency but material discrepancy 
and inconsistency, which renders the account narrated by the witnesses so 
highly improbable that the same may safely be discarded altogether from 
consideration. 
16. In the present case, there is evidence to the effect that the appellant was 
part of an unlawful assembly which gathered at the place of occurrence. 
The victim had in mind bringing a thriving trade in liquor to be brought to a 
grinding halt. There was, thus, definite motive for the accused persons 
including the appellant to throttle the voice of the victim. In such a 
scenario, the appellant was required to point out serious loopholes in the 
prosecution story for discrediting the witnesses. Unfortunately, our faith in 
the credibility and reliability of the witnesses is unshaken. Although, there 
are a few inconsistencies in the testimonies of the witnesses but the same 
are minor and not substantial, as argued, so as to erode the credibility of 
such witnesses. it is clear that PW1 and PW2 have spoken in one common 
voice that the appellant was the one who stabbed the victim and that he 
succumbed to the injury caused by such stab. The medical evidence of Dr. 
Dinesh P.18 does support the version of PW1 and PW2 that the victim died 
of haemorrhage caused by an incised wound. None of the discrepancies in 
the statements of PW1 and PW2, pointed out by learned counsel for the 
appellant, have the effect of shaking the root of their testimonies and make 
their version unreliable or implausible. The incident took place at around 
7:40 PM. Considering that it was evening time, it is possible that one of the 
two eyewitnesses standing 5-7 metres from the scene of the incident 
 
18 “PW8”, hereafter 

misidentified the weapon. Both eyewitnesses have, however, correctly 
described the appellant having stabbed the victim in the lower 
chest/stomach area on the left side. The medical report corroborates this 
ocular testimony by noting that the incised wound was found 6 cm below 
the nipple and 13 cm lateral to the midline of the chest. 
17. Even otherwise, section 134 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 ordains that 
no particular number of witnesses is required, in any case, to prove a fact. 
Therefore, it is not the law that a conviction cannot be recorded unless 
there is oral testimony of at least two witnesses matching with each other. 
It is the quality of evidence and not the quantity that matters. If the 
evidence of a solitary witness appeals to the court to be wholly reliable, the 
same can form the foundation for recording a conviction. Viewed thus, the 
conviction of the appellant does not call for interference based on the sole 
testimony of PW2, which we have found to be entirely trustworthy. Version 
of PW2 being sufficiently corroborated by PW1 (except the weapon) is an 
additional ground not to accept the argument advanced by learned counsel 
for the appellant to reverse the conviction. 
18. PW4 who had turned hostile during the trial has deposed that he was not 
present at the place of occurrence. While it is settled law that a witness 
cannot be disbelieved on the sole ground of him turning hostile, the 
hostility of PW4 does not particularly dent the prosecution’s case. He has, 
in his testimony, not stated an alternative case which would lead us to 
question the credibility of the other eyewitnesses. We do not find any merit 
in the argument that merely because PW4 resiled from his statement given 
to the police, the entire case presented by the prosecution is unreliable. 

19. It is also quite understandable why PW4 turned hostile. It is anybody’s 
guess that those who trade in illicit liquor people of might, who can go to 
any extent to keep the trade thriving. Having witnessed the fate of the 
victim, PW4 must have felt insecure and, thus, decided against standing by 
the prosecution case to save his own life. 
20. We hold, without equivocation, that the prosecution has been able to 
establish beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was the person who 
stabbed the victim during the course of the attack by the accused persons 
leading to his death. 
21. The criminal act of the appellant as the one responsible for homicidal 
death of the victim being established, we need to probe now whether such 
act would come within the ambit of section 300, IPC. Sections 299 and 300 
thereof have to be read together, as culpable homicide and murder are 
closely related concepts. It is often said that culpable homicide is the genus 
and murder is one of species in that genus. All murders are culpable 
homicide but not all culpable homicides are murder. 
22. Though closely related, culpable homicide and murder cover very 
different acts. To decide the issue, we can profitably take the aid of the 
decision of this Court in Pulicherla Nagaraju agaraja Reddy v. 
State of Andhra Pradesh19 wherein certain factors have been listed to 
glean if the aggressor had an intention to cause death: 
“29… It is for the courts to ensure that the cases of murder 
punishable under Section 302, are not converted into offences 
punishable under section 304 Part I/II, or cases of culpable homicide 
not amounting to murder are treated as murder punishable under 
Section 302. The intention to cause death can be gathered generally 
 
19 (2006) 

from a combination of a few or several of the following, among other, 
circumstances; (i) nature of the weapon used; (ii) whether the 
weapon was carried by the accused or was picked up from the spot; 
(iii) whether the blow is aimed at a vital part of the body; (iv) the 
amount of force employed in causing injury; (v) whether the act was 
in the course of sudden quarrel or sudden fight or free for all fight; 
(vi) whether the incident occurs by chance or whether there was any 
premeditation; (vii) whether there was any prior enmity or whether 
the deceased was a stranger; (viii) whether there was any grave and 
sudden provocation, and if so, the cause for such provocation; (ix) 
whether it was in the heat of passion; (x) whether the person 
inflicting the injury has taken undue advantage or has acted in a cruel 
and unusual manner; (xi) whether the accused dealt a single blow or 
several blows. The above list of circumstances is, of course, not 
exhaustive and there may be several other special circumstances with 
reference to individual cases which may throw light on the question of 
intention.” 
 
23. Applying the rubric provided in Pulicherla Nagaraju (supra) to the 
present case, we find that the weapon used for the premeditated attack 
was a dagger, which is considered a deadly weapon. The weapon was 
carried by the appellant to the scene of the incident and not picked up 
from the spot. The victim was stabbed in his chest, which houses 
multiple vital organs of the body. There was no provocation from the side 
of the victim. The appellant and other co-accused had reached the place 
of occurrence with the premeditated intention to cause hurt to the 
victim, which can be seen from the fact that they formed an unlawful 
assembly armed with deadly weapons with the common intention to 
attack the victim and thereby put an end to the movement triggered by 
him to stop trade in illicit liquor. 
24. The post mortem examination of the victim revealed the cause of death 
of the appellant to be haemorrhage due to an incised wound on the apex 

of the heart. The apex of the heart is the lowest tip of the heart located 
on the lower left side of the chest. In his cross examination, PW8 (who 
conducted the post-mortem examination) noted that such an injury can 
cause death within 5 (five) minutes of infliction. Needless to observe, the 
heart is one of several vital organs of the body, and the appellant caused 
such bodily injury, which in the ordinary course of nature was sufficient 
to cause death. 
25. The appellant’s submission that only one of the eight injuries sustained 
by the victim is grievous and the rest are simple and hence there is no 
intention to cause death, cannot be accepted after examining the facts of 
the case. In Stalin v. State20, this Court held that death caused by a 
single stab wound can also be considered murder if the requirements of 
section 300, IPC are fulfilled. 
26. To summarise, the appellant participated in a premeditated attack on 
the victim, armed with a deadly weapon and stabbed the unarmed victim 
on a vital organ causing his death. The conduct of the appellant is 
covered by both clauses (1) and (3) of section 300, IPC. The intention to 
cause death can easily be discerned from the conduct of the appellant 
and the nature of fatal injury inflicted, which in the ordinary course of 
nature was sufficient to cause death. Fulfilment of any one condition of 
section 300, IPC is enough to convict the appellant under section 302 
thereof, but in the present case not one but two conditions have clearly 
been shown to exist to nail the appellant for murder. 
 
20 (2020) 

27. In conclusion, we agree with the High Court’s affirmance of the 
conviction 
and 
find 
that 
the 
impugned 
judgment 
warrants 
no 
interference. The criminal appeal, accordingly, stands dismissed. 
28. The order dated 13th February, 2015 granting bail to the appellant 
stands vacated. We direct the appellant to surrender before the 
concerned court immediately but not later than 3 (three) weeks from 
date to serve out the rest of his sentence. 

……..………………………J 
(DIPANKAR DATTA) 

………………..……………J 
(PANKAJ MITHAL) 
New Delhi; 
08th July, 2024