Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Naresh Kumar 

 …Appellant 
 
Versus 
 
State of Delhi 

 …Respondent 

JUDGMENT 

C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J. 
 
1. 
Births of crimes and culprits concerned, occur 
together. Yet, under the criminal justice delivery system 
only on concluding findings on commission of the crime 
concerned in the affirmative, the question whether the 
accused is its culprit would arise. Culpability can be 
fixed, if at all it is to be fixed, on the accused upon 
conclusive proof of the same established by the 
prosecution only after following various procedural 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
safeguards recognizing certain rights of an accused. 
Failure to comply with such mandatory procedures may 
even vitiate the very trial, subject to the satisfaction of 
conditions, therefor. Foremost among one such right is 
embedded in Section 313 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (for short the ‘Cr.PC’). Though 
questioning under clause (a) of sub-Section (1) of Section 
313, Cr.PC, is discretionary, the questioning under 
clause (b) thereof is mandatory. Needless to say, a fatal 
non-compliance in the matter of questioning under 
Clause (b) of sub-section (1) thereof, in case resulted in 
material prejudice to any convict in a criminal case the 
trial concerned, qua that convict should stand vitiated. 
This prelude becomes necessary as in the captioned 
appeal the main thrust of the argument advanced is 
founded on fatal, non-compliance in the matter of 
questioning under Section 313, Cr.PC, qua the appellant 
who is a life convict. We will dilate on this a little later. 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
2. 
The appellant, who was accused No.4 in Sessions 
Case No.3/97 is challenging the confirmation of his 
conviction under Section 302, IPC, with the aid of Section 
34, IPC, under the impugned judgment in Criminal 
Appeal No.540/2000 dated 20.12.2016 passed by the 
High Court of Delhi. As per the prosecution, an argy-
bargy over spilling of drops of water over the roof of the 
appellant’s house while Laxmi, the sister of the 
deceased-Arun Kumar was cleaning the chajja (parapet) 
of their house resulted in the accurst incident, where the 
said Arun Kumar lost his life on 14.06.1995 at 08.45 pm. 
The case of the prosecution is that enraged by the 
dropping of water over the roof, the wife of the appellant, 
namely, Meena, hurled filthy words at Laxmi. Then the 
appellant came out and he, too, started abusing. 
Thereupon, the deceased asked him to stop abusing his 
sister and then the appellant exhorted his brother 
Mahinder Kumar to come out and finish them. Soon, 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
Mahinder came out with a knife and the appellant-
Naresh Kumar caught hold of Arun Kumar and Mahinder 
stabbed on his chest repeatedly with the knife. The 
necroscopic evidence in this case consists of the oral 
testimony of PW-17, Dr. LK Baruah and the postmortem 
report Ext.PW7/A, which disclosed that the deceased 
had sustained the following antemortem injuries: 
 
“1. 
Incised wound size 1.3 cm x 0.5 cm. On the left 
side front of chest. There is 1-1/2 medial to the left 
nipple placed abliquely. 
2. 
Incised wound size.3 cm x 0.5 cm.x? on the 
middle of chest situated 1.5 cm. Right to the mid line 
and below a line drawn between two nipples. 
3. 
Two incised wounds size 1.3 cm. And other 1.5 
cm. In the right epigeastric region. 
4. 
Incised wounds left side lower part of chest 9 
cm. Below left nipple size 1.4 cm x 2.3 cm. 
5. 
Abrasion on the dorsom left forearm and hand 
6. 
Abrasion seen below left eye.” 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
3. 
Taking note of the said necroscopic evidence 
corroborating the events unfolded through the oral 
testimonies of the eye-witnesses viz., Anil Kumar (PW-7), 
Smt. Prem Devi (PW-8), Sanjay (PW-20), who are 
respectively the brother, mother and one cousin of the 
deceased and Smt. Madhu (PW-19) and Anand Kumar 
(PW-22) besides the other evidences, the trial Court 
found that the homicidal death of Arun Kumar amounts to 
murder and culpability was fixed on Mahinder Kumar, 
the first accused. We make it clear that we are not going 
to make any observation in respect of Sri Mahinder 
Kumar in this appeal and reference about him was made 
solely for the purpose of disposing this appeal. 
4. 
As noticed earlier, the conviction of the appellant 
under Section 302, IPC, was then made with the aid of 
Section 34, IPC, and upon which he was awarded 
imprisonment for life. The conviction of the appellant 
herein was confirmed under the impugned common 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
judgment 
dated 
20.12.2016 
in 
Criminal 
Appeal 
No.540/2000 (filed by the appellant herein), and 
 (filed by Mahinder 
Kumar). 
5. 
Heard Sh. S.D. Singh, learned counsel appearing 
for the appellant and Ms. Sonia Mathur, learned senior 
counsel appearing for the respondent State. 
6. 
As noticed earlier, the thrust of the argument for 
the appellant was founded on prejudicial non-
compliance 
of 
Section 
313, 
Cr.PC, 
during 
the 
examination thereunder, qua the appellant. Before 
going into its details, we think it appropriate to consider 
whether the appellant is raising this contention for the 
first time before this Court. In this context, it is to be 
noted that there is nothing on record which would reveal 
that specific contention in this regard was raised before 
the High Court in the appeal. True, that in the appeal 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
before the High Court a ground in this regard was raised 
as ‘ground No.13’ as hereunder: - 
“13. That has been no proper examination of the 
appellant u/s. 313 Cr.P.C. which has caused 
material prejudice to the appellant.” 
 
7. 
There is nothing in the impugned judgment to 
reveal that this point was argued with specific details 
establishing prejudice, before the High Court. The 
innumerable grounds (grounds A to Z and AA to GG) 
raised in this appeal would reveal that neither directly 
nor indirectly, this core contention was taken in any of 
them. At any rate, no ground was raised to the effect that 
despite raising this ground, the High Court had failed to 
consider it. Be that as it may, the order dated 21.07.2017 
of this Court would reveal that the learned counsel for the 
appellant argued before this Court that while recording 
the statement of the appellant under Section 313, Cr.PC, 
no incriminating circumstances appearing in the 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
prosecution evidence against him, were put to him and 
that vitiated the whole trial. Obviously, thereupon notice 
was issued in the Special Leave Petition from which this 
appeal arose. Later, only in the first application for bail, 
a contention on the following lines was taken and it was 
reiterated in the second application for bail as well: 
 
“7. That on completion of the evidence statement of 
accused under Section 313 Cr. PC have been recorded 
on 6.6.2000 and the mere perusal of the statement 
would show that no incriminating evidence which had 
been subsequently considered for the conviction of the 
appellant by the Ld. Trial Court as well as Hon’ble 
High Court had been put to the Appellant. Therefore, 
the entire trial against the Appellant is vitiated.” 
 
8. 
During the course of the arguments by the learned 
counsel for the appellant submitted that this contention 
is based on non-questioning on two incriminating 
circumstances appeared against the appellant in the 
prosecution evidence viz., exhortation to do away with 
their lives (aaj inko jaan se hi khatam karde) and the 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
evidence that ‘the appellant had caught hold of the hands 
of the deceased Arun Kumar to enable Mahinder Kumar 
to stab him repeatedly with knife’ and they formed the 
foundation for holding that the appellant had shared 
common intention with the first accused and ultimately, 
for holding the appellant guilty with the aid of Section 34, 
IPC, for the offence under Section 300, IPC, punishable 
under Section 302, IPC. 
9. 
In view of the aforementioned core contentions, we 
are of the considered view that we need to consider the 
other grounds taken up in the appeal on the merits only 
if the appellant could not succeed based on non-
examination under Section 313, Cr.PC, qua the 
appellant. We may consider any other relevant aspect, 
circumstance or evidence if we find that it is required for 
a proper consideration and appreciation of the above-
mentioned core contention. 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
10. 
We have taken note of the absence of materials to 
show 
that 
the 
aforesaid 
core 
contention 
was 
appropriately raised and argued before the High Court. 
In the captioned appeal, it was not taken at all. In view 
of the circumstances the contention is resurrected, we 
are of the considered view that to entertain the same, it 
is essential to have a short survey on the authorities on 
the scope of maintaining such a contention at this stage 
in the aforementioned circumstances. Subject to its 
answer, we may also have to consider the question of 
prejudice or miscarriage of justice due to the non-
compliance with mandate for questioning under Section 
313, Cr.PC. 
11. 
In the context of the issues thus involved, it is only 
proper to look into the very object of Section 313, Cr.PC. 
This aspect has been considered many a times by this 
Court to hold that it embodies one salutary principle of 
natural justice viz., audi alteram partem and empowering 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
the Court to examine the accused thereunder is to give 
the accused concerned an opportunity to explain the 
incriminating circumstances appearing against him in 
the prosecution evidence. In the decision in V.K. 
Sasikala v. State1, this Court held that examination of an 
accused under Section 313, Cr.PC, would not only 
provide an opportunity to him to explain the 
incriminating circumstances appearing in evidence 
against him, but also would permit him to forward his 
own version with regard to his alleged involvement in 
the crime. Furthermore, it was held that such an 
examination would have a fair nexus with a defence he 
might choose to bring and, therefore, any failure in such 
examination might take the effect of curtailing his right 
in the event he took up a specific defence. The general 
position is that if any incriminating circumstance, 
appearing against an accused in the prosecution 
 
1 (2012) 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
evidence, is not put to him it should not be used against 
him and must be excluded from consideration. At the 
same time, we may hasten to add that it is a well-neigh 
settled position that non-examination or inadequate 
examination under Section 313, Cr.PC, on any 
incriminating circumstance, by itself, would not vitiate a 
trial qua the convict concerned unless it has resulted in 
material prejudice to him or in miscarriage of justice. In 
the decision in Suresh Chandra Bihari v. State of Bihar2 
and in Wariyam Singh & Ors. v. State of U.P.3, this Court 
held that mere defective/improper examination under 
Section 313, Cr.PC, would be no ground to set aside a 
conviction of the accused unless it has resulted in 
prejudice to the accused. In view of the said position 
which is being followed with alacrity we do not think it 
necessary to multiply the authorities on it. 
 
 SC 2420 
 SC 305 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
12. 
We have already noted that ‘ground No.13’ raised 
in the appeal before the High Court was too vague, in the 
sense without clarity whatsoever, as to what were the 
incriminating circumstances that appeared in the 
prosecution evidence not being put to the appellant 
while being examined and what is the material prejudice 
or miscarriage of justice caused consequent to such 
failure. To make matters worse, a scanning of the 
impugned judgment of the High Court would not 
disclose whether before the High Court, the said 
contention was pressed into service much-less whether 
it was argued with precision on quintessential materials 
to establish that the trial qua the appellant was vitiated. 
In the contextual situation it is relevant to refer to the 
decision of this Court in Amanullah v. State of U.P.4. 
Normally, it has to be presumed that all the arguments 
actually pressed at the hearing in the High Court were 
 
 SC 1370 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
noticed and appropriately dealt with and if the judgment 
of the High Court does not contain discussion on a point, 
then that point should be assumed prima facie not to have 
been argued at the bar unless the contrary is specifically 
shown, it was so, held in the said judgment. In the case 
on hand though grounds A to Z and AA to GG were taken 
in this appeal, there is absolute absence of any 
contention in any one of them to the effect that despite 
being pressed into the said contention was not taken into 
consideration and appropriately dealt with by the High 
Court. Hence, the conclusion can only be that it was not 
argued. 
13. 
This position takes us to the next question as to 
whether in such circumstances the contention based on 
non-examination/inadequate examination under Section 
313, Cr.PC, causing material prejudice qua the appellant 
can be maintained at this stage. In this context, it is only 
appropriate to refer to the decision of this Court in Shobit 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
Chamar & Anr. v. State of Bihar5. It was held therein that 
where the plea as to non-compliance of the provisions of 
Section 313, Cr.PC, was raised for the first time before 
the Supreme Court, in case no prejudice had resulted to 
the accused was proved, the trial could not be held as 
vitiated. In that case, though the non-compliance was 
taken for the first time before the Supreme Court, the 
records showed that the relevant portion of the statement 
of witnesses were put to the accused in examination 
under Section 313, Cr.PC, and, thereupon, the plea was 
rejected. It is to be noted that was also a case of murder. 
14. 
In the light of the aforesaid question posed for 
consideration, it is only appropriate to refer to the 
relevant provisions under Section 313 (1), (4) and (5). 
 
“313. Power to examine the accused. — (1) In every 
inquiry or trial, for the purpose of enabling the 
 
 SC 1693 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
accused personally to explain any circumstances 
appearing in the evidence against him, the Court— 
(a) may at any stage, without previously 
warning the accused put such questions to 
him as the Court considers necessary; 
(b) shall, after the witnesses for the 
prosecution have been examined and 
before he is called on for his defence, 
question him generally on the case: 
Provided that in a summons-case, where the 
Court has dispensed with the personal 
attendance of the accused, it may also 
dispense with his examination under clause 
(b). 
(2) … 
(3) … 
(4) The answers given by the accused may be taken 
into consideration in such inquiry or trial, and put in 
evidence for or against him in any other inquiry into, 
or trial for, any other offence which such answers may 
tend to show he has committed. 
 
(5) The Court may take help of Prosecutor and Defence 
Counsel in preparing relevant questions which are to 
be put to the accused and the Court may permit filing 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
of written statement by the accused as sufficient 
compliance of this section.” 
 
15. 
A bare perusal of the provisions under Section 313, 
Cr.PC, extracted above, would undoubtedly reveal the 
irrecusable obligation coupled with duty on Court 
concerned to put the incriminating circumstances 
appearing in the prosecution evidence against accused 
concerned facing the trial providing him an opportunity 
to explain. Sub-Section (5) of Section 313, Cr.PC, which 
was inserted under Code of Criminal Procedure 
(Amendment) Act, 2008 (Act 5 of 2009) with effect from 
31.12.2009, would lend support to this view. It reads 
thus: - 
“Section 313. Power to examine the accused. 
*** 
 
*** 
 
*** 
 
*** 
(5) The Court may take help of Prosecutor and Defence 
Counsel in preparing relevant questions which are to 
be put to the accused and the Court may permit filing 
of written statement by the accused as sufficient 
compliance of this section.” 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 

16. 
In this context, the maxim “actus curiae neminem 
gravabit” – “the act of court shall prejudice no one”, has 
also to be looked into. In the decision in Oil and Natural 
Gas Company Limited v. Modern Construction and 
Company6, this Court held that the court has to correct 
the mistake it has done, rather than to ask the affected 
party to seek his remedy elsewhere. In the context of the 
decisions referred above, there can be no doubt that in 
a charge for commission of a serious offence where 
extreme penalty alone is imposable in case the accused 
is found guilty, procedural safeguards ensuring 
protection of right(s) of accused must be followed and at 
any rate, in such cases when non-compliance of the 
mandatory procedure capable of vitiating trial qua the 
convict concerned is raised and revealed from records, 
irrespective of the fact it was not raised appropriately, it 
 
6 (2014) 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
must be considered lest the byproduct of consideration 
of the case would result in miscarriage of justice. Being 
the Court existing for dispensation of justice, this Court 
is bound to consider and correct the mistake committed 
by the Court by looking into the question whether non-
examination or inadequate examination of accused 
concerned caused material prejudice or miscarriage of 
justice. We may hasten to add here, that we shall not be 
understood to have held that always such a mistake has 
to be corrected by this Court by examining the question 
whether material prejudice or miscarriage of justice had 
been caused. In this context, the summarization of law 
on the subject of consequence of omission to make 
questioning on incriminating circumstances appearing 
in the prosecution evidence and the ways of curing the 
same, if it is called for, by this Court in the decision in Raj 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
Kumar uman v. State (NCT of Delhi)7, assumes 
relevance. Paragraph 16 of the said decision reads thus:- 
 
“17. The law consistently laid down by this Court can 
be summarized as under: 
(i) It is the duty of the Trial Court to put each 
material circumstance appearing in the evidence 
against the accused specifically, distinctively 
and separately. The material circumstance 
means the circumstance or the material on 
the basis of which the prosecution is seeking 
his conviction;” 
(ii) The object of examination of the accused 
under Section 313 is to enable the accused to 
explain any circumstance appearing against him 
in the evidence; 
(iii) The Court must ordinarily eschew 
material circumstances not put to the accused 
from consideration while dealing with the case 
of the particular accused; 
(iv) The failure to put material circumstances 
to the accused amounts to a serious irregularity. 
It will vitiate the trial if it is shown to have 
prejudiced the accused; 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
(v) If any irregularity in putting the material 
circumstance to the accused does not result in 
failure of justice, it becomes a curable defect. 
However, while deciding whether the defect can 
be cured, one of the considerations will be the 
passage of time from the date of the incident; 
(vi) In case such irregularity is curable, even 
the appellate court can question the accused on 
the material circumstance which is not put to 
him; and 
(vii) In a given case, the case can be 
remanded to the Trial Court from the stage of 
recording the supplementary statement of the 
concerned accused under Section 313 of CrPC. 
(viii) While deciding the question whether 
prejudice has been caused to the accused 
because of the omission, the delay in raising 
the contention is only one of the several 
factors to be considered.” 
 
17. 
In view of the circumstances obtained in this case, 
factually and legally, it is also relevant to refer to 
paragraph 20 of the decision in Raj Kumar’s case 
(supra) and it reads thus:- 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
“21. Even assuming that the defect or irregularity was 
curable, the question is whether today, the 
appellant-accused can be called upon to explain the 
said circumstance. More than 27 years have 
passed since the date of the incident. Considering the 
passage of time, we are of the view that it will be unjust 
now at this stage to remit the case to the Trial Court for 
recording further statement of the appellant under 
Section 313 of CrPC. In the facts of the case, the 
appellant cannot be called upon to answer something 
which has transpired 27 years back. There is one more 
aspect of the matter which persuaded us not to pass an 
order of remand. The said factor is that the 
appellant has already undergone incarceration for a 
period of 10 years and 4 months.” 
 
18. 
In this case, the incident in question occurred on 
14.06.1995 and thus, obviously, more than 29 years have 
passed by. The appellant has already undergone 
incarceration for a period of more than 12 years. In the 
circumstances, we are inclined to proceed with the 
consideration of the contentions bearing in mind the 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
aforesaid authorities laying down the position of law on 
various aspects of Section 313, Cr.PC. 
19. 
In the case on hand, the appellant was convicted for 
the offence under Section 300, IPC, punishable under 
Section 302, IPC, with the aid of Section 34, IPC. In other 
words, the conviction was not under Section 302, Cr.PC, 
simpliciter. Upon finding guilty for commission of 
murder only one of two extreme penalties viz., death or 
imprisonment for life could be imposed on the convict. 
When this be the consequence of finding an accused to 
have committed murder or in any other serious offence 
where extreme punishment of like nature alone is 
imposable, the failure to comply with the mandatory 
questioning on incriminating circumstance(s) appearing 
in the prosecution case, if made out, the plea of non-
examination or inadequate examination under Section 
313, Cr.PC, whether resulted in material prejudice to the 
accused or total miscarriage of justice, shall not be 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
ignored or declined to be taken into account by the 
Court. 
20. 
We have already noted that crucial incriminating 
circumstances viz., (1) pertaining to the exhortation of 
the appellant to kill Arun Kumar and others in his family 
(2) he had caught hold of the deceased to enable 
Mahinder Kumar to stab on his chest repeatedly, were 
not allegedly put to the appellant while being examined 
under Section 313, Cr.PC. The first among the twin 
incriminating circumstances not to put to the appellant 
was virtually the charge framed against him to the effect 
that in furtherance of the common intention of Mohinder 
Kumar and the appellant caught hold of deceased Arun 
Kumar and the other accused Mohinder Kumar inflicted 
knife blows on deceased Arun Kumar and murdered 
him. The former incriminating circumstance relating to 
exhortation by the appellant did not form part of the 
charge against the appellant. There can be no doubt 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
with respect to the position that the question whether the 
aforementioned 
twin 
incriminating 
circumstances 
appeared in the prosecution evidence and whether they 
were put to the appellant while being examined under 
Section 313, Cr.PC, to enable him an opportunity to offer 
explanation are not matters of argument as a bare 
perusal of the materials on record viz., the oral 
testimonies of the eyewitnesses and Section 313, Cr.PC, 
examination of the appellant would reveal the verity or 
otherwise of the said contentions. The oral testimonies 
of Anil Kumar (PW-7), Smt. Prem Devi (PW-8), Mrs. 
Madhu (PW-19) and Anand Kumar (PW-22) would reveal 
that they have deposed regarding the exhortation from 
the appellant though in slightly different manner, and 
also about the fact that he had caught hold of the 
deceased to enable Mohinder Kumar to stab on the chest 
of the deceased repeatedly. The examination of the 
appellant under Section 313, Cr.PC, which is available 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
on record, would reveal that both the incriminating 
circumstances were not directly or even indirectly put to 
the appellant while being examined under Section 313, 
Cr.PC. The learned counsel appearing for the 
respondent would fairly admit that the said material on 
record would reveal the correctness of the contentions 
of the appellant. 
21. 
We have already held that whether non-
questioning or inadequate questioning on incriminating 
circumstances to an accused by itself would not vitiate 
the trial qua the accused concerned and to hold the trial 
qua him is vitiated it is to be established further that it 
resulted in material prejudice to the accused. True that 
the onus to establish the prejudice or miscarriage on 
account of non-questioning or inadequate questioning 
on any incriminating circumstance(s), during the 
examination under Section 313, Cr.PC, is on the convict 
concerned. We say so, because if an accused is 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
ultimately acquitted, he could not have a case that he was 
prejudiced or miscarriage of justice had occurred owing 
to such non-questioning or inadequate questioning. 
22. 
In the light of the above view of the matter, we are 
inclined to consider the further question whether the 
non-questioning on the aforesaid twin incriminating 
circumstances to the appellant during his examination 
under Section 313, Cr.PC, had caused material prejudice 
to him. The decision of this Court in State of Punjab v. 
Swaran Singh8, constrain us to consider one another 
factor while considering the question of prejudice. In 
Swaran Singh’s case (supra), this Court held that where 
the evidence of the witnesses is recorded in the 
presence of the accused who had the opportunity to 
cross examine them but did not cross examine them in 
respect of facts deposed, then, omission to put question 
to the accused regarding the evidence of such witnesses 
 
8 (2005) 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
would not cause prejudice to such an accused and, 
therefore, could not be held as grounds vitiating the trial 
qua the convict concerned. We have already found that 
Anil Kumar (PW-7), Smt. Prem Devi (PW-8), Mrs. Madhu 
(PW-19) and Anand Kumar (PW-22) have deposed about 
the said circumstances. A scanning of their oral 
testimonies, available on record, would undoubtedly 
reveal that on both the points, on behalf of the appellants 
they were cross examined. 
23. 
The position, as above, would take us to the last 
question whether material prejudice was caused to the 
appellant on account of non-questioning him on the 
aforesaid incriminating circumstances and thereby 
depriving him an opportunity to explain. This question 
can better be considered by referring to paragraph 31 
of the judgment of the Trial Court, which virtually got 
confirmance from the High Court under the impugned 
judgment. It reads thus:- 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
“31. As far the part played by accused Naresh is 
concerned, this has come in the evidence of PWs that 
he (Naresh) is the man, who called his brother 
Mahinder and exhorted “Mahender came out and kill 
them today” and thereafter his taking part in the 
incident, by catching hold of deceased Arun Kumar, 
clearly goes to show the common' intention of the two, 
i.e. Naresh and Mahinder and even the Learned 
Defence Counsel, cannot be benefited from the above 
noted authorities.” 
 
24. 
It is evident from the afore-extracted paragraph 
from the judgment of the Trial Court that the said 
conclusion that appellant had shared the common 
intention to commit murder of the deceased Arun Kumar 
was based only on the aforesaid two incriminating 
circumstances which were not put to the appellant while 
being questioned under Section 313, Cr.PC. When the 
very charge framed against him, as referred as above, 
would reveal that there was no charge of commission of 
an offence under Section 300, IPC, punishable under 
Section 302, IPC, simplicitor against the appellant 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
whereas the said charge thereunder with the aid of 
Section 34, IPC. In such circumstances, when the finding 
of common intention was based on the twin incriminating 
circumstances and when they were not put to the 
appellant while he was being questioned under Section 
313, Cr.PC, and when they ultimately culminated in his 
conviction under Section 302, IPC, with the aid of Section 
34, IPC, and when he was awarded with the life 
imprisonment consequently, it can only be held that the 
appellant was materially prejudiced and it had resulted 
in blatant miscarriage of justice. The failure as above is 
not a curable defect and it is nothing but a patent 
illegality vitiating the trial qua the appellant. 
25. 
Once, the upshot of the discussion is above, we do 
not think it proper to deal with the innumerable grounds 
raised by the appellant, not only because it has become 
unnecessary but also such consideration may adversely 
affect the co-accused whose appeal was also decided 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
under the very same common judgment impugned in 
this appeal. 
26. 
As noticed hereinbefore, the incident in question 
occurred more than 29 years ago and the appellant had 
already undergone incarceration more than 12 years. In 
such circumstances, if he is again subjected to 
examination under Section 313, Cr.PC, it would cause 
further prejudice to him in view of the patent illegality 
occurred qua the appellant. Hence, the conviction of the 
appellant could not be sustained. 
27. 
 For the aforesaid reasons, the appeal must 
succeed. Accordingly, the impugned judgment of the 
trial Court and the High Court are set aside qua the 
appellant. We make it clear that this judgment would not 
disturb the conviction of the other accused. We also 
make it clear that this observation shall not be taken as 
confirmation of his conviction as it is a matter which may 
be dealt with in an appeal, if any, filed by him. The 

Crl. Appeal No.1751 of 2017 
 
appellant herein stands acquitted of the offences alleged 
against him. If his detention is not required in connection 
with any other case, he shall be released, forthwith. 
28. 
The appeal is allowed on the above terms. 
29. 
Pending application(s), if any, are disposed of. 

……………………, J. 
 (C.T. Ravikumar) 

……………………, J. 
 (Sandeep Mehta) 
New Delhi; 
July 08, 2024