IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

SHADAKSHARI 

APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 

STATE OF KARNATAKA & ANR. 
 
 RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
UJJAL BHUYAN, J. 
 
 Heard learned counsel for the parties. 
 
2. Challenge made in this appeal is to the order dated 
25.11.2020 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at 
Bengaluru in (Sri. 
Mallikarjuna Vs. State of Karnataka) quashing the complaint 
dated 19.12.2016 lodged by the appellant; the chargesheet in 
C.C. No.116 of 2018 including the order dated 28.03.2018 
passed therein by the learned Judicial Magistrate First Class, 
Belur. 
 
3. Facts lie within a very narrow compass. The appellant as the 
complainant lodged a first information report dated 19.12.2016 
(referred to as ‘the complaint’ in the impugned order) alleging 

that respondent No.2 and another were irregularly creating 
documents of property in the name of dead person despite 
knowing the fact that those were fake documents, such as, 
death certificate, family tree of the original successor of land of 
the appellant etc. for illegal gain. The said first information was 
received and registered by Haleebedu Police Station, Belur as 
Crime No. 323/2016 under Sections 409, 419, 420, 423, 465, 
466, 467, 468, 471 and 473 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) 
read with Section 149 and Section 34 thereof. 
 
4. It may be mentioned that respondent No.2 is working as 
Village Accountant, Kirigdalu Circle in the district of Hassan, 
Karnataka State. 
 
5. Respondent No.2 filed a petition under Section 482 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.PC) for quashing of the 
said FIR before the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru (‘High 
Court’ for short). The same was registered as Criminal Petition 
No.9580 of 2017. 
 
5.1 The High Court in its order dated 05.01.2018 noted that the 
specific case of the appellant was that land admeasuring 1 acre 
13 guntas in survey No.7/6 situated at Chattanahalli Village, 
Halebeedu Hobli, Belur Taluk, Hassan District belonged to the 
appellant and his family members. The same was given to 
accused No.1 for the purpose of cultivation. Accused No.1 in 

collusion with revenue officials including accused No.2 
(respondent No.2 herein) created lot of fake documents in favour 
of respondent No.1. High Court vide the order dated 05.01.2018 
observed that there were specific and serious allegations against 
respondent No.2 even as to creation of death certificate of a 
living person. It was observed that a reading of the FIR made 
out a case for investigation and that it was too premature to 
interfere with such FIR. Adverting to the case of Lalita Kumari 
Vs. Govt. of Uttar Pradesh, (2014), the High Court did 
not interfere though granted liberty to respondent No.2 to seek 
his legal remedy in the event any adverse report was made. 
 
6. Sub Inspector of Police, Haleebedu Police Station, who was 
the investigating officer submitted final report under Section 
173 of the Cr.PC in the Court of the Additional Civil Judge 
(Junior Division) and Judicial Magistrate First Class, Belur on 
20.03.2018 which was registered as chargesheet No.12/2018. 
The following persons have been named as accused in the 
chargesheet: 
i. 
Accused No.1 - Ramegowda 
ii. 
Accused No.2 - Mallikarjuna (respondent No.2) 
iii. 
Accused No.3 - Manjunath Aras 
They have been charged under Sections 471, 468, 467, 465, 
420, 409, 466 and 423 read with Section 34 of IPC. The 
chargesheet also mentions the names of thirty-one witnesses. 

7. As per the chargesheet, the deceased husband of witness 
No.2 Somashekharappa had permitted his deceased younger 
brother Thumbegowda to use the subject land for cultivation 
about 40-50 years ago. After the death of Thumbegowda, his 
son i.e. accused No.1 was cultivating the subject land. During 
the year 1993, Somashekharappa died but accused No.1 in 
collusion with accused No. 2 (respondent No.2) created a fake 
certificate of death to the effect that Somashekharappa had died 
during the year 2010. In this fake document, father of the 
deceased Thumbegowda was mentioned as Somashekharappa 
instead of Sannasiddegowda. By creating such fake document, 
the accused sought to make illegal gain. 
 
8. Respondent No.2 again approached the High Court by filing 
a petition under Section 482 Cr.PC for quashing the complaint 
dated 19.12.2016 as well as the chargesheet and the order 
dated 28.03.2018 (what is the order dated 28.03.2018 has not 
been mentioned by respondent No.2). It may be mentioned that 
upon the chargesheet being filed in the court of the Additional 
Civil Judge (Junior Division) and Judicial Magistrate First 
Class, Belur, the same was registered as C.C. No.116 of 2018. 
The quash petition of respondent No.2 was registered as. The High Court observed 
that respondent No.2 was a public servant. The offence 
complained against him, as per the prosecution, was committed 
while discharging his duties as a public servant. Investigating 
officer had sought for sanction to prosecute respondent No.2 

but sanction was denied. In such circumstances, High Court 
held that since sanction was refused, prosecution for criminal 
offence against a public servant cannot continue. Consequently, 
the complaint, the chargesheet as well as the order dated 
28.03.2018 were set aside by the High Court vide the order 
dated 25.11.2020. 
 
9. Aggrieved thereby, the complainant as the appellant has 
instituted the present proceeding. 
 
10. This court by order dated 15.05.2023 granted permission to 
the appellant to file special leave petition. After condoning the 
delay, notice was issued. Thereafter, respondent No.2 filed 
counter affidavit. On perusal of the counter affidavit of the 
second respondent this court in the proceedings held on 
21.11.2023 noted that Annexure R-1 annexed to the said 
affidavit was a file noting recording the opinion of some officers 
that it was not a fit case to accord sanction under Section 197 
Cr.PC to prosecute the second respondent. However, this Court 
noticed that there was no decision of the competent authority 
granting sanction. In such an eventuality, this Court directed 
the State to file an affidavit dealing with the aspect of sanction 
and to produce the relevant document. 
 
11. Pursuant thereto respondent No. 1 i.e State of Karnataka 
has filed an affidavit. The affidavit says that the investigating 

officer had written to the Deputy Commissioner, Hassan, on 
22.01.2018 
seeking 
sanction 
to 
prosecute 
the 
village 
accountant Mallikarjun (Responsible No. 2). It is further seen 
that the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Hassan had 
informed the investigating officer vide letter dated 17.03.2018 
that upon examination of the concerned file and considering the 
opinion of the legal advisor, sanction for prosecution of 
respondent No. 2 was not granted. 
 
12. Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the High 
Court was not justified in quashing the complaint as well as the 
chargesheet and the related cognizance order. He submits that 
no sanction to prosecute was required qua respondent No. 2 as 
making of a fake document cannot be said to be carried out by 
respondent No. 2 in the discharge of his official duty. In support 
of his contention, he has placed reliance on the decision of this 
Court in Shambhoo Nath Misra Vs State of U.P., (1997). 

13. Learned State counsel supports the contentions of the 
learned counsel for the appellant. 
 
14. On the other hand, learned counsel for respondent No. 2 
supports the order of the High Court and submits that the High 
Court had rightly quashed the complaint and the chargesheet. 
Without sanction to prosecute a public servant the latter cannot 

be prosecuted. This is a well-settled proposition and in this 
connection has placed reliance on a decision of this Court in D. 
Devaraja Vs. Obais Sanders Hussain, (2020). 
 
15. Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties have 
received the due consideration of this court. 
 
16. The question for consideration in this appeal is whether 
sanction is required to prosecute respondent No. 2 who faces 
accusation amongst others of creating fake documents by 
misusing his official position as a Village Accountant, thus a 
public servant? The competent authority has declined to grant 
sanction to prosecute. High Court has held that in the absence 
of such sanction, respondent No. 2 cannot be prosecuted and 
consequently has quashed the complaint as well as the 
chargesheet, giving liberty to the appellant to assail denial of 
sanction to prosecute respondent No. 2 in an appropriate 
proceeding, if so advised. 

17. Section 197 Cr.PC deals with prosecution of judges and 
public servants. Section 197 reads as under: 
“197. Prosecution of Judges and public servants: 
(1) When any person who is or was a Judge or 
Magistrate or a public servant not removable from his 
office save by or with the sanction of the Government 
is accused of any offence alleged to have been 
committed by him while acting or purporting to act in 

the discharge of his official duty, no Court shall take 
cognizance of such offence except with the previous 
sanction (save as otherwise provided in the Lokpal and 
Lokayuktas Act, 2013) – 
(a) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the 
case may be, was at the time of commission of the 
alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs 
of the Union, of the Central Government; 
(b) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the 
case may be, was at the time of commission of the 
alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs 
of a State, of the State Government: 
[Provided that where the alleged offence was committed 
by a person referred to in clause (b) during the period 
while a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of Article 
356 of the Constitution was in force in a State, clause 
(b) will apply as if for the expression “State 
Government” 
occurring 
therein, 
the 
expression 
“Central Government” were substituted.] 
[Explanation — For the removal of doubts it is hereby 
declared that no sanction shall be required in case of a 
public servant accused of any offence alleged to have 
been committed under section 166A, section 166B, 
section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, 
section 354D, section 370, section 375, section 376, 
section 376A, section 376AB, section 376C, section 
376D, section 376DA, section 376DB or section 509 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).] 
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence 
alleged to have been committed by any member of the 
Armed Forces of the Union while acting or purporting 
to act in the discharge of his official duty, except with 
the previous sanction of the Central Government. 
(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct 
that the provisions of Sub-Section (2) shall apply to 
such class or category of the members of the Forces 
charged with the maintenance of public order as may 
be specified therein, wherever they may be serving, and 
thereupon the provisions of that sub-section will apply 
as if for the expression “Central Government” occurring 

therein, the expression “State Government” were 
substituted. 
[(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (3), no Court shall take cognizance of any 
offence, alleged to have been committed by any 
member of the Forces charged with the maintenance of 
public order in a State while acting or purporting to act 
in the discharge of his official duty during the period 
while a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 
356 of the Constitution was in force therein, except 
with the previous sanction of the Central Government.] 
[(3B) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in this Code or any other law, it is hereby 
declared that any sanction accorded by the State 
Government or any cognizance taken by a Court upon 
such sanction, during the period commencing on the 
20th day of August, 1991 and ending with the date 
immediately preceding the date on which the Code of 
Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1991, receives 
the assent of the President, with respect to an offence 
alleged to have been committed during the period while 
a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 356 of 
the Constitution was in force in the State, shall be 
invalid and it shall be competent for the Central 
Government in such matter to accord sanction and for 
the Court to take cognizance thereon.] 
(4) The Central Government or the State Government, 
as the case may be, may determine the person by 
whom, the manner in which, and the offence or 
offences for which, the prosecution of such Judge, 
Magistrate or public servant is to be conducted, and 
may specify the Court before which the trial is to be 
held.” 
 
18. As per sub section (1) of Section 197 where any person who 
is or was a judge or magistrate or a public servant not removable 
from his office save by or with the sanction of the Government is 
accused of any offence alleged to have been committed by him 

while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official 
duty, no court shall take cognizance of such offence except with 
the previous sanction of the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be. 
 
19. The ambit, scope and effect of Section 197 Cr.PC has received 
considerable attention of this court. It is not necessary to advert 
to and dilate on all such decisions. Suffice it to say that the 
object of such sanction for prosecution is to protect a public 
servant discharging official duties and functions from undue 
harassment by initiation of frivolous criminal proceedings. 
 
20. In State of Orissa Vs. Ganesh Chandra Jew, (2004), 
this court explained the underlying concept of protection under 
Section 197 and held as follows: 
“7. The protection given under Section 197 is to protect 
responsible public servants against the institution of 
possibly vexatious criminal proceedings for offences 
alleged to have been committed by them while they are 
acting or purporting to act as public servants. The 
policy of the legislature is to afford adequate protection 
to public servants to ensure that they are not 
prosecuted for anything done by them in the discharge 
of their official duties without reasonable cause, and if 
sanction is granted, to confer on the Government, if they 
choose to exercise it, complete control of the 
prosecution. This protection has certain limits and is 
available only when the alleged act done by the public 
servant is reasonably connected with the discharge of 
his official duty and is not merely a cloak for doing the 
objectionable act. If in doing his official duty, he acted 
in excess of his duty, but there is a reasonable 
connection between the act and the performance of the 
official duty, the excess will not be a sufficient ground 

to deprive the public servant of the protection. The 
question is not as to the nature of the offence such as 
whether the alleged offence contained an element 
necessarily dependent upon the offender being a public 
servant, but whether it was committed by a public 
servant acting or purporting to act as such in the 
discharge of his official capacity. Before Section 197 can 
be invoked, it must be shown that the official concerned 
was accused of an offence alleged to have been 
committed by him while acting or purporting to act in 
the discharge of his official duties. It is not the duty 
which requires examination so much as the act, 
because the official act can be performed both in the 
discharge of the official duty as well as in dereliction of 
it. The act must fall within the scope and range of the 
official duties of the public servant concerned. It is the 
quality of the act which is important and the protection 
of this section is available if the act falls within the 
scope and range of his official duty. There cannot be any 
universal rule to determine whether there is a 
reasonable connection between the act done and the 
official duty, nor is it possible to lay down any such rule. 
One safe and sure test in this regard would be to 
consider if the omission or neglect on the part of the 
public servant to commit the act complained of could 
have made him answerable for a charge of dereliction of 
his official duty. If the answer to this question is in the 
affirmative, it may be said that such act was committed 
by the public servant while acting in the discharge of 
his official duty and there was every connection with the 
act complained of and the official duty of the public 
servant. This aspect makes it clear that the concept of 
Section 197 does not get immediately attracted on 
institution of the complaint case.” 

21. This aspect was also examined by this court in Shambhu 
Nath Misra (supra). Posing the question as to whether a public 
servant who allegedly commits the offence of fabrication of 
records or misappropriation of public funds can be said to have 
acted in the discharge of his official duties. Observing that it is 

not the official duty to fabricate records or to misappropriate 
public funds, this court held as under: 
“5. The question is when the public servant is alleged 
to have committed the offence of fabrication of record or 
misappropriation of public fund etc. can he be said to 
have acted in discharge of his official duties. It is not 
the official duty of the public servant to fabricate the 
false records and misappropriate the public funds etc. in furtherance of or in the discharge of his official 
duties. The official capacity only enables him to 
fabricate the record or misappropriate the public fund 
etc. It does not mean that it is integrally connected or 
inseparably interlinked with the crime committed in the 
course of the same transaction, as was believed by the 
learned Judge. Under these circumstances, we are of 
the opinion that the view expressed by the High Court 
as well as by the trial court on the question of sanction 
is clearly illegal and cannot be sustained.” 
 
22. Even in D. Devaraja (supra) relied upon by learned counsel 
for respondent No. 2, this court referred to Ganesh Chandra 
Jew (supra) and held as follows: 
“35. In State of Orissa v. Ganesh Chandra Jew [State of 
Orissa v. Ganesh Chandra Jew, (2004): 2004 
SCC (Cri) 2104] this Court interpreted the use of the 
expression “official duty” to imply that the act or 
omission must have been done by the public servant in 
course of his service and that it should have been in 
discharge of his duty. Section 197 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure does not extend its protective cover 
to every act or omission done by a public servant while 
in service. The scope of operation of the section is 
restricted to only those acts or omissions which are 
done by a public servant in discharge of official duty.” 
 
23. Thus, this court has been consistent in holding that Section 
197 Cr.PC does not extend its protective cover to every act or 

omission of a public servant while in service. It is restricted to 
only those acts or omissions which are done by public servants 
in the discharge of official duties. 
 
24. After the hearing was over, learned counsel for respondent 
No.2 circulated a judgment of this Court in A. Srinivasulu Vs. 
State Rep. by the Inspector of Police, 
in support of the contention that a public servant cannot be 
prosecuted without obtaining sanction under Section 197 of 
Cr.PC. We have carefully gone through the aforesaid decision 
rendered by a two Judge Bench of this Court in A. Srinivasulu 
(supra). That was a case where seven persons were 
chargesheeted by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for 
allegedly committing offences under Section 120B read with 
Sections 420, 468, 471 along with Sections 468 and 193 IPC 
read with Sections 13 (2) and 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988 (for short ‘P.C. Act, 1988’). Four of the 
accused persons being A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 were officials of 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, a public sector undertaking 
and thus were public servants both under the IPC as well as 
under the P.C. Act, 1988. Accused No.1 had retired from service 
before filing of the chargesheet. Insofar accused Nos. 3 and 4, 
the competent authority had refused to grant sanction but 
granted the same in respect of accused No.1. It was in that 
context that this court considered the requirement of sanction 
under Section 197 Cr.P.C qua accused No.1 and observed that 
accused No.1 could not be prosecuted for committing the 

offence of criminal conspiracy when sanction for prosecuting 
accused Nos.3 and 4 with whom criminal conspiracy was 
alleged, was declined. This court held as follows: 
“52. It must be remembered that in this particular 
case, the FIR actually implicated only four persons, 
namely PW-16, A-3, A-4 and A-5. A-1 was not 
implicated in the FIR. It was only after a confession 
statement was made by PW-16 in the year 1998 that 
A-1 was roped in. The allegations against A-1 were that 
he got into a criminal conspiracy with the others to 
commit these offences. But the Management of BHEL 
refused to grant sanction for prosecuting A-3 and A-4, 
twice, on the ground that the decisions taken were in 
the realm of commercial wisdom of the Company. If 
according to the Management of the Company, the 
very same act of the co-conspirators fell in the 
realm of commercial wisdom, it is inconceivable 
that the act of A-1, as part of the criminal 
conspiracy, fell outside the discharge of his public 
duty, so as to disentitle him for protection under 
Section 197(1) of the Code.” 
 
24.1 Admittedly, 
facts 
of 
the 
present 
case 
are 
clearly 
distinguishable from the facts of A. Srinivasulu (supra) and, 
therefore, the said decision cannot be applied to the facts of the 
present case. 
 
25. The question whether respondent No.2 was involved in 
fabricating official documents by misusing his official position 
as a public servant is a matter of trial. Certainly, a view can be 
taken that manufacturing of such documents or fabrication of 
records cannot be a part of the official duty of a public servant. 
If that be the position, the High Court was not justified in 

quashing the complaint as well as the chargesheet in its 
entirety, more so when there are two other accused persons 
besides respondent No.2. There is another aspect of the matter. 
Respondent No.2 had unsuccessfully challenged the complaint 
in an earlier proceeding under Section 482 Cr.PC. Though 
liberty was granted by the High Court to respondent No.2 to 
challenge any adverse report if filed subsequent to the lodging 
of the complaint, instead of confining the challenge to the 
chargesheet, respondent No.2 also assailed the complaint as 
well which he could not have done. 
26. That being the position, we are of the unhesitant view that 
the High Court had erred in quashing the complaint as well as 
the chargesheet in its entirety. Consequently, we set aside the 
order of the High Court dated 25.11.2020 passed in Criminal 
Petition No. 4998/2020. We make it clear that observations 
made in this judgment are only for the purpose of deciding the 
present challenge and should not be construed as our opinion 
on merit. That apart, all contentions are kept open. 
27. Appeal is accordingly allowed. No costs. 
 
 ……………………J. 

 [ABHAY S. OKA] 

………………………J. 
 [UJJAL BHUYAN]