IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

( SLP (CRL.) NO.2756 OF 2019) 

P. SASIKUMAR 
 …APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 
THE STATE REP. BY THE 
INSPECTOR OF POLICE 
 …RESPONDENT 

JUDGMENT 
 
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J. 

1. 
The appellant before us has challenged the order dated 
12.01.2017 of the High Court of Madras which has upheld the 
conviction of the appellant under Section 302 read with 
Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as 
‘IPC’) as well as under Section(s) 449, 404 and 201 r/w 302 
IPC. He has been, inter alia, sentenced for life imprisonment 
under Section 302 IPC. 
2. 
It was a brutal murder of a 14-year-old girl committed inside 
her house on the night of 13.11.2014, allegedly by two 

accused, one of them being the present appellant before this 
Court. There is no direct evidence of the crime although there 
is both ocular as well as forensic evidence placed by the 
prosecution to prove the murder of the 14-year-old girl, at the 
hands of the present appellant and another accused, who is 
accused no.1 and also the main accused. The present accused 
is accused no.2. 
3. 
The case of the prosecution is largely based on circumstantial 
evidence. FIR No.408/2014 was lodged on 13.11.2014 at 
police station Alagapuram by PW-1 Durairaj, who is the 
father of the deceased. The complainant states that he is 
working as a Manager at JSP Granite Company at Salem, 
Tamil Nadu and he has two daughters. The elder daughter 
had studied engineering from Mahendra Engineering College 
and is now working in L&T Company, Chennai. His younger 
daughter was studying in the 8th standard in a local school in 
Salem. His wife is working as an accountant in a private 
company. On 13.11.2014 his wife had gone to Chennai to 
meet their elder daughter as she was not well. The younger 
daughter (deceased) was alone in the house. That day he had 
called his younger daughter about 2-3 times, in order to 
remind her to receive her tiffin but she did not answer his 

call. He had then made up his mind to return to his house 
early. When he was climbing the stairs of his house at about 
07:15 p.m., after parking his scooter, he saw a person aged 
about 25 years, walking down the stairs. This man had a 
helmet in his hand, which he immediately wore on seeing the 
complainant. He found the door of his house open and his 
daughter was bleeding profusely from her neck. Meanwhile, 
neighbors had gathered on hearing his cries and they 
informed him that two persons had come to his house who 
had brutally killed his daughter. The deceased was still alive 
was rushed to the hospital where she was declared dead. 
4. 
The post mortem was conducted on the body of the deceased 
by Dr. K. Gokularamanan (PW-14) at 10:30 a.m. next day on 
14.11.2014 and the following antemortem injuries were found 
on the deceased – 
“1. A well extended broad cut injury on the 
front side of neck and on both sides extending 
up to the upper side of Thyroid ligament bone 
measuring a depth of 14 x 6 up to the depth of 
the bone and the neck spinal bone present in 
the 
underside 
of 
injury, 
Adams 
apple, 
muscles and blood vessels were seen on the 
edges of the injury and blood outflow was 
seen in the surrounding areas. 
 
2. On the right hand side of the aforesaid 
injury a cut injury on the lower and outer side 
was seen which extended up to the backside 
of neck measuring 12 x 4 depths in the 

muscles and blood outflow was seen in the 
surrounding areas. No other injuries were 
seen on the external parts of the body.” 

According to the postmortem report, the cause of death 
was shock due to the antemortem injuries on the neck and 
profuse bleeding and the time of death was 12-18 hours prior 
to the post mortem. 
5. 
Meanwhile 
the 
FIR 
was 
registered 
as 
Case 
Crime 
No.408/2014. The two accused were apprehended by the 
Police on 15.11.2014, at about 10 p.m. 
6. 
Recoveries were made during the investigation on their 
pointing out which is as follows:- 
From the pointing out of accused No. 1:- 
A black colour Pulsar Vehicle without registration number, a 
black colour helmet, a black colour cell phone with broken 
glass, a knife with a maroon handle and a checkered blood-
stained shirt were recovered. 
From pointing out of accused No. 2 i.e. present appellant:- 
A dark green monkey cap, a Samsung Galaxy Pro Cell Phone, 
a blood-stained elephant-coloured jeans and a white/green 
shirt were recovered. 
7. 
At this juncture, we must also record that although there are 
two accused in the case and, both were charged for the above 

offences and faced the trial and were convicted by the Trial 
Court under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC apart from 
other offences such as 449, 404 and 201 r/w 302 IPC, yet 
there is no record, before this Court of any appeal being filed 
before the High Court by accused no. 1 who also stands 
convicted and sentenced for the same offences like the 
present appellant. This is also mentioned by the High Court 
while deciding the appeal that they have before them only the 
criminal appeal of accused No. 2 i.e. the present appellant- 
Sasikumar, and the court is not aware of any Criminal Appeal 
being filed by accused no.1 – Yugadhithan. Before us, thus, 
is only accused no. 2. Accused no.1, who is the main accused 
inasmuch as it was accused no.1 against whom the 
prosecution additionally has a case of motive to commit this 
murder. 
8. 
The prosecution case is that when Harini (PW2)-the elder 
sister of the deceased was a student in Mahendra Engineering 
College, accused no. 1 (Yugadhithan) was also studying in the 
same college and was totally infatuated by her. His feelings 
were never reciprocated by the elder sister of the deceased. It 
is because of this reason that he was enraged and had even 
started stalking the elder sister of the deceased. He had even 

reached her present place of work L&T Company at Chennai, 
causing much anxiety to her. PW2 had also complained 
against accused no. 1 to the principal of Mahendra 
Engineering College earlier stating that he had been harassing 
her. The prosecution case further, is that accused no. 1 had 
threatened the elder sister of the deceased warning her that if 
she does reciprocate his feelings, he would kill her entire 
family. 
9. 
But the one who is before us today and whose conviction 
stands confirmed by the High Court is not accused No.1 but 
accused no.2. The entire question before us here is of 
identification of accused no. 2. From all available evidences 
which the prosecution has placed before the Trial Court, inter 
alia, in the form of PW-1 and PW-5 have stated that accused 
No.2 i.e., the present appellant was seen by them wearing a 
“green colored monkey cap”. When this accused had entered 
the premises, when he knocked the door of the house of the 
deceased, when he was coming down from the stairs along 
with accused no.1 and at all other relevant times the 
witnesses who have seen and identified the accused no.2 i.e., 
the present appellant, had seen the appellant for the first time 
on 13.11.2014 while he was wearing a green colored monkey 

cap. None of them had seen him earlier. PW-5 who is the 
closest witness in this case states as under:- 
“…I know Duraiaj. It could be 6.30 hours in the 
evening on 13.11.2014. At that time I was taking 
good water in balcony at that time a person went 
wearing monkey cap. Another person went wearing 
a helmet. The time could be 6.35, 640 hrs in the 
evening. They both knocked the door of Tejashree 
house and went inside the house. They both were 
found talking inside in a sofa. They are the present 
accused. They were asking phone number with 
Tejashree for that Tejashree has told them that 
father has gone out and he has to come. Both the 
accused and Tejashree were found to be talking. 
After taking water I went to my home. I informed my 
house by around 7.00 hrs in the evening that I am 
going to super market. Later I came back by 7.25 
hrs at that time Sun News was under broadcast 
when I parked my vehicle and climbed stairs 
Durairaj came behind me. When I placed the articles 
in home within 5 minutes I heard the sound of 
Durairaj. Immediately I went to Durairaj House. 
After tearing the cloth he was shouting from the 
place where his daughter was lying. I told Durairaj 
that 2 person came and went half an hour prior to 
that. I told Durairaj that they both kept Tejashree 
sitting and was talking with her. Immediately call 
was made to ambulance…” 
 
PW-5 is said to have identified the accused later when both the 
accused were apprehended by the police and were in the 
hospital. In other words, while these two accused persons were 
in the custody of the police this particular witness PW-5 was 
taken to the hospital where he had identified the two accused. 
This so-called identification, on which much reliance has been 

placed by the prosecution, was made by PW-5 in the hospital by 
way of a statement to the police, and it can only be read as a 
statement under Section 162 of the Criminal Procedure Code 
which can only be used for the limited purpose as provided 
under Section 162 of the CrPC itself. 
 
The case of the prosecution is that both the accused were 
apprehended on 15.11.2014 near the Salem-Coimbatore bye 
pass fly over. The recovery of incriminating material such as 
motor bike, weapon, the monkey cap, helmet, clothes etc. were 
made on the same day. In other words, when the accused were 
in judicial custody, there is nothing on record to suggest that 
the investigating officer or the investigating team had taken any 
permission from the Magistrate for the release of the accused 
for these recoveries. These recoveries therefore, have no 
relevance. At this juncture, we must reiterate that our 
observation in this case and our finding and conclusions are 
based only on the evidences and the material which is available 
against the present appellant, it should not be construed in any 
manner as a finding or a comment on the case of accused no. 1 
who is not before us and evidently against whom the 
prosecution has some more material, including motive. There 
is also no motive against the present appellant. In fact, the 

Pulsar bike which has been recovered on pointing out of 
accused no.1 does not belong to the appellant but was 
purchased by a person named ‘Satish’ from the showroom and 
this person ‘Satish’ has never been questioned by the police or 
produced as a prosecution witness during the trial. 
10. The admitted position in this case is that the test 
identification parade (hereinafter referred to as ‘TIP’) was not 
conducted. All the prosecution witnesses who identified the 
accused in the Court such as PW-1 and PW-5 were not known 
to the present appellant i.e., accused no.2. They had not seen 
the present appellant prior to the said incident. He was a 
stranger to both of them. More importantly, both of them 
have seen the appellant/accused No. 2 on the date of the 
crime while he was wearing a “green colour monkey cap”! 
11. Now, as one is familiar a monkey cap covers the entire face, 
chin and cheek of a person, leaving only his eyes and nose 
and part of forehead exposed. These two witnesses (PW-1 and 
PW-5), had seen the appellant wearing a monkey cap and that 
too from a distance. Under these circumstances, TIP had 
become necessary particularly when both the accused, who 
are alleged to have committed this murder were arrested 
within two days. The incident is of about 7:00 pm on 

13.11.2014 and both of them were arrested at around 10 pm 
on 15.11.2014. The case of the prosecution is that while they 
were being arrested, they received injuries as they tried to 
escape and consequently, they were taken to the Hospital for 
treatment. It was in the hospital, that PW-1 i.e. father of the 
deceased and the complainant and PW-5 were taken by the 
Investigating Officer who are said to have identified the two 
accused as the one who had committed the crime. No 
explanation whatsoever has been given by the prosecution as 
to why TIP was not conducted in this case before a Magistrate 
as it ought to have been done. In fact, the High Court has 
recorded this flaw in the investigation at more than one place 
in its judgment. It has again observed that the Investigating 
Officer (PW-24) was before the Court and in spite of being 
questioned as to what the reasons were for not holding TIP in 
this case, no satisfactory reply was given by him. 
12. It is well settled that TIP is only a part of Police investigation. 
The identification in TIP of an accused is not a substantive 
piece of evidence. The substantive piece of evidence, or what 
can be called evidence is only dock identification that is 
identification made by witness in Court during trial. This 
identification has been made in Court by PW-1 and PW-5. 

The High Court rightly dismisses the identification made by 
PW-1 for the reason that the appellant i.e., accused no.2 was 
a stranger to PW-1 and PW-1 had seen the appellant for the 
first time when he was wearing a monkey cap, and in the 
absence of TIP to admit the identification by PW-1 made for 
the first time in the Court was not proper. However, the High 
Court has believed the testimony of PW-5 who has identified 
accused no.2 under similar circumstances! The appellant was 
also stranger to PW-5 and PW-5 had also seen the accused 
i.e., the present appellant for the first time on that fateful day 
i.e. on 13.11.2014 while he was wearing a green colour 
monkey cap. The only reason assigned for believing the 
testimony of PW-5 is that he is after all an independent 
witness and has no grudge to falsely implicate the appellant. 
This is the entire reasoning. We are afraid the High Court has 
gone completely wrong in believing the testimony of PW-5 as 
to the identification of the appellant. In cases where accused 
is a stranger to a witness and there has been no TIP, the trial 
court should be very cautious while accepting the dock 
identification by such a witness (See: Kunjumon v. State of 
Kerala (2012) ). 

13. After considering the peculiar facts of the present case, we are 
of the opinion that not conducting a TIP in this case was a 
fatal flaw in the police investigation and in the absence of TIP 
in the present case the dock identification of the present 
appellant will always remain doubtful. Doubt always belongs 
to the accused. The prosecution has not been able to prove 
the identity of the present appellant i.e. A-2 beyond a 
reasonable doubt. 
The relevance of a TIP, is well-settled. It depends on the 
fact of a case. In a given case, TIP may not be necessary. The 
non conduct of a TIP may not prejudice the case of the 
prosecution or affect the identification of the accused. It 
would all depend upon the facts of the case. It is possible 
that the evidence of prosecution witness who has identified 
the accused in a court is of a sterling nature, as held by this 
Court in the case of Rajesh v. State of Haryana (2021) and therefore TIP may not be necessary. It is the 
task of the investigation team to see the relevance of a TIP in a 
given case. Not conducting TIP in a given case may prove 
fatal for the prosecution as we are afraid it will be in the 
present case. 

14. The relevance of TIP has been explained by this Court in a 
number of cases (Please see: Ravi Kapur v. State of 
Rajasthan (2012), Malkhansingh and Ors. v. 
State of Madhya Pradesh (2003) ). 
15. In the facts of the present case, the identification of the 
accused before the court ought to have been corroborated by 
the previous TIP which has not been done. The emphasis of 
TIP in a given case is of vital importance as has been shown 
by this Court in recent two cases of Jayan v. State of Kerala 
(2021) and Amrik Singh v. State of Punjab 
(2022). In Jayan (supra), this Court disbelieved 
the dock identification of the accused therein by a witness 
and while doing so, this Court discussed the aspect of TIP in 
the following words: 
“It is well settled that TI parade is a part of 
investigation and it is not a substantive evidence. 
The question of holding TI parade arises when the 
accused is not known to the witness earlier. The 
identification by a witness of the accused in the 
Court who has for the first time seen the accused in 
the incident of offence is a weak piece of evidence 
especially when there is a large time gap between 
the date of the incident and the date of recording of 
his evidence. In such a case, TI parade may make 
the identification of the accused by the witness 
before the Court trustworthy….” 
 
 (Para 18) 

1 Para 35 
2 Para 16 

16. 
Under these circumstances, we hold that the identity of 
the present appellant is in doubt. The appellant could not 
have been convicted on the basis of a very doubtful evidence 
as to the appellant’s identity. The appeal is allowed and the 
impugned order of the High Court dated 12.01.2017 is hereby 
set aside. The appellant has been in jail for about 8 years as 
we have been told at the Bar, he shall be released forthwith 
unless he is required in some other case. We make it 
absolutely clear that this decision of acquittal is based on the 
evidence, or lack thereof, which the prosecution has against 
accused no. 2 i.e. the present appellant. This will absolutely 
have no bearing on the case of accused no.1. 

…….…………………………..J 
 [SUDHANSHU DHULIA] 

………..………………………J. 
 [PRASANNA B. VARALE] 
 
New Delhi 
July 8, 2024