IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

R. RADHAKRISHNA PRASAD 

…. APPELLANT 

VERSUS 

SWAMINATHAN & ANR....RESPONDENTS 

JUDGMENT 

PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J. 

This appeal would call in question the Judgment and 
decree of the High Court of Kerala by which the High Court has 
allowed the appeal preferred by the defendant no. 1 and 
modified the decree passed by the Trial Court whereby, in a 
suit for specific performance, the Trial Court had directed the 
defendant no. 1 to refund a sum of Rs. 18,00,000/- (Rs. 
Eighteen Lakhs only) to the plaintiff. Under the impugned 

Judgment, the High Court has allowed the plaintiff to recover 
only a sum of Rs. 3,00,000/- (Rs. Three Lakhs only) with 12% 
interest per annum from the date of suit till realisation from 
the defendant no. 1. 
 
2. 
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the 
appellant/plaintiff preferred a suit for specific performance of 
the agreement dated 26.03.1998 whereunder the parties 
entered into an agreement for sale of the suit property over 
which the defendant no. 1 had a right by virtue of Partition 
Deed no. 2304/81 and Sale Deed nos. 759/93 & 1586/93 of 
the S.R.O. Chengannur. The defendant no. 1 agreed to sell 
the said property to the plaintiff for a sale consideration of Rs. 
30,00,000/- (Thirty Lakhs only) and to handover the vacant 
possession of the suit property to the plaintiff within 06 
months from the date of agreement. He received an advance 
sale consideration of Rs. 3,00,000/- (Three Lakhs only) from 
the plaintiff and also handed over the title deeds and 
encumbrance certificate to the plaintiff. The defendant no. 1 
had availed of a loan from the defendant no. 2 - Bank by way 
of creating an equitable mortgage on deposit of his title deeds. 

Therefore, to clear the said liabilities, the defendant no. 1 
received an additional amount of Rs. 15,00,000/- (Fifteen 
Lakhs only) from the plaintiff between the period from 
26.03.1998 and 12.09.1998 and extended the period of the 
agreement for one year from 12.09.1998. The plaintiff 
averred in the suit that he was always ready and willing to pay 
the balance sale consideration as per the agreement but due 
to the laches on the part of the defendant no. 1, the sale deed 
could not be executed in time. In spite of repeated requests, 
the defendant no. 1 did not execute the sale deed, therefore, 
the suit was preferred. The plaintiff claimed for specific 
performance of the agreement and in the alternative prayed 
for refund of the advance sale consideration of Rs. 
18,00,000/- (Eighteen Lakhs only), mesne profits etc. together with interest and other incidental expenses. No relief 
was sought from the defendant no. 2. 
 
3. 
The defendant no. 1 contested the suit by denying the 
whole transaction. He denied having any acquaintance with 
the plaintiff as also the execution of the agreement. He also 
stated that he is only a co-owner of the suit property which 

would fetch value of more than Rs. 1,00,00,000/- (One Crore 
only). Thus, according to the defendant no. 1, the plaintiff has 
raised a false claim on the basis of a non-existing agreement. 
It is also stated in the written statement that there were 
financial transactions between one K.K. Vijayadharan Pillai and 
defendant no. 1 during which the said K.K. Vijayadharan Pillai 
obtained his signatures on blank papers and cheques from him 
and his wife. He has also initiated criminal prosecutions and 
instituted civil suit against defendant no. 1. The present suit is 
one of such instances. Thus, he denied any privity of contract 
between himself and the plaintiff. The suit has been instituted 
under the influence of K.K Vijayadharan Pillai on the strength 
of some forged and fabricated documents. The defendant no. 
2 - Bank did not appear despite receiving summons and was 
thus proceeded exparte. 
 
4. 
Before the Trial Court, the plaintiff examined three 
witnesses and exhibited documents A1 to A8 whereas, on his 
side, defendant no. 1 examined two witnesses and exhibited 
two documents B1 and B2. 

5. 
Basing on the undisputed facts that the agreement bears 
the signatures of defendant no. 1, the Trial Court found that 
the agreement was executed by the defendant no. 1 and the 
two witnesses of the agreement namely, K.K. Vijayadharan 
Pillai (PW-2) and Jose P. George (PW-3) having supported the 
plaintiff’s case, the agreement is not forged or fabricated. The 
Trial Court also considered the documentary evidence as 
contained in exhibit A-1 to A-8 to conclude that the suit notice 
was duly served on the defendant no. 1 and that he was ready 
with the sale consideration amount for the execution of the 
sale deed as reflected in the document exhibit A-7. Therefore, 
the plaintiff is entitled to a decree for specific performance. 
This finding was also found supported by the evidence of PW-2 
who was examined as a witness to the agreement and the 
endorsement exhibit A-1(a) and has proved that the 
documents were exhibited in his presence and the defendant 
no. 1 had put his signatures on the documents. Similar is the 
case with the other witness PW-3 – Jose P. George. The Trial 
Court also considered the evidence of DW-1, a practicing 
advocate who issued exhibit B-2 notice on the defendant no. 

1. However, this witness has been disbelieved by the Trial 
Court. The defendant no. 1 examined himself as DW-2 who 
admitted his ownership in the suit property. He maintained 
his stand that K.K. Vijayadharan Pillai had obtained his 
signatures on blank papers and blank cheque leaves and the 
same has been misused to create forged agreement. 
However, the Trial Court upon consideration of the equitable 
principles on which a decree for specific performance is 
granted, was convinced with the case of defendant no. 1 that 
the suit property would fetch more value than the sale 
consideration 
mentioned 
in 
the 
agreement, 
therefore, 
considering the principles under Section 20 of the Specific 
Relief Act, 1963, the Trial Court denied specific performance 
and, in the alternative, directed the defendant no. 1 to repay 
the advance sale consideration of Rs. 18,00,000/- (Eighteen 
Lakhs only) together with interest at the rate of 12% per 
annum to the plaintiff. 
 
6. 
Feeling aggrieved by the decree for refund of money 
passed by the Trial Court, the defendant no. 1 preferred R.F.A. 
No. 25 of 2010 in the High Court, and the another Ex. F.A. No. 

6 of 2011 was preferred by a claimant who had set up a claim 
over the property of the defendant no. 1, which had been 
brought to sell in execution to satisfy the decree passed by the 
Trial Court. The claimant was the advocate who appeared for 
the defendant no. 1 in the execution proceedings, and his 
claim was dismissed. Aggrieved thereby, he preferred the said 
appeal i.e. Ex. F.A. 6 of 2011. 
 
7. 
Under the impugned judgement of the High Court, the 
appeal preferred by the defendant no. 1 has been allowed in 
part, modifying the decree and allowing the plaintiff to recover 
only a sum of Rs. 3,00,000/- (Three Lakhs only) with 12% 
interest per annum from the date of suit till realisation from 
the defendant no. 1 and at the same time rejecting the claim 
petition of the claimant who was the appellant in Ex. F.A. No. 6 
of 2011. 
 
8. 
In this Civil Appeal, we are concerned with the appeal 
preferred by the plaintiff who alone has approached this Court. 
The claimant in Ex. F.A. No. 6 of 2011 is not before us, 
therefore, the said part of the judgment has attained finality. 

9. 
It is also to notice that in so far as the declining of the 
specific relief of the agreement of sale, there is no further 
challenge from the plaintiff by preferring First Appeal before 
the High Court. Therefore, the same has become final and we 
are only concerned with the refund part of the relief allowed in 
favour of the plaintiff by the Trial Court and modified by the 
High Court. 
 
10. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and 
perused the material papers available on record of the Civil 
Appeal as also the copy of the agreement which was made 
part of the record in course of hearing. 
 
11. Since the defendant no. 1 has not preferred any appeal 
before this Court challenging the findings of the First Appellate 
Court that the execution of the agreement is proved, we are 
not considering the said issue. The material issue to be 
decided in this appeal is whether the plaintiff has proved 
payment of Rs. 3,00,000/- (Three Lakhs only) initially and 
another sum of Rs. 15,00,000/- (Fifteen Lakhs only) totalling 
to Rs. 18,00,000/- (Eighteen Lakhs only) to the defendant no. 

1. Both the Courts below have found that payment of Rs. 
3,00,000/- (Three Lakhs only) on the date of agreement has 
been duly proved in the evidence of PW-1 and PW-3. The 
bone of contention between the parties is the payment of 
additional advance consideration of Rs. 15,00,000/- (Fifteen 
Lakhs only) as evidenced by exhibit A-1(a) endorsement. On 
this aspect, the only evidence is that of the plaintiff himself 
without any corroboration from any other witness. The High 
Court has noted that PW-1 would state that stamp receipts 
had been collected whenever such subsequent payment were 
made but none of the stamp receipts were produced. We have 
perused the xerox copy of the document which was made 
available to us at the time of hearing. The document would 
show that the witness PW-2 had signed just below that 
endorsement and only thereafter, the signature of the 
defendant no. 1 is seen subscribed. Ordinarily, in any 
agreement witnessing payment of money, the party signs first 
and 
the 
witness(s) 
puts 
his 
signature(s) 
below 
that 
endorsement. However, in the case in hand, the witness has 
signed just below that endorsement and only thereafter, the 

defendant no. 1 is seen subscribing to the endorsement. In 
the suit notice exhibit B-1 also, there is no mention of 
payment of a definite sum paid as advance sale consideration 
nor existence of any endorsement has been mentioned 
therein. The amount of Rs. 15,00,000/- (Fifteen Lakhs only) 
so received subsequent to exhibit A-1 agreement of sale, as 
stated in the second notice and also in the plaint and so 
reflected in exhibit A-1(a) endorsement is not stated in exhibit 
B-1 suit notice. There is no reason why payment of such 
substantial amount of Rs. 15,00,000/- (Fifteen Lakhs only) 
would be missing in the suit notice. The only possible reason 
for this could be that the advocate who prepared the notice 
was not apprised of this fact. If such was the case, plaintiff’s 
statement in Court, without any further corroboration, is not 
believable and the High Court has rightly found that the case 
of the plaintiff as to the subsequent payment of Rs. 
15,00,000/- (Fifteen Lakhs only) is not established by positive 
evidence. 

12. We have considered the entire evidence to examine the 
correctness of the findings recorded by the High Court and we 
fail to persuade ourselves to reach to any other conclusion 
than the one reached by the High Court holding that the 
plaintiff has proved payment of advance sale consideration of 
Rs. 3,00,000/- (Three Lakhs only) at the time of execution of 
the agreement. 
 
13. In view of the foregoing, we find no substance in this 
appeal which deserves to be and is hereby dismissed. 

14. The parties shall bear their own costs. 

 …………………………………….. J. 

 (VIKRAM NATH)...………………………………. J. 

 (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
July 08, 2024.