IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

SHIV PRATAP SINGH RANA 

 APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ANR. 
 RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
UJJAL BHUYAN, J. 

This criminal appeal by special leave is directed 
against the judgment and order dated 03.10.2019 passed by 
the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Gwalior (the ‘High 
Court’ hereinafter) dismissing Criminal Revision No. 2288 of 
2019 filed by the appellant. The aforesaid criminal revision 
petition was filed by the appellant before the High Court 
assailing the order dated 24.04.2019 passed by the Xth 
Additional Sessions Judge, Gwalior (‘Sessions Judge’ 
hereinafter) in Sessions Trial No. 505 of 2018 whereby 
charges under Section 376(2)(n) and 506 of the Indian Penal 

Code, 1860 (IPC) were framed against the appellant and the 
application for discharge filed by the appellant was rejected. 
2. 
 
The case of the prosecution is that the prosecutrix 
had lodged a first information report (FIR) on 06.09.2018 
alleging that in the year 2016, the accused (appellant herein) 
used to show photographs of hers and telling her to come to 
Gwalior with him otherwise her photographs would be 
uploaded on Whatsapp. It was due to fear that she came to 
Gwalior alongwith the appellant by train from Dabra. One boy 
from Anupam Nagar came to the railway station to receive 
her. On his motorbike, the prosecutrix and the appellant went 
to Anupam Nagar city centre where the appellant was living in 
rented premises. There, the appellant forcefully committed 
wrongful act on her. Thereafter, the appellant forcefully took 
the signature of the prosecutrix on an affidavit. It was 
mentioned in the affidavit that the prosecutrix would live with 
the appellant for life. After that she came to Dabra with the 
appellant and went home. Appellant used to tell her again and 
again about having a relationship. He told her that he would 

marry her after the marriage of his brother. But after the 
marriage of his brother when the prosecutrix broached the 
topic of marriage, the appellant told her that his brother had 
received Rs. 15 lakhs in marriage; if her family would give Rs. 
15 lakhs then only he would marry her, otherwise not. Her 
parents went to the residence of the appellant with a marriage 
proposal but his family members turned out the proposal. In 
the FIR, it was alleged that the appellant while having 
relationship with the prosecutrix took money from her on 
various occasions totalling Rs. 90,000/-; besides jewellery 
were also taken. When the appellant started threatening the 
prosecutrix, she filed the FIR before the Vishwavidhyalaya 
Police Station, District Gwalior. 
3. 
 
The FIR was registered as Crime No. 401 of 2018 
under Sections 376 and 506 IPC. 
4. 
 
Police carried out the investigation during the 
course of which statement of the prosecutrix under Section 
161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.P.C.) was 
recorded on 11.09.2018. That apart, statement of the 

prosecutrix was also recorded on 12.09.2018 under Section 
164 Cr.P.C. On completion of the investigation, chargesheet 
was filed against the appellant under Sections 376 and 506 of 
IPC. 
5. 
 
Appellant filed an application under Section 227 
Cr.P.C. before the Sessions Judge seeking his discharge. By 
the order dated 24.04.2019, the Sessions Judge took the view 
that prima-facie the chargesheet discloses sufficient evidence 
to frame charge against the appellant. In such circumstances, 
the accused (appellant) could not be discharged from the trial 
for the offences under Sections 376 and 506 of IPC. 
Consequently, the application filed by the appellant under 
Section 227 Cr.P.C. was dismissed. 
6. 
 
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the Sessions 
Judge, appellant filed a criminal revision petition under 
Section 397 Cr.P.C. The said petition was registered as. By the judgment and 
order dated 03.10.2019, the High Court took the view that 
trial needs to be conducted for unearthing the truth and that 

no case for interference was made out. Consequently, the 
criminal revision petition was dismissed. 
7. 
 
Assailing the aforesaid decision of the High Court, 
appellant preferred, 
this Court issued notice and passed an interim order staying 
further proceedings in Sessions Trial No. 505 of 2018 pending 
before the Sessions Judge. Subsequently by order dated 
12.05.2023, 
this 
Court 
granted 
leave 
and 
directed 
continuance of the interim order during the pendency of the 
criminal appeal, which came to be registered as Criminal 
Appeal No. 1552 of 2023. 
8. 
 
Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the 
relationship between the appellant and the prosecutrix was 
purely consensual. Therefore, there is no question of any 
offence committed by the appellant either under Section 376 
IPC or under Section 506 IPC. A bare reading of the FIR and 
the chargesheet would go to show that there is no criminal 
element involved in the case. Therefore, it would be contrary 

to the principles of justice if the appellant is made to suffer 
the ordeal of a long-drawn criminal trial and in the process 
suffer ignominy which would have irreparable consequences. 
This aspect of the matter was overlooked by the Sessions 
Judge as well as by the High Court. He, therefore, seeks 
quashing of the orders passed by the Sessions Judge and the 
High Court and further to quash the proceedings in Sessions 
Trial No. 505 of 2018 pending before the Sessions Judge. 
9. 
 
Learned counsel for respondent No. 1 on the other 
hand submits that on the information of the prosecutrix, 
police registered FIR under Sections 376 and 506 IPC against 
the accused (appellant). Police investigated the case and 
collected materials. Having considered the medical records, 
statement of the prosecutrix under Section 164 Cr.P.C. and 
other corroborating materials, a report under Section 173 
Cr.P.C. was filed to prosecute the accused (appellant) under 
the aforesaid provisions of IPC. 
9.1. 
Learned counsel further submitted that there were 
sufficient materials for the learned Sessions Judge to frame 

charges against the appellant. It is trite law that at the stage 
of framing charge, a full-fledged trial is not required. The 
court is required to take a prima-facie view based on the 
materials available on record as to whether the case is fit to 
stand trial. Trial court found sufficient material to frame 
charge against the appellant. The High Court while exercising 
revisional jurisdiction, examined the case in detail and found 
no merit in the application of the appellant. Appellant had 
committed rape on the prosecutrix on the false promise of 
marriage and threatening to make public her photographs. 
Thus, it is a fit case which comes within the ambit of the 
definition of rape under Section 375 IPC. Inducing a woman 
to have a sexual relationship on the basis of false promise of 
marriage would be rape within the meaning of Section 375 
IPC. At this stage, the prosecution case is supported by the 
statement of the prosecutrix recorded under Section 164 
Cr.PC. and other corroborating material. It is not a case where 
the trial should be nipped in the bud. At least a triable case is 
made out where the appellant would have all the opportunity 

to defend himself to prove his innocence. He, therefore, 
submits that no case is made out for interference by this 
Court in the impugned order of the High Court and the appeal 
is liable to be dismissed. 
10. 
After narrating the factual matrix, learned counsel 
for respondent No. 2 (prosecutrix) submits that appellant took 
advantage of the friendly nature of the prosecutrix in the 
context of appellant being the friend of her younger brother. 
Taking advantage of her vulnerability, appellant took private 
photographs of hers when she was changing her clothes after 
taking bath near a temple compound which they had visited 
together. Appellant later on showed such pictures to the 
prosecutrix and blackmailed her to indulge in a physical 
relationship with him. He threatened her that if she refused 
his demand, he would upload her private pictures on social 
media and also show them to her father. It is under such 
circumstances that the prosecutrix travelled with the 
appellant to Gwalior where he forced himself upon her in his 
tenanted premises. He asserts that compelling the prosecutrix 

to have intercourse with the appellant under the fear that he 
would leak her photographs would be in essence a consent 
vitiated by coercion. Such a consent is no consent at all. It is 
a clear case which would come within the ambit of the 
definition of rape. 
10.1. 
To pacify the prosecutrix and to keep on exploiting 
her physically and mentally, appellant swore an affidavit on 
28.09.2016 stating therein that he loved the prosecutrix and 
would take care of her under all circumstances. According to 
learned counsel, the physical relationship between the two 
was on the basis of consent of the prosecutrix which was 
obtained under ‘misconception of fact’ on the false promise of 
marriage. Intention of the appellant was quite clear. He 
deceived the prosecutrix on the pretext of marriage to have 
and maintain a physical relationship. 
10.2. 
He submitted that appellant had obtained a stamp 
paper dated 07.07.2017 wherein he expressed his desire to 
marry the prosecutrix. According to learned counsel for 
respondent No. 2 i.e. the prosecutrix, that was done with the 

malafide intention of procuring financial support for his 
‘purported’ business investment from her because of which 
respondent No. 2 had handed over various articles to the 
appellant amounting to Rs. 90,000/-. 
10.3. 
Though respondent No. 2 continuously requested 
the appellant to solemnize their marriage but on one pretext 
or the other, the appellant evaded the same. At the same time 
he continued to physically exploit her. Initially, he had 
assured the prosecutrix that he would marry her after the 
marriage of his elder brother. But his malafide intention 
became obvious when he raised a demand of Rs. 15 lakhs 
saying that such amount was received by his elder brother in 
marriage. 
10.4. 
In the course of his submissions, learned counsel 
also relied upon Section 90 IPC to buttress the point that 
consent of the prosecutrix was obtained on a ‘misconception 
of fact’. 
11. 
In response to a query of the Court, learned 
counsel for the State, i.e., respondent No. 1 submitted on 

instructions that neither the photographs nor the mobile 
phone of the appellant have been seized. He also admits that 
the affidavit dated 28.09.2016 and the stamp paper dated 
07.07.2017 have also not been seized. No jewellery as alleged 
by the prosecutrix to have been given to the appellant by her 
has been recovered or seized from the appellant. 
12. 
Submissions made by learned counsel for the 
parties have received the due consideration of the Court. 
13. 
At the outset, let us examine the statement of the 
prosecutrix made before the police. In her statement under 
Section 161 Cr.P.C., the prosecutrix stated that appellant was 
not only a friend of her younger brother Mukul Rana but also 
a distant brother of her brother-in-law Shailendra Rana. 
Appellant used to run a competition coaching centre at 
Dabra, which the prosecutrix used to attend alongwith her 
brother Mukul during the years 2015 and 2016.On the 
recommendation of the appellant, prosecutrix got a job of 
receptionist in a company. In the year 2016, appellant 
disclosed his affection towards the prosecutrix which was 

turned down by her on the ground that he was not only 
younger to her but also friend of her younger brother Mukul. 
However, they became friends. She stated that on one Monday 
in the month of Savan of that year, appellant took her to a 
forest outside Kitore village ahead of Gijorra where there was 
a temple of Doodhkho Shankar Ji. There she took bath in the 
waterfall. Later on, appellant showed her the photographs 
which he had taken while she was changing her clothes in the 
temple. Though the prosecutrix told the appellant to delete 
the photographs, he did not do so. Thereafter, he started 
blackmailing her by showing her the photographs because of 
which the prosecutrix stated that she had left the coaching 
centre and the job. Notwithstanding the same, appellant 
continued to threaten her by saying that the photographs 
would be made viral and that those would be shown to her 
father. It was because of such threatening that she went with 
the appellant by train from Dabra to Gwalior. On reaching 
Gwalior, he took her to one place at Anoopam Nagar where he 
forcefully made physical relationship with her. The place was 

taken on rent by a friend of the appellant Nitin Nagariya. On 
28.09.2016, appellant obtained a stamp paper where he put 
his as well as the signature of the prosecutrix. It was 
mentioned in the stamp paper that he would support her 
throughout her life. According to the prosecutrix, she told the 
appellant many a times to marry her but on one pretext or the 
other, he evaded the proposal. Later on, he said that he would 
marry her after the marriage of his brother Jaideep. 
Prosecutrix stated that she had given the appellant money on 
several 
occasions 
after 
withdrawing 
from 
bank. 
On 
16.06.2017, prosecutrix gave the appellant a cheque of Rs. 
10,000/- of her mother. Appellant also stated that he had left 
the coaching centre and wanted to do business of his own and 
then his family members would be ready for marriage. On 
07.07.2018, appellant had given the prosecutrix one e-stamp 
in his name wherein it was mentioned that he would marry 
her and on his assurance on 22.11.2017, prosecutrix took the 
pendant of the mangalsootra of her sister and gave it to the 
appellant. She went with the appellant to the bank where he 

mortgaged the pendant of the mangalsootra and took loan of 
Rs. 8,000/-. She further helped him in obtaining loan of Rs. 
5,000/-. Later on, when she broached the topic of marriage 
since marriage of his brother had taken place on 18.04.2018, 
appellant told the prosecutrix that his brother had received 
Rs. 15 lacs in marriage; therefore, if she paid Rs. 15 lacs, he 
would marry her. However, when her family members talked 
with the family members of the appellant at his house, they 
refused. Though in the meeting of relatives, appellant was 
ordered to return the jewellery and money to the prosecutrix 
and also to marry her, he refused to do so. It was thereafter 
that she lodged the FIR on 05.09.2018. 
14. 
Let us now examine the statement of the 
prosecutrix dated12.09.2018 made under Section 164 Cr.P.C. 
15. 
In her statement recorded under Section 164 
Cr.P.C., prosecutrix stated that the incident was of the year 
2016, in the month of Savan. However, as two years had 
elapsed, she could not remember the date. She used to go to 
coaching class along with the appellant, who was a distant 

brother of her jijaji. The coaching class used to be held in the 
house of cousin brother of the appellant. One day, the 
appellant told the prosecutrix that a post of receptionist was 
vacant in the office in which she could work. Thereafter, he 
expressed his affection towards her which she turned down 
on the ground that the appellant was the friend of her 
younger brother and was also younger to her. After a few 
days, in the month of Savan, appellant took the prosecutrix to 
a temple near his village where she took bath under a water 
fall. Appellant took her photographs while prosecutrix was 
bathing. After 5/6 days, when she went to the coaching class, 
appellant showed her the photographs. He also expressed his 
desire of marrying her but the prosecutrix refused such 
proposal of the appellant. At that time, the appellant told her 
that if she continued to refuse his proposal, he would send 
the photographs to her father. 
15.1. 
After a few days, appellant took her to Anupam 
Nagar of Gwalior, where his friend Nitin was residing in a 
rented premise. There the appellant forced himself upon the 

prosecutrix and when she refused, then he made physical 
relation with her without her consent. On her request to 
delete the photographs, the appellant told her that he would 
do so only if she agreed to marry him. Thereafter, he dropped 
the prosecutrix at Dabra and continued with the physical 
relationship with her. On 28.09.2016, appellant gave a stamp 
paper to the prosecutrix stating that he would support her 
throughout her life. On 16.06.2017, appellant demanded 
money from the prosecutrix, pursuant to which she gave him 
a cheque of her mother amounting to Rs.10,000/-. Again on 
07.07.2017, appellant gave a stamp paper to the prosecutrix 
seeking her consent for marriage. Next when he asked for 
more money, prosecutrix gave him jewellery of her mother and 
sister as she was not having any money. Appellant mortgaged 
the jewellery in a bank against which he withdrew some 
money. Thereafter, she stated that when she withdrew money 
from the bank to meet the demands of the appellant, her 
family members came to know about the relationship. 

15.2. 
Appellant told her before the marriage of his elder 
brother in April, 2018, that her family members should not 
come to his place till the marriage of his brother was over. 
After the marriage was over, he told her that his brother had 
received Rs.15 lacs in marriage and asked her whether her 
family members would be in a position to furnish such an 
amount. After the marriage of his brother, family members of 
the prosecutrix went to the house of the appellant in the 
month of June, 2018 but found his family members to be 
evasive on the question of marriage. Though people of the 
community told the appellant and his family members to 
return the jewellery and also to marry the prosecutrix, they 
did not do so. Thereafter, appellant switched off his mobile 
phone and disappeared from Dabra. Brother of the appellant 
told the prosecutrix that if she complained before the police, 
she would be killed and that her brother would be implicated 
in a false case. It was thereafter that she lodged the FIR on 
05.09.2018. 

16. 
From a perusal and comparison of the two 
statements of the prosecutrix, one before the police under 
Section 161 Cr.P.C. and the other under Section 164 Cr.P.C., 
that too recorded within a span of 24 hours, what is 
noticeable is that not only are the statements contradictory in 
themselves, those are contradictory to each other as well. The 
fact that the appellant had lodged the FIR two years after the 
alleged incident is itself suggestive of the consensual nature of 
the relationship which had gone sour. It is inconceivable that 
the prosecutrix, who was about 22 years of age at the time of 
the alleged incident, would accompany the appellant to a 
temple if she was being threatened by the appellant. She was 
a major and, therefore, fully conscious of the consequences of 
her own actions. It is not the case of the prosecutrix that the 
appellant had forced her to have bath under the waterfall and 
thereafter took her photographs. The act of the prosecutrix 
having bath under the waterfall and changing her clothes 
thereafter in the company of the appellant virtually rules out 
any threat or coercion by the appellant on the prosecurtix. 

17. 
In the course of the hearing, the Bench had put a 
pointed query to learned counsel for the State as to whether 
the mobile phone of the appellant or the photographs 
allegedly taken by the appellant of the prosecutrix while she 
was bathing and changing clothes were recovered to which 
the reply on instructions was that those were neither 
recovered nor seized. Further, the stamp paper dated 
28.09.2016 as well as the cheque dated 16.06.2017 have not 
been seized. The jewellery allegedly given by the prosecutrix to 
the appellant has also not been seized. The stamp paper 
dated 07.07.2017 has not been seized. In the absence of such 
materials, it would be virtually impossible for the prosecution 
to prove the charges of rape and intimidation against the 
appellant. 
18. 
We have carefully gone through the definition of 
rape provided under Section 375 IPC. We have also gone 
through the provisions of Section 376(2)(n) IPC, which deals 
with the offence of rape committed repeatedly on the same 
woman. Section 375 IPC defines ‘rape’ by a man if he does 

any of the acts in terms of clauses (a) to (d) under the seven 
descriptions 
mentioned 
therein. 
As 
per 
the 
second 
description, a man commits rape if he does any of the acts as 
mentioned in clauses (a) to (d) without the consent of the 
woman. Consent has been defined in Explanation 2 to mean 
an unequivocal voluntary agreement when the woman by 
words, gestures or any form of verbal or non-verbal 
communication, communicates willingness to participate in 
the specific sexual act. However, the proviso thereto clarifies 
that a woman who does not physically resist to the act of 
penetration shall not by the reason only of that fact, be 
regarded as consenting to the sexual activity. 
19. 
Having regard to the above and in the overall 
conspectus of the case, we are of the view that the physical 
relationship between the prosecutrix and the appellant cannot 
be said to be against her will and without her consent. On the 
basis of the available materials, no case of rape or of criminal 
intimidation is made out. 

20. 
Learned counsel for the respondents had placed 
considerable reliance on the provisions of Section 90 IPC, 
particularly on the expression “under a misconception of 
fact”. Section 90 IPC reads thus: 
“90. Consent known to be given under fear or 
misconception.— 
A consent is not such a consent as it intended by 
any section of this Code, if the consent is given by a 
person under fear of injury, or under a misconception 
of fact, and if the person doing the act knows, or has 
reason to believe, that the consent was given in 
consequence of such fear or misconception; or 
Consent of insane person.— if the consent is given 
by a person who, from unsoundness of mind, or 
intoxication, is unable to understand the nature and 
consequence of that to which he gives his consent; or 
Consent of child.— unless the contrary appears from 
the context, if the consent is given by a person who 
is under twelve years of age.” 
 
21. 
Section 90 IPC says that a consent is not such a 
consent as it is intended by any section of IPC, if the consent 
is given by a person under the fear of injury or under a 
misconception of fact. 
22. 
In Dr. Dhruvaram Murlidhar Sonar vs. State of 
Maharashtra, (2019), this Court after examining 
Section 90 of the IPC held as follows: 

“Thus, section 90 though does not define 
“consent”, 
but 
describes 
what 
is 
not 
“consent”. Consent may be express or 
implied, coerced or misguided, obtained 
willingly or through deceit. If the consent is 
given 
by 
the 
complainant 
under 
misconception of fact, it is vitiated. Consent 
for the purpose of section 375 requires 
voluntary participation not only after the 
exercise 
of 
intelligence 
based 
on 
the 
knowledge of the significance and moral 
quality of the act, but also after having fully 
exercised the choice between resistance and 
assent. Whether there was any consent or 
not is to be ascertained only on a careful 
study of all relevant circumstances.” 
 
23. 
This Court also examined the interplay between 
Section 375 IPC and Section 90 IPC in the context of consent 
in the case of Pramod Suryabhan Pawar Vs. State of 
Maharashtra, (2019), and held that consent with 
respect to Section 375 IPC involves an active understanding 
of the circumstances, actions and consequences of the 
proposed act. An individual who makes a reasoned choice to 
act after evaluating various alternative actions (or inaction) 
as well as the various possible consequences flowing from 
such action (or inaction), consents to such action. After 
deliberating upon the various case laws, this Court summed 
up the legal position as under: 
“To summarise the legal position that 
emerges from the above cases, the “consent” 
of a woman with respect to Section 375 

must involve an active and reasoned 
deliberation towards the proposed act. To 
establish 
whether 
the 
“consent” 
was 
vitiated by a “misconception of fact” arising 
out of a promise to marry, two propositions 
must 
be 
established. 
The 
promise 
of 
marriage must have been a false promise, 
given in bad faith and with no intention of 
being adhered to at the time it was given. 
The 
false 
promise 
itself 
must 
be 
of 
immediate relevance, or bear a direct nexus 
to the woman’s decision to engage in the 
sexual act.” 
 
24. 
Learned counsel for respondents had relied heavily 
on the expression “misconception of fact”. However, according 
to us, there is no misconception of fact here. Right from the 
inception, it is the case of the prosecution that while the 
appellant was insisting on having a relationship with the 
prosecutrix, the later had turned down the same on the 
ground that appellant was the friend of her younger brother 
and a distant relative of her jijaji. That apart, according to the 
prosecutrix, the appellant was younger to her. Nonetheless, 
the prosecutrix had accompanied the appellant to a temple, 
where she had voluntarily taken bath under a waterfall. Her 
allegation 
that 
appellant 
had 
surreptitiously 
taken 

photographs of her while she was bathing and later on 
changing clothes and was blackmailing her with such 
photographs remain unfounded in the absence of seizure of 
such photographs or the mobile phone on which such 
photographs were taken by the appellant. If, indeed, she was 
under some kind of threat from the appellant, it defies any 
logic, when the prosecutrix accompanied the appellant to 
Gwalior from Dabra, a journey which they had made together 
by train. On reaching Gwalior, she accompanied the appellant 
on a scooter to a rented premises at Anupam Nagar, where 
she alleged that appellant had forced himself upon her. But 
she did not raise any alarm or hue and cry at any point of 
time. Rather, she returned back to Dabra alongwith the 
appellant. The relationship did not terminate there. It 
continued even thereafter. It is the case of the prosecutrix 
herself that at one point of time the family members of the two 
had met to discuss about their marriage but nothing final 
could be reached regarding their marriage. It was only 
thereafter that the FIR was lodged. As already pointed out 

above, neither the affidavit nor stamp papers have been 
recovered or seized by the police; so also the jewellery. The 
alleged cheque of the prosecutrix’s mother given to the 
appellant or the bank statement to indicate transfer of such 
money have not been gathered by the police. In the absence of 
such materials, the entire sub-stratum of the prosecutrix’s 
case collapses. Thus, there is hardly any possibility of 
conviction of the appellant. As a matter of fact, it is not even a 
case which can stand trial. It appears to be a case of a 
consensual relationship which had gone sour leading to 
lodging of FIR. In the circumstances, Court is of the view that 
compelling the appellant to face the criminal trial on these 
materials would be nothing but an abuse of the process of the 
Court, result of the trial being a foregone conclusion. 
25. 
From the factual matrix of the case, the following 
relevant features can be culled out: 
(i) the relationship between the appellant and the 
prosecutrix was of a consensual nature; 
(ii) the parties were in a relationship for a period of 
almost two years; and 

(iii) though there were talks between the parties and 
their family members regarding marriage, the same 
did not fructify leading to lodging of FIR. 
26. 
That being the position and having regard to the 
facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the view that it 
would be in the interest of justice if the proceedings are 
terminated at this stage itself. Consequently, impugned order 
of the High Court dated 03.10.2019 and the order of the 
Sessions Judge dated 24.04.2019 are hereby set aside and 
quashed. 
27. 
Resultantly, proceedings in Sessions Trial No. 
505/2018, pending before the 10th Additional Sessions Judge, 
Gwalior, are hereby quashed. 
28. 
Consequently, the appeal is allowed....………………………………J 
 [ABHAY S. OKA] 

…………………………………J. 
 [UJJAL BHUYAN]