IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

SURESH DATTU BHOJANE & ANR. 
 
 …APPELLANTS 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA 

 …RESPONDENT 
 
With 

SATISH RAMA BHOJANE 

 …APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA 

 …RESPONDENT 

JUDGMENT 
 
PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
Counsel for the parties were heard. 
2. 
Under challenge in the present criminal appeals is the judgment 
and order dated 18.10.2010 of High Court of Judicature at 
Bombay whereby it has dismissed the criminal appeals of 
appellants confirming the judgment and order of the Trial Court 

dated 21.02.2002 convicting accused Nos. 1-6 including the 
present appellants (i.e. A-3, A-5 & A-6) for offences punishable 
under Sections 147, 148, 302 r/w 149 and 307 r/w 149 of IPC 
and at the same time acquitting A-7 and A-8. 
3. 
The Trial Court vide judgment and order dated 21.02.2002 
acquitted accused Nos. 7 & 8, convicted the remaining accused 
Nos. 1-6 and sentenced them for an offence under Section 302 
r/w 149 of IPC with rigorous imprisonment for life and fine of 
Rs. 100/- and in default, to suffer further imprisonment for 
period of 1 week. 
4. 
There are two separate appeals impugned 
judgment and order dated 18.10.2010 which have been clubbed 
together vide order of this Court dated 22.04.2013. Criminal 
Appeal No. 412/2012 has been filed by accused Nos. 5 & 6 and 
 has been filed by accused No. 3. 
Therefore, in the present appeals, we are concerned only with 
conviction of accused No. 3 (Satish Rama Bhojane), accused No. 
5 (Suresh Dattu Bhojane) and accused No. 6 (Anna nil 
Maruti Bhojane). 

5. 
The allegations in the present appeals relate to a group assault 
conducted by all accused persons with deadly weapons which 
resulted in the death of one Mohan Mungase and injuries to his 
brother Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5) and one Maruti Nakate 
(PW-7). 
6. 
The Trial Court records reveal that the prosecution case is, that 
accused Nos. 2 and 3 are sons of Mama Bhojane and his wife 
Chhaya (accused no. 8). Mama Bhojane was owner of one 
country liquor shop at village Borale. He had entrusted the 
country liquor shop to the accused No. 1. Later on, he entrusted 
the country liquor shop to deceased Mohan Mungase and his 
brother Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5) for the purpose of running 
it. Hence, accused No.1 got annoyed over such entrustment of 
the shop to deceased and his brother Nandkumar Mungase 
(PW-5). 
7. 
On 06.02.1999 at about 7:00 pm, the deceased Mohan 
Mungase, his cousin Balu Mungase (PW-8), Anil Dhanve and 
Yuvraj Mungase were sitting at shop of Shiva Chougule situated 
at Village Borale. At that time accused Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 

came there and abused the deceased Mohan Mungase and 
extended death threats. Thereafter, they went to the house of 
Mama Bhojane. 
8. 
The deceased Mohan Mungase in order to apprise Mama 
Bhojane about the incident also went to his house along with 
Balu Mungase, Anil Dhanve and Yuvraj Mungase. When he 
entered the house, he found that Mama Bhojane was not there 
and instead his wife (A-8) was there along with all the accused. 
9. 
At that time, a telephonic information was received by 
Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5) at his residence that his brother 
deceased Mohan Mungase has picked up some quarrel at the 
house of Mama Bhojane. On receiving the said information, 
Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5) arrived at the house of Mama 
Bhojane and he was followed by his sister Savita (PW-4). It is 
pertinent to note here that Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5) was 
married on 04.02.1999 i.e. 2 days earlier to the incident and, 
therefore, his sister had come to attend the marriage and was 
staying with them. 

10. Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5), upon reaching the house of Mama 
Bhojane, saw his brother Mohan Mungase inside the house 
along with all the 8 accused persons. Accused Nos. 1-4 were 
armed with swords whereas accused No.7 had a scythe in his 
hand. The accused No. 8 had chilli powder. Accused Nos. 1-8 
together had attacked Mohan Mungase by swords and when he 
tried to intervene, he too was assaulted with the swords but was 
intervened by her sister Savita (PW-4) and was rescued. At that 
very point of time, Maruti Nakate (PW-7) had also come to the 
house and was also assaulted. 
11. In the meantime, Anil Dhanve who had accompanied Mohan 
Mungase to the house of Mama Bhojane, went to the police 
outpost where police constable Mahadeo Metkari (PW-9) and 
police constable Malkotgi were present. Upon being informed of 
the quarrel, both of them proceeded to the house of Mama 
Bhojane. When the police constables reached there, Savita 
(PW-4) was fetching the injured Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5) 
and Maruti Nakate (PW-7) out of the house. The accused Nos. 2 
and 3, armed with swords, were still following the injured but 
finding that the police have arrived, they closed the door from 

inside. Thereafter, all the accused escaped the place of incident 
through the roof of the house. 
12. Police constable Mahadeo (PW-9) took the injured Nandkumar 
Mungase (PW-5) and Maruti Nakate (PW-7) to the Mangalwedha 
Police Station. Thereafter, they were sent to the Rural Hospital, 
Mangalwedha from where they were referred to the Civil 
Hospital, Solapur. Thereafter, Savita (PW-4) lodged the report at 
2:15 am on the same night at Mangalwedha Police station. 
Crime No. 10/99 under section 302 and 307 r/w 34 of the IPC 
and under Section 135 of the Bombay Police Act was registered 
on the basis of her report. 
13. Charges (Exhibit 2) under Sections 148, 302 r/w. 149, 307 r/w. 
149 of l.P.C. and Section 135 of the Bombay Police Act were 
framed on 23.02.2000. The accused did not plead guilty to the 
charges. 
14. In all there were eight accused persons. They were as followed: 
A-1 - 
Dhondappa 
A-2 - 
Sachin 
A-3 - 
Satish 

A-4 - 
Manohar 
A-5 - 
Suresh 
A-6 - 
Anna Bhojane 
A-7 - 
Kondabai Nakate 
A-8 - 
Chaya Bhojane 
15. It is pertinent to note that A-7 and A-8 were acquitted by the 
Trial Court and there was no appeal filed against their acquittal 
and as such the conviction remained as against A-1 to A-6. A-1 
had died during the pendency of the appeal in the High Court 
and his appeal stood abated. Thus, leaving A-2 to A-6 but in 
appeals we are only concerned with three of them that is A-3, 
A-5 & A-6. 
16. The learned Trial Court held that the prosecution has succeeded 
in establishing that the appellant accused Nos. 1-6, armed with 
deadly weapons, had formed an unlawful assembly with 
common object to commit murder of the deceased Mohan 
Mungase and had injured two others. 
17. The conviction is challenged herein mainly on the ground that 
there was no active participation of the appellants i.e., A-5 & 

A-6 visible from evidence on record so as to form a common 
object which would warrant application of Section 149 of IPC. 
18. The prosecution of the appellants hinges primarily on the 
evidence of the informant, Savita (PW-4), sister of the deceased, 
Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5), brother of the deceased and that 
of the Constable Mahadeo (PW-9). 
19. Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5) in his statement has clearly 
described that he and the deceased Mohan Mungase were 
looking after the Country Liquor Shop of Mama Bhojane for the 
last 8 to 9 months before the date of incident. Earlier, the said 
shop was managed by one of the accused Dhondappa (A-1). But 
as the management was entrusted to him and his brother, he 
got annoyed and used to abuse them. On the date of incident at 
about 8.15 pm to 8.30 pm, he had received a telephonic call 
which was picked up by his mother that there is a quarrel in 
the house of Mama Bhojane. Therefore, he went running to the 
said house and his sister Savita (PW-4) followed him. On 
reaching the house he saw the accused Dhondappa (A-1), 
Sachin (A-2), Satish (A-3) and Manohar (A-4), who were all 

armed with swords, beating his brother Mohan Mungase. He 
heard Dhondappa shouting not to leave Mohan Mungase and to 
kill him. He then saw Dhondappa dealing a blow of the sword 
on the head of his brother as a result of which he fell down. 
Then the accused Sachin (A-2), Satish (A-3) and Manohar (A-4) 
assaulted him with swords. He and his sister kept on shouting 
not to beat him but in vain. The accused Dhondappa (A-1) 
rather gave a sword blow to him on his right hand, the other 
accused Sachin (A-2) and Satish (A-3) hit him on the right 
shoulder and below the left side of the throat. Before they could 
give any other blow to him, his sister Savita (PW-4) intervened 
and at the same time one of his friends Maruti Nakate (PW-7) 
also arrived. A sword blow was also given on the back of Maruti 
Nakate (PW-7), then his sister Savita (PW-4) pushed him and 
Maruti Nakate outside the house. Meanwhile, somebody 
informed that the police had arrived. The accused persons on 
hearing this closed the door of the house and escaped. The 
police sent us to the Police Station from where we were referred 
to the Government hospital Mangalwedha and finally to the Civil 
Hospital Sholapur. 

20. There are no material contradictions in the testimony of the 
aforesaid Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5) and his statement could 
not be shaken even in the cross-examination. No doubt, he has 
not assigned any specific role to A-5 and A-6, nonetheless, he 
had repeatedly mentioned that 7 accused persons were present 
at the scene of the crime which means there were three other 
persons in addition to A-1 to A-4 who were armed with swords. 
21. The informant Savita (PW-4) in her statement clearly mentioned 
that though she was married outside the village, she had come 
to the Village Borale to take care of her sick mother and for the 
marriage of her brother Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5). Her 
brother Mohan Mungase and Nandkumar Mungase used to run 
Country Liquor Shop. On the date of the incident, while she was 
cooking in the house, a telephonic call was received by her 
mother which was handed over to his brother Nandkumar 
Mungase (PW-5) who after attending the call immediately left for 
the house of Mama Bhojane where her other brother Mohan 
Mungase has picked up quarrel with some persons. She 
followed his brother Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5) and came to 
the house of Mama Bhojane. There was electric light in the 

house and she saw the accused Dhondappa (A-1), Sachin (A-2), 
Satish (A-3), Manohar (A-4), Anna Bhojane (A-6) Kondabai 
Nakate (A-7) and the wife of Mama Bhojane i.e. Chaya Bhojane 
(A-8). The accused Kondabai Nakate (A-7) was having scythe 
whereas others were armed with swords. The accused Chaya 
Bhonaje (A-8) was having chilli powder. She saw all the accused 
assaulting Mohan Mungase with swords. She and her brother 
Nandkumar Mungase kept on shouting not to assault him but 
Satish (A-3) kept on assaulting her brother with the sword, even 
Maruti Nakate (PW-7) who came and tried to intervene was not 
spared and was hit in the back. She saw the accused climbing 
staircase running out from the backside of the house. The 
injured were taken to the Police Station and then to hospital in 
a jeep and she lodged the report at the Police Station. Her 
evidence could not be dislodged through cross-examination, 
rather it supported the prosecution version as also the 
statement of his brother Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5). 
22. The police constable Mahadeo (PW-9) accompanied by constable 
Malkotgi reached the place of occurrence of the crime on 
receiving information of the quarrel from one Anil Dhanve of the 

Village Borale. When he reached, there was a crowd opposite to 
the house. He saw two men and a woman coming out of the 
house. The accused Sachin (A-2) and Satish (A-3) were at the 
door of the house, ready to assault these two men who on seeing 
the police closed the door. He saw Mohan Mungase lying in the 
pool of blood inside the house through the gap between the two 
doors. He saw accused Dhondappa (A-1), Sachin (A-2), Satish 
(A-3) and Manohar (A-4) inside the house armed with swords 
and Kondabai (A-7) armed with scythe. Then he saw the 
accused running away by jumping over roof of the house. 
Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5) had sustained bleeding injuries on 
his right hand and the neck. Maruti Nakate (PW-7) was also 
injured in the back. Both the injured were taken to hospital by 
the people. He i.e. constable Mahadeo (PW-9) and constable 
Malkotgi did not go with them to the hospital but went to the 
police out post which is ½ km. away from the place of crime. 
23. A reading of the statement of Constable Mahadeo (PW-9) also 
reveals the same story as narrated by Nandkumar Mungase 
(PW-5) and Savita (PW-4). There appears to be no direct conflict 
between his statement and that of other two material witnesses. 

24. One another eye-witness Balu Mungase (PW-8) though had 
turned hostile, but has repeated the same story that the 
accused persons were armed with swords and that Savita (PW-
4) took Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5) and Maruti Nakate (PW-7) 
outside the house. Both of them had sustained injuries; 
Nandkumar Mungase on his hand and neck and Maruti Nakate 
on his back. 
25. In view of the aforesaid testimony of the eye-witnesses, the 
courts below have rightly held that the deceased Mohan 
Mungase was killed by the accused persons on the fateful day 
in the house of Mama Bhojane. 
26. The only point which arises for consideration is whether in the 
facts and circumstances of the case, the accused A-5 and A-6 
could also be convicted as they were not alleged to have been 
armed with any weapon and have not been assigned any specific 
role. 
27. The aforesaid accused persons may not be armed and may not 
have been assigned any specific role but nonetheless their 
presence at the scene of the crime along with other accused 

persons is duly established. They were held to be part of the 
unlawful assembly with common object. The evidence of 
Nandkumar Mungase (PW-5) proves the presence of Suresh (A-
5) and Anna (A-6). He has also stated that they were armed with 
swords at the material time. They were likely to strike him with 
sword but was timely saved by Savita (PW-4). The testimony of 
Savita (PW-4) also speaks about the armed presence of both the 
above accused and that they have gheraoed the deceased 
Mohan Mungase. The evidence of both the above eye-witnesses 
clearly proves that both of them were present at the scene of the 
crime and were having the common object to kill Mohan 
Mungase. All of them had joined together and have come to the 
house of Mama Bhojane after a quarrel was picked up with the 
deceased Mohan Mungase earlier to the incident at the shop of 
Shiva Chougale situate in the village. 
28. The accused A-5 and A-6 are undoubtedly part of unlawful 
assembly and were having the common object viz the killing of 
deceased Mohan Mungase and his brother Nandkumar 
Mungase. They had a clear motive for the above purpose as the 
country liquor shop which was settled in favour of A-1 was 

subsequently entrusted to the deceased and his brother by the 
owner Mama Bhojane. The accused A-5 and A-6 were present 
even at the time when the deceased was threatened with dire 
consequences while he was sitting on the platform of a shop just 
before the fatal incident. They both were present in the house of 
Mama Bhojane when the crime took place. The assembly of all 
the accused persons in the house of Mama Bhojane with the 
deadly weapons was apparently for the purposes of teaching a 
lesson to the deceased and his brother to settle the score arising 
from the entrustment of the country liquor shop. Therefore, 
both A-5 and A-6 were certainly part of the unlawful assembly 
having the common object and as such are guilty of the offence 
as envisaged under Section 149 of the IPC. 
29. The accused A-5 and A-6 have been charged under Section 149 
IPC. Therefore, their presence with the other co-accused 
amounted to an unlawful assembly which is sufficient for 
conviction, even if they may have not actively participated in the 
commission of the crime. It goes without saying that when the 

charge is under Section 149, the presence of the accused as part 
of the unlawful assembly itself is sufficient for conviction1. 
30. In view of the aforesaid testimony of the eye-witnesses and the 
concurrent findings of the facts recorded by the courts below 
about the presence of A-5 and A-6 at the scene of the crime as 
part of unlawful assembly and their active role in surrounding 
the deceased with the common intention to kill him, we are of 
the opinion that they cannot escape the conviction. 
31. Besides the above, there is hardly any scope for interference 
with the conviction and sentence of A-3. He has been assigned 
an active role in the crime. All the eyewitness has categorically 
stated about his presence and that he was armed with deadly 
weapon, i.e., sword and that he had also wielded blows not only 
upon the deceased but upon the injured persons. In the light of 
the aforesaid evidence, there is no flaw in his conviction. 
32. The submission that he has already undergone over 13 years of 
incarceration and therefore some leniency be shown and his 
sentence be reduced to that he had already undergone or 
 
1 Yunis alias Kariya vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 2003 SC 539 

alternatively he may be prematurely released has no substance. 
The minimum sentence for committing murder is life 
imprisonment and therefore is not liable to be reduced. In the 
event he has already undergone sufficiently long incarceration 
and is eligible for remission, he may or as a matter of fact even 
the others are at liberty to apply for remission for premature 
release in accordance with the policy of the State. In the event 
any such application or representation is made by any of the 
appellants, the same shall be considered most expeditiously by 
the authority concerned in accordance with law and in the light 
of the remission policy of the State in vogue. 
33. The appeals lack merit and are dismissed with the above 
observations. 
 
 ……………………………….. J. 
(ABHAY S. OKA) 

……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL)