IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
( SLP (CRL) No. 6006 OF 2019) 

THE STATE OF PUNJAB 

 …APPELLANT 
 
Versus 
 
PARTAP SINGH VERKA 
…RESPONDENT 

JUDGMENT 
 
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J. 
 
1. The State of Punjab is in appeal here against the judgment and 
order dated 02.08.2018, passed by the High Court of Punjab 
and Haryana setting aside the order dated 20.05.2017 of the 
Trial Court which had summoned respondent Pratap Singh 
Verka under Section 319 of Criminal Procedure Code 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘CrPC’) to face the trial for the 
offences under sections 7/13(2) of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as ‘P.C Act’). 

2. Brief facts of the case are that on 25.04.2016, an FIR u/s 7/13 
(2) of the P.C Act was lodged against Respondent- Dr. Partap 
Singh Verka and another co-accused i.e. ‘Vikas’, at Police 
Station Vigilance Bureau, Amritsar. It was disclosed in the FIR 
that the present respondent was working as a doctor in Guru 
Nanak Hospital at the relevant point of time when 
complainant-Gurwinder Singh sought treatment for his 
brother who was in jail. The complainant alleged that on 
20.04.2016 the Respondent took a bribe of Rs.10,000 from the 
complainant through the accused-Vikas for admitting the 
complainant’s brother in his hospital, as he was otherwise 
reluctant to treat a prisoner. Again on 24.04.2016, the 
respondent demanded another Rs.10,000/- to keep the 
patient in the hospital for further treatment and asked the 
complainant to give that amount to the other accused i.e. 
‘Vikas’ in two installments of Rs.5,000 each. The complainant, 
however, contacted the Vigilance Bureau instead and the 
officials of Vigilance laid a trap to catch the culprits. On 
25.04.2016, the accused-Vikas (ward attendant) was caught 
red-handed in the parking lot of the hospital receiving Rs.5000 

from the complainant. On the same day, the respondent was 
also arrested from his office. 
3. In May 2016, both the accused were released on bail. A 
chargesheet dated 22.12.2016 was later filed only against the 
other accused-Vikas. The present respondent was not named 
in the charge-sheet as an accused. 
4. However, during the course of the trial, the complainant-
Gurwinder Singh deposed as PW-1 on 12.05.2017 and in his 
examination-in-chief, he said that it was the present 
Respondent who had demanded the bribe and it was on his 
behalf that the other accused, Vikas had received the bribe 
amount. The trial Court deferred the hearing on the request of 
the Public Prosecutor of the State who then wanted to move 
an application under Section 319 of the CrPC for summoning 
the respondent as an accused. Consequently, an application 
was moved by the State on 18.05.2017 under Section 319 
CrPC, which was allowed on 20.05.2017 and Dr. Partap Singh 
Verka was summoned to face the trial. 
5. The accused Respondent challenged this order of the Trial 
Court before the High Court which has set aside the order of 

the Trial Court, as sanction under Section 19 of the P.C Act 
had not been taken. 
6. We have heard the counsel for the Appellant-State as well as 
for the Respondent and have also perused the material before 
us. 
7. There is no dispute on the fact that the Respondent is a ‘Public 
Servant’ as defined under Section 2(c) of the P.C Act. Section 
19 of the P.C Act puts a bar on Courts to take cognizance of 
an offence under Sections 7, 11, 13 and 15, without the 
previous 
sanction 
of 
the 
State 
Government, 
Central 
Government or the competent authority, as the case may be. 
The relevant portion of Section 19 of the P.C Act is as follows: 
“19. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution.—
(1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence 
punishable under sections 7, 11, 13 and 15 alleged 
to have been committed by a public servant, except 
with the previous sanction save as otherwise 
provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 
(1 of 2014)— 
(a) in the case of a person who is employed, or as 
the case may be, was at the time of commission of 
the alleged offence employed in connection with the 
affairs of the Union and is not removable from his 
office save by or with the sanction of the Central 
Government, of that Government; 
(b) in the case of a person who is employed, or as 
the case may be, was at the time of commission of 
the alleged offence employed in connection with the 
affairs of a State and is not removable from his 

office save by or with the sanction of the State 
Government, of that Government; 
(c) in the case of any other person, of the authority 
competent to remove him from his office.” 
 
8. While allowing the Section 319 (CrPC) application moved by 
the Public Prosecutor, the Trial Court did not consider the 
question of sanction. Before this Court the stand of the State 
of Punjab is that there was no need for this sanction as 
cognizance was taken in the Court itself under Section 319 of 
the CrPC. 
 In Dilawar Singh v. Parvinder Singh, [(2005) ], this Court while explaining the provisions of Section 19 
of the P.C Act and also the provisions under Section 319 
Cr.PC., said as under: 
“This section creates a complete bar on the power 
of the court to take cognizance of an offence 
punishable under Sections 7, 10, 11, 13 and 15 
alleged to have been committed by a public servant, 
except with the previous sanction of the competent 
authority enumerated in clauses (a) to (c) of this 
sub-section. If the sub-section is read as a whole, it 
will clearly show that the sanction for prosecution 
has to be granted with respect to a specific accused 
and only after sanction has been granted that the 
court gets the competence to take cognizance of an 
offence punishable under Sections 7, 10, 11, 13 
and 15 alleged to have been committed by such 
public servant…” (para 4) 

Further, in regard to the relation between Section 19 of P.C 
Act and the provisions of cognizance under CrPC, this Court 
laid down the law in the following words: 
“…….the provisions of Section 19 of the Act will 
have an overriding effect over the general 
provisions contained in Section 190 or 319 CrPC. A 
Special Judge while trying an offence under the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, cannot summon 
another person and proceed against him in the 
purported exercise of power under Section 319 
CrPC if no sanction has been granted by the 
appropriate authority for prosecution of such a 
person as the existence of a sanction is sine qua 
non for taking cognizance of the offence qua that 
person.” (para 8) 
 
9. In Paul Varghese v. State of Kerala, (2007), 
this Court again reiterated this provision and held: 
“As has been rightly held by the High Court in view 
of what has been stated in Dilawar Singh 
case [(2005): (2006) 1 SCC (Cri) 727] 
the trial court was not justified in holding that 
Section 

of 
the 
Code 
has 
to 
get 
preference/primacy over Section 19 of the Act, and 
that matter stands concluded.” (para 4) 
 
10. The words and phrases used in Section 19(1) of the P.C Act 
itself make it evident that the provision is mandatory in 
nature. In Surinderjit Singh Mand v. State of Punjab (2016), although this court was dealing with the issue of 
sanction under Section 197 of CrPC but while doing so it 

referred to various judgments including the two cases 
discussed above and emphasized the provision of prior 
sanction: 
“The law declared by this Court emerging from the 
judgments referred to hereinabove, leaves no room 
for any doubt that under Section 197 of the Code 
and/or sanction mandated under a special statute 
(as postulated under Section 19 of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act) would be a necessary prerequisite 
before a court of competent jurisdiction takes 
cognizance of an offence (whether under the Penal 
Code, or under the special statutory enactment 
concerned). The procedure for obtaining sanction 
would be governed by the provisions of the Code 
and/or as mandated under the special enactment. 
The words engaged in Section 197 of the Code are, 
“… no court shall take cognizance of such offence 
except with previous sanction…”. 
Likewise sub-section (1) of Section 19 of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act provides— 
“19. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution.—
(1) No court shall take cognizance … except with the 
previous sanction ….” 
The mandate is clear and unambiguous that a court 
“shall not” take cognizance without sanction. The 
same needs no further elaboration. Therefore, a 
court just cannot take cognizance without sanction 
by the appropriate authority. Thus viewed, we find 
no merit in the second contention advanced at the 
hands of the learned counsel for the respondents 
that where cognizance is taken under Section 319 
of the Code, sanction either under Section 197 of 
the Code (or under the special enactment 
concerned) is not a mandatory prerequisite.” 
 
11. It is a well settled position of law that courts cannot take 
cognizance against any public servant for offences committed 

under Sections 7,11,13 & 15 of the P.C. Act, even on an 
application under section 319 of the CrPC, without first 
following the requirements of Section 19 of the P.C Act. Here, 
the correct procedure should have been for the prosecution to 
obtain sanction under Section 19 of the P.C Act from the 
appropriate 
Government, 
before 
formally 
moving 
an 
application before the Court under Section 319 of CrPC. In 
fact, the Trial Court too should have insisted on the prior 
sanction, which it did not. In absence of the sanction the 
entire procedure remains flawed. We are completely in 
agreement by the decision of the High Court and therefore are 
not inclined to interfere with the impugned order passed by 
the High Court and accordingly this appeal is hereby 
dismissed. 
 Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of. 

 …..………………………..J. 
 [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]...…………………………J. 
[PRASANNA B. VARALE] 
New Delhi 
July 8, 2024