Non­
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

    X

              … Appellant

VERSUS

    Y
  … Respondent
JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.
This   is   an   unfortunate   case   in   which   the   appellant­
husband   and   respondent­wife,   notwithstanding   continuous
separation at least from 2008, have not been able to settle
their matrimonial dispute. For the sake of privacy, we have
masked their names.
2.
The marriage between the parties was solemnised on
25th March 1999.  Two children were born from the marriage.
Both of them are adults.   The matrimonial dispute led to
multiple litigations. The matrimonial discord started in 2006,
which led to the appellant filing a petition under Section 9 of
the   Hindu   Marriage   Act,   1955   (for   short,   ‘HM   Act’)   for
restitution   of   conjugal   rights.     The   petition   was   filed   on

17th  December   2008.     By   the   judgment   and   decree   dated
15th 
May   2013,   the   learned   Additional   Civil   Judge
(Sr.Division),   Barnala,   passed   a   decree   of   restitution   of
conjugal rights under which the respondent was directed to
join the appellant's company within three months.  According
to the case of the appellant, as the respondent did not abide
by the decree for restitution of conjugal rights, on 23rd August
2013, the appellant filed a petition under Section 13 of the
HM Act before the Family Court at Barnala seeking a decree
of   divorce   on   the  grounds   of   cruelty  and   desertion.   Being
aggrieved by the decree for restitution of conjugal rights, in
the   year   2013   itself,   the   respondent   preferred   an   appeal
before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.   The appeal
was dismissed by the judgment dated 19th February 2015,
and   the   decree   for   restitution   of   conjugal   rights   was
confirmed.  
3.
On 1st  August 2016, the learned Judge of the Family
Court   at   Barnala  allowed   the   divorce   petition   filed   by   the
appellant and dissolved the marriage between the appellant
and   respondent.     The   respondent   challenged   the   divorce
decree by preferring an appeal before the Punjab and Haryana
High Court.  By the  impugned  judgment  dated  4th  October
2019, the High Court has set aside the divorce decree.
4.
There were two other litigations between the parties. The
respondent filed a petition under Section 125 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, claiming maintenance against the
appellant. On 19th October 2013, the said petition was partly

allowed.     The   Trial   Court   denied   maintenance   to   the
respondent on the ground that the respondent had refused to
live with the appellant without any sufficient cause. However,
the Trial Court directed the appellant to pay maintenance at
the rate of Rs.3500/­ and Rs.4000/­ per month respectively
to the children. The respondent filed a complaint before the
Court of the Judicial Magistrate alleging the commission of
offences   punishable   under   Section   406   and   498A   of   the
Indian Penal Code against the appellant. On 16th April 2014,
the   learned   Magistrate   dismissed   the   complaint.     The
respondent preferred a revision application against the order
of dismissal of the complaint. The revision application was
rejected by the order dated 18th October 2016 by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge. 
5.
During the pendency of this appeal, the dispute was
referred   to   the   Supreme   Court   Mediation   Centre.   On   2nd
August 2021, the learned Mediator submitted a failure report.
Orders dated 22nd March and 6th May 2024 show that even
this Court attempted to bring about a settlement. But the
efforts could not succeed.
SUBMISSIONS
6.
Shri   Sukumar   Pattjoshi,   learned   senior   advocate
appearing for the appellant, submitted that as the decree for
restitution   of   conjugal   rights   was   not   abided   by   the
respondent, a decree on the ground of desertion must follow.
He   submitted   that   consistent   denial   by   the   respondent   to

resume the matrimonial relationship caused mental cruelty to
the appellant. Therefore, there was no reason for the High
Court to disturb the decree of divorce. 
7.
Shri   Sharma,   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the
respondent, submitted that after considering the evidence on
record, the High Court found that the appellant failed to prove
the grounds for divorce pleaded by him. He submitted that
looking at the evidence on record, the findings recorded by the
High Court cannot be disturbed. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
8.
We may note here that though an effort made by this
Court   to   bring   about   a   settlement   did   not   succeed,   the
learned   senior   counsel   appearing   for   the   appellant,   on
instructions, stated that the appellant’s offer of payment of
Rs. 30 lakhs as lumpsum  maintenance or alimony to  the
respondent is still open subject to respondent agreeing for
passing a decree of divorce.
9.
There is no dispute that the parties have been residing
separately since 2008. In IA No. 109594 of 2024, filed by the
appellant,   he   has   stated   that   their   son   and   daughter   are
major. The application records that the daughter resides in
Canada and the son is in India.   There is no dispute about
this factual position. 
10.
As noted earlier, the appellant filed a petition for the
restitution of conjugal rights in December 2008.  The petition

was decreed on 15th May 2013.  The learned Additional Civil
Judge (Sr.Division), Barnala, recorded the following findings
in the judgment. 
“10.  Thus, from the entire evidence adduced
by the petitioner,  it has been established
on   record   that   the   respondent   has   left
the   company   of   the   petitioner   without
any reason and cause and has neglected
and deserted the petitioner. The petitioner
has   still   love   and   affection   with   the
respondent and is ready to keep her with
him as his wife…………………………..”
            (emphasis added)
The   High   Court   dismissed   the   appeal   preferred   by   the
respondent   and   confirmed   the   decree   for   restitution   of
conjugal rights. In paragraph 10 of the decision, the High
Court held thus:
“…………The trial court has rightly drawn
the conclusion that the appellant had left
the company of the respondent without
any reasonable excuse  and had neglected
and deserted him as he was ready to keep
her with him as his wife……………..”
     (emphasis added)
The appeal was dismissed on 19th February 2015.
11.
Thereafter, on 1st August 2016, the divorce petition filed
by the appellant was decreed in which a finding was recorded
that   the   appellant   made   every   effort   to   bring   back   the
respondent­wife   and   despite   the   decree   of   restitution   of
conjugal rights, the respondent did not resume cohabitation.
In the divorce petition filed by the appellant, he specifically

relied upon the decree for restitution of conjugal rights passed
against the respondent and stated that after the decree, the
respondent had not resumed cohabitation.   The Trial Court
accepted the grounds of cruelty and desertion, and a decree of
divorce was passed. 
12.
In   the   impugned   judgment,   while   setting   aside   the
decree of divorce, the High Court held that the ground of
desertion was not made out as the appellant has continuously
neglected   his   duties   as   a   husband   and   considering   his
conduct, the respondent had no choice but to leave him and
stay at her parental home. 
13.
In our view, it is not possible to sustain the judgment of
the   High   Court   on   the   issue   of   desertion.     As   mentioned
earlier, on 15th May 2013, the Civil Court passed a decree for
restitution   of   conjugal   rights   against   the   respondent   on   a
petition   filed   by   the   appellant   in   the   year   2008.     The
categorical finding recorded by the Trial Court was that the
respondent left the appellant's company without reasonable
cause.  The decree of the Trial Court was confirmed on 19th
February   2015.     The   Family   Court   decreed   the   divorce
petition filed by the appellant on 1st  August 2016.   Nothing
was brought on record by the respondent to show that after
19th  February   2015,   when   the   decree   for   restitution   of
conjugal rights was confirmed by the High Court, any effort
was made by her to resume cohabitation. We must note that
between   1st  August   2016,   when   a   decree   of   divorce   was
passed, and 4th October 2019, when the decree was set aside

by   the   impugned   decree,   no   efforts   were   made   by   the
respondent to resume cohabitation.   She had not made out
any such case. Moreover, there is no material on record to
show that after the decree of restitution of conjugal rights was
passed, the respondent showed even an inclination to resume
cohabitation with the appellant.  There is a concluded finding
recorded by the Trial Court on 15th May 2013 while passing a
decree   of   restitution   of   conjugal   rights   that   it   was   the
respondent who had deserted the appellant without sufficient
cause.
14.
Section 13(1) and 13(1A) of the HM Act read thus: 
“13. Divorce.­ Any marriage solemnised, whether
before or after the commencement of this Act, may,
on a petition presented by either the husband
or the wife, be dissolved by a decree of divorce
on the ground that the other party­

has, after the solemnisation of the marriage,
had   voluntary   sexual   intercourse   with   any
person other than his or her spouse; or

has, after the solemnisation of the marriage,
treated the petitioner with cruelty; or

has   deserted   the   petitioner   for   a
continuous   period   of   not   less   than   two
years
 
immediately
 
preceding
 
the
presentation of the petition; or

has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to
another religion; or

has been incurably of unsound mind, or has
been suffering continuously or intermittently
from mental disorder of such a kind and to

such   an   extent   that   the   petitioner   cannot
reasonably   be   expected   to   live   with   the
respondent.
Explanation.­In this clause,­

the expression “mental disorder” means
mental   illness,   arrested   or   incomplete
development   of   mind,   psychopathic
disorder   or   any   other   disorder   or
disability   of   mind   and   includes
schizophrenia;

the   expression   “psychopathic   disorder”
means a persistent disorder or disability
of mind (whether or not including sub­
normality of intelligence) which results in
abnormally   aggressive   or   seriously
irresponsible conduct on the part of the
other   party,   and   whether   or   not   it
requires   or   is   susceptible   to   medical
treatment; or

… … … …

has been suffering from venereal disease in a
communicable form; or

has   renounced   the   world   by   entering   any
religious order; or

has not been heard of as being alive for a
period   of   seven   years   or   more   by   those
persons who would naturally have heard of it,
had that party been alive;
Explanation.­In   this   sub­section,   the   expression
“desertion” means the desertion of the petitioner by
the other party to the marriage without reasonable
cause and without the consent or against the wish
of such party, and includes the wilful neglect of the
petitioner by the other party to the marriage, and

its grammatical variations and cognate expressions
shall be construed accordingly.
(1A)   Either   party   to   a   marriage,   whether
solemnised before or after the commencement of
this   Act,   may   also   present   a   petition   for   the
dissolution of the marriage by a decree of divorce
on the ground­
(i) that   there   has   been   no   resumption   of
cohabitation as between the parties to the
marriage   for   a   period   of   one   year   or
upwards after the passing of a decree for
judicial   separation   in   a   proceeding   to
which they were parties; or
(ii) that   there   has   been   no   restitution   of
conjugal rights as between the parties to
the marriage for a period of one year or
upwards after the passing of a decree for
restitution   of   conjugal   rights   in   a
proceeding to which they were parties.”
                        (emphasis added)
We may note here that under Section 13(1A)(ii), it is provided
that a divorce petition can be presented on the ground that
there has been no restitution of conjugal rights between the
parties to the marriage for a period of one year and more after
passing the decree for restitution of conjugal rights.  Indeed,
the period of one year was not complete when the appellant
filed the divorce petition.   In the Judgment dated 15th  May
2013 passed by the Trial Court, which was affirmed by the
High Court, the Courts accepted the appellant's case that the
continuous desertion was from December 2006.  The decree
was  confirmed  on  19th  February  2015  by  the  High  Court.
Admittedly, the respondent did not resume the co­habitation

after   15th  May   2013   till   the   date   of   filing   of   the   divorce
petition.  It is not her case that any event happened after the
decree for restitution of conjugal rights was passed, which
prevented her from joining the appellant's company.  Hence,
the desertion of the appellant at least from 2008 till the date
of filing the divorce petition in 2013 continued without any
reasonable   cause.   Therefore,   a   decree   for   divorce   on   the
ground   of   desertion   under   Section   13(1)(ib)   ought   to   have
been passed. Thus, in our view, the High Court ought to have
confirmed the decree of divorce on the ground of desertion.
This is a case of a complete breakdown of marriage for last 16
years and more.
15.
The appellant has offered to pay the respondent a lump
sum alimony of Rs. 30 lakhs. In the facts of the case, this
amount is  reasonable and  can  be accepted  as a  one­time
lump sum alimony. Though we are passing a decree of divorce
on the ground of desertion, we will have to clarify that the
decree shall come into operation after a sum of Rs. 30 lakhs
is paid to the respondent. 
16.
Hence, we pass the following order:
a.
The appeal is partly allowed by setting aside that part
of the impugned judgment by which the High Court
interfered with the decree for divorce on the ground
of desertion. Accordingly, the marriage between the
appellant and respondent, solemnised on 25th March
1999,   is   hereby   dissolved   by   a   decree   of   divorce

under Section 13(1)(ib) of the HM Act.  The finding of
the   High   Court   on   the   ground   of   cruelty   is   not
disturbed; 
b.
The decree passed as above shall come into force only
on the appellant paying a sum of Rs. 30 lakhs to the
respondent by directly transferring the amount to the
respondent's account. We direct the advocate for the
respondent to provide the bank account details of the
respondent and a cancelled cheque of her account to
the   advocate   for   the   appellant   within   three   weeks
from today. The appellant shall pay the sum of Rs. 30
lakhs   to   the   respondent   within   a   period   of   three
months from today by direct transfer to the account
of the respondent; 
c.
The appellant shall file an affidavit before this Court
immediately on making payment of Rs. 30 lakhs to
the respondent, along with proof of payment.  If the
respondent does not furnish her bank account details
within three weeks from today, it will be open for the
appellant to deposit the said amount with this Court
within three months from today. The deposit of the
said amount with the Supreme Court shall also be
treated   as   compliance,   and   immediately   on   the
compliance being made, the decree of divorce shall
become effective.  The respondent will be entitled to
withdraw the amount deposited in this Court; 

d.
Registry shall immediately draw a decree of divorce
after the proof of payment or deposit of the amount of
Rs.30 lakhs is filed on record;
e.
The payment of the sum of Rs.30 lakhs shall be in
full   and   final   settlement   of   the   claim   of   the
respondent for maintenance; and
f.
The   appeal   is,   accordingly,   partly   allowed   on   the
above terms with no order regarding costs. 
                  ….…………………….J.
                  (Abhay S. Oka)
…..…………………...J.
  (Ujjal Bhuyan)
New Delhi;
July 08, 2024.