AP 15 of 2023 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

Elfit Arabia & Anr 

… Petitioners 
 
Versus 
 
Concept Hotel BARONS Limited & Ors 

… Respondents 

WITH 

ORDER 

The petitioner, an entity incorporated in the United Arab Emirates, was purportedly 
approached by the respondents to finance a telecommunication project undertaken 
by Telesuprecon Nigeria Limited (TNL). Accordingly, the Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) which forms the basis of the petition under Section 11(6) of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act 19961 was executed on 1 June 2004. TNL was 
represented by the second respondent, who is also a director of the first respondent – 
a company incorporated in India. Pursuant to the terms of the MoU, the petitioners 
 
1 “Act” 

AP 15 of 2023 
 
claim to have disbursed funds on various occasions. On 2 August 2006, a 
supplementary MoU was executed, setting out the terms of repayment and 
settlement of the petitioners’ dues. The respondents agreed to lien their property as 
comfort and issue cheques in support of their finances. 

It has been stated that cheques were given to the petitioner from time to time during 
the course of meetings between the parties to negotiate repayment. On 7 May 2011, 
fifteen cheques which had been furnished to the petitioner for a consolidated amount 
of Rs. 7.30 crores were presented for payment but allegedly dishonoured. Accordingly, 
on 2 June 2011, the petitioners issued a legal notice to the respondents to implement 
the MoU and make the necessary payment. 

Eleven years thereafter, on 4 July 2022, the petitioners invoked arbitration in terms of 
clause 19 of the MoU. The respondent failed to reply to the notice invoking arbitration. 
Therefore, the petitioner issued a fresh notice dated 27 October 2022 calling upon the 
respondent to refer the dispute to arbitration. The petitioner did not receive a response 
to the second notice and instituted the present petition before this court for the 
appointment of an arbitrator. 

According to the petitioner, in the interregnum, proceedings under Section 138 of the 
Negotiable Instruments Act 1881 were instituted against the respondents. An order of 
acquittal was passed by the Magistrate on 23 July 2018. Proceedings are pending 
before the High Court of Bombay in appeal. 

The respondents contend that the claims of the petitioner are barred by limitation and 
urge this Court to dismiss the petition. Whether a claim is barred by limitation lies 

AP 15 of 2023 
 
ordinarily within the domain of the arbitral tribunal. However, a court exercising 
jurisdiction under Section 11(6) of the Act may reject ex facie non-arbitrable or dead 
claims, to protect the other party from being drawn into a protracted arbitration 
process,2 that is bound to eventually fail. The court must ‘cut the deadwood’ by 
refraining from appointing an arbitrator when claims are ex facie time-barred and 
dead, or there is no subsisting dispute.3 

This examination does not involve a full review of contested facts but only a primary 
review, where uncontested facts speak for themselves.4 Such limited scrutiny is 
necessary as it is the duty of the court to protect the parties from being compelled to 
arbitrate when the claim is demonstrably barred by limitation. If courts do not 
intervene within this limited compass and mechanically refer every dispute to 
arbitration, it may undermine the effectiveness of the arbitration process itself.5 

The above principles that have been affirmed in a consistent line of precedent, flow 
from the following observations in Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corporation:6 
“139. … Undertaking a detailed full review or a 
long-drawn review at the referral stage would 
obstruct and cause delay undermining the 
integrity and efficacy of arbitration as a dispute 
resolution mechanism. Conversely, if the court 
becomes too reluctant to intervene, it may 
undermine effectiveness of both the arbitration 
and the court. There are certain cases where the 
prima facie examination may require a deeper 
consideration. The court's challenge is to find the 
right amount of and the context when it would 
 
2 Arif Azim Co. Ltd. v. Aptech Ltd., (2024), para 68. 
3 Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corporation (2021), para 154.4; BSNL v. Nortel Networks 
(India) (P) Ltd., (2021), para 45.1. 
4 NTPC Ltd. v. SPML Infra Ltd., (2023), para 27. 
5 Ibid, para 28. 
6 (2021). 

AP 15 of 2023 
 
examine the prima facie case or exercise restraint. 
The legal order needs a right balance between 
avoiding arbitration obstructing tactics at referral 
stage and protecting parties from being forced to 
arbitrate when the matter is clearly non-arbitrable. 
… 
148. Section 43(1) of the Arbitration Act states that 
the Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to arbitrations 
as it applies to court proceedings. Sub-section (2) 
states that for the purposes of the Arbitration Act 
and Limitation Act, arbitration shall be deemed to 
have commenced on the date referred to in 
Section 21. Limitation law is procedural and 
normally disputes, being factual, would be for the 
arbitrator to decide guided by the facts found 
and the law applicable. The court at the referral 
stage can interfere only when it is manifest that the 
claims are ex facie time-barred and dead, or 
there is no subsisting dispute. All other cases should 
be referred to the Arbitral Tribunal for decision on 
merits. … 
… 
154.4. Rarely as a demurrer the court may interfere 
at Section 8 or 11 stage when it is manifestly and 
ex facie certain that the arbitration agreement is 
non-existent, invalid or the disputes are non-
arbitrable, though the nature and facet of non-
arbitrability would, to some extent, determine the 
level and nature of judicial scrutiny. The restricted 
and limited review is to check and protect parties 
from being forced to arbitrate when the matter is 
demonstrably “non-arbitrable” and to cut off the 
deadwood. The court by default would refer the 
matter 
when 
contentions 
relating 
to 
non-
arbitrability 
are 
plainly 
arguable; 
when 
consideration in summary proceedings would be 
insufficient and inconclusive; when facts are 
contested; when the party opposing arbitration 
adopts delaying tactics or impairs conduct of 
arbitration proceedings. … ” 
(emphasis supplied) 

Having regard to the uncontested chronology of events detailed in paragraphs 1 to 
4 above, it is abundantly clear that the notices invoking arbitration dated 4 July 2022 

AP 15 of 2023 
 
and 27 October 2022 were issued eleven years after the cause of action arose in 
2011.7 This is well beyond the limitation period of three years,8 and the claim which is 
sought to be raised is hopelessly barred by limitation. 

The initiation of arbitration and criminal proceedings under Section 138 of the 
Negotiable Instruments Act 1881 are separate and independent proceedings that 
arise from two separate causes of action.9 Therefore, the institution of the proceedings 
under Section 138 does not imply a ‘continuing cause of action’ for the purpose of 
initiating arbitration, as erroneously contended by the petitioner. 

The facts of the present case undoubtedly fall within the narrow compass of 
interference that courts must exercise at this stage. If this Court were to refer the 
dispute to arbitration, it would amount to compelling the parties to arbitrate a 
‘deadwood’ claim that is ex-facie time-barred. 

We, therefore, decline to entertain the Arbitration Petition. 

The Arbitration Petition is accordingly dismissed. 

Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 

The companion ) has 
 
7 Section 21, Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. 
8 Section 46(1), Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996; Article 55 of the Schedule, Limitation Act, 1963. 
9 Sri Krishna Agencies v. State of A.P., (2009), para 7. 

AP 15 of 2023 
 
been dismissed by the above order. Save and except for the date of the MoU which 
is 26 May 2004 in the present case, the facts are similar. 

For the reasons already indicated, we arrive at the conclusion that the claim is ex-
facie barred by limitation. 

The Arbitration Petition is accordingly dismissed. 

Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of..…...…...…...………………...…CJI. 
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 

……..…...…...………………...…..J. 
[J B Pardiwala].…...…...…...………………...…..J. 
[Manoj Misra] 

New Delhi; 
July 09, 2024 
GKA