IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Ramalingam & Ors. 

 … Appellants 
 
versus 
 
N. Viswanathan 

 … Respondent 
 
JUDGMENT 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
The appellants have taken exception to the judgment and 
order dated 20th December 2018 passed by the learned Single 
Judge of the High Court of Judicature at Madras. The learned 
Additional District and Sessions Judge, Salem, had passed an 
order dated 9th January 2009 granting discharge to the 
appellants in the exercise of powers under Section 227 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short ‘CrPC’). One 
Nanjundan, the husband of the deceased Siddammal, 
challenged the order of the learned Additional District and 
Sessions Judge by filing a revision application. The High 
Court, by the impugned judgment and order, has allowed the 
revision application and has remanded the case to the learned 
Additional District and Sessions Judge for holding trial. The 

said Nanjundan died during the pendency of revision 
application. The respondent is his son. 
2. 
We must advert to a few factual aspects. The 
respondent’s father Nanjundan had lodged a First Information 
Report bearing Cr. No.107 of 2004 (the FIR) alleging the 
commission of offences under Sections 341, 323 and 302 of the 
Indian Penal Code against the appellants. The FIR was based 
on the incident of 9th October 2004. In the complaint, based 
on which the FIR was registered, it was alleged that the first 
appellant had filed a suit against the respondent, praying for 
carrying out the measurement of the property claimed by the 
appellants and removing encroachment. On the date of the 
incident, around 11 am, the appellants and one Gopal 
assembled in front of the respondent’s house, along with village 
munsif and a surveyor. They informed the respondent’s father 
that Gopal had purchased the said property from the first 
appellant, and they wanted to measure the property. The 
respondent’s mother (the deceased) tried to prevent them from 
entering to carry out a survey. The allegation is that at that 
time, the first appellant exhorted the second appellant to kill 
the deceased. Thereupon, the second appellant picked up a 
stick lying at the site and assaulted her on the chest. After 
that, the third and first appellant kicked the deceased on her 
chest and stomach. The respondent’s mother was declared 
dead in the hospital where she was taken. 
3. 
After completing the investigation, the investigating 
officer submitted a final report recording that the death of the 
deceased was due to natural cause and due to prior enmity, 

the respondent falsely implicated the appellants. The final 
report was accordingly, filed on 22nd December 2004. Instead 
of filing a protest petition, the respondent’s father filed a 
complaint under Section 200 of CrPC containing the same 
averments made in his complaint based on which the FIR was 
registered. The Judicial Magistrate recorded evidence of 
witnesses, including a doctor who performed a post-mortem. 
The doctor deposed that the death was natural. 
4. 
As stated earlier, the appellants invoked Section 227 of 
CrPC for discharge, which was allowed by order dated 9th 
January, 2009. 
SUBMISSIONS 
5. 
The submission of the learned counsel appearing for the 
appellants is that the post-mortem certificate dated 10th 
October 2004 records that there were no ante-mortem injuries 
anywhere on the body of the deceased. Moreover, it records 
that the final opinion was reserved pending the chemical 
examiner’s and histo-pathological reports. He submitted that 
both the reports were not placed on record, and there is no final 
opinion regarding the cause of death. He invited our attention 
to the deposition of Dr. R. Vallinayagam, who conducted a post-
mortem on the body of the deceased. He pointed out that apart 
from stating that there were no ante-mortem injuries, the 
doctor opined that there was a tear in the heart caused due to 
heart disease. The doctor stated that the death was a natural 
one. He submitted that the case made out by the respondent’s 
father was false. 

6. 
The learned counsel appearing for the respondent 
supported the impugned judgment. He submitted that though 
his father may not have filed a protest petition, he was entitled 
in law to file a private complaint under Section 200 of CrPC. He 
submitted that ultimately, only after a complete trial the 
question of whether the appellants are responsible for the 
homicidal death of the deceased can be determined. He would, 
therefore, submit that no case is made out for interference. 
OUR VIEW 
7. 
Perusal of the impugned judgment shows that the High 
Court was of the view that the learned Additional District and 
Sessions Judge had conducted a mini-trial. We may note here 
that initially, the learned Judicial Magistrate had dismissed the 
complaint by exercising the power under Section 203 of CrPC 
on the ground that the death was not proved to be homicidal. 
The High Court, in a petition filed by the respondent’s father, 
interfered and, by judgment and order dated 18th September 
2007, set aside the order of the learned Magistrate. We find 
from a copy of the said judgment and order that the same was 
passed without a notice being issued to the present appellants. 
8. 
After having perused the order of the learned Additional 
District and Sessions Judge dated 9th January 2009, we find 
that a mini-trial was not conducted. The Court has considered 
the case within four corners of its limited jurisdiction under 
Section 227 of the CrPC. 
9. 
On our query, the learned counsel appearing for the 
respondent stated that, to his knowledge, the chemical 

examiner’s report and the histo-pathological report had not 
been received even today. The incident is of 9th October 2004. 
The significance of the post-mortem certificate is that it records 
that there were no ante-mortem injuries present on the body of 
the deceased. The evidence of Dr. R. Vallinayagam examined 
by the respondent himself is the most material. The doctor 
reiterated that in the post-mortem examination, he did not 
notice any external injuries on the body of the deceased. He 
has stated thus: 
“In my report, I have given a report that 
there are no external injuries. There was 
a tear in the heart of about 0lx.5 cm. This 
tear was caused because of the heart 
disease. So, I did not take this as an 
injury. I have told in the report that 
death has occurred only due to the above 
reason. I have stated in the report that 
100 grams of clotted blood was present 
surrounding the heart. Police have 
enquired me in this regard. During the 
enquiry, I have stated that death has 
occurred due to the tear in the heart, 
the wall of the heart was weak, due to 
blood flow and shock and stated that 
the death is a natural one.” 
(emphasis added) 
10. 
Thus, the expert witness examined by the respondent, 
who admittedly carried out a post-mortem on the body of the 
deceased, has categorically stated that the death of the 
deceased was natural. This is coupled with the fact that there 
were no external injuries found on the body of the deceased. 
11. 
The version of the respondent’s father who was examined 
as PW-1 is that one of the appellants hit the deceased with a 

stick on her chest, and the other appellant repeatedly kicked 
her on her chest. In the post-mortem, no injury was found on 
the chest or any other part of the body of the deceased. 
Therefore, taking the evidence of the respondent’s father and 
other witnesses as it is, there was no material to proceed 
against the appellants in the private complaint filed by the 
respondent’s father. We may also note here that even according 
to the case of the respondent’s father, there was a dispute 
between him and the appellants over the property, and the 
incident occurred when, as per the order of the Civil Court, an 
attempt was made to survey the property through a government 
surveyor. 
12. 
The High Court, even after referring to the post-mortem 
certificate, has completely ignored the doctor's evidence. 
Hence, the impugned judgment and order cannot be sustained, 
and the same is set aside. The Judgment and order dated 9th 
January 2009 in Crl. Misc. Petition No.51 of 2008 in Sessions 
Case no. 270 of 2008 is restored. 
13. 
The appeal is, accordingly, allowed. 
 
….…………………….J. 
 (Abhay S. Oka) 
 
…..…………………...J. 
 (Ujjal Bhuyan) 
New Delhi; 
January 18, 2024.