IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

RATNU YADAV 

 …APPELLANT 

VERSUS 

THE STATE OF CHHATTISGARH …RESPONDENT 

JUDGMENT 

ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
1. 
The Sessions Court convicted the appellant-accused for 
the offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal 
Code (for short, ‘IPC’) for committing the murder of Smt 
Hemwati Bai, who was his stepmother. Appellant was 
sentenced to undergo life imprisonment. By the impugned 
judgment, the High Court has dismissed the appeal preferred 
by the appellant. 
 
FACTUAL ASPECT 
2. 
The case of the prosecution in brief is that the appellant 
had a land dispute with the deceased. The allegation against 

the appellant is that on 2nd March 2013, he assaulted the 
deceased. After that, he caught hold of the deceased by her hair 
and dragged her up to the village pond. The appellant put her 
head inside the pond water. The deceased was suffocated to 
death. The first informant–Darshu, PW-4, informed the police 
that Hemwati Bai died due to drowning. Accordingly, a First 
Information Report (for short, ‘FIR’) was registered. After the 
completion of the investigation, a chargesheet was filed against 
the appellant. The prosecution examined ten witnesses. There 
is no direct evidence. The prosecution relied upon evidence of 
PW-1, Sukhmani Bai, the village officer. The prosecution case 
is that the appellant made an extra-judicial confession before 
the witness. The prosecution relied upon the evidence of PW-5, 
Chaprasi, the deceased's brother. According to PW-5, he saw 
the appellant holding the hair of the deceased and was taking 
her towards the pond. Though PW-1 was declared hostile, the 
Trial Court and High Court relied upon a part of her testimony. 
The Courts also believed the testimony of PW-5. 
 
SUBMISSIONS 
3. 
Shri Shridhar Y. Chitale, learned counsel appearing for 
the appellant as amicus curiae, has taken us through the 
postmortem report and testimony of relevant prosecution 
witnesses. Based on the evidence of PW-9, Dr Pankaj Kishore, 
his submission is that the death was due to drowning, and the 
prosecution has not discharged the burden on it to prove that 
it was a homicidal death. He submitted that evidence of PW-1, 
who was declared as hostile, cannot be believed as in the 

examination-in-chief, the witness did not depose that the 
appellant made a confession of killing the deceased. However, 
in the cross-examination made by the public prosecutor, the 
witness purportedly stated that the appellant confessed before 
her about killing the deceased. He submitted that evidence of 
PW-1 cannot be believed. As regards the evidence of PW-5, he 
stated that though the witness deposed that he saw the 
appellant dragging the deceased towards the pond, PW-2 – 
Bisoha, who was allegedly present at that time, did not support 
the prosecution. Moreover, another witness, Lakhan, was 
allegedly present there and was not examined by the 
prosecution. He pointed out that the incident happened in the 
evening and PW-10, Investigating Officer admitted that there is 
a temple near the house of the deceased and other people lived 
nearby. He would, therefore, submit that the prosecution has 
failed to prove the appellant's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. 
 
4. 
Shri Prashant Singh, learned counsel appearing for the 
respondent State, submitted that in her cross-examination 
made by the public prosecutor, PW-1 has clearly deposed about 
the confessional statement made by the appellant. He 
submitted that evidence of a hostile witness need not be 
rejected in its entirety and that the Court can always rely upon 
a part of the testimony of such a witness. He submitted that 
the evidence of PW-5 proves that the appellant was last seen 
together with the deceased, and at that time, he was holding 
the deceased by her hair. He submitted that this evidence is 
sufficient to hold that the death of the deceased is homicidal. 

He submitted that in view of the oral testimony of the said two 
witnesses, the appellant's guilt has been established. 
 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
5. 
We have carefully perused the evidence of prosecution 
witnesses and other documents on record. The prosecution is 
relying upon the extra-judicial confession made by the 
appellant before PW-1 and evidence of PW-5 of last seen 
together. The case of the prosecution is that after an altercation 
with the deceased in her house, the appellant held the 
deceased by her hair and dragged her to the village pond. The 
prosecution is relying upon a site map. It shows that a road 
separates the pond and the house of the deceased. The sketch 
shows the existence of a ridge around the pond and two 
temples on the ridge of the pond abutting the road. The temples 
are exactly opposite the house of the deceased. According to 
the prosecution case, the appellant dragged the deceased by 
holding her hair from her house up to the pond. Between the 
house of the deceased and the pond, there is a road and ridge 
of the pond. This means the appellant must have dragged the 
deceased for a considerable distance. The postmortem report 
records explicitly that no marks of any injury were found on 
the body of the deceased. In his evidence, PW-9 Dr Pankaj 
Kishore reiterated that there was no injury mark on the body 
of the deceased. If the prosecution story of the appellant 
dragging the deceased was true, there would have been some 
injury on the body of the deceased. Therefore, the absence of 

any injury marks on the body militates against the 
prosecution’s case. 
 
6. 
Evidence of PW-9 shows that salt water was found in the 
trachea and lungs of the deceased. Perhaps to find out whether 
the water found in the trachea and lungs of the deceased was 
the water in the pond, samples of water from the pond were 
collected and sent to the laboratory. That is what PW-10, the 
Investigating Officer, has stated in paragraph 11 of his 
deposition. He further stated that the Director of the State 
Judicial Laboratory returned the samples without testing them 
on the ground that the cause of death was established in the 
postmortem notes. 
 
7. 
According to PW-9, the cause of death was due to 
drowning; however, he was unable to state whether the death 
was homicidal or accidental. The reason is that it was difficult 
for him to state whether deceased immersed in the water 
herself or she was forced into water. In fact, in postmortem 
notes, PW-9 stated that an expert’s opinion should be sought. 
Admittedly, an expert’s opinion was not sought. 
 
8. 
Now, we turn to evidence of PW-1. She was a village 
Kotwal. She was a signatory to the panchnama of the recovery 
of the dead body and a signatory to the sketch of the site made 
by the police. In the examination-in-chief, she stated that on 
the date of the incident, around 7 p.m., the appellant came to 
her house and stated that his mother had died. She has not 
deposed in her examination-in-chief that the appellant stated 

that he had killed the deceased. A Statement under Section 161 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘CrPC’) of 
the witness was recorded by the police. Obviously, as the said 
witness made a departure from what she had stated in the 
police statement, at the instance of the public prosecutor, the 
witness was declared hostile. The cross-examination of the 
witness by the public prosecutor shows that the witness was 
not confronted by showing the relevant part of her statement 
recorded under Section 161 of CrPC. The witness ought to have 
been confronted with her prior statement in accordance with 
Section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act. However, in the cross-
examination made by the public prosecutor, the witness 
accepted the suggestion given by the public prosecutor that the 
appellant came to her house at 7 p.m. on the date of the 
incident and told her that he had killed his stepmother by 
putting her head into the village pond. 
 
9. 
As regards the evidentiary value of an extra-judicial 
confession, a bench of three Hon’ble Judges of this Court in the 
case of Devi Lal v. State of Rajasthan1, in Paragraph 11, this 
Court held thus: 
“11. It is true that an extra-judicial 
confession is used against its maker but as 
a matter of caution, advisable for the court 
to look for a corroboration with the other 
evidence on record. In Gopal Sah v. State 
of Bihar [Gopal Sah v. State of Bihar, 
(2008): (2010) 4 SCC (Cri) 466], this Court while dealing with extra-
 
1 (2019) 

judicial confession held that extra-judicial 
confession is, on the face of it, a weak 
evidence and the Court is reluctant, in the 
absence 
of 
a 
chain 
of 
cogent 
circumstances, to rely on it, for the 
purpose of recording a conviction. In the 
instant case, it may be noticed that there are 
no additional cogent circumstances on record 
to rely on it. At the same time, Shambhu 
Singh (PW 3), while recording his statement 
under Section 164 CrPC, has not made such 
statement of extra-judicial confession (Ext. 
D-5) made by accused Babu Lal. In addition, 
no other circumstances are on record to 
support it.” 
 (emphasis added) 
 
In paragraph 16 of the decision of this Court in the case of 
Nikhil Chandra Mondal v. State of West Bengal2, this Court 
held thus: 
“16. It is a settled principle of law that 
extra-judicial confession is a weak piece of 
evidence. It has been held that where an 
extra-judicial confession is surrounded by 
suspicious circumstances, its credibility 
becomes 
doubtful 
and 
it 
loses 
its 
importance. It has further been held that 
it is well-settled that it is a rule of caution 
where the court would generally look for 
an independent reliable corroboration 
before placing any reliance upon such 
extra-judicial confession. It has been held 
that there is no doubt that conviction can be 
based on extra-judicial confession, but in the 
 
2 (2023) 

very nature of things, it is a weak piece of 
evidence.” 
 (emphasis added) 

10. The normal rule of human conduct is that if a person 
wants to confess to the crime committed by him, he will do so 
before the person in whom he has implicit faith. It is not the 
case of the prosecution that the appellant had a close 
acquaintance with PW-1 for a certain length of time before the 
incident. Moreover, the version of the witness in examination-
in-chief and cross-examination is entirely different. Therefore, 
in our considered view the testimony of PW-1 is not reliable. 
Hence, the case of extra-judicial confession cannot be 
accepted. 
 
11. Now, we come to the testimony of PW-5. At the beginning 
of his examination-in-chief, he stated that the deceased was 
his elder sister. He stated that there was an altercation between 
the deceased and the appellant in her house. Thereafter, the 
appellant caught hold of the deceased by her hair, and he 
slammed her. At that time, PW-2, Bisoha was present. The 
witness further stated that by holding his mother’s hair, the 
appellant took her towards the pond. At that time, one Lakhan 
came there and tried to tell the appellant that he should not do 
such acts with his mother. The appellant abused him and 
forced him to leave. It is pertinent to note that PW-2 Bisoha did 
not support the prosecution and was declared hostile. More 
importantly, Lakhan, who has allegedly seen the appellant 

dragging the deceased with her hair, has not been examined as 
a witness. 
 
12. As admitted by PW-10, Investigating Officer, there is a 
temple near the deceased's house, and other people live nearby. 
The incident happened in the evening before 7 p.m. There were 
two temples on the ridge of the pond. Obviously, there must be 
many people around the place of the incident. None of them 
has been examined as a witness. Moreover, the officer stated 
that it was not revealed during the investigation that the 
deceased shouted. An adverse inference must be drawn against 
the prosecution for not examining material witnesses, 
including Lakhan. Considering the evidence of PW-5, Lakhan 
was a very crucial witness. The prosecution has not explained 
his non-examination. PW-2, Bisoha has not supported the 
prosecution. Moreover, in the absence of injuries on the body 
of the deceased, it is very difficult to accept the testimony of 
PW-5 that by holding the hair of his mother, the appellant 
dragged her to the pond. Therefore, evidence of PW-5 of last 
seen together is not worthy of acceptance. 
 
13. Considering what we have held earlier, the appellant's 
guilt was not proved beyond a reasonable doubt. The appellant 
was incarcerated for 11 years. 
 
14. Hence, the impugned judgment and order dated 7th April 
2018 and 9th July 2013 are hereby set aside. The appellant is 
acquitted of the offence registered with FIR No. 68 of 2013 of 
Police Station Kharora, district Raipur. The appellant shall be 

immediately set at liberty unless his custody is required in any 
other case. The appeal is, accordingly, allowed. 

……………………..J. 
(Abhay S. Oka) 
 
……………………..J. 
(Rajesh Bindal) 
New Delhi; 
July 09, 2024