IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

THANKAMMA GEORGE... APPELLANT 
VERSUS 
LILLY THOMAS AND ANOTHER... RESPONDENT(S) 
 
JUDGMENT 
S.V.N. BHATTI, J. 
I. FACTUAL MATRIX 
1. 
Thankamma George/Appellant, and Lilly Thomas/Respondent No. 1, are 
sisters, and the daughters of one late George. P.M. Thomas/Respondent No. 2 
is the husband of Respondent No. 1. The Appellant filed O.S. No. 139 of 2011 
dated 11.05.2011 before the Court of Senior Civil Judge, Pathanamthitta for the 
relief of declaration that the Appellant is the sole title holder of the suit schedule 
property and for recovery of possession from the Respondents. The Appellant 
prayed that she be declared as the exclusive and sole owner of one-half of the 
plaint schedule property, sale deed no. 345/2008 dated 16.04.2008 (Ex. A-5) of 

Enathu Sub-Registrar office as void ab initio, for consequential relief of 
perpetual injunction restraining the Respondents from alienating and from 
encumbering the suit schedule property in any manner. The frame of the suit is 
for more than one relief and the suit schedule consists of an extent of 8.47 ares 
(1013 sq. yds.) in Re-Sy. No. 216/6, Block No. 19 of Village Ezhamkulam. The 
suit schedule reads thus: 
“8.47 Ares of land to the South and West of the North Eastern 3.03 
Ares in 11.50 Ares in Re-Sy. No.216/6 of Block No.19, 
corresponding to old Sy. No.621/6 with the double-storeyed 
residential and shop building presently bearing Panchayath 
Nos.X/17, A, B and C, of Ezhamkulam Grama Panchayath”. 
2. 
The Appellant and Respondent No. 1, on 16.01.1991, through sale deed 
no. 61/1991 purchased 11.50 ares of open plot from one Sivadasan Pillai. On 
04.12.2003, the Appellant, since had been working abroad, executed Power of 
Attorney No. 44/2003 (Ex. A-4) concerning the property covered by the sale 
deed dated 16.01.1991, in favour of Respondent No. 1. The Power of Attorney 
authorized Respondent No. 1 to execute appropriate deeds, if necessary, sale 
deeds, and receive sale consideration for and on behalf of the Appellant. The 
Power of Attorney (Ex. A-4) creates the relationship of the principal and the 
agent between the Appellant and Respondent No. 1. Ex. A-4 recites that sale 
can be effected, subject to necessity and accounting for sale proceeds. On 
18.01.2008, the Appellant and Respondent No. 1, contrary to the principal and 
agent relationship, executed a sale deed in favour of one Joemon and his wife. 
Thus, upon the sale of a portion of the open plot, the Appellant/Plaintiff retained 

an extent of 8.47 ares as described in the suit schedule. On 16.04.2008, 
Respondent No. 1, by way of sale, transferred the suit schedule in favour of her 
husband/Respondent No. 2 vide sale deed no. 345/2008 (Ex. A-5). On 
26.02.2009, the Appellant filed a petition before the Taluk Legal Services 
Authority for redressal of the dispute, i.e., the alienation of the Appellant’s half 
share in the suit schedule in favour of Respondent No. 2. The Appellant did not 
get any relief from the Legal Services Authority; hence, on 11.05.2011, the 
Appellant filed the Suit for the reliefs noted above. 
II. PLAINT AVERMENTS: 
3. 
The Appellant has resided abroad since 1966 and worked as a Nurse in 
Bahrain, the U.K. and the U.S.A.. She claims to have remained as a spinster. 
From the earnings as a Nurse, the Appellant has supported Respondent No. 1 
in more than one sense. The plaint refers to a few circumstances claiming 
exclusive ownership of the property purchased through sale deed nos. 61 and 
877 of 1991. We are not referring to these averments for the appeal, which is 
confined to the relief granted by the Trial Court, i.e., half share in the suit 
schedule property. Having regard to the Appellant working overseas, 
Respondent No. 1 was authorised to act as the Appellant's agent, depending 
upon necessity. Contrary to the Power of Attorney dated 04.12.2003 (Ex. A-4), 
the Appellant in her capacity as the owner of the property, sold an extent of 3.03 
ares in favour of Joemon and his wife. Thereafter, Respondent No. 1, through 

Ex. A-5, i.e., sale deed dated 16.04.2008, sold the property retained by the 
sisters to Respondent No. 2. The Appellant averred that the agency granted 
was withdrawn when the Appellant joined in the execution of sale deed No. 59 
of 2008 in favour of Joemon and his wife. Therefore, the sale deed dated 
16.04.2008 (Ex. A-5), executed after implied revocation, is void ab initio. Ex. A-
5 was executed without, both, the Appellant's knowledge, and the transfer of 
sale consideration by Respondent No. 2 to Respondent No. 1; thus, no right or 
title to the extent of half share of the Appellant is created or transferred in favour 
of Respondent No. 2. The sale unsupported by consideration is illegal and void 
ab initio. The cause of action for filing the suit arose when the Appellant moved 
the Legal Services Authority on 26.02.2009. Knowledge of the execution of Ex. 
A-5 is stated to have been acquired about that time. 
III. AVERMENTS IN WRITTEN STATEMENT OF RESPONDENT NOS. 1 & 2: 
4. 
The Respondents admit the relationship. The Appellant has been a U.S. citizen since 1991. It is admitted that the Appellant retired from service in 2007 
and stayed and lived with Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 between 2007 and 2009. 
After filing the suit, the Appellant again left for the U.S.A. The sale deed dated 
16.04.2008 (Ex. A-5) in favour of Respondent No. 2 was executed when the 
Appellant resided with the Respondents in India. Respondent No. 1 admits the 
joint execution of the sale deed dated 18.01.2008 (Ex. A-3) in favour of Joemon 
and his wife. It is explained by averring that the total consideration received as 

sale consideration under Ex. A-3 was Rs. 7,00,000/-, and a sum of 
Rs. 2,00,000/- was paid in foreign currency to the Appellant. The balance of 
Rs. 5,00,000/- was deposited in the joint account of Appellant and Respondent 
No. 1. Respondent No. 1 asserts to have the authority of an agent given through 
Power of Attorney dated 04.12.2003 (Ex. A-4); therefore, the sale deed dated 
16.04.2008 (Ex. A-5) in favour of Respondent No. 2 is valid and binds the 
Appellant. In fine, the defense taken by Respondent No. 1 is that she has the 
authority to act on behalf of the Appellant. The Appellant received sale 
consideration in the previous transaction. The suit is filed beyond the limitation 
period and, therefore, is liable to be dismissed. 
5. 
The Trial Court framed the following issues for consideration: 
1. “Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a declaration as prayed for? 
2. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for recovery of possession of plaint 
scheduled property? 
3. Whether plaintiff is entitled for ½ right over plaint scheduled 
property? 
4. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for separate possession of her share 
by metes and bounds? 
5. Whether the sale deed No.345/08 is liable to be set aside? 
6. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for a permanent prohibitory 
injunction as prayed for? 
7. Relief and cost.” 
 
6. 
The Appellant marked Exs. A-1 to A-11 and examined P.Ws. 1 to 5. 
Respondent No. 1 was examined as D.W.1 and Exs. B-1 to B-3 were marked 
on behalf of Respondent No. 1. On third-party evidence, Exs. X-1 to X-12 were 
marked. 

7. 
The Trial Court, on examination of oral and documentary evidence, 
rejected the claim of the Appellant for declaration as the owner of the entire suit 
schedule property but accepted the alternate prayer for partition and decreed 
the suit accordingly. The Trial Court on whether the authority granted in favour 
of Respondent No. 1 continued to remain until the execution of the sale deed 
dated 18.01.2008 (Ex. A-3), as late as 16.04.2008, when the sale deed (Ex. A-
5) was executed by Respondent No. 1 in favour of Respondent No. 2, held that 
the execution of Ex. A-3 by the Appellant as a co-executant along with 
Respondent No. 1 results in revocation of power granted in favour of 
Respondent No. 1. The finding recorded is that the agency in favour of 
Respondent No. 1 by an act of implied revocation stood terminated. 
Consequently, it is held that the alienation of the Appellant’s half share by the 
Respondents in the suit schedule property is illegal and not binding on the 
Appellant. Adverting to the absence of consideration under Ex. A-5, the Trial 
Court relied on the categorical admission of Respondent No. 1 as D.W.1 and 
noticed that no consideration was passed from Respondent No. 2 to 
Respondent No. 1 and the sale in Ex. A-5 is void ab initio. On the above 
consideration, the Trial Court decreed the suit for partition, and the operative 
portion of the judgment reads thus: 
“1. Plaintiff ½ right over plaint scheduled property is hereby declared. 
2. The Ext.A5 sale deed No.345/08 executed by 1st defendant in favour 
of 2nd defendant is void, hence set aside. 
3. Intimate the cancellation of Ext.A5 to SRO concerned. 

4. The plaintiff is entitled for partition of plaint scheduled property as 
follows:- 
a) Plaintiff is entitled for ½ share right over plaint scheduled 
property. b) Plaintiff is entitled for separate possession of that share by metes 
and bounds. c) File final decree application within 3 months from date of the 
preliminary decree. d) Plaintiff is entitled for recovery of that ½ share after final decree. 
 
5. Defendants are hereby restrained by a permanent prohibitory 
injunction from alienating plaint scheduled property, inducting 
strangers into possession, encumbering the same and from 
committing any act of waste therein tell ommitting any act of waste 
therein effecting affecting recovery of possession of plaintiff ½ share 
from plaint scheduled property. 
6. The suit is kept in sine-die. 
7. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, there is no 
order as to cost”. 
8. 
Respondent No. 1, aggrieved by the Trial Court judgment, filed R.F.A. No. 
405 of 2016 before the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam. Through the 
impugned judgment dated 08.03.2022, the Appeal was allowed at the instance 
of Respondent No. 1. The High Court, in the impugned judgment, noted what (i) 
would be the effect of a registered power of attorney authorising the agent to 
execute and transfer immoveable property; (ii) whether unilateral cancellation 
after the exercise of the right of alienation given under the power of attorney is 
available; (iii) what would be the effect of the sale executed by the power holder 
with respect to an immoveable property; (iv) what amounts to a document void 
ab initio or void document; (v) whether the Trial Court is justified in decreeing 
the suit of the Appellant. We may observe that the question framed by the High 
Court as a preface for consideration suffers from more than one fallacy, one of 
them being unilateral cancellation after exercising the right of alienation in 

favour of Respondent No. 1. To explain, it is noted at this juncture that the 
chronology and the plaint averments disclose that the Appellant's implied 
cancellation of power of attorney is not after execution of the sale deed dated 
16.04.2008 (Ex. A-5). That apart, the Appellate Court held that the frame of the 
suit is incorrect and illegal since the plaint does not pray for setting aside the 
Ex. A-5 on available grounds such as fraud, undue influence, coercion, etc. 
Therefore, the declaration of Ex. A-5, in the absence of available legal grounds 
as void ab initio, reflects the failure of the Trial Court to appreciate the concept 
of void ab initio and the underlying legal implication involved in the said concept. 
The Appellant came to know of the execution of the sale deed dated 16.04.2008 
(Ex. A-5) in the year 2009. The Appellant did not question Ex. A-5 till the suit 
was filed on 11.05.2011. The registration of the sale deed amounts to 
constructive notice to the Appellant. The suit for the relief of setting aside Ex. A-
5, it is noted, that though the plea of limitation is not taken, the suit is still barred 
by limitation. The Appellate Court records in the impugned judgment that the 
mere fact of the Appellant joining in execution along with Respondent No. 1 in 
executing the sale deed dated 18.01.2008 (Ex. A-3) does not amount to implied 
revocation. The joint execution of the sale deed will neither affect the 
cancellation nor the revocation of the power of attorney. The non-receipt of sale 
consideration once the sale was completed in terms of Section 54 of the 
Transfer of Property Act, 1882, and Section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908, 

the vendor under a deed not supported by a sale consideration has the remedy 
of receiving the sale consideration from the vendee. The legality of the sale is 
not affected by the non-receipt of sale consideration. Through the impugned 
judgment, the Appeal was allowed. Hence, the Civil Appeal at the instance of 
the Appellant. 
IV. SUBMISSIONS: 
9. 
We have heard the Shri V. Chitambaresh, for the Appellant and Shri 
Harish Beeran for the Respondents. 
10. 
Shri V. Chitambaresh, Ld. Senior Counsel for the Appellant, argues that 
the impugned judgment is inconsistent with the case pleaded or proved by the 
parties. Insofar as the finding recorded against the Appellant by the Trial Court, 
she does not propose to reopen the findings accepted by the Appellate Court. 
Still, denying half share to the Appellant in the suit schedule property is per se 
illegal. The consideration by the impugned judgment proceeds on an erroneous 
appreciation or application of Sections 207 and 208 of the Indian Contract Act, 
1872 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”). The Appellant, being the principal, is 
authorised by law to expressly cancel or recall the authority granted to 
Respondent No. 1. The Appellant can plead and prove that by an implied act of 
revocation, which is to the knowledge of Respondent No. 1 and Respondent 
No. 2, the Power of Attorney (Ex. A-4) stood cancelled. The execution of the 
sale deed dated 16.04.2008 (Ex. A-5) by Respondent No. 1 in favour of 

Respondent No. 2 does not bind the Appellant and the Appellant continues to 
be the half shareholder of plaint schedule. It is argued that the Power of Attorney 
(Ex. A-4) is one in the nature of necessity enabling Respondent No. 1 to act in 
accordance with the conditions stipulated. One of the conditions is that the 
Appellant was absent from the country when the requirement to execute arose. 
The Appellant retired in 2007 and was in India on the date of execution of the 
sale deed dated 18.01.2008 (Ex. A-3) in favour of Joemon. For the above 
reasons, Respondent No. 1 ceased to be an agent of the Appellant and, hence, 
Ex. A-5 was executed without authority. 
10.1 It is argued that one of the essential ingredients of a legal and valid sale 
is receipt of sale consideration by the vendor. Under Section 55 of the Transfer 
of Property Act, 1882, to constitute a sale, the conveyance must be for 
consideration, and the vendor must receive the sale consideration. The receipt 
or non-receipt of consideration insofar as parties to the document present more 
than one remedy, a third party to Ex. A-5 can raise the plea of Ex. A-5 being 
illegal and void ab initio. The admission, on non-receipt of sale consideration, 
goes to the root of the legality of Ex. A-5. 
11. 
Shri Haris Beeran, Ld. Counsel for the Respondents, argues that, 
patently, the suit is barred by limitation. The plea of implied revocation of 
authority vis-à-vis Respondent No. 1 is illegal and not available in the facts and 
circumstances of the case. The impugned judgment examined each of the 

circumstances stated in the case, the evidence adduced by the parties together 
with the contemporaneous conduct and dismissed the suit of the Appellant. 
Once it is admitted that power of attorney is executed by the Appellant, thereby 
Respondent No. 1 is the agent, recalling the said power of attorney must be 
established as a matter of fact. The joint execution does not amount to the 
implied revocation of the authority of Respondent No. 1 as the power of attorney 
of the Appellant. Ld. Counsel fairly states that keeping in perspective the view 
expressed by this Court in Amar Nath v. Gian Chand & Anr.1, the power of 
attorney need not be cancelled by a registered deed alone. We find it convenient 
to excerpt the following paragraph from the above citation, and it reads thus: 
“83. 
We need not pronounce on the question whether the power 
of attorney being registered, it could be cancelled only by a registered 
power of attorney. This we say as even in the absence of a registered 
cancellation of the power of attorney, there must be cancellation and 
it must further be brought to the notice of the third party at any rate as 
already noticed. Such a cancellation is not made out”. 
12. 
Given the above-accepted position in law, we need to examine the 
method and mode of recalling the power of an agent. In the circumstances of 
this case, whether the implied revocation is made out. In the case on hand, the 
controversy centers around the implied revocation of the agency. In this 
judgment, we are not dealing with a power of attorney coupled with interest and 
revocation, etc. The Appellant accepted the sale deed dated 16.04.2008 (Ex. A-
5), and the total sale consideration of her share was said to have been received 
 
1 (2022). at the time of execution of the sale deed dated 18.01.2008 (Ex. A-3). The 
consideration by the Appellate Court is legal and valid, and the jurisdiction of 
this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution of India is not made out. It is 
argued and brought on record that the Respondents are in a settled possession 
of the suit schedule property by constructing a house. The house in existence 
is constructed by Respondent No. 2. The Appellant is not entitled to partition of 
the constructed portion. 
V. ANALYSIS 
13. 
We have perused the record and noted the rival submissions. 
14. 
The admitted circumstances of the case are (i) the relationship between 
the Appellant and Respondent No. 1, and Respondent No. 1 and Respondent 
No. 2; (ii) the employment of the Appellant as a Nurse in Bahrain, the U.K. and 
the U.S.A.; (iii) purchase of suit schedule property in 1991 by the Appellant and 
Respondent No. 1; (iv) execution of the Power of Attorney dated 04.12.2003 
(Ex. A-4); (v) execution of the sale deed dated 18.01.2008 (Ex. A-3) in favour of 
Joemon; (vi) execution of sale deed dated 16.04.2008 (Ex. A-5) by Respondent 
No. 1 in favour of Respondent No. 2. The Appellant and Respondent No. 1 are 
co-owners of the schedule property. Respondent No. 1 was the Appellant's 
agent. Therefore, the question for decision is whether the execution of Ex. A-3 
amounts to implied revocation under Section 207 read with Section 208 of the 
Act. 

15. 
We examine the plea of limitation raised by the Respondents. The 
Respondents’ case is that the suit was filed on 11.05.2011, and in effect, the 
suit seeks to set aside the sale deed dated 16.04.2008 (Ex. A-5). The suit was 
filed beyond the limitation period and should have been dismissed. Limitation is 
a question of law and fact. The period of limitation and the time from which the 
period begins to run, depend on the article in the schedule appended to the 
Limitation Act of 1963. The case falls under “Part III – Suits Relating to 
Declarations”. Article 58 reads thus: 
Description of 
suit 
Period of 
Limitation 
Time from which period 
begins to run 
To obtain any other 
declaration 
Three 
years 
When the right to sue first 
accrues. 

15.1 The words “when the right to sue first accrues” have been interpreted and 
held by this Court in Smt. Neelam Kumari & Anr. v. U.P. Financial 
Corporation2. The starting point for the limitation in the case of setting aside 
sale deeds has two limbs: the date of execution and the date of knowledge. 
There is no difficulty in applying the period of limitation expiring three years from 
the date of execution, provided that the Appellant had knowledge of Ex. A-5 on 
the date of registration and the right to sue first accrued. The Respondents, in 
the circumstances of the case, failed to establish the Appellant’s knowledge of 
the execution of Ex. A-5. In the final analysis, Ex. A-5 is held as without authority 
 
 Utt 5. and void. The applicability of limitation has a different perspective. So, the 
starting point is when the right to sue first accrued to the Appellant. The admitted 
case of the Respondents is that the Appellant is a US citizen and she stayed 
abroad. Therefore, unless it is clearly established as a fact that the Appellant 
had knowledge of Ex. A-5, it cannot be inferred that the Appellant had 
contemporaneous knowledge of Ex. A-5 and the limitation started running from 
the date of execution of Ex. A-5. That apart, another fact is whether the said 
exhibit is void or voidable and this depends on the implied revocation relied on 
by the Appellant. From a consideration of relevant circumstances, including the 
filing of a grievance petition before the Legal Services Authority and the reply of 
the Respondents in the instant suit, we are of the view that the suit is filed within 
three years from the date when the right to sue first accrued to Appellant and, 
therefore, the suit is not barred by limitation. Even if the plea of limitation is held 
against the Respondents, the outcome still depends on the relationship as 
principal and agent between the Appellant and Respondent No. 1 and the 
existence and effect of implied revocation pleaded to question the validity of Ex. 
A-5. 
16. 
The terms ‘agent’ and ‘agency’ have several different meanings, but in law 
the word ‘agency’ is used to connote the relationship which exists where one 
person has the authority or capacity to create a legal relationship between a 
person occupying the position of principal and third parties. The relationship of 

agency arises whenever one person, called the agent, has the authority to act 
on behalf of another, called the principal, and consents to act as such. The 
relationship has its genesis in a contract, as has been held in Syed Abdul 
Khader v. Rami Reddy & Ors3. The case of Respondent No. 1 is that the Power 
of Attorney dated 04.12.2003 (Ex. A-4) is the contract authorising her to act as 
the power of attorney holder of the Appellant. The sale deed dated 16.04.2008 
(Ex. A-5) is not for consideration, but on the contrary, it imposed restrictions on 
the discretion of Respondent No. 1. We are not invited to interpret these clauses 
and, hence, we do not examine them. The Appellant executed Ex. A-4 in favour 
of Respondent No. 1. In law, the Appellant is bound by the acts performed by 
Respondent No. 1 in due course and under the authority given by the Appellant 
to Respondent No. 1 through Ex. A-4. The Appellant, when she was residing 
with the Respondents in India post-retirement, executed the sale deed dated 
18.01.2008 (Ex. A-3) in favour of third parties. The co-execution of Ex. A-3 is 
not disputed, and Respondent No. 2 is one of the witnesses to Ex. A-3. Sections 
207 and 208 of the Act read thus: 
“207. 
Revocation and renunciation may be expressed or 
implied.—Revocation and renunciation may be expressed or may be 
implied in the conduct of the principal or agent respectively. 
 
208. 
When termination of agent’s authority takes effect as to 
agent, and as to third persons.— The termination of the authority of 
an agent does not, so far as regards the agent, take effect before it 
becomes known to him, or, so far as regards third persons, before it 
becomes known to them”. 
 
 SC 553. 

17. 
The Act provides for express or implied revocation and renunciation of 
agency. Section 207 provides for express or implied revocation or renunciation. 
Section 208 sets out the effective date of termination of authority with regard to 
an agent and a third person. Let us refer to a few citations dealing with the 
revocation of agency. 
18. 
This Court, in Deb Ratan Biswas & Ors v. Most. Anand Moyi Devi & 
Ors.4 dealt with a case of signing of compromise by the principal/defendants 
during the existence of the agency, and if such independent signing amounts to 
implied revocation of power of attorney executed in favour of the attorneys. 
Relevant paragraphs read thus: 
“9. 
The principal Pushpa Biswas and Apurva Kumar Biswas have 
signed the compromise for partition of the property, which in our opinion 
in law amounts to implied revocation of power of attorney in favour of 
Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Mishra vide Illustration to Section 207 of the Indian 
Contract Act. Pushpa Biswas and Apurva Kumar Biswas cannot be 
allowed to say that their own act of signing the compromise petition 
was collusive and fraudulent. xxx 
xxx 
11. 
The principal is not bound to consult his attorney before signing 
a compromise petition. 
12. 
It is well-settled that even after execution of a power of attorney 
the principal can act independently and does not have to take the 
consent of the attorney. The attorney is after all only an agent of the 
principal. Even after executing a power of attorney the principal can act 
on his own”. 
 
4. 

19. 
The High Court of Punjab and Haryana in Amrik Singh (deceased) 
represented by his legal heirs Darshan Singh & Ors. v. Sohan Singh 
(deceased) by his legal heirs Gurudev Kaur & Ors.5, tracing the power of 
revocation under Section 207 of the Act, held that the revocation of the power 
of attorney could be either express or implied as provided under Section 207 of 
the Act. 
20. 
In N. Shivkumar & Anr. v. R. Peter Pereira6, the Madras High Court dealt 
with a case where the principal executing a settlement deed in the subsistence 
of a power of attorney, and held as under: 
“23. 
WhenSec.207 preceding Sec.208 of the Act provides for 
revocation and renunciation by even an implied conduct of the 
principal, there is no impediment for the principal to deal with the 
property that belongs to the principal. When a settlement deed came 
to be executed on 18.04.2007, and the same was also duly registered 
before the concerned Sub Registrar, it was an implied act of 
revocation/renunciation of the Power of Attorney dated 29.05.2002 
executed in favour of the 1st Appellant. Therefore, on the date of the 
execution of the settlement deed by Thelma Cecelia Pereira on 
18.04.2007, it resulted in an implied revocation of the Power of 
Attorney dated 29.05.2002 and the 1st Appellant had no authority to 
deal with the property of the principal on or after 18.04.2007. xxx 
xxx 
25. 
Though the counsel for the Appellants would also draw any 
attention to Ex.B.3 Will under which Thelma Cecelia Pereira 
bequeathed the suit property to the defendant, the said Will also gets 
superceded and impliedly revoked by the testatrix, by executing a 
settlement deed in favour of her brother, Raymond Pereira. xxx 
xxx 
 
5 1987 SCC Online P&H 891. 
6 S.A. No.1206 of 2014 (Madras HC). 

27. 
A con-joint reading of Sections 201 and 207 of the Contract 
Act and especially the illustrations appended to these Sections, I am 
of the view that the principal viz., Thelma Cecelia Pereira was well 
within her right and authority to deal with the suit property, dehors the 
Power of Attorney and during its subsistence and the moment the 
settlement deed was executed by the principal herself, it resulted in an 
automatic implied termination of the Power of Attorney given to the 
power agent. 
(Emphasis supplied)” 
21. 
In the absence of a particular mode suggested for revocation of the 
authority of an agent, the manner adopted by the principal to revoke the 
authority of the agent must be one which clearly and unequivocally 
communicates to the parties i.e., to be affected by such revocation, that the 
agent’s authority has been withdrawn. In the framework of Sections 207 and 
208 of the Act, the revocation/renunciation of authority may be made by express 
words or may be implied from the words and conduct of the principal, viz., which 
is inconsistent with the continuance of the agency. This is one facet of 
renunciation or revocation of authority of an agent; the other facet is governed 
by Section 208 of the Act. Section 208 provides for the effective time and date 
of termination of the agent’s authority and third parties. From a plain reading, 
Section 208 infers and gives effect to revocation upon the twin conditions being 
satisfied, (i) communication to the agent and (ii) knowledge to a third party i.e., 
one who deals with or is likely to deal with the agent. Then, the revocation of 
authority becomes known to the agent and the said third parties. In other words, 
an idea in the mind of the principal to revoke cannot be construed as implied 
revocation or renunciation of agency. There ought to be an act or conduct of the 

principal which implies that the agency is revoked or withdrawn. If the revocation 
is expressed, such as by publication in newspapers, public notice or 
advertisement, communication to the agent etc., the parties who deal with the 
agent have a reasonable opportunity to know the revocation of agency by the 
principal. Two stages of revocation are, firstly, one dealing with the agent, and 
secondly, one which applies to the third parties. For attracting the consequence 
of revocation to either of the situations, the revocation of the agent’s authority is 
made by the principal in a manner that clearly implies that the principal has 
withdrawn the authority to act on his or her behalf by the agent. Followed by 
knowledge to third parties, let us examine the circumstances of the case on 
whether implied revocation coupled with communication is established. 
22. 
The Power of Attorney (Ex. A-4) was executed on 04.12.2003. The 
Appellant, on 30.11.2007, claims to have retired from service and settled in 
India. A power of attorney confers power for the execution of deeds in situations 
of necessity, including in the absence of the Appellant in the country. From the 
record, it can be noted that from 2007 onwards, the Appellant was not entirely 
absent from India or residing exclusively in the U.S.A. Therefore, the Appellant 
and Respondent No. 1 executed the sale deed dated 18.01.2008 (Ex. A-3). 
Respondent No. 2 is one of the witnesses to Ex. A-3. The execution of sale 
deed dated 16.04.2008 (Ex. A-5) is inconsistent with and contradictory to the 
power granted to Respondent No. 1 in Ex. A-4. This is an explicit conduct of the 

Appellant to act for herself on the share she holds in the property purchased in 
1991. In Deb Ratan Biswas (supra), this Court held that the signing of a 
compromise by the defendants themselves would amount to implied revocation 
of power of attorney. In a case where the principal chooses to act for himself, 
particularly to the agent's knowledge and a person to be affected, then it can be 
held that Section 207 of the Act is attracted. We have no doubt in holding that 
the Appellant, in terms of Section 207, impliedly revoked the authority of 
Respondent No. 1, and as required by Section 208, Respondent No. 2 had the 
knowledge of the independent dealing with the property by the Appellant. 
Therefore, the revocation takes effect on 18.01.2008. Ex. A-5 was executed on 
16.04.2008. Thus, with the operation of implied revocation of authority, 
Respondent No. 1 cannot act as an agent of the Appellant and, hence, the sale 
deed insofar as the Appellant’s share in the suit schedule is held void ab initio. 
23. 
The ancillary argument is on non-receipt of consideration under Ex. A-5. 
Let us refer to the evidence of D.W.1, which reads as follows: 
“(Q) 
No. Immediately after the marriage, I sold the property to my 
husband. On 16-4-08, after the marriage, the property was sold to the 
husband for consideration. Agreed to pay an amount of Rs.80,000 as 
consideration. But not given. We are wife and husband. The 
consideration other than what is stated in the deed has not been 
given? (Q) No. When the property was sold to the husband the plaintiff 
was in the native place”. 
24. 
Evidence of D.W.1 is clear that Ex. A-5 is not supported by consideration. 
The Appellant is a third party to Ex. A-5. For the view, we have taken on implied 

revocation of Ex. A-4 by the Appellant, the deliberation of this issue does not 
influence the conclusion. Therefore, we merely express our agreement with the 
findings recorded by the Trial Court on this behalf. 
25. 
As already noted, the impugned judgment excerpted a slew of unavailable 
questions and answered them in an axiomatic way. Since the findings are 
conflicting, we have, within our jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution 
of India, examined the record and the contentions urged by the parties. We are 
convinced that the impugned judgment is unsustainable, and consequently, the 
appeal succeeds and is allowed. The judgment and the decree of the Trial Court 
are confirmed. 
25.1 We take note of the close relationship between the Appellant and the 
Respondents, and that the Respondents have constructed the house and reside 
in the house. Admittedly, the Appellant is not successful in her claim for half 
share in the house constructed in the plaint schedule. Therefore, it would be 
legal and equitable to direct the Trial Court first to explore the possibility of 
determining the market value of the Appellant’s half share in the suit schedule 
property and subject to the Respondents paying the current market value to the 
Appellant towards her half share, a final decree be passed accordingly. If the 
parties do not arrive at a consensus on the current market value, the operative 
portion in the judgment and decree of the Trial Court could be put to final decree 
proceedings and execution in accordance with the law. In such an event, the 

Appellant compensates the Respondents for possessing the constructed area 
along with her half share in the plaint schedule. 
26. 
Civil Appeal is allowed. No order as to costs...……… 
 [ C.T. RAVIKUMAR ]...……… 
 [ S.V.N. BHATTI ]