IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 ( SLP(Crl.) No(s). 9091 of 2022) 
 
MIR MUSTAFA ALI HASMI. 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF A.P. 
 
 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
 
2. 
This appeal by special leave filed on behalf of the appellant 
lays a challenge to the judgment dated 2nd August, 2022 passed 
by the High Court of Telangana at Hyderabad in Criminal Appeal 
No.1036 of 2008, whereby the appeal preferred by the appellant 
was dismissed and the judgement dated 5th August, 2008 passed 
by the learned Additional Special Judge for SPE and ACB Cases, 
City Civil Court, Hyderabad(hereinafter being referred to as ‘trial 
Court’) was affirmed. By the said judgment, the appellant herein 
i.e., Accused Officer No.1(hereinafter being referred to as ‘AO1’) 
and Accused Officer No.2(hereinafter being referred to as ‘AO2’) 
were convicted and sentenced as below:- 

i) Offence punishable under Section 7 of Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988(hereinafter being referred to as ‘PC 
Act’): Rigorous Imprisonment of one year and a fine of 
Rs.1,000/- each (in default, simple imprisonment for three 
months) 
ii) Offence punishable under Section 13(1)(d) read with 13(2) 
of PC Act: Rigorous Imprisonment of one year and a fine of 
Rs. 1,000/- each (in default, simple imprisonment for 
three months) 
Both the sentences were ordered to run concurrently. 
3. 
In appeal, the High Court overturned the conviction of AO2 
and affirmed the conviction of the appellant(AO1) herein. 
4. 
The case of the prosecution in a nutshell is that the 
appellant(AO1) being the Forest Section Officer and co-
accused(AO2-N.Hanumanthu)(since acquitted) being the Forest 
Guard were both part of the Flying Squad of the Forest 
Department. On 6th January, 2003, the appellant(AO1) and AO2 
had gone to a saw-mill at Vanasthalipuram, purportedly operated 
by the complainant Mukka Ramesh(hereinafter being referred to 
as ‘PW-1’), which was taken on lease in the name of PW-1’s wife 
from one Sri E. Ramachary. During their visit, the appellant(AO1) 

and AO2 detected teakwood lying in the saw-mill. It is alleged that 
both the accused (AO1 and AO2), threatened PW-1 that he would 
be booked in a case for the illegal and unlicensed possession of 
teakwood in the saw-mill. It is further alleged that on the plea of 
PW-1, the appellant (AO1) booked a case against one M. Ashok, a 
worker in the saw-mill and not against PW-1 and thereafter, a 
compounding fee of Rs.50,000/- was charged, by issuing a 
receipt(Exhibit P-2) in the name of M. Ashok. 
5. 
It is further alleged that after their visit on 6th January, 2023, 
the appellant(AO1) and AO2 started demanding mamool (monthly 
gratification) to the tune of Rs.5,000/- from the PW-1 under a 
threat that they would book a case against him and in that manner 
his business would be ruined. Threatening calls were allegedly 
made to PW-1 on a regular basis. On 21st January, 2003, AO2 
called PW-1 and asked him to keep the mamool money ready with 
further instruction that he would make a call and give directions 
for delivery of the said bribe. On 22nd January, 2003, the 
appellant(AO1) called PW-1 and asked him to reach Hotel Quality-
Inn Residency, Nampally(hereinafter being referred to as ‘Hotel 
Quality-Inn’), on early morning of 23rd January, 2003 with the 
demanded mamool amount of Rs. 5,000/-. Disinclined to pay the 

bribe, PW-1 lodged a complaint(Exhibit P-1) on 22nd January, 2003 
with Shri G. Ramachander, Deputy Superintendent of Police, 
ACB(hereinafter being referred to as ‘DySP’)(PW-10) and a crime 
report was registered thereupon. The trap was arranged on 23rd 
January, 2003. The complainant(PW-1), along with his friend 
Potagunta Ramesh Naidu(hereinafter being referred to as ‘PW-2’) 
reached the ACB office with the currency notes to the tune of 
Rs.5,000/- being the bribe amount. Two independent witnesses, 
namely, Kathi Srinivas Rao(PW-3) and Md. Mahmood Ali were 
summoned to act as mediators(panchas). At 9:45 am, the trap 
party conducted the pre-trap proceedings which were recorded in 
the memorandum(Exhibit P-4). After completing the pre-trap 
proceedings, the trap party, under the leadership of DySP(PW-10) 
proceeded 
to 
the 
Hotel 
Quality-Inn 
at 
10:30 
am. 
The 
complainant(PW-1) and PW-2 entered the Hotel and met the 
appellant(AO1) in the coffee shop of the said Hotel. It is further 
alleged that the complainant(PW-1) offered the bribe amount to the 
appellant(AO1) at the coffee shop, who showed reluctance to 
accept the same and asked them to follow him into the cellar of the 
hotel. The DySP and the other trap party members followed them 
from a distance. After reaching the cellar, the appellant(AO1) 

demanded 
and 
accepted 
the 
bribe 
amount 
from 
the 
complainant(PW-1) and pushed it down into the rexine bag which 
he was carrying. The prosecution claims that the above sequence 
of events which transpired between the appellant(AO1) and the 
complainant(PW-1) in presence of PW-2 was also visible to the trap 
party which was waiting in the hotel lobby, however, they could 
not overhear the conversation. 
6. 
At about 11:25 am, PW-2 came out of the cellar and gave the 
pre-arranged signal upon which, the trap party proceeded towards 
the appellant (AO1). The DySP(PW-10) questioned him about 
having accepted the bribe amount. The complainant(PW-1) 
immediately informed the DySP(PW-10) that the appellant(AO1) 
had demanded and accepted the bribe amount of Rs.5,000/- from 
him and had placed the same in a rexine bag. The hands of the 
appellant(AO1) were rinsed in sodium carbonate solution. The 
wash of the fingers of his right hand turned pink. The appellant 
(AO1), upon being questioned about having accepted the bribe, 
stated with trepidation that he had accepted the said amount 
towards compounding fee and opened the rexine bag which he was 
carrying. The mediator, Kathi Srinivas(PW-3) took out the currency 
notes from the rexine bag being held by the appellant(AO1) and on 

verification, numbers of the notes tallied with the numbers of the 
currency notes submitted by the complainant(PW-1) at the time of 
the pre-trap proceedings. The bribe amount and a diary along with 
the rexine bag held by the appellant(AO1) were seized. The diary 
too was tested for presence of phenolphthalein because it had also 
come into contact of the tainted currency notes which was kept in 
the 
bag. 
A 
money-receipt 
book 
was 
also 
seized 
(via 
memorandum(Exhibit P-6)). The post-trap proceedings were 
recorded in the memorandum(Exhibit P-11). 
7. 
The prosecution sanction was procured and upon concluding 
the investigation, charge sheet came to be filed against the 
appellant (AO1) and AO2 in the Court of learned Additional Special 
Judge for SPE and ACB Cases, City Civil Court, Hyderabad. The 
learned trial Court framed charges against the appellant(AO1) and 
AO2 for the offences punishable under Sections 7, 13(1)(d) read 
with Section 13(2) of the PC Act. They denied the charges and 
claimed trial. The prosecution examined as many as 11 witnesses 
and exhibited 19 documents and 8 material objects in order to 
prove its case. The accused (AO1 and AO2) upon being questioned 
under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973(hereinafter being referred as ‘CrPC’) and when confronted 

with the allegations as appearing in the prosecution evidence, 
denied the same and claimed to be innocent. 
8. 
The appellant(AO1) categorically stated in his statement 
under Section 313 CrPC, that while he and the complainant(PW-
1) were having coffee in the hotel, he inadvertently left his rexine 
bag behind at the coffee shop. He conjectured that the 
complainant(PW-1) might have planted the tainted currency notes 
in his rexine bag without his knowledge because he was aggrieved 
by the fine of Rs.50,000/- imposed upon M. Ashok (employee of 
the saw-mill) by the appellant(AO1) earlier. 
9. 
Upon hearing the arguments of the learned defence counsel 
and the learned Special Public Prosecutor and after evaluating the 
evidence available on record, the trial Court proceeded to convict 
and sentence the appellant(AO1) and AO2 as above vide judgment 
dated 5th August, 2008. 
10. The said judgment was assailed by both the accused by filing 
separate appeals before the High Court of Telangana. The appeal 
preferred by AO2 was accepted whereas, the appeal preferred by 
the appellant(AO1) was rejected by judgment dated 2nd August, 
2022 which is subjected to challenge in this appeal by special 
leave. 

Submissions on behalf of the appellant: - 
11. Shri Dama Sheshadri Naidu, learned senior counsel 
representing the appellant, vehemently and fervently contended 
that the entire prosecution case is false and fabricated. No 
convincing evidence was led by the prosecution to prove the factum 
of demand of bribe by the AO1(appellant). G.Ramachander(PW-
10) DySP, who was also the Trap Laying Officer(hereinafter being 
referred to as ‘TLO’) did not make any effort to get the factum of 
demand of bribe verified by means of any independent or tangible 
evidence. 
12. Shri Naidu submitted that the prosecution failed to prove that 
the appellant(AO1) had ever demanded any bribe from the 
complainant(PW-1) because neither did the TLO(PW-10) make any 
endeavour to get the telephonic conversation between the 
complainant(PW-1) and the appellant(AO1) recorded nor did he 
make any attempt to place a recording device on the person of the 
complainant(PW-1) during the trap proceeding so as to verify the 
factum of demand of bribe. Furthermore, other than the interested 
witness i.e., PW-2, no independent witness was directed by the 
TLO to overhear the conversation which took place between the 
complainant(PW-1) and the appellant(AO1) on the day of the trap. 

13. Shri Naidu urged that even the allegation of acceptance of 
illegal gratification by the appellant(AO1) is surrounded in a cloud 
of dubiety. In order to buttress these submissions, Shri Naidu 
drew the attention of the Court to the following admissions as 
appearing in the cross-examination of the complainant, Mukka 
Ramesh(PW-1): - 
“We ordered coffee took ½ an hour for servicing. I removed the 
amount and about to give the amount to the AO. I did not give 
it to his hand. The accused refused and asked me to come 
downstairs. After ordering coffee the coffee being served we 3 
took coffee. The Accused No.1 started to going out and we follow 
the accused at that time I kept the amount in my pocket and 
while going out from coffee inn the amount was with me. We 
have to get down the same ramp by 50ft. We have to take turns 
After the accused 1 going out I found the bag of him in the hotel 
1 picked it up I handed over the bag to the accused 1 after 
crossing 2tables in the hotel. Al was going to since I paid the 
bill of the hotel I was to little bit late to follow AO. 1. We have to 
again pass the ramp down the cellar by about 50ft. Where there 
are two different stands for parking motor cycles and four 
wheelers. The generators are situated near to the parking stand 
of two wheelers. The accused came on two wheeler I asked the 
accused 1 to show the papers. He showed the papers to me. It 
is not true to suggest that after accused showing the papers to 
me I snatched them and myself and Pw2 turned them and 
throw them away. It is not true to suggest that I paid the money 
to the Accused 1 near the generator and the accused asked me 
to put it in bag is false. It is not true to suggest I kept the tainted 
amount in the rexyne bag which was left by the accused before 
leaving coffee inn and I planted the currency notes in the bag 
and handed over it to him and the accused has no knowledge 
the tainted amount was in the rexyne bag. It is not true to 
suggest that myself and Pw2 used our influence to ACB to 
organize the false trap against Alas AO.1 insisted of filing case 
against my wife, Manjula. It is not true to suggest that the AO1 
and 2 did not telephone me and my statement is false.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
14. Referring to the above admissions as appearing in the 
testimony of the complainant(PW-1), Shri Naidu contended that it 

is clear that the appellant(AO1) had forgotten his rexine bag in the 
coffee shop from which the tainted currency notes were recovered 
later by the trap party, and it was the complainant(PW-1) who 
handed over the same rexine bag to the appellant(AO1). Shri Naidu 
urged that fuelled by ulterior motive, the complainant(PW-1) 
misused this window of opportunity to plant the tainted currency 
notes in the bag of the appellant(AO1). 
15. Learned counsel also urged that the prosecution did not take 
any steps to get the wash collected from the hands of the 
appellant(AO1) during the trap proceedings, tested through the 
FSL and thus, there is no corroborative evidence to show that the 
appellant(AO1) had accepted or handled the tainted currency 
notes as alleged by prosecution. 
16. Shri Naidu further contended that the trial Court as well as 
the High Court rendered the findings of guilt against the 
appellant(AO1) merely on the basis of assumptions and 
presumptions drawn from the tainted and vacillating deposition of 
the complainant(PW-1) and PW-2, who was admittedly a close 
friend of the complainant(PW-1) and thus, he can be categorized 
as being an interested witness. 

17. Learned counsel also urged that the TLO(PW-10) was under 
an obligation to send an independent shadow witness with the 
complainant(PW-1) and PW-2 to oversee and overhear the events 
as they unfolded during the course of the transaction of demand 
and acceptance of the bribe. Admittedly, neither the mediators nor 
any other witness associated in the trap proceedings heard the 
conversation which took place between the AO1(appellant), the 
complainant(PW-1) and PW-2, despite the positive case that they 
all were sitting on the nearby table. It was the complainant(PW-1) 
who voluntarily took his friend, PW-2, and got him associated 
during the trap proceeding. As per Shri Naidu, this was a clear 
attempt by the complainant(PW-1) in connivance with the TLO(PW-
10) to create evidence through a partisan witness acting and 
hence, the prosecution is guilty of deliberately associating an 
interested witness so as to fortify the alleged transaction of 
demand and acceptance of bribe. 
 
18. Shri Naidu urged that the High Court cursorily brushed aside 
the crucial admission as appearing in the cross-examination of the 
complainant(PW-1)(reproduced supra) that the rexine bag of the 
appellant(AO1) from which the tainted currency notes were 
recovered had been handled by the complainant(PW-1), by 

observing that this was an afterthought. As per Shri Naidu, the 
said vital admission was spontaneously elicited during the cross-
examination conducted from the complainant(PW-1) and thus, it 
cannot be ignored as being an afterthought. He contended that the 
prosecution 
consciously 
chose 
not 
to 
re-examine 
the 
complainant(PW-1) on this aspect of his testimony and thus, the 
defence cannot be denied to the benefit thereof. 
 
19. Shri Naidu, further contended that no calls were made by the 
appellant(AO1) to the complainant(PW-1) proximate to the date of 
the trap. He drew the attention of the Court to the call detail 
records(CDR) of the appellant(AO1) and the complainant(PW-1) 
and urged that only two calls were exchanged between the 
appellant(AO1) and the complainant(PW-1), one being on 8th 
January, 2003 and the other on 17th January, 2003 and hence, 
the allegation made by the complainant(PW-1) in the FIR and in 
his deposition, that the appellant(AO1) called him on 21st January, 
2003, 22nd January, 2003 and 23rd January, 2003 in connection 
with demand of bribe is falsified, creating a grave doubt on the 
veracity of the entire prosecution case. 
20. Attention of the Court was also drawn to the pertinent 
admission made by the complainant(PW-1) in his testimony that 

while they were having coffee in the coffee shop of the Hotel 
Quality-Inn, he took out the bribe amount and offered it to the 
appellant(AO1) who refused to accept the same. Shri Naidu thus, 
urged that it is crystal clear that the prosecution miserably failed 
to prove that the appellant(AO1) demanded or accepted any bribe 
amount from the complainant(PW-1). 
21. On these grounds, learned senior counsel appearing for the 
appellant implored the Court to accept the appeal, set aside the 
impugned judgments and direct acquittal of the appellant(AO1) 
from the charges. 
Submission on behalf of the respondent-State: - 
22., learned standing counsel appearing for the State, 
vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions advanced on 
behalf of the appellant(AO1). He contended that the appellant(AO1) 
being the Forest Section Officer firstly, imposed an unwarranted 
fine 
amount 
of 
Rs.50,000/- 
on 
the 
saw-mill 
of 
the 
complainant(PW-1). Thereafter, extending a threat of repeated 
action thereby harming the business of the complainant(PW-1), 
the appellant(AO1), demanded a monthly amount of Rs.5,000/- as 
bribe(mamool) from the complainant(PW-1) which fact is duly 

corroborated from the evidence of the complainant(PW-1) and PW-
2. 
23. He urged that at the time of preparation of the memorandum 
of the post-trap proceedings(Exhibit P-11), the appellant(AO1) 
admitted 
that 
he 
had 
received 
the 
amount 
from 
the 
complainant(PW-1), offering a far-fetched explanation that the 
same was received as compounding fee in a case whereas, no such 
case was pending. It was thus, contended that this admission 
made by the appellant(AO1) can be read against him. The 
subsequent plea set up by the appellant(AO1) that the currency 
notes were planted by the complainant(PW-1) himself in his rexine 
bag without his knowledge is unacceptable on the face of record 
and that such frivolous defence plea was rightly discarded by the 
trial Court and the High Court. 
24. He further urged that the appellant(AO1), having failed to 
offer a plausible explanation regarding the tainted currency notes 
found from the rexine bag in his possession and so also to the 
presence of phenolphthalein on the fingers of his right hand, was 
rightly convicted by the trial Court and his conviction was 
justifiably affirmed by the High Court. He thus, implored the Court 
to dismiss the appeal and affirm the impugned judgments. 

Discussion and Conclusion: - 
25. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have perused the impugned 
judgments. With the assistance of learned counsel for the parties, 
we have thoroughly examined the evidence available on record. 
26. Since fervent arguments were raised on behalf of the parties 
on the aspect of demand of bribe, it would be useful to recapitulate 
the relevant position of law on the use of circumstantial evidence 
to prove demand of illegal gratification. 
27. A Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of Neeraj 
Dutta v. State(Government of NCT of Delhi),1 was called upon to 
answer a reference on the question as to whether the 
circumstantial evidence can be relied upon to prove the demand of 
illegal gratification and whether in the absence of evidence of the 
complainant direct/primary, oral or documentary, would it be 
permissible to draw an inferential deduction of culpability/guilt of 
a public servant under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) read with Section 
13(2) of the Act based on other evidence adduced by the 
 
1 (2023) 

prosecution. This Constitution Bench traversed the entire history 
of the judicial pronouncements on the issue and held as below: - 
“88. What emerges from the aforesaid discussion is 
summarised as under: 
88.1. (a) Proof of demand and acceptance of illegal 
gratification by a public servant as a fact in issue by 
the prosecution is a sine qua non in order to establish 
the guilt of the accused public servant under Sections 
7 and 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act. 
88.2. (b) In order to bring home the guilt of the 
accused, the prosecution has to first prove the 
demand of illegal gratification and the subsequent 
acceptance as a matter of fact. This fact in issue can 
be proved either by direct evidence which can be in 
the nature of oral evidence or documentary evidence. 
88.3. (c) Further, the fact in issue, namely, the proof 
of demand and acceptance of illegal gratification can 
also be proved by circumstantial evidence in the 
absence of direct oral and documentary evidence. 
88.4. (d) In order to prove the fact in issue, namely, 
the demand and acceptance of illegal gratification by 
the public servant, the following aspects have to be 
borne in mind: 
 
(i) if there is an offer to pay by the bribe-
giver without there being any demand from 
the public servant and the latter simply 
accepts the offer and receives the illegal 
gratification, it is a case of acceptance as 
per Section 7 of the Act. In such a case, 
there need not be a prior demand by the 
public servant. 
 
(ii) On the other hand, if the public servant 
makes 
a 
demand and 
the 
bribe-giver 
accepts the demand and tenders the 
demanded gratification which in turn is 
received by the public servant, it is a case of 
obtainment. In the case of obtainment, the 
prior 
demand 
for 
illegal 
gratification 
emanates from the public servant. This is 
an offence under Sections 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) 
of the Act. 

(iii) In both cases of (i) and (ii) above, the 
offer by the bribe-giver and the demand by 
the public servant respectively have to be 
proved by the prosecution as a fact in issue. 
In other words, mere acceptance or receipt 
of an illegal gratification without anything 
more would not make it an offence under 
Section 7 or Sections 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii), 
respectively of the Act. Therefore, under 
Section 7 of the Act, in order to bring home 
the offence, there must be an offer which 
emanates from the bribe-giver which is 
accepted by the public servant which would 
make it an offence. Similarly, a prior 
demand by the public servant when 
accepted by the bribe-giver and in turn 
there is a payment made which is received 
by the public servant, would be an offence 
of obtainment under Sections 13(1)(d)(i) and 
(ii) of the Act. 
 
88.5. (e) The presumption of fact with regard to the 
demand and acceptance or obtainment of an illegal 
gratification may be made by a court of law by way of 
an inference only when the foundational facts have 
been proved by relevant oral and documentary 
evidence and not in the absence thereof. On the basis 
of the material on record, the court has the discretion 
to raise a presumption of fact while considering 
whether the fact of demand has been proved by the 
prosecution or not. Of course, a presumption of fact 
is subject to rebuttal by the accused and in the 
absence of rebuttal presumption stands. 
88.6. (f) In the event the complainant turns “hostile”, 
or has died or is unavailable to let in his evidence 
during trial, demand of illegal gratification can be 
proved by letting in the evidence of any other witness 
who can again let in evidence, either orally or by 
documentary evidence or the prosecution can prove 
the case by circumstantial evidence. The trial does 
not abate nor does it result in an order of acquittal of 
the accused public servant. 
88.7. (g) Insofar as Section 7 of the Act is concerned, 
on the proof of the facts in issue, Section 20 mandates 
the court to raise a presumption that the illegal 
gratification was for the purpose of a motive or reward 
as mentioned in the said Section. The said 

presumption has to be raised by the court as a legal 
presumption or a presumption in law. Of course, the 
said presumption is also subject to rebuttal. Section 
20 does not apply to Sections 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the 
Act. 
88.8. (h) We clarify that the presumption in law under 
Section 20 of the Act is distinct from presumption of 
fact referred to above in sub-para 88.5(e), above, as 
the former is a mandatory presumption while the 
latter is discretionary in nature.” 
 
28. Thus, in addition to answering the primary issue raised in 
the matter, the Constitution Bench also went on to hold that in 
order to bring home the guilt of the accused, the prosecution has 
to prove the demand of illegal gratification and the subsequent 
acceptance, by either direct or circumstantial evidence. 
29. Keeping in view the ratio of the above mentioned decision of 
the Constitution Bench, we now proceed to discuss the evidence 
available on record so as to find out whether the prosecution has 
been able to prove beyond all manner of doubt the fact that the 
appellant(AO1) 
demanded 
and 
accepted 
bribe 
from 
the 
complainant(PW-1). 
30. First and foremost, we may note that the first allegation of 
demand as emanating from the prosecution case is reflected from 
the complaint (Exhibit P-1) submitted by the complainant(PW-1) to 
the DySP, ACB Department, Hyderabad Range on 22nd January, 

2003, alleging inter alia that a fine of Rs.50,000/- had been 
imposed on his saw mill by the flying squad led by the 
appellant(AO1) in relation to the recovery of illegal and unlicensed 
teakwood in the saw-mill. After a week of this event, the 
appellant(AO1) and the Forest guard(AO2) again came to the saw-
mill and demanded a monthly amount(mamool) of Rs.5,000/- to 
refrain from taking any further action on the saw-mill. Thus the 
allegation of demand as emanating from the complaint(Exhibit P-
1) is common to both the appellant(AO1) as well as the co-
accused(AO2) who stands acquitted by the High Court. The 
complaint(Exhibit P-1) was lodged on 22nd January, 2003. The 
DySP (PW-10) organized the pre-trap proceedings, on the next day 
i.e. on 23rd January 2003 without making any attempt to verify the 
allegation of demand of bribe levelled against the appellant(AO1) 
by the complainant(PW-1) in the complaint(Exhibit P-1). 
31. It is the settled convention in such cases that the Trap Laying 
Officer, makes efforts to verify the factum of demand of bribe by 
the public servant before initiating the trap proceedings. The 
factum of demand of bribe can also be verified by recording the 
telephonic conversation between the decoy and the suspect public 
servant. Often, a recording device is secretly placed on the person 

of the decoy to record the conversation which would transpire 
during the course of acceptance of bribe by the public servant. 
However, no such steps were taken by the DySP(PW-10), who 
straight away organized the trap without making any effort 
whatsoever to verify the factum of demand attributed to the 
appellant(AO1) and AO2. It is relevant to mention here that PW-2 
was the only witness associated by the DySP/TLO(PW-10) to 
accompany the complainant(PW-1) for witnessing the transaction 
of demand and acceptance of bribe. Evidently thus, PW-2 was kept 
as a shadow witness in the case. During the course of trial, the 
complainant(PW-1) and PW-2 both admitted that they were close 
friends. The complainant(PW-1) and PW-2 being close friends, it 
can safely be assumed that PW-2 was an interested witness. 
Hence, it is also manifested that TLO/DySP(PW-10) did not make 
any effort whatsoever to associate an independent person to act as 
a shadow witness in the trap proceedings. It is recorded in the 
memorandum of the pre-trap proceedings(Exhibit P-4) that it was 
the DySP(PW-10) who summoned the PW-2 and asked him to act 
as a shadow witness to oversee and overhear the transaction of 
acceptance of illegal gratification. However, this fact is totally 
contradicted by the version as set out in the evidence of the 

complainant(PW-1) and PW-2. Both categorically stated that it was 
the complainant(PW-1) who asked PW-2 to accompany him during 
the trap proceedings scheduled to take place on the morning of 
23rd January, 2003. In normal course, before proceeding to the 
stage of trap, it was incumbent upon the DySP(PW-10) to get an 
independent verification done of the alleged demand which fact 
assumes prominence considering the circumstance that the 
accompanying shadow witness, Ramesh Naidu(PW-2) is a close 
friend of the complainant(PW-1) who himself bore a grudge against 
the appellant(AO1) on account of the fine of Rs. 50,000/- imposed 
on the saw-mill. 
32. Now, we shall proceed to discuss the evidence of the material 
prosecution witnesses. 
33. The complainant(PW-1), stated in examination-in-chief that 
he had taken a premises on lease from E. Ramachary in the name 
of his wife and was running a saw-mill and timber depot 
thereupon. On 6th January, 2003, the Flying Squad of the Forest 
Department 
comprising 
of 
Mir 
Mustafa, 
Forest 
Section 
Officer(appellant herein)(AO1) and N. Hanumanthu, Forest 
Guard(AO2) along with three other staff members came to his saw-
mill and conducted an inspection. They allegedly found teakwood 

stored in the saw-mill without any licence etc. and thus a case was 
booked against the complainant(PW-1) who disputed that no 
teakwood was found in his mill. After booking the case, the 
appellant(AO1) and AO2 imposed a fine of Rs.50,000/- but the fine 
receipt was issued in the name of an employee of the saw mill 
named M. Ashok. After 7 or 10 days, AO1 and AO2 again came to 
his saw-mill and demanded a monthly payment(mamool) of 
Rs.5,000/- threatening that if the amount was not paid, they 
would book repeated cases against him and dismantle his 
business. On 21st February, 2003, AO1 and AO2 rang up the 
complainant(PW-1) and demanded a bribe of Rs.5,000/-. AO2 also 
frequently called the complainant(PW-1) over mobile and harassed 
him in relation to the demand of Rs.5,000/-. Being perturbed by 
these persistent demands, the complainant(PW-1) went to the ACB 
Office on 22nd January, 2003 and submitted a complaint(Exhibit 
P-1) to the DySP(PW-10). The complainant(PW-1) was instructed 
by the DySP(PW-10) to come to the ACB office on 23rd January, 
2003 along with the bribe amount of Rs.5,000/- which he intended 
to pay for getting the appellant(AO1) and AO2 trapped. On the 
same day, i.e. on 22nd January, 2003 in the evening, the 
complainant(PW-1) informed his friend Ramesh Naidu(PW-2) 

about lodging of the complaint and requested him to accompany 
him to the ACB office on the next day. The complainant(PW-1) 
alleged that in the morning of 23rd March, 2003, he received 
another phone call from the appellant(AO1) and AO2 and he was 
directed to come to the Quality-Inn Residency Hotel, Nampally 
along with the bribe amount of Rs.5,000/-. The complainant(PW-
1) agreed and thereafter, he proceeded to the ACB office where PW-
2 was already waiting for him. The DySP(PW-10), his staff along 
with mediators assembled in the ACB office. The DySP(PW-10) 
introduced the complainant(PW-1) to the mediators; pre-trap 
proceedings were undertaken; the mediators verified the currency 
notes presented by the complainant(PW-1) and noted the 
denomination and the serial numbers thereof in the pre-trap 
panchnama(Exhibit P-4). A white powder was applied to the 
currency notes. The DySP(PW-10) then requested PW-2 to act as 
an 
accompanying 
witness(shadow 
witness). 
He 
told 
the 
complainant(PW-1) and PW-2 to proceed to the Hotel Quality-Inn 
for paying the bribe amount to the appellant(AO1) and AO2 on 
their further demand and even otherwise. PW-2 was instructed to 
watch the sequence of events which would transpire between the 
complainant(PW-1) and the two accused(AO1 and AO2) and after 

transfer of the bribe amount, to give the pre-arranged signal by 
wiping his hand with the handkerchief. The procedure of use of 
phenolphthalein powder was demonstrated in presence of the 
complainant(PW-1). After that, the complainant(PW-1) and PW-2 
proceeded to the Hotel Quality-Inn and the DySP(PW-10) and other 
trap party members followed them from a distance. The 
complainant(PW-1) and PW-2 reached the Hotel Quality-Inn at 
about 10:30 am. The complainant(PW-1) parked his vehicle in the 
cellar of the hotel and then he, along with PW-2 went into the coffee 
shop and occupied a table. The mediators and Inspector, N. 
Chandrashekar(PW-11) also came into the shop and occupied a 
nearby table. The DySP(PW-10) and other staff members kept vigil 
at the entry gate of the coffee shop. While they were waiting, the 
appellant(AO1) came to the complainant’s table and occupied the 
chair opposite to the one on which the complainant(PW-1) and PW-
2 were sitting. The appellant(AO1) enquired whether he had 
brought the demanded amount; to which the complainant(PW-1) 
answered in affirmative. While the complainant(PW-1) was about 
to pass on the tainted currency notes to the appellant(AO1), he 
showed reluctance and suggested that the amount should not be 
given in the hotel and directed the complainant(PW-1) to proceed 

to the cellar. Accordingly, the complainant(PW-1), PW-2 and the 
appellant(AO1) proceeded to the cellar and reached near the 
generator room. There, the appellant(AO1) opened the zip of his 
rexine bag and asked the complainant(PW-1) to put the money in 
that bag. In conformance, the complainant(PW-1) took the tainted 
currency notes from his left side shirt pocket and placed the same 
in the bag of the appellant(AO1) wherein, some book and papers 
were lying. The appellant(AO1) pushed down the currency notes 
with his right hand, handed some papers to the complainant(PW-
1) and closed the zip of the bag. The appellant(AO1) asked the 
complainant(PW-1) to tear the said papers, who complied and torn 
the papers. In the meanwhile, PW-2 left them and proceeded 
outside. In a short while, the DySP(PW-10) and the trap party 
rushed down into the cellar and disclosed their identity to 
AO1(appellant). The DySP(PW-10), then asked the complaint(PW-
1) to narrate the intervening sequence of events. The version as 
given out by the complainant(PW-1) was incorporated by the 
mediators in the post-trap memo(Exhibit P-11). The version of PW-
2 was also noted down by the mediators in the same memo. The 
panchnama was drawn in a lounge on the second floor of the hotel. 
The trap party stayed at the hotel till 5:00 pm. The 

complainant(PW-1) and PW-2 were called to the ACB office and 
their statements were recorded. Later on, Section 164 CrPC 
statements of both the complainant(PW-1) and PW-2 were also 
recorded. In his statement, the complainant(PW-1) stated that the 
torn papers, upon which the appellant(AO1) had taken his 
signatures during the very first raid i.e. on 6th January, 2003, were 
handed over to the DySP(PW-10) at the time of drawing the post 
trap memo. 
34. In cross examination, the complainant(PW-1) stated that he 
was not aware that one M. Ashok of Vanasthalipuram was running 
the saw-mill and that the same M. Ashok turned out to be a 
signatory to the seizure proceeding conducted on 6th January, 
2003 at the saw-mill as well as a panch witness in the trap 
proceedings. A pertinent question was put to the complainant 
regarding the calls made to him by AO1(appellant), and he 
admitted that the appellant(AO1) did not call him between 6th 
January, 2003 to 23rd January, 2003 in relation to demand of 
bribe. The complainant(PW-1) also admitted that he had been 
warned by the appellant(AO1) that he would book a case against 
his wife Manjula. 

35. The pivotal extracts drawn above from the cross-examination 
of the complainant(PW-1) clearly indicate that the tainted currency 
notes were not given by the complainant(PW-1) to the 
appellant(AO1)in his hands presumably, because he had shown 
reluctance to accept the same. After the complainant(PW-1), his 
companion PW-2, and the appellant(AO1)had taken coffee, the 
appellant(AO1)started moving out towards the cellar followed by 
the complainant(PW-1) and PW-2. While the complainant(PW-1) 
was proceeding towards the cellar, he noticed that the rexine bag 
of the appellant(AO1)had been left behind in the coffee shop and 
thus, he picked it up and handed the same to the AO1(appellant). 
Nevertheless, he denied the defence suggestion that he had 
planted the tainted currency notes in the rexine bag left behind by 
the accused. 
36. PW-2 in examination-in-chief, virtually repeated what was 
stated by the complainant(PW-1) in his deposition. However, in his 
cross-examination, PW-2 feigned ignorance to the fact that the 
complainant(PW-1) picked up the rexine bag from the coffee shop 
and handed over the same to the appellant(AO1). He admitted 
being a friend of the complainant(PW-1). 

37. Kathi Srinivas Rao(PW-3) was one of the panch witness 
associated in the trap proceedings. He stated in his examination-
in-chief that he, along with the other mediator and Inspector N. 
Chandrashekar(PW-11) had occupied a table in the coffee shop 
near the one on which the complainant(PW-1) and the 
accompanying witness(PW-2) were sitting. At about 10:45 am, the 
appellant(AO1)entered the coffee shop and started talking to the 
complainant(PW-1). He also took out some papers from the rexine 
bag and showed the same to the complainant(PW-1). At about 
11:15 am, the complainant(PW-1) and the accompanying 
witness(PW-2) along with the appellant(AO1) left the coffee shop 
and moved towards the cellar of the hotel. The witness(PW-3) 
deposed about the recovery of the tainted currency notes from the 
bag held by the appellant(AO1) in the cellar of the hotel. 
38. What is significant to note from the evidence of the 
witness(PW-3) is that he did not make a whisper that he observed 
or overheard the appellant(AO1) demanding any bribe from the 
complainant(PW-1) while they were all sitting in the coffee shop. 
39. A. Balachithari(PW-4) being the Forest Beat Officer, stated 
that acting on the direction of the AO1(appellant), the flying squad 
proceeded towards a saw-mill at Vanasthalipuram on the 

suspicion that teakwood was illegally stocked therein. A worker M. 
Ashok was present in the mill. Upon finding illegal and unlicensed 
teakwood in the saw-mill, the appellant(AO1) issued a money 
receipt in the name of M. Ashok after receiving a sum of 
Rs.50,000/- as compounding fee. A panchnama was also drawn 
regarding 
these 
proceedings. 
In 
cross-examination, 
the 
witness(PW-4) admitted that they found the teakwood in the saw-
mill which was owned by a lady who did not come to the spot when 
the proceedings were undertaken. The name of the saw-mill was 
Malikarjun saw-mill. It may be noted that the appellant(AO1) has 
fervently contended that the second panch witness, M. Ashok was 
actually the owner of the saw-mill and is the same person in whose 
name the panchnama was prepared on 6th January, 2003. It is the 
contention of the appellant(AO1) that the entire trap proceedings 
were orchestrated at the behest of the said M. Ashok. 
40. G. Santosh Kumar(PW-5) being the Divisional Forest Officer, 
Vigilance was examined to narrate the procedural aspects 
pertaining to the duties of the Forest Section Officers etc. In cross-
examination, the witness(PW-5) admitted that he had not been 
shown any records relating to the case. He feigned total ignorance 
about the instant ACB case. 

41. B. Arun Madhav(PW-6) being the Nodal officer of Idea Cellular 
Limited proved the call detail records(CDR) of the cell phones held 
by the appellant(AO1)and AO2. It is clearly borne out from his 
evidence and the call detail records(Exhibit P-14 and P-15) that no 
calls were exchanged between the appellant(AO1) and the 
complainant(PW-1) after 17th January, 2023. Thus, it becomes 
crystal clear that the case setup by the complainant(PW-1) that the 
appellant(AO1)regularly called him right up to the date of the filing 
of the complaint(Exhibit P-1) and also gave him instructions over 
mobile to come to the Hotel Quality-Inn for paying the bribe 
(mamool) is nothing but a sheer piece of concoction. The call detail 
records(CDR) completely demolish the case setup by the 
complainant(PW-1) in this regard. 
42. M.A. Waheeda(PW-9) being the Divisional Forest Officer, 
Kothagudam was examined by the prosecution to narrate about 
the procedure prevailing in the forest department. He stated that 
on 6th January, 2003, the appellant(AO1) had booked a case at a 
saw-mill in Vanasthalipuram and collected a sum of Rs. 50,000/- 
towards the fine. He deposited this amount with the department. 
43. It is thus clear that once the appellant(AO1) had collected the 
compounding fees and deposited the same in the department and 

hence, there remained no rhyme or reason for him to have handed 
over 
the 
very 
same 
set 
of 
seizure 
documents 
to 
the 
complainant(PW-1) at the time of payment of bribe. The 
compounding fee already having been entered in the records of the 
department, the destruction of the memoranda etc. would not be 
of any help to the complainant(PW-1). 
44. G. Ramachander(PW-10) being the DySP, ACB registered the 
FIR and conducted the trap proceedings. Upon perusal of his 
examination-in-chief, it transpires that the officer never instructed 
the 
accompanying 
witness(PW-2) 
to 
come 
with 
the 
complainant(PW-1) to the ACB office on 23rd January, 2003. 
During the pre-trap proceedings, the two mediators were called 
who were introduced to the complainant(PW-1) and vice versa. 
DySP(PW-10) stated that it is only after the demonstration of the 
phenolphthalein powder had been made in presence of all 
witnesses, that he had called PW-2 who is acquainted with the 
complainant(PW-1), asking him to act as a shadow witness. PW-2 
agreed to accompany the complainant(PW-1) and oversee the 
transaction exchange of bribe. This version is belied when we 
peruse the deposition of the complainant(PW-1) and PW-2 who 
categorically stated that it was the complainant(PW-1) who asked 

PW-2 on 22nd January, 2003 to accompany him to the ACB office. 
DySP(PW-10) also narrated about the sequence of events leading 
to the recovery of the trap money from the rexine bag being held 
by the AO1(appellant). In cross-examination, DySP(PW-10) 
admitted that he did not make any enquiry whether the 
complainant(PW-1) was having any license to run saw-mill or the 
timber depot under the name of Malikarjun saw-mill. He simply 
accepted the version of the complainant(PW-1) that he had taken 
the saw-mill on lease from one E. Ramachary. However, neither 
any enquiry was made from E. Ramachary nor did the DySP(PW-
10) visit the saw-mill before registering the case on the ipse dixit of 
the complainant(PW-1). He did not ask the complainant(PW-1) to 
produce the attendance register of the workers employed in the 
saw-mill. He also did not make any enquiry about the rent receipts 
issued 
by 
E. 
Ramachary. 
Smt. 
Manjula, 
wife 
of 
the 
complainant(PW-1) was alleged to be the lease holder of the saw-
mill. However, DySP(PW-10) neither enquired about the financial 
status nor about the capability of complainant(PW-1) to pay the 
compounding fee of Rs.50,000/- under the memo(Exhibit P-2). 
PW-10 also admittedly did not make any effort to verify the 
allegation 
made 
by 
the 
complainant(PW-1) 
in 
the 

complaint(Exhibit P-1) that the appellant(AO1) was demanding 
mamool(bribe) from him. DySP(PW-10) explained that he got 
verification done through one Inspector and came to know that the 
appellant(AO1) was in a habit of demanding mamools(bribe). 
However, he could not recall the name of the said Inspector. He 
feigned 
ignorance 
having 
prior 
knowledge 
about 
the 
complainant(PW-1) and PW-2 being close friends. He admitted that 
there was no mention in the complaint(Exhibit P-1) as to the place 
or time where the bribe amount was to be handed over to the 
appellant(AO1). He also denied having seen the complainant(PW-
1) picking up the rexine bag from the table and handing it over to 
the appellant(AO1). He rather stated that he continuously saw the 
appellant(AO1) holding the rexine bag. DySP(PW-10) admitted that 
the fact that “the complainant(PW-1) had asked him to check the 
rexine bag wherein, the bribe amount was kept at the instructions 
of AO1” was not recorded in memorandum(Exhibit P-11). A 
pertinent suggestion was given to DySP(PW-10) that the 
appellant(AO1) stated at the time of the trap that he had forgotten 
his rexine bag in the coffee shop and that PW-1 had planted the 
currency notes therein which the DySP(PW-10) denied. 

45. N. Chandrasekhar(PW-11) deposed that he was posted as 
Inspector, ACB from December, 2002 to March, 2006. He assisted 
the DySP(PW-10) in pre and post-trap proceedings conducted on 
23rd January, 2003. He stated that the investigation of the case 
was entrusted to him wherein, he examined the witnesses 
including one M. Ashok. He admitted that M. Ashok was one of 
the workers employed in the saw-mill of the complainant(PW-1). 
He verified the panchama(Exhibit P-3) wherein, the name of M. 
Ashok was mentioned as a panch witness. He was questioned with 
reference to forest offence report which was prepared during the 
inspection of the saw-mill on 6th January, 2003, and admitted that 
M. Ashok who signed these documents was the same person who 
stood as a panch in the trap proceedings. The receipt(Exhibit P-2) 
did not contain the name of Malikarjun saw-mill and rather it 
reflected that the sum of Rs.50,000/- was received from M. Ashok. 
46. What is most engrossing and significant to note from the 
evidence of N. Chandrashekar(PW-11) is that he did not utter a 
single word that he, along with the panch witnesses had occupied 
a table nearby the one on which the complainant(PW-1) and the 
appellant(AO1) were sitting inside the coffee shop of Hotel Quality-
Inn. Evidently, the persons who were assigned the task to overhear 

the 
conversation 
between 
the 
appellant(AO1) 
and 
the 
complainant(PW-1) would be the most important witnesses in the 
case. The deposition of N. Chandrashekar(PW-11) on the above 
aspect contradicts to what was noted in the post-trap 
proceedings(Exhibit P-11) and the deposition made by panch 
witness. Kathi Srinivas Rao(PW-3) who categorically stated that he 
along mediators and other panch witness who would be none other 
than M. Ashok, went to Coffee Shop of Hotel Quality-Inn and 
occupied a table near the one on which the complainant(PW1) and 
the appellant(AO1) were sitting. 
47. We may note that in so far as the allegation of demand of 
bribe is concerned, the complainant(PW-1), alleged in the 
complaint(Exhibit P-1) that a week after 6th January, 2003, the 
appellant(AO1) and AO2 both came to his mill and pressurized him 
that he would have to pay a monthly bribe(mamool) of Rs.5,000/- 
otherwise, they would file cases on him and his business would be 
ruined. As per the evidence of A Balachithan(PW-4) and the 
receipt(Exhibit P-2), the case for illegal possession of teakwood 
wherein, a sum of Rs.50,000/- was charged by way of 
compounding fee was not registered against the complainant(PW-
1). It is an admitted position that M. Ashok S/o Abbaiah paid the 

said amount and the receipt(Exhibit P-2) bears his name and 
signature. The very same M. Ashok was also associated as a panch 
witness in the trap proceedings which cannot be by a mere chance 
or coincidence. The association of M. Ashok as a panch witness in 
the trap proceedings in the backdrop of the fact that the 
appellant(AO1) had imposed penalty of Rs.50,000/- on the same 
person is very significant and gives rise to a strong suspicion that 
M. Ashok might have been instrumental in orchestrating the trap 
proceedings. What lends assurance to this conclusion is that the 
DySP(PW-10) admittedly made no investigation whatsoever 
regarding the ownership or licence of the saw-mill where the 
incident dated 6th January, 2003 took place. 
48. It is absolutely unnatural that the DySP(PW-10) would have 
blindly accepted the version of the complainant(PW-1) that the 
appellant(AO1) had made a search on his licenced premises and 
imposed a fine of Rs.50,000/- on account of the recovery of 
teakwood illegally stored in the said mill. Since M. Ashok paid the 
compounding fee of Rs.50,000/- and the cash receipt(Exhibit P-2) 
was also issued in his name, any prudent person would presume 
that it was M. Ashok who was operating the saw-mill. The 
complainant(PW-1) consciously tried to project that M. Ashok was 

merely a labourer in his mill. However, his version is falsified in 
face of the receipt(Exhibit P-2) which portrays that M. Ashok had 
paid the compounding fee which was a very heavy amount to the 
tune of Rs.50,000/-. If the recovery of teakwood has been effected 
from the mill being operated by the complainant(PW-1) then, there 
was no reason as to why compounding fees would be charged from 
M. Ashok. In view of these facts, there was no justification for the 
DySP(PW-10) to have straightaway register the FIR on the mere 
ipse dixit of the complainant(PW-1) and to have planned the trap 
proceedings without the minimum endeavour to verify the 
background facts leading to the alleged demand of bribe. A prudent 
and unbiased police officer would be persuaded to make at least a 
basic enquiry into these facts rather than following the dictat of 
the complainant(PW-1). It may be highlighted that the prosecution 
very conveniently chose not to examine the said M. Ashok S/o 
Abbaiah as a witness in the case. 
49. Admittedly, 
as 
per 
the 
complaint(Exhibit 
P-1), 
the 
appellant(AO1) as well as the forest guard N. Hanumanthu(AO2) 
both demanded the bribe from the complainant(PW-1). The 
complainant(PW-1) in his evidence, stated that the appellant(AO1) 
and AO2 threatened him frequently by making mobile calls and 

pressurised him to pay up the mamool amount of Rs.5,000/- or to 
face adverse consequences. However, as discussed above, this 
allegation of the complainant(PW-1) is belied by the call detail 
records and the evidence of B. Arun Madhav(PW-6). 
50. Since the receipt of Rs.50,000/- had been issued in the name 
of M. Ashok, there could not have been any rhyme or reason for 
DySP(PW-10) to have accepted the bald version of the 
complainant(PW-1) that the raid had been made at a premises 
licenced in the name of his wife. The documents prepared on 6th 
January, 2003 would definitely be sufficient to put DySP(PW-10) 
on guard. Thus, there was neither any reason for the 
appellant(AO1) to have demanded bribe from the complainant(PW-
1) nor any justification for him to cave in to such demand. 
51. The complainant(PW-1) alleged that after he lodged the 
complaint(Exhibit P-1) to the DySP(PW-10) on 22nd January, 2003, 
he was called by the appellant(AO1) and AO2 and was directed to 
come to the Hotel Quality-Inn with the proposed bribe amount of 
Rs.5,000/-. Acting on his own wisdom, the complainant(PW-1) 
asked his friend PW-2 to accompany him to the ACB office. The 
complainant(PW-1) further alleged that when he and Ramesh 
Naidu(PW-2) were about to proceed to ACB office, he received 

another phone call from the appellant(AO1) and AO2 in the 
morning of 23rd January, 2003 and who instructed him to reach 
Hotel Quality-Inn. This fact, however, does not find place in the 
complaint(Exhibit P-1) and is thus a very significant omission. 
When the pre-trap panchnama(Exhibit P-4) was drawn, the 
complainant(PW-1) modified his version and alleged that it was 
AO2, who telephoned him in the morning and asked him to come 
to the Hotel Quality-Inn with the bribe amount. This apparent 
modulation by the complainant(PW-1) regarding the accused who 
had made the demand again throws a doubt on his conduct and 
credibility. The call detail records proved by PW-6 again decimates 
the version of the complainant(PW-1) because they clearly 
established that no call was made from the mobile number of the 
appellant(AO1) to the mobile number of the complainant(PW-1) 
after 17th January, 2003. As against the noting in the pre-trap 
panchnama(Exhibit P-4), the complainant(PW-1), during his sworn 
testimony, deposed that the phone call was made on 21st March, 
2003 by both the appellant(AO1) and AO2. The complainant(PW-
1) also alleged that after the pre-trap proceedings, the DySP(PW-
10) called Ramesh Naidu(PW-2) and instructed him to act as a 
shadow witness. However, the fact remains that Ramesh 

Naidu(PW-2) had already been asked by the complainant(PW-1) to 
accompany him in the trap proceedings. The complainant(PW-1) 
further alleged that a little while after he and Ramesh Naidu(PW-
2) had occupied one table in the said coffee shop, the mediators 
and Inspector N. Chandrasekhar(PW-11) also came to the coffee 
shop and occupied a nearby table. The appellant(AO1) entered the 
coffee shop after some time and took the chair opposite to the ones 
wherein the complainant(PW-1) and the shadow witness were 
sitting. The appellant(AO1) asked the complainant(PW-1) whether 
he had brought the bribe amount of Rs.5,000/- to which the 
complainant(PW-1) 
replied 
in 
affirmative. 
When 
the 
complainant(PW-1) was about to handover the tainted currency 
notes, the appellant(AO1) hesitated and said that the amount 
should not be given in the coffee shop. The complainant(PW-1) was 
directed by the appellant(AO1) to proceed to the cellar of the hotel 
and accordingly, both he and PW-2 proceeded to the cellar and 
reached the generator room. There, the appellant(AO1) opened the 
zip of his rexine bag and instructed the complainant(PW-1) to place 
the bribe money inside the same. The complainant(PW-1) complied 
and placed the tainted currency notes in the rexine bag of the 
appellant(AO1). The appellant(AO1) then handed him the papers 

which were prepared during the inspection of the saw-mill by the 
Flying Squad. This version of the complaint was corroborated only 
by Ramesh Naidu(PW-2). However, the version of the 
complainant(PW-1) and PW-2 that the appellant(AO1) while sitting 
inside the coffee shop, initially demanded the bribe and then 
refused to accept the same does not find corroboration from the 
evidence of K. Srinivas Rao(PW-3) and the Inspector(PW-11). If at 
all, the complainant(PW-1) and the appellant(AO1) were sitting on 
the table adjoining the one on which the panch witnesses and the 
Inspector, N. Chandrasekhar(PW-11) were sitting then, these 
persons would not have missed out hearing the appellant(AO1) 
demanding the bribe from the complainant(PW-1). In total 
diversion to the version of the complainant(PW-1) and PW-2, the 
panch witness(PW-3) and the Inspector(PW-11) did not utter a 
word in their testimonies, that they both went to the coffee shop 
and occupied a table adjacent to the table where the 
complainant(PW-1), PW-2 and the appellant(AO1) were sitting. 
This can be supported by post-trap panchnama(Exhibit P-11), 
which also doesn’t elucidate on the fact that K. Sriniwas Rao(PW-
3) 
and 
Inspector(PW-11) 
heard 
the 
conversation 
of 
the 
complainant(PW-1) and the appellant(AO1). Thus, it can be 

presumed and put the Court on guard that the testimonies of PW-
3 and PW-11 and the post-trap panchnama(Exhibit P-11) distorted 
the facts. 
52. Thus, there is a grave suspicion on the story as put forth by 
the prosecution that the accused, the appellant(AO1) demanded 
the bribe money from the complainant(PW-1) while in the coffee 
shop of Hotel Quality-Inn. 
53. In view of the above analysis and elaboration of evidence, we 
have no hesitation in holding that the prosecution miserably failed 
to prove the factum of demand of bribe against the appellant(AO1) 
by reliable direct or circumstantial evidence. The allegation 
regarding acceptance of bribe by the appellant(AO1) is primarily 
based on the evidence of the complainant(PW-1) and PW-2 and the 
DySP(PW-10). From the extracted portion of the deposition of the 
complainant(PW-1) supra, it is comprehensible that he admitted 
that the appellant(AO1), forgot his rexine bag in the coffee shop 
and that the complainant(PW-1) picked up the same and handed 
it over to the appellant(AO1). Thus, unquestionably, the 
complainant(PW-1) had the opportunity to plant the tainted 
currency notes into the bag being carried by the appellant(AO1). 

54. As we have observed above that the entire case seems to have 
been planned at the behest of M. Ashok, it is clear that the 
complainant(PW-1) was simply used as a tool to get the 
appellant(AO1) trapped on made up allegations. The High Court 
while discussing the case, brushed aside the said part of the 
evidence of the complainant(PW-1) by observing that the same was 
an afterthought. However, the fact remains that these vital facts 
were elicited during the cross-examination of the complainant(PW-
1) and hence, the benefit thereof would have to be given to the 
appellant(AO1) more particularly as the prosecution did not make 
any effort to clarify this anomaly by way of re-examination. If at 
all, the prosecution felt that the captioned admission extracted 
above 
as 
appearing 
in 
the 
cross-examination 
of 
the 
complainant(PW-1) was a material deviation from the case set up 
by the prosecution, then, the public prosecutor was under an 
obligation to re-examine the witness to remove the anomaly. 
Having failed to do so, the prosecution cannot be permitted to cry 
foul that the decoy complainant(PW-1) modulated his testimony in 
the cross-examination so as to favour the accused. It is admitted 
that the DySP(PW-10) and the other members of the trap party 
were standing outside the coffee shop and thus, they could not 

have seen the sequence of events wherein, the complainant(PW-1) 
picked up the bag of the AO1(appellant). PW-2, of course denied 
this suggestion, but we cannot be oblivious to the fact that the star 
witness of the prosecution, namely, the complainant(PW-1) himself 
made a candid admission to the suggestion given by the defence in 
cross-examination, that he got unhindered access to the bag of the 
appellant(AO1) and that this fact remained contraversed by the 
prosecution. In addition to the above, this Court has to remain 
conscious of the fact that the prosecution made no effort 
whatsoever to get the wash taken from the hands of the 
appellant(AO1) and the rexine bag examined through the FSL. 
Hence, there is no satisfactory evidence on record to establish that 
the appellant(AO1) had actually handled the tainted currency 
notes as claimed by the complainant(PW-1). 
55. After a threadbare analysis and evaluation of the evidence 
available on record, we feel that the prosecution case is full of 
embellishments contradicting and doubting and thus, it would not 
be safe to convict the appellant(AO1) for having demanded and 
accepted the bribe money from the complainant(PW-1). At the cost 
of repetition, we may state that the manner in which M. Ashok S/o 
Abbaiah was associated as a panch witness in the trap 

proceedings, creates a grave doubt that the entire case was 
orchestrated against the appellant(AO1) at the instance of the said 
M. Ashok. 
56. In wake of the discussion made hereinabove, we are of the 
view that the prosecution has failed to bring home the charges 
against the appellant(AO1) by leading evidence which can be 
termed to be of unimpeachable character. The AO1(appellant), 
therefore, deserves to be acquitted of the charges. 
57. Resultantly, the impugned judgments dated 2nd August, 2022 
and 5th August, 2008 are hereby quashed and set aside. 
58. The appellant(AO1) is acquitted of the charges. He is on bail 
and need not surrender. His bail bonds are discharged. 
59. The appeal is allowed in these terms. 
60. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
July 10, 2024