IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Shanmugasekar 

 … Appellant 
 
versus 

The State of Tamil Nadu... Respondent 

JUDGMENT 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
The appellant, the accused no. 1, who has been convicted 
for the offences punishable under Section 294(b) and 302 of 
the Indian Penal Code (for short, ‘the IPC’), has preferred this 
appeal. There were six accused. The appellant and PW-4 
Kesavan are the sons of accused no. 2 Kaari and accused no.3 
Mandiammal. Accused no.4, Dhanalakshmi, is the appellant's 
wife; accused no.5, Akila and accused no.6, Aparna, are the 
appellant's daughters. PW-4 Kesavan had married PW-5 
Saravanapriya. The deceased Muthu was the father of PW-5. 
PW-1 Kalidoss is the other son-in-law of the deceased Muthu. 
He was married to Maheswari, Muthu's daughter. 
2. 
PW-4 Kesavan had built a tiled house and was living in 
the house along with his wife PW-5 and children. Adjacent to 

the house of PW-4, accused nos. 2 and 3 (parents of PW-4) had 
built a house. They were residing on the ground floor of the 
house, and the appellant was living on the first floor of the 
house with his family. The houses had a common electricity 
meter. There was an understanding between the appellant and 
PW-4 that they would pay electricity charges every alternate 
month. The prosecution alleged that for September 2016, PW-
4 did not pay the electricity charges. Therefore, at 8.40 pm on 
28th September 2016, the appellant questioned PW-4 as to why 
he did not pay the electricity charges. That led to an altercation 
between them. The appellant was joined by accused nos.2 to 
6. They supported the appellant in the ongoing altercation. The 
deceased Muthu was residing in the house, which was very 
close by at a distance of 100 feet. As PW-1’s wife Maheswari 
was pregnant, he and his wife were staying in the deceased's 
house. On hearing the noise, the deceased, PW-1 and PW-5, 
came to the spot and tried to intervene. The quarrel between 
the two groups started. Amidst quarrel, the appellant and 
accused no.2 rushed back to their house and brought 
billhooks. The allegation is that they attacked the deceased 
with a billhook on his head. In the fight, PW-4 and PW-5 were 
injured. The deceased was taken to hospital, where he was 
declared dead. The prosecution relied upon the evidence of 
eye-witnesses PW-1 Kalidoss, PW-2 Sathyamoorthi, PW-3 
Govindammal, PW-4 Kesavan, PW-5 Saravanapriya, and PW-6 
Chandrashekar. PW-2, PW-3 and PW-6 are the sons of 
Muthu’s elder brother. It is alleged that the appellant and co-
accused made an extra-judicial confession before the Village 

Administrative Officer (PW-8). We must note here that the Trial 
Court, for the reasons recorded, did not believe the theory of 
extra-judicial confession and discarded the prosecution's 
evidence to that extent. However, eyewitnesses supported the 
prosecution, and their testimony was the basis of the 
appellant's conviction. 
3. 
The Trial Court acquitted the accused nos. 3 to 6. As 
stated earlier, the Trial Court convicted the appellant for 
offences punishable under Sections 294(b) and 302 of the IPC. 
Accused no.2, Kaari was convicted only for the offences 
punishable under Section 294(b) and 324 of the IPC. The 
appellant preferred an appeal against the conviction. PW-1 
Kalidoss preferred an appeal for challenging the acquittal of 
accused no.2 for the offence punishable under Section 302 of 
the IPC and the acquittal of the other accused. By the 
impugned judgment, the High Court dismissed all the appeals. 
As can be seen from the order dated 3rd February 2023, notice 
was issued by this Court on the basis of one of the contentions 
that, at the highest, the offence committed by the appellant 
would be punishable under part II of Section 304 of the IPC. 
SUBMISSIONS 
4. 
The learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant 
has taken us through the notes of evidence. He submitted that 
all the factual aspects have not been brought on record by the 
prosecution. He submitted that there is a serious controversy 
regarding the time of the incident, which creates a serious 

doubt. The prosecution has not proved the guilt of the 
appellant beyond reasonable doubt. 
 
5. 
Without prejudice to the contentions mentioned above, 
the learned senior counsel submitted that the appellant had no 
intention to kill the deceased Muthu. His dispute was with PW-
4 Kesavan and it was the deceased and PW-1 who came to the 
site to intervene. He submitted that by no stretch of 
imagination, the appellant had any motive to kill the deceased 
Muthu. The motive has not been established. The intention of 
the appellant to kill Muthu has not been established. The 
learned senior counsel submitted that the appellant is covered 
by the exceptions under Section 300 of the IPC. Learned 
counsel further submitted that the injuries were not sufficient 
by themselves to cause death in the ordinary course. He relied 
upon the decisions of this Court in the case of Chilamakur 
Nagireddy and Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh1 and Virsa 
Singh v. State of Punjab2. He submitted that this was a case 
where there was no pre-meditation, and the offence occurred 
due to a sudden fight in the heat of passion. He would, 
therefore, submit that at the highest, the offence proved against 
the appellant will be punishable under Part II of Section 304 of 
the IPC. The learned counsel for the respondent supported the 
appellant's conviction. 

1 (1977) 
 SC 465 

CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
6. 
We have carefully perused the evidence of the prosecution 
witnesses. PW-4 Kesavan is the real brother of the appellant 
and Muthu was the father-in-law of PW-4. From the evidence 
of the material prosecution witnesses, it appears that there was 
a quarrel between the appellant and PW-4 due to non-payment 
of the electricity bill of the house by PW-4, and the altercation 
was on the night of 28th September 2016. The whole thing 
started as the appellant started questioning PW-4 as to why he 
had not paid the electricity bill. There does not appear to be 
any dispute on this. A perusal of the evidence of PW-5 and 
other eye-witnesses shows that after hearing the noise of the 
quarrel, the deceased, along with PW-1 Kalidoss, came there 
and tried to intervene in the ongoing quarrel. The fight was 
amongst the family members of the accused no.2. However, 
the evidence of the eye-witnesses shows that the appellant and 
accused no.2, while the quarrel was going on, rushed back to 
their house and brought one Aruval (billhook) each in their 
hands. The witnesses are consistent on the fact that the 
appellant assaulted the deceased on his head by using Aruval. 
As the eyewitnesses are related to the deceased, we have closely 
scrutinised their evidence. We find no material contradictions 
and omissions brought on record in their cross-examination. 
As the ocular evidence of the eyewitnesses inspires confidence, 
minor discrepancies in their evidence regarding the exact time 
of the incident are not sufficient to discard their testimony. 

7. 
 If there was no intention on the part of the appellant to 
cause bodily injury to the deceased and other injured 
witnesses, there was no reason for him to go back to his house 
and bring the weapon. He brought the billhook from his home, 
obviously to make an assault. It is not the defence of the 
appellant that the deceased was the aggressor. The deceased 
had come to the spot only to resolve the fight among the family 
members of the appellant. Hence, it cannot be said that there 
was a sudden and grave provocation due to any act on the part 
of the deceased. The appellant himself started the dispute by 
questioning the PW-4 on non-payment of the electricity bill. 
Therefore, the appellant's case will not fall under Exception 1 
or Exception 4 of Section 300 of the IPC. We may also note 
here that the post-mortem notes show that there was a brain 
injury inflicted on the deceased. The medical opinion is that 
the deceased died due to shock and bleeding on account of the 
chest injury and head injury. 
8. 
Therefore, there is no reason to interfere with the view 
taken by the courts that the offence punishable under Section 
302 of IPC was proved beyond reasonable doubt. Hence, the 
appeal is dismissed...…………..………J. 
 (Abhay S. Oka)..…………..………J. 
 
(Ujjal Bhuyan) 
New Delhi; 
July 10, 2024.