SLP (C) No. 10005 of 2022 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 7305 OF 2024 
[ SLP (C) No(s). 10005 of 2022] 

YOGESH GOYANKA 
 
VERSUS 
 
GOVIND & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 
 
SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeal arises out of judgment dated 
21.01.2022 passed by the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan 
in S.B. whereby the writ 
petition preferred by the Appellant herein under Article 227 of 
the Constitution of India was dismissed (the ‘Impugned 
Order’). The Appellant approached the High Court on being 
aggrieved by the dismissal of his impleadment application under 
Order 1 Rule 10, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (the ‘CPC’) vide 

SLP (C) No. 10005 of 2022 

order dated 10.10.2019 passed by the Ld. Additional District 
Judge No. 1, Hindaun City (the ‘ADJ’). 
 
Brief Facts: 
3. 
The Appellant before us, along with the proforma 
Respondents herein purchased farming land being Khasra No. 
5896, 5897, 5898, 5936 and 5895 admeasuring 2.38 hectare at 
Hinduan City, Rajasthan (the ‘Subject Land’) from Respondent 
No. 21 vide registered sale deed dated 28.09.2018 (the ‘RSD’) 
for a collective consideration of Rs. 1,51,65,360/-. Admittedly, 
the RSD contained an explicit declaration to the effect that there 
were cases pending in the Court of the Ld. SDM and in the court 
of Ld. ADJ, Hindaun City, relating to the Subject Land. 
4. 
The Subject Land originally belonged to Respondent Nos. 
1-17 (the ‘Plaintiffs’) and was released in favor of Respondent 
Nos. 18-20 (the ‘Defendants’) vide release deeds dated 
11.08.2006 and 31.01.2007 (the ‘Release Deeds’). Thereafter, on 
the strength of the Release Deeds, the Subject Land was sold to 
Respondent No. 21 by the Defendants vide registered sale deed 
dated 26.04.2007 and the revenue records were mutated to reflect 
the name of Respondent No. 21. It is pertinent to note that the 
Plaintiffs and the Defendants are all relatives, having a common 
ancestor namely, one Mr. Nathua. 
5. 
The events giving rise to the present appeal began on 
03.01.2018 when the Plaintiffs filed Suit No. 1 of 2018 in the 

SLP (C) No. 10005 of 2022 

court of the ADJ, against the Defendants and Respondent No. 21 
(hereinafter 
collectively 
referred 
to 
as 
the 
‘Original 
Defendants’) seeking permanent injunction and a declaration to 
the effect that the Release Deeds and the sale deed dated 
26.04.2007 are null and void (the ‘Underlying Suit’). 
6. 
Admittedly, after the issuance of notice in the Underlying 
Suit, Respondent No. 21 entered appearance before the ADJ on 
11.01.2018 and hence knowingly executed the RSD in favor of 
the Appellant pendente lite. Thereafter, on 25.01.2019, the ADJ 
granted a temporary injunction in favor of the Plaintiffs. 
7. 
On becoming aware of the temporary injunction, the 
Appellant, along with the other pendente lite purchasers of the 
Subject Land filed an impleadment application on 13.02.2019 
before the ADJ under Order 1 Rule 10, CPC. Vide order dated 
10.10.2019, the application was dismissed by the ADJ holding 
that no need arises to implead the applicants therein as (i) 
permission of the Court was not sought prior to the sale; and (ii) 
more importantly, they were not bona fide purchasers as they 
were wholly cognizant of the Underlying Suit prior to their 
purchase. The ADJ placed reliance on the judgment of this Court 
in Bibi Zubaida Khatoon vs. Nabi Hassan Saheb & Anr (2004). 
8. 
Thereafter, the Appellant alone approached the High Court 
under Article 227 of the Constitution of India challenging the 
order of the ADJ. Vide the Impugned Order, the High Court held 

SLP (C) No. 10005 of 2022 

that the impleadment application was untenable as the RSD itself 
was a nullity by virtue of being hit by the doctrine of lis pendens 
as provided under Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, 
1882 (the ‘Act’). 
 
Submissions & Analysis: 
9. 
Mr. C.A. Sundaram, Learned Senior Counsel for the 
Appellant forcefully contended before us that the Appellant after 
paying the full consideration, obtained a registered sale deed in 
his favor and is therefore entitled to the protection of his interests 
in the Subject Land. He argues that impleadment of the Appellant 
in the Underlying Suit is necessary as there exists a real 
possibility of collusion between the Plaintiffs and the Original 
Defendants. To substantiate his claim, Learned Counsel 
highlights that the Plaintiffs and the Defendants are relatives. 
Further, he points to the considerable delay in the filing of the 
Underlying Suit, about 12 years after the execution of the Release 
Deeds. 
10. 
On the legal issue, Mr. Sundaram asserts that there is no 
bar to the impleadment of a transferee pendente lite, even when 
the transferee has prior knowledge of pendency. To buttress his 
contention, he points to the judgment of this Court in Thomson 
Press vs. Nanak Builders, (2015) wherein, after 
considering all the previous judgments on the question of 
impleadment of a transferee pendente lite, this Court permitted 

SLP (C) No. 10005 of 2022 

the impleadment of a transferee in a suit for specific performance, 
who not only had notice of the pendency but also had knowledge 
of the injunction prohibiting any transactions relating to the 
subject property therein. 
11. 
 Mr. V.K. Shukla, Learned Senior Counsel for 
the Plaintiffs contended that the Appellant is not entitled to 
impleadment as he is not a bona fide purchaser. He argued that 
despite having knowledge of the pendency, no permission was 
sought from the Court to execute the RSD and hence, the 
Appellant is not entitled to any relief. To buttress his contention, 
reliance is placed on Bibi Zubaida (supra) wherein this Court 
held that transferees pendente lite cannot, as a matter of right, 
seek impleadment. In that case, this Court upheld the decision of 
the trial court rejecting impleadment on grounds that the 
transferee was not bona fide and was only attempting to 
complicate and delay the pending suit. 
12. 
Mr. Shukla also contends that the judgment of this Court 
in Thomson Press (supra) is entirely distinguishable on facts 
from the present matter and is hence inapplicable. To that extent, 
he highlights that contrary to the factual position in Thomson 
Press (supra), in this case, the title of the Appellant itself is in 
question and additionally, the Appellant is not in possession of 
the Subject Land. 
13. 
Going a little further, Mr. Huzefa Ahmadi, Learned Senior 
Counsel for Respondent No. 21 contends that the Appellant 

SLP (C) No. 10005 of 2022 

cannot seek impleadment as he is not even a purchaser of the 
Subject Land. Mr. Ahmadi submits that out of the 6 cheques 
issued under the RSD, 2 cheques bounced on 01.10.2018 
rendering the consideration unpaid. He highlights that the RSD 
contains an express clause to the effect that if the payment made 
under the 6 cheques are not completed, the purchasers will not 
receive any legal rights over the Subject Land through the RSD. 
On the question of unpaid consideration, Mr. Sundaram asserts 
that the entire consideration was paid by the Appellant via RTGS. 
14. 
He further highlights that this contention was neither 
raised before the ADJ nor the High Court and is merely an 
afterthought, pointing further to the Appellant’s suspicion of 
collusion between the parties. It is also brought to the notice of 
this Court that Respondent No. 21 previously filed a suit for 
declaration to the effect that the RSD is null and void but the same 
was dismissed in default on 28.02.2020. 
15. 
We have heard the Learned Counsel for the parties and 
have carefully perused the record. 
16. 
The fulcrum of the dispute herein concerns the 
impleadment of a transferee pendente lite who undisputedly had 
notice of the pending litigation. At the outset, it appears pertinent 
to reiterate the settled position that the doctrine of lis pendens as 
provided under Section 52 of the Act does not render all transfers 
pendente lite to be void ab-initio, it merely renders rights arising 
from such transfers as subservient to the rights of the parties to 

SLP (C) No. 10005 of 2022 

the pending litigation and subject to any direction that the Court 
may pass thereunder. 
17. 
Therefore, the mere fact that the RSD was executed during 
the pendency of the Underlying Suit does not automatically 
render it null and void. On this ground alone, we find the 
Impugned Order to be wholly erroneous as it employs Section 52 
of the Act to nullify the RSD and on that basis, concludes that the 
impleadment application is untenable. Contrary to this approach 
of the High Court, the law on impleadment of subsequent 
transferees, as established by this Court has evolved in a manner 
that liberally enables subsequent transferees to protect their 
interests in recognition of the possibility that the transferor 
pendente lite may not defend the title or may collude with the 
plaintiff therein [See the decision of this Court in Amit Kumar 
Shaw vs. Farida Khatoon, (2005) & A. Nawab John 
vs. V.N. Subramaniyam, (2012) ]. 
18. 
Similarly, we also find fault with the order of the ADJ and 
its misplaced reliance on Bibi Zubaida (supra). The only 
principle emerging from the judgment of this Court in Bibi 
Zubaida (supra) is that transferees pendente lite cannot seek 
impleadment as a matter of right and to that extent, we agree with 
the ADJ. However, Bibi Zubaida (supra) does not place a bar on 
impleadment of transferees who purchase property without 
seeking leave of the Court. The decision of the Court in Bibi 
Zubaida (supra) turns on its own facts; the Court rejected the 

SLP (C) No. 10005 of 2022 

application for joinder therein noting that the underlying suit was 
pending since 1983 and upheld the finding of the Trial Court that 
the subsequent purchaser was not bona fide and attempted to 
complicate and delay the underlying suit. Therefore, the 
judgment in Bibi Zubaida (supra), being distinguishable on facts, 
does not assist the Respondents herein. 
19. 
The Respondents herein assail the impleadment of the 
Appellant on the ground that he is not a bona fide purchaser as 
he had full knowledge of the pending litigation. While that is the 
admitted position, there exists no bar to the impleadment of 
transferees pendente lite with notice. Permitting the impleadment 
of a transferee pendente lite is, in each case, a discretionary 
exercise undertaken to enable a purchaser with a legally 
enforceable right to protect their interests especially when the 
transferor fails to defend the suit or where there is a possibility of 
collusion. 
20. 
In the particular facts and circumstances of this case, Mr. 
Sundaram has been able to satisfy this Court on the possibility of 
collusion between the Respondents. It is a fact that the Plaintiffs 
and Defendants are relatives. More importantly, Plaintiffs 
approached the court in the Underlying Suit after a substantial 
delay of 11 years whereas admittedly, the revenue records were 
mutated to reflect the name of Respondent No. 21 since 2007. It 
is also curious that the claim of non-payment of consideration by 
the Appellant was made for the first time before this Court. 

SLP (C) No. 10005 of 2022 

21. 
On the other hand, the Appellant has a registered sale deed 
in his favor and has therefore seemingly acquired an interest in 
the Subject Land. Whether or not the consideration was paid, is 
a disputed question of fact that shall be determined by the Trial 
Court. Therefore, in the considered opinion of this Court, 
considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, 
including the fact that the trial has not progressed significantly, 
the Appellant herein, in the interest of justice, is entitled to 
impleadment in the Underlying Suit in order to protect his 
interests, if any, in the Subject Land. 
22. 
In light of the aforesaid, the appeal stands allowed. The 
Impugned Order and the order of the ADJ dated 10.10.2019 are 
set aside and the Appellant is directed to be added as a party-
defendant in the Underlying Suit. 
23. 
Pending applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of. 

……………………………………J. 
 [VIKRAM NATH] 

……………………………………J. 
 [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 
 
NEW DELHI 
JULY 10, 2024