IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

ARVIND KEJRIWAL... 
APPELLANT 

VERSUS 

DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT... 
RESPONDENT 

JUDGMENT 
 
SANJIV KHANNA, J. 

This appeal filed by the appellant – Arvind Kejriwal assails the judgment 
and order dated 09.04.2024 passed by the single Judge of the High Court of 
Delhi whereby the Criminal Writ Petition filed by Arvind Kejriwal under Articles 
226 and 227 of the Constitution of India read with Section 482 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 19731, challenging his arrest by the Directorate of 
Enforcement2, vide the arrest order dated 21.03.2024, on the ground of 
violation of Section 19 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 20023, and 
the proceedings pursuant thereto including the order of remand dated 
22.03.2024 to the custody of DoE passed by the Special Judge, has been 
rejected. 
 
2. 
At the outset, we must clarify that this is not an appeal against refusal or grant 
of bail. Instead, this appeal impugns the validity of arrest under Section 19 of 
 
1 For short, the “Code”. 
2 For short, “DoE”. 
3 For short, the “PML Act”. the PML Act. It raises a pivotal question regarding the scope and ambit of the 
trial court/courts to examine the legality of the arrest under Section 19. The 
issue is legal in nature, and with the ratio being propounded in detail, the 
decision becomes complex and legalistic.4 
 
3. 
On 17.08.2022, the Central Bureau of Investigation5 registered RC No. 
0032022A0053 for the offences punishable under Section 120B read with 
Section 477A of the Indian Penal Code, 18606 and Section 7 of the Prevention 
of Corruption Act, 1988. The registration was based on a complaint dated 
20.07.2022, made by the Lieutenant Governor of the Government of National 
Capital Territory7 of Delhi, and on the directions of the competent authority 
conveyed by the Director, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. 
 
4. 
Later, on 25.11.2022, the CBI filed a chargesheet. Thereafter, on 25.04.2023 
and 08.07.2023, two supplementary chargesheets were filed. On 15.12.2022, 
the Special Court took cognisance of the offences. The chargesheets inter alia 
allege that the excise policy, framed for the sale of liquor in NCT of Delhi, was 
a product of criminal conspiracy. It was hatched by a cartel of liquor 
manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers and it provided undue pecuniary gain 
to public servants and other accused in the conspiracy. It resulted in huge 
losses to the government exchequer and ultimately to the public. Arvind 
Kejriwal is not an accused in the said chargesheets. 
 
4 While introducing the Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2012 in the Rajya Sabha on 
17.12.2012, the then Finance Minister, Mr. P Chidambaram, stated, “Firstly, we must remember that 
money-laundering is a very technically-defined offence. It is not the way we understand ‘money-
laundering in a colloquial sense.” This has been quoted with approval in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary and 
others v. Union of India and others, (2022) SCC OnLine SC 929, at paragraph 35. 
5 For short, “CBI”. 
6 For short, “IPC”. 
7 For short, “NCT”. 

5. 
On 22.08.2022, the DoE recorded ECIR No. HIU-II/14/2022 based on offences 
detailed under the RC registered by CBI. The offences under the RC are the 
predicate offence for investigation/inquiry into the scheduled offences under the 
PML Act. On 26.11.2022, the DoE filed the first prosecution complaint. On 
20.12.2022, the Special Court took cognisance. Since then, the DoE has filed 
seven supplementary prosecution complaints. In the last complaint, that is, the 
Seventh Supplementary Prosecution Complaint dated 17.05.2024, Arvind 
Kejriwal has been named as an accused. 
 
6. 
On 30.10.2023, Arvind Kejriwal was issued notice under Section 50 of the PML 
Act for his appearance and recording of statement. Thereafter, eight summons 
were issued till his arrest on 21.03.2024. DoE states that Arvind Kejriwal failed 
to appear and join the investigation. Arvind Kejriwal claims that the summons 
and notices under Section 50 were illegal, bad in law and invalid.8 
 
7. 
The cardinal ground taken in the present appeal is that Arvind Kejriwal was 
arrested in violation of Section 19(1) of the PML Act. It is contended that the 
arrest was illegal, which makes the order of remand to custody of the DoE 
passed by the Special Court dated 01.04.2024 also illegal. Therefore, it would 
be apt to begin by referring to Section 19 and elucidating how the Courts have 
interpreted and applied the section. 
 
8. 
Section 19 of the PML Act reads: 
“19. Power to arrest.—(1) If the Director, Deputy Director, 
Assistant Director or any other officer authorised in this behalf by 
the Central Government by general or special order, has on the 
 
8 We are not directly examining the question of validity of the summons and notices, though the effect 
and failure to appear is one of the aspects which will be noticed subsequently. basis of material in his possession, reason to believe (the reason 
for such belief to be recorded in writing) that any person has been 
guilty of an offence punishable under this Act, he may arrest such 
person and shall, as soon as may be, inform him of the grounds 
for such arrest. 
 
(2) The Director, Deputy Director, Assistant Director or any other 
officer shall, immediately after arrest of such person under sub-
section (1), forward a copy of the order along with the material in 
his possession, referred to in that sub-section, to the Adjudicating 
Authority, in a sealed envelope, in the manner as may be 
prescribed and such Adjudicating Authority shall keep such order 
and material for such period, as may be prescribed. 
 
(3) Every person arrested under sub-section (1) shall, within 
twenty-four hours, be taken to a Special Court or Judicial 
Magistrate or a Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, 
having jurisdiction: 
 
Provided that the period of twenty-four hours shall exclude the 
time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to 
the Special Court or Magistrate's Court.” 
 
9. 
A bare reading of the section reflects, that while the legislature has given power 
to the Director, Deputy Director, Assistant Director, or an authorised officer to 
arrest a person, it is fenced with preconditions and requirements, which must 
be satisfied prior to the arrest of a person. The conditions are – 
Þ The officer must have material in his possession. 
Þ On the basis of such material, the authorised officer should form and 
record in writing, “reasons to believe” that the person to be arrested, is 
guilty of an offence punishable under the PML Act. 
Þ The person arrested, as soon as may be, must be informed of the 
grounds of arrest. 
These preconditions act as stringent safeguards to protect life and liberty of 
individuals. We shall subsequently interpret the words “material”, “reason to 
believe”, and “guilty of the offence”. Before that, we will refer to some judgments 

of this Court on the importance of Section 19(1) and the effect on the legality of 
the arrest upon failure to comply with the statutory requirements. 
 
10. 
In Pankaj Bansal v. Union of India and others,9 interpreting Section 19 of the 
PML Act with reference to Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India,10 this Court 
has observed: 
“32. In 
this 
regard, 
we 
may 
note 
that 
Article 22(1) of 
the Constitution provides, inter alia, that no person who is 
arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed, as 
soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest. This being the 
fundamental right guaranteed to the arrested person, the mode of 
conveying information of the grounds of arrest must necessarily 
be meaningful so as to serve the intended purpose. It may be 
noted that Section 45 of the Act of 2002 enables the person 
arrested under Section 19 thereof to seek release on bail but it 
postulates that unless the twin conditions prescribed thereunder 
are satisfied, such a person would not be entitled to grant of bail. 
The twin conditions set out in the provision are that, firstly, the 
Court must be satisfied, after giving an opportunity to the public 
prosecutor to oppose the application for release, that there are 
reasonable grounds to believe that the arrested person is not 
guilty of the offence and, secondly, that he is not likely to commit 
any offence while on bail. To meet this requirement, it would be 
essential for the arrested person to be aware of the grounds on 
which the authorized officer arrested him/her under Section 19 
and the basis for the officer's ‘reason to believe’ that he/she is 
guilty of an offence punishable under the Act of 2002. It is only if 
the arrested person has knowledge of these facts that he/she 
would be in a position to plead and prove before the Special Court 
that there are grounds to believe that he/she is not guilty of such 
offence, so as to avail the relief of bail. Therefore, communication 
of the grounds of arrest, as mandated by Article 22(1) of 
the Constitution and Section 19 of the Act of 2002, is meant to 
serve this higher purpose and must be given due importance.” 
 
In the Court’s view, Section 19 includes inbuilt checks that designated officers 
must adhere to. First, the “reasons to believe” of the alleged involvement of the 
arrestee have to be recorded in writing. Secondly, while affecting the arrest, the 
 
9 2023 SCC Online SC 1244. 
10 “22. Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.—(1) No person who is arrested shall be 
detained in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest nor shall 
he be denied the right to consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice.” 

reasons shall be furnished to the arrestee. Lastly, a copy of the order of arrest 
along with the material in possession have to be forwarded to the safe custody 
of the adjudicating authority. This ensures fairness, objectivity and 
accountability of the designated officer while forming their opinion, regarding 
the involvement of the arrestee in the offence of money laundering. 
 
11. 
Arrest under Section 19(1) of the PML Act may occur prior to the filing of the 
prosecution complaint and before the Special Judge takes cognizance.11 Till 
the prosecution complaint is filed, there is no requirement to provide the 
accused with a copy of the ECIR.12 The ECIR is not a public document. Thus, 
to introduce checks and balances, Section 19(1) imposes safeguards to protect 
the rights and liberty of the arrestee. This is in compliance with the mandate of 
Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India. 
 
12. 
V. Senthil Balaji v. State and others13 similarly states that the designated 
officer can only arrest once they record “reasons to believe” in writing, that the 
person being arrested is guilty of the offence punishable under the PML Act. It 
is mandatory to record the “reasons to believe” to arrive at the opinion that the 
arrestee is guilty of the offence, and to furnish the reasons to the arrestee. This 
ensures an element of fairness and accountability. 
 
13. 
The decision in V. Senthil Balaji (supra) has also examined the interplay 
between Section 19 of the PML Act and Section 167 of the Code. The 
magistrate is expected to do a balancing act as the investigation is to be 
 
11 See Tarsem Lal v. Directorate of Enforcement, Jalandhar Zonal Office, (2024) SCC Online SC 971. 
12 It appears that in several cases multiple complaints in same ECIR are filed. Whether a copy of the 
ECIR must be supplied to an accused has been examined in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra) which 
has been referred to subsequently. 
13 (2024). concluded within 24 hours as a matter of rule. Therefore, the investigating 
agency has to satisfy the magistrate with adequate material on the need for 
custody of the arrestee. Magistrates must bear this crucial aspect in mind while 
examining and passing an order on the DoE’s prayer for custodial remand. 
More significantly, the magistrate is under the bounden duty to ensure due 
compliance with Section 19(1) of the PML Act. Any failure to comply would 
entitle the arrestee to be released. Section 167 of the Code, therefore, enjoins 
upon the magistrate the necessity to satisfy due compliance of the law by 
perusing the order passed by the authority under Section 19(1) of the PML Act. 
Upon such satisfaction, the magistrate may consider the request for custodial 
remand. 
 
14. 
Pankaj Bansal (supra) reiterates V. Senthil Balaji (supra) to hold that the 
magistrate/court has the duty to ensure that the conditions in Section 19(1) of 
the PML Act are duly satisfied and that the arrest is valid and lawful. This is in 
lieu of the mandate under Section 167 of the Code. If the court fails to discharge 
its duty in right earnest and with proper perspective, the remand order would 
fail on the ground that the court cannot validate an unlawful arrest made under 
Section 19(1). The Court relied on In the matter of Madhu Limaye and 
others,14 which held that it is necessary for the State to establish that, at the 
stage of remand, while directing detention in custody, the magistrate has 
applied their mind to all relevant matters. If the arrest itself is unconstitutional 
viz. Article 22(1) of the Constitution, the remand would not cure the 
constitutional infirmities attached to such arrest. The principle stands 
 
14 (1969). expanded, as the violation of Section 19(1) of the PML Act will equally vitiate 
the arrest. 
 
15. 
In Pankaj Bansal (supra), one of the contentions raised by the DoE was that 
the legality of arrest is rendered immaterial once the competent court passes 
an order of remand. Reliance was placed on certain judgments. However, these 
judgments were distinguished on the ground that they primarily addressed writs 
of habeas corpus following remand orders by the jurisdictional court. Therefore, 
the ratios therein are not applicable to this scenario. In the context of statutory 
compliance, the Court observed in clear terms that if the arrest is not in 
conformity with Section 19(1) of the PML Act, the mere passing of an order of 
remand, in itself, would not be sufficient to validate the person’s arrest. Thus, 
notwithstanding the order of remand, the issue whether the arrest of the person 
is lawful at its inception, is open for consideration and must be answered. 
 
16. 
Recently, in Prabir Purkayastha v. State (NCT of Delhi),15 this Court 
reiterated the aforesaid principles expounded in Pankaj Bansal (supra). The 
said principles were applied to the pari materia provisions16 of the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. The Court explained that Section 19(1) of the 
PML Act is meant to serve a higher purpose, and also to enforce the mandate 
of Article 22(1) of the Constitution. The right to life and personal liberty is 
sacrosanct, a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21 and protected by 
Articles 20 and 22 of the Constitution. Reference was made to the observations 
of this Court in Roy V.D. v. State of Kerala17 that the right to be informed about 
 
15. 
16 Sections 43A, 43B and 43C of the UAPA. 
17 (2000). the grounds of arrest flows from Article 22(1) of the Constitution and any 
infringement of this fundamental right vitiates the process of arrest and remand. 
The fact that the chargesheet has been filed in the matter would not validate 
the otherwise illegality and unconstitutionality committed at the time of arrest 
and grant of remand custody of the accused. Reference is also made to the 
principle behind Article 22(5) of the Constitution. Thus, this Court held that not 
complying with the constitutional mandate under Article 22(1) and the statutory 
mandate of the UAPA, on the requirement to communicate grounds of arrest or 
grounds of detention, would lead to the custody or detention being rendered 
illegal. 
 
17. 
In Vijay Madanlal Choudhary and others v. Union of India and others,18 a 
three Judge Bench of this Court distinguished between the stringent 
requirements stipulated in Section 19(1) of the PML Act, and the power of arrest 
given to the police in cognisable offences under Section 41 of the Code19. 
 
18 (2022) SCC Online SC 929. 
19 “41. When police may arrest without warrant.—(1) Any police officer may without an order from a 
Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person— 
(a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable offence; 
(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been received, 
or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years or which may extend to seven years 
whether with or without fine, if the following conditions are satisfied, namely:— 
(i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of such complaint, information, or suspicion that 
such person has committed the said offence; 
(ii) the police office is satisfied that such arrest is necessary— 
(a) to prevent such person from committing any further offence; or 
(b) for proper investigation of the offence; or 
(c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the offence to disappear or tampering with 
such evidence in any manner; or 
(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted 
with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to the police 
officer; or 
(e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court whenever required cannot be ensured, 
and the police officer shall record while making such arrest, his reasons in writing. 
Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not required under the 
provisions of this sub-section, record the reasons in writing for not making the arrest. 

Reference was made to Section 104 of the Customs Act, 1962,20 which was 
elucidated and considered by the Constitution Bench of this Court in Ramesh 
Chandra Mehta v. State of West Bengal21, and in Union of India v. Padam 
Narain Aggarwal and others22. On the safeguards against the abuse of the 
power of arrest in case of the Customs Act, Padam Narain Aggarwal (supra) 
observes that the power to arrest by a customs os anfficer is statutory in 
character. Such power can be exercised only in cases where the customs 
officer has the “reason to believe” that the person sought to be arrested is guilty 
of the offence punishable under the prescribed sections. Padam Narain 
Aggarwal (supra) observes: 
“36. From the above discussion, it is amply clear that power to 
arrest a person by a Customs Officer is statutory in character and 
cannot be interfered with. Such power of arrest can be exercised 
only in those cases where the Customs Officer has “reason to 
believe” that a person has been guilty of an offence punishable 
under Sections 132, 133, 135, 135-A or 136 of the Act. Thus, the 
power must be exercised on objective facts of commission of an 
 
(ba) against whom credible information has been received that he has committed a cognizable offence 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to more than seven years whether with or 
without fine or with death sentence and the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of that 
information that such person has committed the said offence; 
(c) who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this Code or by order of the State Government; 
or 
(d) in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably be suspected to be stolen property 
and who may reasonably be suspected of having committed an offence with reference to such thing; or 
(e) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty, or who has escaped, or attempts to 
escape, from lawful custody; or 
(f) who is reasonably suspected of being a deserter from any of the Armed Forces of the Union; or 
(g) who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible 
information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists, of his having been concerned in, any 
act committed at any place out of India which, if committed in India, would have been punishable as an 
offence, and for which he is, under any law relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable to be apprehended 
or detained in custody in India; or 
(h) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule made under sub-section (5) of Section 
356; or 
(i) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has been received from another police 
officer, provided that the requisition specifies the person to be arrested and the offence or other cause 
for which the arrest is to be made and it appears therefrom that the person might lawfully be arrested 
without a warrant by the officer who issued the requisition.” 
20 For short, “Customs Act”. 
21 (1969). 
22 (2008). offence enumerated and the Customs Officer has reason to 
believe that a person sought to be arrested has been guilty of 
commission of such offence. The power to arrest thus is 
circumscribed by objective considerations and cannot be 
exercised on whims, caprice or fancy of the officer. 
 
37. The section also obliges the Customs Officer to inform the 
person arrested of the grounds of arrest as soon as may be. The 
law 
requires 
such 
person 
to 
be 
produced 
before 
a 
Magistrate without unnecessary delay. 
 
38. The law thus, on the one hand, allows a Customs Officer to 
exercise power to arrest a person who has committed certain 
offences, and on the other hand, takes due care to ensure 
individual freedom and liberty by laying down norms and 
providing safeguards so that the power of arrest is not abused or 
misused by the authorities. It is keeping in view these 
considerations that we have to decide correctness or otherwise 
of the directions issued by a Single Judge of the High Court. 
“Blanket” order of bail may amount to or result in an invitation to 
commit an offence or a passport to carry on criminal activities or 
to afford a shield against any and all types of illegal operations, 
which, in our judgment, can never be allowed in a society 
governed by the rule of law.” 

18. 
Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra) affirms the aforesaid ratio, and states that 
the safeguards provided as preconditions in Section 19(1) of the PML Act have 
to be fulfilled by the designated officer before affecting arrest. The safeguards 
are of a higher standard. They ensure that the designated officer does not act 
arbitrarily, and is made accountable for their judgment about the ‘necessity to 
arrest’ the person23 alleged to be involved in the offence of money laundering, 
at the stage before the complaint is filed. Paragraph 89 reads as under: 
“89…The safeguards provided in the 2002 Act and the 
preconditions to be fulfilled by the authorised officer before 
effecting arrest, as contained in section 19 of the 2002 Act, are 
equally stringent and of higher standard. Those safeguards 
ensure that the authorised officers do not act arbitrarily, but make 
them accountable for their judgment about the necessity to arrest 
any person as being involved in the commission of offence of 
money-laundering even before filing of the complaint before the 
 
23 The aspect of necessity to arrest, has been independently examined later. 

Special Court under section 44(1)(b) of the 2002 Act in that 
regard. If the action of the authorised officer is found to be 
vexatious, he can be proceeded with and inflicted with 
punishment specified under section 62 of the 2002 Act. The 
safeguards to be adhered to by the jurisdictional police officer 
before effecting arrest as stipulated in the 1973 Code, are 
certainly not comparable. Suffice it to observe that this power has 
been given to the high-ranking officials with further conditions to 
ensure that there is objectivity and their own accountability in 
resorting to arrest of a person even before a formal complaint is 
filed under section 44(1)(b) of the 2002 Act. Investing of power in 
the high-ranking officials in this regard has stood the test of 
reasonableness in Premium Granites (supra), wherein the court 
restated the position that requirement of giving reasons for 
exercise of power by itself excludes chances of arbitrariness. 
Further, in Sukhwinder Pal Bipan Kumar (supra), the court 
restated the position that where the discretion to apply the 
provisions of a particular statute is left with the Government or 
one of the highest officers, it will be presumed that the discretion 
vested in such highest authority will not be abused. Additionally, 
the Central Government has framed Rules under section 73 in 
2005, regarding the forms and the manner of forwarding a copy 
of order of arrest of a person along with the material to the 
Adjudicating Authority and the period of its retention. In yet 
another decision in Ahmed Noormohmed Bhatti (supra), this court 
opined that the provision cannot be held to be unreasonable or 
arbitrary and, therefore, unconstitutional merely because the 
authority vested with the power may abuse his authority. (Also 
see Manzoor Ali Khan (supra).” 

We respectfully agree with the ratio of the decisions in Pankaj Bansal (supra) 
and Prabir Purkayastha (supra), which enrich and strengthen the view taken 
in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra), on the interpretation of Section 19 of 
the PML Act. Power to arrest a person without a warrant from the court and 
without instituting a criminal case is a drastic and extreme power. Therefore, 
the legislature has prescribed safeguards in the form of exacting conditions as 
to how and when the power is exercisable. The conditions are salutary and 
serve as a check against the exercise of an otherwise harsh and pernicious 
power. 

19. 
Given that the legislature has prescribed preconditions to prevent abuse and 
unauthorised use of statutory power, the wielding of such power by an 
authorized person or authority cannot be conclusive. The exercise of the power 
and satisfaction of the conditions must and should be put to judicial scrutiny 
and examination, if the arrestee specifically challenges their arrest. If we do not 
hold so, then the restraint prescribed by the legislature would, in fact and in 
practice, be reduced to a mere formal exercise. Given the conditions imposed, 
the nature of the power and the effect on the rights of the individuals, it is 
nobody’s case, and not even argued by the DoE, that the authorised officer is 
entitled to arrest a person without following the statutory requirements. 
 
20. 
However, it has been argued by the DoE that the power to arrest is neither an 
administrative nor a quasi-judicial power as the arrest is made during 
investigation. Judicial scrutiny is not permissible as it will interfere with 
investigation, or at best should be limited to subversive abuse of law. Discretion 
and right to arrest vests with the competent officer, whose subjective opinion 
should prevail. 
 
21. 
We do not agree and must reject this argument. We hold that the power of 
judicial review shall prevail, and the court/magistrate is required to examine that 
the exercise of the power to arrest meets the statutory conditions. The 
legislature, while imposing strict conditions as preconditions to arrest, was 
aware that the arrest may be before or prior to initiation of the criminal 
proceedings/prosecution complaint. The legislature, neither explicitly nor 
impliedly, excludes the court surveillance and examination of the preconditions 
of Section 19(1) of the PML Act being satisfied in a particular case. This flows 

from the mandate of Section 19(3) which requires that the arrestee must be 
produced within 24 hours and taken to the Special Court, or court of 
judicial/metropolitan magistrate having jurisdiction. The exercise of the power 
to arrest is not exempt from the scrutiny of courts. The power of judicial review 
remains both before and after the filing of criminal proceedings/prosecution 
complaint. It cannot be said that the courts would exceed their power, when 
they examine the validity of arrest under Section 19(1) of the PML Act, once 
the accused is produced in court in terms of Section 19(3) of the PML Act. 
 
22. 
Before we examine the scope and width of the jurisdiction of the court when it 
examines validity of arrest under Section 19(1) of the PML Act, we must take 
on record and deal with the argument of the DoE relying on the paragraphs 176 
to 179 in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra) under the heading ‘ECIR vis-a-
vis FIR’. The submission is that there is difference between the “reasons to 
believe”, and the “grounds of arrest”, the latter is mandated to be furnished to 
the arrestee, but the former is an internal and confidential document, the 
furnishing of which may be detrimental to investigation. Therefore, it is urged 
that “reasons to believe” need not be supplied to the arrestee. Paragraphs 178 
and 179 of Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra) read: 
“178. The next issue is: whether it is necessary to furnish copy of 
ECIR to the person concerned apprehending arrest or at least 
after his arrest? section 19(1) of the 2002 Act postulates that after 
arrest, as soon as may be, the person should be informed about 
the grounds for such arrest. This stipulation is compliant with the 
mandate of article 22(1) of the Constitution. Being a special 
legislation and considering the complexity of the inquiry/ 
investigation both for the purposes of initiating civil action as well 
as prosecution, non-supply of ECIR in a given case cannot be 
faulted. The ECIR may contain details of the material in 
possession of the Authority and recording satisfaction of reason 
to believe that the person is guilty of money-laundering offence, if 
revealed before the inquiry/ investigation required to proceed 

against the property being proceeds of crime including to the 
person involved in the process or activity connected therewith, 
may have deleterious impact on the final outcome of the 
inquiry/investigation. So long as the person has been informed 
about grounds of his arrest that is sufficient compliance of 
mandate of article 22(1) of the Constitution. Moreover, the 
arrested person before being produced before the Special Court 
within twenty-four hours or for that purposes of remand on each 
occasion, the court is free to look into the relevant records made 
available by the Authority about the involvement of the arrested 
person in the offence of money-laundering. In any case, upon 
filing of the complaint before the statutory period provided in 1973 
Code, after arrest, the person would get all relevant materials 
forming part of the complaint filed by the Authority under section 
44(1)(b) of the 2002 Act before the Special Court. 
 
179. Viewed thus, supply of ECIR in every case to person 
concerned is not mandatory. From the submissions made across 
the Bar, it is noticed that in some cases ED has furnished copy of 
ECIR to the person before filing of the complaint. That does not 
mean that in every case same procedure must be followed. It is 
enough, if ED at the time of arrest, contemporaneously discloses 
the grounds of such arrest to such person. Suffice it to observe 
that ECIR cannot be equated with an FIR which is mandatorily 
required to be recorded and supplied to the accused as per the 
provisions of 1973 Code. Revealing a copy of an ECIR, if made 
mandatory, may defeat the purpose sought to be achieved by the 
2002 Act including frustrating the attachment of property 
(proceeds of crime). Non-supply of ECIR, which is essentially an 
internal document of ED, cannot be cited as violation of 
constitutional right. Concededly, the person arrested, in terms of 
section 19 of the 2002 Act, is contemporaneously made aware 
about the grounds of his arrest. This is compliant with the 
mandate of article 22(1) of the Constitution. It is not unknown that 
at times FIR does not reveal all aspects of the offence in question. 
In several cases, even the names of persons actually involved in 
the commission of offence are not mentioned in the FIR and 
described as unknown accused. Even, the particulars as unfolded 
are not fully recorded in the FIR. Despite that, the accused named 
in any ordinary offence is able to apply for anticipatory bail or 
regular bail, in which proceeding, the police papers are normally 
perused by the concerned court. On the same analogy, the 
argument of prejudice pressed into service by the petitioners for 
non-supply of ECIR deserves to be answered against the 
petitioners. For, the arrested person for offence of money-
laundering is contemporaneously informed about the grounds of 
his arrest; and when produced before the Special Court, it is open 
to the Special Court to call upon the representative of ED to 
produce relevant record concerning the case of the accused 
before him and look into the same for answering the need for his 

continued detention. Taking any view of the matter, therefore, the 
argument under consideration does not take the matter any 
further.” 
 
23. 
The paragraphs in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra), while recording that 
there is a difference between ECIR and FIR, hold that the ECIR need not to be 
furnished to the accused, unlike an FIR recorded under Section 154 of the 
Code. The PML Act, a special legislation for the offence of money laundering, 
creates a unique mechanism for inquiry/investigation into the offence. An 
analogy cannot be drawn with the provisions of the Code. ECIR is an internal 
document for initiating penal action or prosecution. Having held so in 
paragraphs 178 and 179, it is observed that Section 19(1) of the PML Act 
postulates that after arrest, as soon as may be, the arrestee should be 
contemporaneously informed of the grounds of arrest to ensure compliance 
with Article 22(1) of the Constitution. Non-supply of ECIR is not to be faulted. 
ECIR may contain details of material in possession of the authority, which if 
revealed before the inquiry/investigation, may have a deleterious impact on the 
final outcome of the inquiry/investigation. The judgment states that the 
accused, upon filing of the prosecution complaint, will get all relevant materials 
forming part of the complaint. For the same reason, it is argued by the DoE that 
the accused is entitled to the “grounds of arrest” and not the “reasons to 
believe”. Grounds of arrest may only summarily refer to the reasons given for 
arrest. 
 
24. 
In the present case, we are examining Section 19(1) of the PML Act and the 
rights of the accused. We are not concerned with the ECIR. The relevant 
question arising is – whether the arrestee is entitled to be supplied with a copy 

of the “reasons to believe”? Paragraph 89 in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary 
(supra) refers to the importance of recording the “reasons to believe” in writing, 
and states this is mandatory. Further, both Pankaj Bansal (supra) and Prabir 
Purkayastha (supra) hold that the failure to record “reasons to believe” in 
writing will result in the arrest being rendered illegal and invalid. Paragraph 131 
of Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra), which has been quoted subsequently, 
states that Section 19(1) requires in-depth scrutiny by the designated officer. A 
higher threshold is required for making an arrest, necessitating a review of the 
material available to demonstrate the person’s guilt. Production of the “reasons 
to believe” before the Special Court/magistrate, cannot be construed and is not 
the same as furnishing or providing the “reasons to believe” to the arrestee who 
has a right to challenge his arrest in violation of Section 19(1) of the PML Act.24 
 
25. 
On the aspect of the checks on the power to arrest under the PML Act, we 
would like to quote from the submission made on behalf of the DoE, as recorded 
in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra). Specific reliance was placed on a 
Canadian judgment in the case of Gifford v. Kelson25. The relevant 
paragraphs in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra) read: 
“16(liii). …Secondly, there must be material in possession with 
the Authority before the power of arrest can be exercised as 
opposed to the Cr. P. C. which gives the power of arrest to any 
police officer and the officer can arrest any person merely on the 
basis of a complaint, credible information or reasonable suspicion 
against such person. Thirdly, there should be reason to believe 
that the person being arrested is guilty of the offence punishable 
under the PMLA in contrast to the provision in Cr. P. C., which 
mainly 
requires 
reasonable 
apprehension/suspicion 
of 
commission of offence. Also, such “reasons to believe” must be 
reduced in writing. Fifthly, as per the constitutional mandate of 
 
24 The arrestee may also challenge his arrest under Section 19(1) of the PML Act on the basis of the 
“grounds of arrest.” 
25 (1943) 51 Man. R 120. article 22(1), the person arrested is required to be informed of the 
grounds of his arrest. It is submitted that the argument of the other 
side that the accused or arrested persons are not even informed 
of the case against them, is contrary to the plain language of the 
Act, as the Act itself mandates that the person arrested is to be 
informed of the ground of his arrest… 
 
xx 
 
xx 

xx 
 
16(lix). Reliance is then placed on the decision of this court in 
Union of India v. Padam Narain Aggarwal, wherein the court 
examined the power to arrest under section 104 of the 1962 Act. 
Relying on the decision, it was stated that the power to arrest is 
statutory in character and cannot be interfered with and can only 
be exercised on objective considerations free from whims, 
caprice or fancy of the officer. The law takes due care to ensure 
individual freedom and liberty by laying down norms and 
providing safeguards so that the authorities may not misuse such 
power. It is submitted that the requirement of "reason to believe" 
and "recording of such reasons in writing" prevent arbitrariness 
and makes the provision compliant with article 14. This is 
reinforced from the fact that only 313 arrests have been made 
under the PMLA in 17 years of operations of the PMLA. 
 
16(lx). Canadian judgment in Gifford v. Kelson was also relied on 
to state that "reason to believe" conveys conviction of the mind 
founded on evidence regarding the existence of a fact or the doing 
of an act, therefore, is of a higher standard than mere suspicion. 
Reliance has been further placed on Premium Granites v. State 
of T. N. to urge that the requirement of giving reasons for exercise 
of the power by itself excludes chances of arbitrariness…” 

26. 
We will reproduce what has been held in Gifford (supra): 
“A suspicion or belief may be entertained, but suspicion and belief 
cannot exist together. Suspicion is much less than belief; belief 
includes or absorbs suspicion. xx 
 
xx 

xx 
 
When, we speak of “reason to believe” we mean a conclusion 
arrived at as to the existence of a fact. Of course “reason to 
believe” does not amount to positive knowledge nor does it mean 
absolute certainty but it does convey conviction of the mind 
founded on evidence regarding the existence of a fact or the doing 
of an act. Suspicion, on the other hand, rings uncertainty. It lives 
in imagination. It is inkling. It is mistrust. It is chalk. ‘Reason to 
believe’ is not. It is cheese.” 

27. 
Gifford (supra) accurately explains the difference between the “reasons to 
believe” and “suspicion”. “Suspicion” requires lower degree of satisfaction, and 
does not amount to belief. Belief is beyond speculation or doubt, and the 
threshold of belief “conveys conviction founded on evidence regarding 
existence of a fact or doing of an act”. Given that the power of arrest is drastic 
and violates Article 21 of the Constitution, we must give meaningful, true and 
full play to the legislative intent.26 
 
28. 
Providing the written “grounds of arrest”, though a must, does not in itself satisfy 
the compliance requirement. The authorized officer’s genuine belief and 
reasoning based on the evidence that establishes the arrestee’s guilt is also 
the legal necessity. As the “reasons to believe” are accorded by the authorised 
officer, the onus to establish satisfaction of the said condition will be on the DoE 
and not on the arrestee. 
 
29. 
On the necessity to satisfy the preconditions mentioned in Section 19(1) of the 
PML Act, we have quoted from the judgment of this Court in Padam Narain 
Aggarwal (supra) and also referred to and quoted from the Canadian judgment 
in Gifford (supra). Existence and validity of the “reasons to believe” goes to the 
root of the power to arrest. The subjective opinion of the arresting officer must 
be founded and based upon fair and objective consideration of the material, as 
available with them on the date of arrest. On the reading of the “reasons to 
believe” the court must form the ‘secondary opinion’ on the validity of the 
exercise undertaken for compliance of Section 19(1) of the PML Act when the 
 
26 We would subsequently examine the expressions “reason to believe”, “guilty of an offence punishable 
under this Act” and “material” in some detail. arrest was made. The “reasons to believe” that the person is guilty of an offence 
under the PML Act should be founded on the material in the form of documents 
and oral statements. 
 
30. 
Referring to the legal position, this Court in Dr. Partap Singh and Another v. 
Director of Enforcement, Foreign Exchange Regulation Act and others27 
has observed: 
“9. When an officer of the Enforcement Department proposes to 
act under Section 37 undoubtedly, he must have reason to 
believe that the documents useful for investigation or proceeding 
under the Act are secreted. The material on which the belief is 
grounded may be secret, may be obtained through Intelligence or 
occasionally may be conveyed orally by informants. It is not 
obligatory upon the officer to disclose his material on the mere 
allegation that there was no material before him on which his 
reason to believe can be grounded. The expression “reason to 
believe” is to be found in various statutes. We may take note of 
one such. Section 34 of Income Tax Act, 1922 inter alia provides 
that the Income Tax Officer must have “reason to believe” that the 
incomes, profits or gains chargeable to income tax have been 
underassessed, then alone he can take action under Section 34. 
In S. Narayanappa v. CIT the assessee challenged the action 
taken under Section 34 and amongst others it was contended on 
his behalf that the reasons which induced the Income Tax Officer 
to initiate proceedings under Section 34 were justiciable, and 
therefore, these reasons should have been communicated by the 
Income Tax Officer to the assessee before the assessment can 
be reopened. It was also submitted that the reasons must be 
sufficient for a prudent man to come to the conclusion that the 
income escaped assessment and that the Court can examine the 
sufficiency or adequacy of the reasons on which the Income Tax 
Officer has acted. Negativing all the limbs of the contention, this 
Court held that 
 
“if there are in fact some reasonable grounds for the 
Income Tax Officer to believe that there had been any non-
disclosure as regards any fact, which could have a material 
bearing on the question of under-assessment, that would 
be sufficient to give jurisdiction to the Income Tax Officer 
to issue notice under Section 34.” 

27 (1985). 

The Court in terms held that whether these grounds are adequate 
or not is not a matter for the court to investigate. 
 
10. The expression “reason to believe” is not synonymous with 
subjective satisfaction of the Officer. The belief must be held in 
good faith; it cannot merely be a pretence. In the same case, it 
was held that it is open to the court to examine the question 
whether the reasons for the belief have a rational connection or a 
relevant bearing to the formation of the belief and are not 
extraneous or irrelevant to the purpose of the section. To this 
limited extent the action of the Income Tax Officer in starting 
proceedings under Section 34 is open to challenge in a court of 
law. (See Calcutta Discount Co. Ltd. v. ITO). In R.S. Seth 
Gopikrishan 
Agarwal v. R.N. 
Sen, Assistant 
Collector 
of 
Customs this Court repelled the challenge to the validity of the 
search of the premises of the appellant and the seizure of the 
documents found therein. The search was carried out under the 
authority of an authorisation issued under Rule 126(L)(2) of the 
Defence of India (Amendment) Rules, 1963 (Gold Control Rules) 
for search of the premises of the appellant. The validity of the 
authorisation was challenged on the ground of mala fides as also 
on the ground that the authorisation did not expressly employ the 
phrase ‘reason to believe’ occurring in Section 105 of the 
Customs Act. Negativing both the contentions, Subba Rao, C.J. speaking for the Court observed that the subject underlying 
Section 105 of the Customs Act which confers power for issuing 
authorisation for search of the premises and seizure of 
incriminating articles was to search for goods liable to be 
confiscated or documents secreted in any place, which are 
relevant to any proceeding under the Act. The legislative policy 
reflected in the section is that the search must be in regard to the 
two categories mentioned in the section. The Court further 
observed that though under the section, the officer concerned 
need not give reasons if the existence of belief is questioned in 
any collateral proceedings he has to produce relevant evidence 
to sustain his belief. A shield against the abuse of power was 
found in the provision that the officer authorised to search has to 
send forthwith to the Collector of Customs a copy of any record 
made by him. Sub-section (2) of Section 37 of the Act takes care 
for this position inasmuch as that where an officer below the rank 
of the Director of Enforcement carried out the search, he must 
send a report to the Director of Enforcement. The last part of the 
submission does not commend to us because the file was 
produced before us and as stated earlier, the Officer issuing the 
search warrant had material which he rightly claimed to be 
adequate for forming the reasonable belief to issue the search 
warrant.” 

This decision relates to the power of authorised officers to conduct search and 
seizure operations under Section 37 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 
1973. The aforesaid observations would be equally relevant, though in the 
context of the power to arrest, a power which is more drastic and intrusive. 
Thus, the nature of inquiry to be undertaken by the courts has to be in-depth 
and detailed. 
 
31. 
In Barium Chemicals Ltd. and another v. Company Law Board and 
others28, the Constitution Bench of this Court had referred to and quoted from 
the decision of the Privy Council in Nakkuda Ali v. Jayaratne29, wherein Lord 
Radcliffe had observed: 
“After all words such as these are commonly found when a 
legislature or law making authority confers powers on a minister 
or official. However read, they must be intended to serve in some 
sense as a condition limiting the exercise of an otherwise arbitrary 
power. But if the question whether the condition has been 
satisfied is to be conclusively decided by the man who wields the 
power the value of the intended restraint is in effect nothing. No 
doubt he must not exercise the power in bad faith; but the field in 
which this kind of question arises is such that the reservation for 
the case of bad faith is hardly more than a formality.” 
 
While agreeing with the first part of the aforesaid quotation, the Constitution 
Bench went on to refer to Joseph Kuruvilla Vellukunnel v. Reserve Bank of 
India and others30, wherein Hidayatullah, J., speaking for the majority, had 
observed: 
“It is enough to say that the Reserve Bank in its dealings with 
banking companies does not act on suspicion but on proved 
facts.” 
 
Thereafter, it was further observed: 
 
 SC 295. 
29 1951 AC 66. 
 SC 1371. 

“But this seems certain that the action (winding up) would not be 
taken up without scrutinising all the evidence and checking and 
re-checking all the findings.” 

32. 
Accordingly, in Barium Chemicals Ltd. (supra), it was held that the expression 
“reason to believe” is not a subjective process altogether, not lending itself even 
to a limited scrutiny of the court that such “reason to believe” or opinion is not 
formed on relevant facts or within the limits. 
 
33. 
Section 26 of the IPC, defines the expression “reason to believe” as sufficient 
cause to believe a thing and not otherwise. Joti Parshad v. State of Haryana31, 
referring to Section 26 of the IPC, has observed: 
“5… “Reason to believe” is not the same thing as “suspicion” or 
“doubt” and mere seeing also cannot be equated to believing. 
“Reason to believe” is a higher level of state of mind. Likewise 
“knowledge” will be slightly on a higher plane than “reason to 
believe”. A person can be supposed to know where there is a 
direct appeal to his senses and a person is presumed to have a 
reason to believe if he has sufficient cause to believe the same. 
Section 26 IPC explains the meaning of the words “reason to 
believe” thus: 
 
“26. ‘Reason to believe’.— A person is said to have ‘reason 
to believe’ a thing, if he has sufficient cause to believe that 
thing but not otherwise.” 
 
In substance what it means is that a person must have reason to 
believe if the circumstances are such that a reasonable man 
would, by probable reasoning, conclude or infer regarding the 
nature of the thing concerned. Such circumstances need not 
necessarily be capable of absolute conviction or inference; but it 
is sufficient if the circumstances are such creating a cause to 
believe by chain of probable reasoning leading to the conclusion 
or inference about the nature of the thing…” 

34. 
Use of the expression ‘not otherwise’, in Section 26 of the IPC, refers to contrary 
evidence or material which would not support the “reason to believe”. The 
 
31 1993 Supp (2) SCC 497. definition extends and puts a more stringent condition in the context of penal 
enactment as compared to the civil law. Clearly, “reason to believe” has to be 
distinguished and is not the same as grave suspicion. It refers to the reasons 
for the formation of the belief which must have a rational connection with or an 
element bearing on the formation of belief. The reason should not be 
extraneous or irrelevant for the purpose of the provision. 
 
35. 
As explained in A.S. Krishnan and others v. State of Kerala32, Section 26 of 
the IPC in substance means that the person must have “reason to believe" if 
the circumstances are such that a reasonable man would, by probable 
reasoning, conclude or infer regarding the nature of things concerned. Such 
circumstances need not necessarily be capable of absolute conviction or 
inference; but it is sufficient if the circumstances are such that it creates a chain 
of probable reasoning leading to the conclusion or inference about the nature 
of the thing.33 
 
36. 
Once we hold that the accused is entitled to challenge his arrest under Section 
19(1) of the PML Act, the court to examine the validity of arrest must catechise 
both the existence and soundness of the “reasons to believe”, based upon the 
material available with the authorised officer. It is difficult to accept that the 
“reasons to believe”, as recorded in writing, are not to be furnished. As 
observed above, the requirements in Section 19(1) are the jurisdictional 
conditions to be satisfied for arrest, the validity of which can be challenged by 
 
32 (2004). 
33 Wednesbury unreasonableness strikes at irrationality when a decision is so outrageous in its defiance 
of logic or of accepted standards that no sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to 
be decided would have arrived at it. See Council of Civil Services Union v. Minister of State for Civil 
Services, (1984) 3 All. ER 935. the accused and examined by the court. Consequently, it would be 
incongruous, if not wrong, to hold that the accused can be denied and not 
furnished a copy of the “reasons to believe”. In reality, this would effectively 
prevent the accused from challenging their arrest, questioning the “reasons to 
believe”. We are concerned with violation of personal liberty, and the exercise 
of the power to arrest in accordance with law. Scrutiny of the action to arrest, 
whether in accordance with law, is amenable to judicial review. It follows that 
the “reasons to believe” should be furnished to the arrestee to enable him to 
exercise his right to challenge the validity of arrest. 
 
37. 
We would accept that in a one-off case, it may not be feasible to reveal all 
material, including names of witnesses and details of documents, when the 
investigation is in progress. This will not be the position in most cases. DoE 
may claim redaction and exclusion of specific particulars and details. However, 
the onus to justify redaction would be on the DoE. The officers of the DoE are 
the authors of the “reasons to believe” and can use appropriate wordings, with 
details of the material, as are necessary in a particular case. As there may only 
be a small number of cases where redaction is justified for good cause, this 
reason is not a good ground to deny the accused’s access to a copy of the 
“reasons to believe” in most cases. Where the non-disclosure of the “reasons 
to believe” with redaction is justified and claimed, the court must be informed. 
The file, including the documents, must be produced before the court. 
Thereupon, the court should examine the request and if they find justification, 
a portion of the “reasons to believe” and the document may be withheld. This 
requires consideration and decision by the court. DoE is not the sole judge. 

38. 
Section 173(6) of the Code, permits the police officer not to furnish statements 
or make disclosures to the accused when it is inexpedient in public interest. In 
such an event, the police officer is to indicate the specific part of the statement 
and append a note requesting the magistrate to exclude that part from the copy 
given to the accused. He has to state the reasons for making such request. The 
same principle will apply. 
 
39. 
We now turn to the scope and ambit of judicial review to be exercised by the 
court. Judicial review does not amount to a mini-trial or a merit review. The 
exercise is confined to ascertain whether the “reasons to believe” are based 
upon material which ‘establish’ that the arrestee is guilty of an offence under 
the PML Act. The exercise is to ensure that the DoE has acted in accordance 
with the law. The courts scrutinize the validity of the arrest in exercise of power 
of judicial review. If adequate and due care is taken by the DoE to ensure that 
the “reasons to believe” justify the arrest in terms of Section 19(1) of the PML 
Act, the exercise of power of judicial review would not be a cause of concern. 
Doubts will only arise when the reasons recorded by the authority are not clear 
and lucid, and therefore a deeper and in-depth scrutiny is required. Arrest, after 
all, cannot be made arbitrarily and on the whims and fancies of the authorities. 
It is to be made on the basis of the valid “reasons to believe”, meeting the 
parameters prescribed by the law. In fact, not to undertake judicial scrutiny 
when justified and necessary, would be an abdication and failure of 
constitutional and statutory duty placed on the court to ensure that the 
fundamental right to life and liberty is not violated. 

40. 
At this stage, we must consider the arguments presented by the DoE, which 
rely on judgments regarding the scope of judicial interference in investigations, 
including the power of arrest. Reference in this regard was made to The King 
Emperor v. Khawaja Nazir Ahmad,34 Dukhishyam Benupani, Asst. 
Director, Enforcement Directorate (FERA) v. Arun Kumar Bajoria,35 State 
of Bihar and another v. J.A.C. Saldanha and others,36 and M.C. Abraham 
and another v. State of Maharashtra and others.37In our opinion, these 
decisions do not apply to the present controversy, as the power of arrest in this 
case is governed by Section 19(1) of the PML Act. These decisions restrict the 
courts from interfering with the statutory right of the police to investigate, 
provided that no legal provisions are violated. Investigation and crime detection 
vests in the authorities by statute, albeit, these powers differ from the Court’s 
authority to adjudicate and determine whether an arrest complies with 
constitutional and statutory provisions. As indicated above, the power to arrest 
without a warrant for cognizable offences is exercised by the police officer in 
terms of Section 41 of the Code.38 Arrest under Section 41 can be made on 
the grounds mentioned in clauses (a) to (i) of Section 41(1) of the Code, which 
include a reasonable complaint, credible information or reasonable suspicion 
that a person has committed an offence, or the arrest is necessary for proper 
investigation of the offence, etc. The grounds mentioned in Section 41 are 
different from the juridical preconditions for exercise of power of arrest under 
Section 19(1) of the PML Act. Section 19(1) conditions are more rigid and 
 
 PC 18. 
35 (1998). 
36 (1980). 
37 (2003). 
38 Refer footnote 18 above. restrictive. As such, the two provisions cannot be equated. The legislature has 
deliberately avoided reference to the grounds mentioned in Section 41 and 
considered it appropriate to impose strict and stringent conditions that act as a 
safeguard. The same reasoning will apply to the contention raised by the DoE 
relying upon the provisions of Section 437 of the Code and the judgment of this 
Court in Gurcharan Singh and others v. State (Delhi Administration).39 
Section 437 of the Code applies when an accused suspected of committing a 
non-bailable offence is arrested or detained without warrant by a police officer 
in charge of a police station or is brought before a court, other than the High 
Court or the Court of Sessions. It is observed that the accused would be 
released on bail, except for in cases specified in clauses (i) and (ii) of Section 
437(1) of the Code. Section 437(1)(i) applies at the stage of initial investigation 
where a person has been arrested for an offence punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life. Section 437(1)(ii) imposes certain fetters on the power of 
granting bail in specified cases when the offence is cognizable and the accused 
has been previously convicted with death, imprisonment for life, or 7 years or 
more, or has previously been convicted on two or more occasions for non-
bailable and cognizable offences. The power under Section 437(1) of the Code 
is exercised by the court, other than the High Court or the Sessions Court. In 
other cases, Section 437(3) of the Code will apply. Gurcharan Singh (supra) 
distinguishes between the language of two sub-sections of Section 437 – 
Section 437(1) and 437(7). It is observed that 437(7) does not apply at the 
investigation stage, but rather after the conclusion of trial and before the court 
delivers its judgment. Thus, the use of the expression ‘not guilty’ pertains to 
 
39 (1978). releasing the accused who is in custody, on a bond without surety, for 
appearance to hear the judgment delivered. Notably, Section 437(6) states that 
if the trial of a person accused of a non-bailable offence is not completed within 
sixty days from the first date fixed for taking evidence, the magistrate to their 
satisfaction shall release such person on bail, provided they have been in 
custody throughout this period. The magistrate may direct otherwise only for 
reasons recorded in writing. Section 439 of the Code, which relates to the power 
of the High Court or the Sessions Court to grant bail, remains free from the 
legislative constraints applicable in cases covered by Section 437(1) of the 
Code. However, Section 437(3) of the Code when applicable applies. 
 
41. 
DoE has drawn our attention to the use of the expression ‘material in 
possession’ in Section 19(1) of the PML Act instead of ‘evidence in possession’. 
Though etymologically correct, this argument overlooks the requirement that 
the designated officer should and must, based on the material, reach and form 
an opinion that the arrestee is guilty of the offence under the PML Act. Guilt can 
only be established on admissible evidence to be led before the court, and 
cannot be based on inadmissible evidence. While there is an element of 
hypothesis, as oral evidence has not been led and the documents are to be 
proven, the decision to arrest should be rational, fair and as per law. Power to 
arrest under Section 19(1) is not for the purpose of investigation. Arrest can 
and should wait, and the power in terms of Section 19(1) of the PML Act can 
be exercised only when the material with the designated officer enables them 
to form an opinion, by recording reasons in writing that the arrestee is guilty. 

42. 
DoE relies upon the language of Sections 227 and 228 of the Code, pertaining 
to discharge and framing of charge, respectively. Section 227 uses the words 
– ‘sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused’. Section 228 uses – 
‘grounds of presuming that the accused has committed an offence’. Thus, DoE 
contends that grave suspicion is sufficient to frame a charge and put the 
accused to trial. This contention should not be accepted, since we are not 
dealing with the trial, framing of charge or recording the evidence. The issue 
before us, which has to be examined and answered, is whether the arrest of 
the person during the course of investigation complies with the law. The 
language of Section 19(1) is clear, and should not be disregarded to defeat the 
legislative intent – to provide stringent safeguards against pre-trial arrest during 
pending investigations. Framing of the charge and putting the accused on trial 
cannot be equated with the power to arrest. A person may face the charge and 
trial even when he is on bail. Notably, Section 439 of the Code does not impose 
statutory restrictions, except under Section 437(3) when applicable, on the 
court’s power to grant bail. However, Section 45 of the PML Act prescribes 
specific fetters in addition to the stipulations under the Code. 
 
43. 
At this stage, it is important to distinguish between Section 19(1) and Section 
45 of the PML Act. We have already quoted Section 19, but would like to quote 
Section 45 which reads as under: 
“45. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.—
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no person accused of an 
offence under this Act shall be released on bail or on his own 
bond unless— 
 
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose 
the application for such release; and 

(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court 
is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he 
is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any 
offence while on bail: 
 
Provided that a person, who, is under the age of sixteen years, or 
is a woman or is sick or infirm or is accused either on his own or 
along with other co-accused of money-laundering a sum of less 
than one crore rupees, may be released on bail, if the Special 
Court so directs: 
 
Provided further that the Special Court shall not take cognizance 
of any offence punishable under Section 4 except upon a 
complaint in writing made by— 
 
(i) the Director; or 
 
(ii) any officer of the Central Government or a State Government 
authorised in writing in this behalf by the Central Government by 
a general or special order made in this behalf by that Government. 
 
(1-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or any other provision of this Act, no 
police officer shall investigate into an offence under this Act 
unless specifically authorised, by the Central Government by a 
general or special order, and, subject to such conditions as may 
be prescribed. 
 
(2) The limitation on granting of bail specified in sub-section (1) is 
in addition to the limitations under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in 
force on granting of bail. 
 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that the 
expression “Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable” shall 
mean and shall be deemed to have always meant that all offences 
under this Act shall be cognizable offences and non-bailable 
offences notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), and accordingly 
the officers authorised under this Act are empowered to arrest an 
accused without warrant, subject to the fulfilment of conditions 
under section 19 and subject to the conditions enshrined under 
this section.” 
 
44. 
In our opinion, the key distinction between Section 19(1) and Section 45 is the 
authority undertaking the exercise, in each case. Under Section 19(1), it is the 
designated/authorised officer who records in writing, their “reasons to believe” 

that the arrestee is ‘guilty’ of an offence under the PML Act. Thus, the arrest is 
based on the opinion of such officer, which opinion is open to judicial review, 
however not merits review, in terms of the well-settled principles of law. 
Contrastingly, under Section 45, it is the Special Court which undertakes the 
exercise. The Special Court independently examines pleas and contentions of 
both the accused and the DoE, and arrives at an objective opinion. The Special 
Court is not bound by the opinion of the designated/authorised officer recorded 
in the “reasons to believe”. A court’s opinion is different and cannot be equated 
to an officer’s opinion. While the Special Court’s opinion is determinative, and 
is only subject to appeal before the higher courts, the DoE’s opinion is not in 
the same category as it is open to judicial review. 
 
45. 
In Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra), the three Judge Bench has in 
paragraph 131 referred to the decision in Ranjitsing Brahmajeetsing Sharma 
v. State of Maharashtra and another40, a case of Maharashtra Control of 
Organised Crime Act, 199941, which observes as under: 
“44. The wording of Section 21(4), in our opinion, does not lead 
to the conclusion that the court must arrive at a positive finding 
that the applicant for bail has not committed an offence under the 
Act. If such a construction is placed, the court intending to grant 
bail must arrive at a finding that the applicant has not committed 
such an offence. In such an event, it will be impossible for the 
prosecution to obtain a judgment of conviction of the applicant. 
Such cannot be the intention of the legislature. Section 21(4) of 
MCOCA, therefore, must be construed reasonably. It must be so 
construed that the court is able to maintain a delicate balance 
between a judgment of acquittal and conviction and an order 
granting bail much before commencement of trial. Similarly, the 
Court will be required to record a finding as to the possibility of his 
committing a crime after grant of bail. However, such an offence 
in futuro must be an offence under the Act and not any other 
offence. Since it is difficult to predict the future conduct of an 
 
40 (2005). 
41 For short, “MCOCA”. accused, the court must necessarily consider this aspect of the 
matter having regard to the antecedents of the accused, his 
propensities and the nature and manner in which he is alleged to 
have committed the offence. 
 
45. It is, furthermore, trite that for the purpose of considering an 
application for grant of bail, although detailed reasons are not 
necessary to be assigned, the order granting bail must 
demonstrate application of mind at least in serious cases as to 
why the applicant has been granted or denied the privilege of bail. 
 
46. The duty of the court at this stage is not to weigh the evidence 
meticulously but to arrive at a finding on the basis of broad 
probabilities. However, while dealing with a special statute like 
MCOCA having regard to the provisions contained in sub-section 
(4) of Section 21 of the Act, the court may have to probe into the 
matter deeper so as to enable it to arrive at a finding that the 
materials collected against the accused during the investigation 
may not justify a judgment of conviction. The findings recorded by 
the court while granting or refusing bail undoubtedly would be 
tentative in nature, which may not have any bearing on the merit 
of the case and the trial court would, thus, be free to decide the 
case on the basis of evidence adduced at the trial, without in any 
manner being prejudiced thereby” 
 
This Court in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra) had agreed with the aforesaid 
observations. 
 
46. 
Two more legal aspects need to be addressed. Section 45 of the PML Act does 
not stipulate the stage when the accused may move an application for bail. A 
bail application can be submitted at any stage, either before or after the 
complaint is filed. Whether the charge is framed or evidence is recorded or not 
recorded, is immaterial. Clearly, the fact that the prosecution complaint has not 
been filed, the charge has not been framed, or evidence is either not recorded 
or partly recorded, will not prevent the court from examining the application for 
bail within the parameters of Section 45 of the PML Act. As the issue would 
relate to grant or denial of bail, the parameters or the stipulation in State of 

Orissa v. Debendra Nath Padhi,42 which states that evidence or material not 
relied by the prosecution cannot be examined at the stage of charge, will not 
apply. The reason is simple and straightforward. Right to bail under Section 45 
of the PML Act is not dependant on the stage of the proceedings. The power of 
the court under Section 45 is unrestricted with reference to the stage of the 
proceedings. All material and evidence that can be led in the trial and 
admissible, whether relied on by the prosecution or not, and can be examined.43 
On the question of burden of proof, Section 24 of the PML Act can be relied on 
by the prosecution. However, at the same time, the observations of this Court 
in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra) with reference to clauses (a) and (b) of 
Section 24, as well as the burden of proof placed on the prosecution to the 
extent indicated in paragraph 57 refer to at least three foundational facts. These 
foundational facts are – criminal activity relating to the scheduled offence has 
been committed; property in question has been derived or obtained directly or 
indirectly by any person as a result of that criminal activity; and the person 
concerned is directly or indirectly involved in any process or activity connected 
with the said property being proceeds of crime, have to be established. It is only 
on establishing the three facts that the offence of money laundering is 
committed. When the foundational facts of Section 24 are met, a legal 
presumption would arise that the proceeds of crime are involved in money 
laundering. The person concerned who has no causal connection with such 
proceeds of crime can disprove their involvement in the process or activity 
 
42 (2005). 
43 It goes without saying that the oral evidence when recorded in the Court can be taken into 
consideration. connected therewith by producing evidence or material in that regard. In that 
event, the legal presumption would be rebutted. 
 
47. 
We now turn to the facts of the present case. At the outset we must record that 
the DoE has produced the “reasons to believe” to invoke Section 19(1) of the 
PML Act. We have examined the contents thereof and the contents of the 
“grounds of arrest” furnished to Arvind Kejriwal upon his arrest. They are 
identical.44 
 
48. 
We would briefly refer to the contents of the “reasons to believe”: 
• CBI has registered an RC regarding framing and implementation of the 
excise policy by the Govt. of NCT of Delhi for the year 2021-22 with the 
intent to procure undue favours from the licensee post the tender. 
Contents of the FIR have been elaborated. 
• DoE has registered an ECIR on the basis of the aforesaid predicate 
offence. Upon investigation by the DoE, several searches have been 
conducted and statements have been recorded. 
• Salient features of the excise policy that establish criminality are: 
o The wholesale entity should not be a manufacturer/winery/ 
brewery/bottler of liquor in India or abroad either directly or 
through any sister entities; 
o The manufacturer/winery/brewery/bottler of liquor has to choose 
a distributor holding wholesale license for supply of Indian and 
foreign liquor as an exclusive distributor; 
 
44 The reasons to believe are enclosed at pages 19 to 34 of Volume I of the convenience compilation 
filed by the DoE. The grounds of arrest are to be found at pages 35 to 62 of the same compilation. o The wholesale licensee shall not directly or indirectly have any 
retail wings. The retail license holder shall not be a 
manufacturer/winery/brewery/bottler of liquor in India or abroad 
either directly or through any sister concerns/related entities; 
o The final price to the retailer shall be fixed by the excise 
commissioner as per the formula prescribed which will include the 
profit margin of 12% for the wholesale license holders. 
• A cartel was formed wherein one group/person effectively would be 
controlling manufacturing, wholesale and retail entitles of liquor business 
in return for bribes/kickbacks. 
• The excise policy 2021 was implemented on 17.11.2021, which 
continued till 31.08.2022, after which the government discontinued the 
policy and went back to the old regime. 
• The role of Arvind Kejriwal is elaborated. He has been described as the 
kingpin/key conspirator in formulation of the policy, which favoured 
certain persons in exchange for kickbacks from liquor businessmen. 
Further, Arvind Kejriwal was involved in the use of proceeds of crime 
generated in the Goa election campaign of Aam Aadmi Party45, in which 
he is the convenor and the ultimate decision maker. 
• C. Arvind, the then Secretary of Manish Sisodia, in his statement dated 
07.12.2022, has stated that the policy was given to him in the form of a 
draft report of the Group of Ministers46 by Manish Sisodia at the 
residence of Arvind Kejriwal. Satyender Jain was also present at that 
 
45 For short, “AA Party”. 
46 For short, “GoM”. time. The details mentioned in the draft document on wholesale profit 
margin of 12%, etc., had not been discussed earlier in the meetings of 
the GoM. He had prepared the policy on the basis of the draft which was 
submitted to the cabinet on 22.03.2021. 
• Statement of Butchi Babu dated 23.03.2023, the then Chartered 
Accountant of K. Kavitha, is referred. Butchi Babu had revealed that 
Vijay Nair who was working for Arvind Kejriwal and Manish Sisodia was 
in touch with Arun Pillai. Vijay Nair was involved in policy formulation, for 
ensuring that the policy favours K. Kavitha. This is corroborated by 
WhatsApp chats which were retrieved from the mobile phone of Butchi 
Babu, wherein certain terms of the excise policy, two days before it was 
finalised by the GoM, were found. 
• Association of Arvind Kejriwal with Vijay Nair is elaborated. Vijay Nair 
has been described as a broker/liaison/middleman on behalf of top 
leaders of AA Party, who wanted bribes/kickbacks from the 
stakeholders. Vijay Nair had threatened those opposing and not 
agreeing to his demands. Vijay Nair was staying in the official residence 
allotted to Kailash Gehlot, a cabinet minister and a close associate of 
Arvind Kejriwal. 
• Vijay Nair on behalf of Arvind Kejriwal and AA Party had received 
kickbacks to the tune of Rs.100 crores from the group/cartel who had 
been favoured. 
• The permanent members of the liquor group/cartel were Magunta 
Srinivasulu Reddy, Raghav Magunta, and K. Kavitha. The group/cartel 

was also represented by Abhishek Boinpally, Arun Pillai and Butchi 
Babu. 
• P. Sarath Reddy in his statement dated 25.04.2023 under Section 50 of 
the PML Act had revealed having expressed his desire to meet top 
political leaders in Delhi, that is, Arvind Kejriwal and Manish Sisodia, 
through Arun Pillai. Arun Pillai had assured him and had coordinated 
with Vijay Nair. Later on he met Arvind Kejriwal in a brief meeting of 10 
minutes or so in which Vijay Nair was also present. He was told by Arvind 
Kejriwal to trust Vijay Nair who was very smart and could handle big and 
small issues. Arvind Kejriwal spoke about the new liquor policy which 
would be a win-win for all. 
• On Arvind Kejriwal’s role of demanding kickbacks, reference is made to 
the statement of Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy dated 16.07.2023 recorded 
under Section 50 of the PML Act; and his statement dated 17.07.2023 
recorded under Section 164 of the Code. K. Kavitha had offered to pay 
Rs. 100 crore to AA Party for the excise policy. She had spoken and 
interacted with Arvind Kejriwal. She had asked Magunta Srinivasulu 
Reddy to arrange Rs. 50 crores. He had his son Raghav Magunta to 
further deal with K. Kavitha. Raghav Magunta had agreed to pay Rs.30 
Crores. Raghav Magunta had paid Rs. 25 crores in cash to Butchi Babu 
and Abhishek Boinpally. 
• Raghav Magunta in his statement dated 26.07.2023 recorded under 
Section 50 of the PML Act, and statement dated 27.07.2023 recorded 
under Section 164 of the Code, has accepted that he had paid Rs.25 
crores in cash to Abhishek Boinpally and Butchi Babu in view of the 

agreement between him, his father – Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy and 
K. Kavitha. Raghav Magunta’s father – Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy had 
met Arvind Kejriwal in mid-March 2021. Arvind Kejriwal had invited him 
to do business under the new excise policy, and in turn Arvind Kejriwal 
wanted funding for the upcoming elections in Punjab and Goa. 
• Proceeds of crime of about Rs.45 Crores, a part of the bribes received, 
were used in the election campaign at Goa in 2021-22. AA Party is the 
real beneficiary of the proceeds of crime. 
• The hawala transfer of approximately Rs. 45 crores is substantiated by 
the CBI in its second supplementary chargesheet. 
• Dinesh Arora in his statement dated 01.10.2022 has stated that he had, 
on instructions of Vijay Nair coordinated the hawala transfer of Rs.31 
Crores with Abhishek Boinpally, Rajesh Joshi and Sudhir. Dinesh Arora 
is a close associate of Manish Sisodia. Sudhir is a close associate of 
Vijay Nair. Rajesh Joshi is the proprietor of M/s Chariot Productions 
Media Pvt. Ltd.47, who were engaged by AA Party for its election 
campaign in Goa. 
• The details of transfer of money from Mumbai to Goa by hawala transfers 
are stated with names and particulars including the amounts. Angadiyas 
based out of Mumbai made such transfers to the entities including 
Chariot, Islam Qazi etc. engaged by AA Party in Goa are elaborated with 
names and figures. Payments for the activities/work was partly in cash. 
• Chariot had itself received such hawala payments and had also engaged 
several vendors for campaign of AA Party to whom part cash payments 
 
47 For short, “Chariot”. were paid. These are proven through various statements by employees 
of vendors, CDR records and data seized by the Income Tax 
department. 
• Use of cash in Goa elections is also corroborated by one of the 
candidates of AA Party. 
• Arvind Kejriwal is guilty as an individual, being a part of the conspiracy 
in the formulation of the excise policy, and, also vicariously as the person 
in-charge and responsible for AA Party. Reference is made to Section 
70 of the PML Act relating to offences by ‘companies’. Arvind Kejriwal, 
as National Convenor of AA Party and member of the Political Affairs 
Committee and National Executive, is ultimately responsible for the 
funds being used in the election expenses, including its generation. 
Thus, he is both individually and vicariously liable for generation and 
utilisation of the proceeds of crime. 
• Lastly, Arvind Kejriwal was afforded multiple opportunities to cooperate 
with the investigation. In spite of summons being issued to him on nine 
occasions, he wilfully disobeyed them by not appearing. 
 
49. 
If we go by the narration of facts and assertions made in the “reasons to 
believe”, the subjective satisfaction that Arvind Kejriwal is guilty, on the basis of 
the material relied is clearly recorded. The “reasons to believe” refer to the 
“material” to show involvement of Arvind Kejriwal in the offence of money 
laundering. 
 
50. 
However, the assertion on behalf of Arvind Kejriwal is that the “reasons to 
believe” do not mention and evaluate “all” or “entire” material. It selectively 

refers to “incriminating” material by giving it a semblance of good faith exercise. 
In reality, the reasons are a sham, and the exercise is undertaken in a pre-
determined and biased manner. The expression “material” in Section 19(1) of 
the PML Act refers to the “all” or “entire” material in possession of the DoE. 
Thus, “all” or “entire” material must be examined and considered by the 
designated/authorised officer to determine the guilt or innocence of the person. 
The following aspects are highlighted: 
• P. Sarath Chandra Reddy was arrested on 10.11.2022. In his statements 
before the DoE on 16.09.2022 and 09.11.2022, which were recorded 
before his arrest, he did not make any allegation or comment against 
Arvind Kejriwal. On the contrary, in his statement dated 09.11.2022, on 
being questioned whether Rs.100 crores in cash was transferred from 
Hyderabad to Delhi (Vijay Nair), through Abhishek Boinpally and Dinesh 
Arora, he has denied having transferred any amount to Vijay Nair, 
Dinesh Arora or Abhishek Boinpally. After his arrest, in his statements 
recorded on 9 occasions, from 11.11.2022 to 25.12.2022, he did not 
make any allegation against Arvind Kejriwal. 
• P. Sarath Chandra Reddy’s application for regular bail was dismissed by 
the Special Judge on 16.02.2023. However, on 01.04.2023, in spite of 
opposition from the DoE, he was granted interim bail as his wife was 
indisposed. On 19.04.2023, he moved an application before the Delhi 
High Court for regular bail. After a few days, on 25.04.2023, P. Sarath 
Chandra Reddy made a statement under Section 50 of the PML Act 
implicating Arvind Kejriwal. Thereafter, interim bail granted to him was 
extended in view of the request made by DoE seeking time to file reply 

and verify documents. On 29.04.2023, P. Sarath Chandra Reddy made 
a statement under Section 164 of the Code to the Magistrate, in which 
he implicated Arvind Kejriwal. On 08.05.2023, he filed an affidavit before 
the High Court wherein he cited health issues and claimed that he is sick 
and infirm. The High Court granted him regular bail as it was not objected 
to by the DoE. On 29.05.2024, P. Sarath Chandra Reddy was granted 
pardon. 
• Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy in his statement recorded on 16.09.2022 did 
not implicate Arvind Kejriwal. In his statement recorded on 24.03.2023, 
on being asked whether he had met Arvind Kejriwal in the context of 
Delhi liquor business, Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy had stated that he had 
met Arvind Kejriwal in his office in 2021 to discuss whether the trust of 
Magunta family could be given land in Delhi for their charitable trust. The 
meeting had lasted for 5-6 minutes. Thus, he had not spoken about the 
Delhi liquor business. 
• Raghav Magunta, son of Magunta Srinivasuly Reddy, was arrested on 
11.02.2023. Raghav Magunta in his first statement recorded before his 
arrest on 16.09.2022 and 5 statements recorded between 10.02.2023 
and 17.02.2023 did not implicate or make any assertion against Arvind 
Kejriwal. Regular bail application filed by Raghav Magunta was 
dismissed by the Special Judge on 20.04.2023. Raghav Magunta’s wife 
attempted suicide on 01.05.2023, and on this ground he sought interim 
bail. The interim bail application was dismissed by the Special Judge on 
08.05.2023. Thereupon, Raghav Magunta had moved the High Court on 
11.05.2023 for grant of interim bail, which application was withdrawn on 

29.05.2023. While doing so, certain observations made by the Special 
Judge in the order dated 08.05.2023 were expunged. On 07.06.2023, 
the maternal grandmother of Raghav Magunta suffered injuries and was 
admitted to an Intensive Care Unit. The High Court granted an interim 
bail to Raghav Magunta for a period of 15 days on this ground. This order 
was challenged by the DoE before this Court. This Court vide order 
dated 09.06.2023 reduced the interim bail period from 15 days to 6 days. 
On 16.07.2023 and 17.07.2023, Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy gave 
statements under Section 50 of the PML Act and Section 164 of the 
Code respectively, implicating and naming Arvind Kejriwal. On 
18.07.2023, the High Court extended the interim bail granted to Raghav 
Magunta recording that the DoE had no objection. On 26.07.2023 and 
27.07.2023, Raghav Magunta gave statements under Section 50 of the 
PML Act and Section 164 of the Code respectively, implicating and 
naming Arvind Kejriwal. On 10.08.2023, the interim bail granted to 
Raghav Magunta was made absolute, recording that the DoE had no 
objection to the grant of bail. On 03.10.2023, Raghav Magunta was 
granted pardon. Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy was never arrested. He is 
a Member of Parliament from Andhra Pradesh. 
• Statement of Butchi Babu is hearsay and it is not evidence. Besides the 
statement was made by Butchi Babu while he was in the custody of CBI, 
and to escape his arrest by the DoE. He was not arrested by the DoE, 
despite being an accused in the CBI case. Butchi Babu had contradicted 
as well as corrected his earlier statements dated 28.02.2023, wherein 
he had stated that he does not know when K. Kavitha and Vijay Nair met. 

Hearsay evidence is inadmissible as per the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872.48 
• C. Arvind has not made any allegation against Arvind Kejriwal or linked 
and referred to the role of Arvind Kejriwal in the proceeds of crime. Mere 
presence of Arvind Kejriwal, the Chief Minister, when files were handed 
over to him would not implicate Arvind Kejriwal. The “reasons to believe” 
do not take into account the fact that the statements of the co-accused 
relied upon, cannot in terms of Section 30 of the Evidence Act, be the 
starting point for ascertainment of the guilt of the accused. The 
statements made earlier in point of time which do not implicate Arvind 
Kejriwal have been ignored. The statements are also contradictory. 
Factually, no incriminating document involving Arvind Kejriwal has been 
recovered during the course of investigation, which commenced in 
August 2022. The statements also do not establish involvement of 
Arvind Kejriwal in activities related to commission of a predicate offence 
as well as act of concealment, possession, acquisition or utilisation of 
proceeds of crime, which are penal offences under Section 3 of the PML 
Act. 
• The statements of persons stated to be engaged with Angadiyas in 
Mumbai do not in any way implicate and link Arvind Kejriwal to the crime. 
The statements are not of such sterling quality as to justify arrest of the 
Chief Minister, who is a prominent leader of a national political party and 
an opposition leader. There is no documentary proof to show that AA 
Party has received kickback from the funds received from the cartel, let 
 
48 For short, “Evidence Act”. alone utilising them in the Goa election campaign. Rajesh Joshi of 
Chariot was granted bail by the Special Judge vide order dated 
06.05.2023 as huge amount of Rs.20-30 crores alleged to have been 
transferred was not established. The payment alleged to have been 
made for election related to jobs of meagre amount in lakhs. 
• Contention of the DoE that P. Sarath Reddy, Magunta Srinivasulu 
Reddy, Raghav Magunta, and Butchi Babu in their earlier statements 
were quiet and did not link Arvind Kejriwal is contested on the ground 
that the statements were recorded by the officers of DoE who had the 
discretion to put questions and also in recording the contents. 
 
51. 
Arvind Kejriwal submits that the “reasons to believe” selectively refer to the 
implicating material, and ignore the exculpatory material. Thus, there is no 
attempt to evaluate the entire material and evidence on record. The co-
accused, in view of prolonged incarceration, strong-arm tactics and threats 
have been coerced to accept the DoE’s version of facts. In support, it is 
highlighted that the DoE changed their position, viz. the co-accused 
conspirators, who were granted bail post the statements implicating Arvind 
Kejriwal. This establishes and shows prejudice and malicious intent. 
 
52. 
In response, the DoE submits that the investigation in the present case is 
complicated. As it is a case of political corruption, independent witnesses are 
not available, and the co-accused were initially reluctant to name and blame 
the top political stakeholders. Admissibility or veracity of the approver/witness 
statements cannot be dealt with in the present proceedings, as credibility of the 
witnesses is to be tested during trial. Statements under Section 164 of the Code 

were recorded before the Magistrate. That apart, the statements are 
corroborated by material evidence or by statement of other witnesses. Reliance 
is placed upon Section 145 of the Evidence Act which permits cross-
examination of witnesses on previous statements made by them. 
 
53. 
At this juncture, we would like to reiterate and clarify that we are not deciding 
an appeal against an order rejecting the prayer/application for grant of bail 
under Section 45 of the PML Act. We are examining the question of the legality 
of arrest of Arvind Kejriwal on 21.03.2024. While doing so, we would be 
exercising the power of judicial review and not merit based review. 
 
54. 
We must also state that the DoE in their additional note filed before us has 
referred to certain retrieved WhatsApp chats which, as per the allegation made, 
show that Arvind Kejriwal was known to Vinod Chauhan, who was involved in 
the hawala transfer of money through Angadiyas from Mumbai to Goa. These 
chats were retrieved after the arrest of Arvind Kejriwal and is not mentioned in 
the “reasons to believe”. Thus, it cannot be examined by us to determine the 
validity of the arrest in terms of Section 19(1) of the PML Act. 
 
55. 
The legality of the “reasons to believe” have to be examined based on what is 
mentioned and recorded therein and the material on record. However, the 
officer acting under Section 19(1) of the PML Act cannot ignore or not consider 
the material which exonerates the arrestee. Any such non-consideration would 
lead to difficult and unacceptable results. First, it would negate the legislative 
intent which imposes stringent conditions. As a general rule of interpretation, 

penal provisions must be interpreted strictly.49 Secondly, any undue indulgence 
and latitude to the DoE will be deleterious to the constitutional values of rule of 
law and life and liberty of persons. An officer cannot be allowed to selectively 
pick and choose material implicating the person to be arrested. They have to 
equally apply their mind to other material which absolves and exculpates the 
arrestee. The power to arrest under Section 19(1) of the PML Act cannot be 
exercised as per the whims and fancies of the officer. 
 
56. 
Undoubtedly, the opinion of the officer is subjective, but formation of opinion 
should be in accordance with the law. Subjectivity of the opinion is not a carte 
blanche to ignore relevant absolving material without an explanation. In such a 
situation, the officer commits an error in law which goes to the root of the 
decision making process, and amounts to legal malice. 
 
57. 
A contention raised by the DoE, and accepted in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary 
(supra), was that the order of arrest under Section 19(1) of the PML Act is a 
decision taken by a high ranking officer. Thus, it is expected that the high 
ranking officer is conscious of the obligation imposed by Section 19(1) of the 
PML Act before passing an order of arrest. We are of the opinion that it would 
 
49 See Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra) at paragraph 31 – “The ‘proceeds of crime’ being the core of 
the ingredients constituting the offence of money-laundering, that expression needs to be construed 
strictly. In that, all properties recovered or attached by the investigating agency in connection with the 
criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence under the general law cannot be regarded as proceeds 
of crime. There may be cases where the property involved in the commission of scheduled offence 
attached by the investigating agency dealing with that offence, cannot be wholly or partly regarded as 
proceeds of crime within the meaning of section 2(1)(u) of the 2002 Act—so long as the whole or some 
portion of the property has been derived or obtained by any person ‘as a result of’ criminal activity 
relating to the stated scheduled offence…” 
Also see M. Ravindran v. Intelligence Officer, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, (2021) 
at paragraph 17.9. – “Additionally, it is well-settled that in case of any ambiguity in the construction of a 
penal statute, the courts must favour the interpretation which leans towards protecting the rights of the 
accused, given the ubiquitous power disparity between the individual accused and the State machinery. 
This is applicable not only in the case of substantive penal statutes but also in the case of procedures 
providing for the curtailment of the liberty of the accused.” 

be incongruous to argue that the high ranking officer should not objectively 
consider all material, including exculpatory material. 
 
58. 
A wrong application of law or arbitrary exercise of duty leads to illegality in the 
process. The court can exercise their judicial review to strike down such a 
decision. This would not amount to judicial overreach or interference with the 
investigation, as has been argued by the DoE. The court only ensures that the 
enforcement of law is in accordance with the statute and the Constitution. An 
adverse decision would only help in ensuring better compliance with the statute 
and the principles of the Constitution. 
 
59. 
Having said so, we accept that a question would arise – does judicial review 
mean a detailed merits review? We have already referred to the contours of 
judicial review expounded in Padam Narain Aggarwal (supra), and Dr. Pratap 
Singh (supra). We have also referred to the principles of Wednesbury 
reasonableness.50 
 
60. 
In Amarendra Kumar Pandey v. Union of India and others,51 this Court 
elaborated on the different facets of judicial review regarding subjective opinion 
or satisfaction. It was held that the courts should not inquire into correctness or 
otherwise of the facts found except where the facts found existing are not 
supported by any evidence at all or the finding is so perverse that no reasonable 
man would say that the facts and circumstances exist. Secondly, it is 
permissible to inquire whether the facts and circumstances so found to exist 
have a reasonable nexus with the purpose for which the power is to be 
 
50 See supra note 33. 
51 (2022) SCC Online SC 881. exercised. In simple words, the conclusion has to logically flow from the facts. 
If it does not, then the courts can interfere, treating the lack of reasonable nexus 
as an error of law. Thirdly, jurisdictional review permits review of errors of law 
when constitutional or statutory terms, essential for the exercise of power, are 
misapplied or misconstrued. Fourthly, judicial review is permissible to check 
improper exercise of power. For instance, it is an improper exercise of power 
when the power is not exercised genuinely, but rather to avoid embarrassment 
or for wreaking personal vengeance. Lastly, judicial review can be exercised 
when the authorities have not considered grounds which are relevant or has 
accounted for grounds which are not relevant. 
 
61. 
Error in decision making process can vitiate a judgment/decision of a statutory 
authority. In terms of Section 19(1) of the PML Act, a decision-making error can 
lead to the arrest and deprivation of liberty of the arrestee. Though not akin to 
preventive detention cases, but given the nature of the order entailing 
arrest – it requires careful scrutiny and consideration. Yet, at the same time, 
the courts should not go into the correctness of the opinion formed or sufficiency 
of the material on which it is based, albeit if a vital ground or fact is not 
considered or the ground or reason is found to be non-existent, the order of 
detention may fail.52 
 
62. 
In Centre for PIL and another v. Union of India and another,53 this Court 
observed that in judicial review, it is permissible to examine the question of 
illegality in the decision-making process. A decision which is vitiated by 
 
52 Ram Manohar Lohia v. State of Bihar and another, AIR 1966 SC 740 and Moti Lal Jain v. State of 
Bihar and others, AIR 1968 SC 1509. 
53 (2011). extraneous considerations can be set aside. Similarly, in Uttamrao Shivdas 
Jankhar v. Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite Patil,54 elaborating on the expression 
“decision making process”, this Court held that judicial interference is warranted 
when there is no proper application of mind on the requirements of law. An error 
in the decision making process crops up where the authority fails to consider a 
relevant factor and considers irrelevant factors to decide the issue. 
 
63. 
In the present case, as noticed above, the “reasons to believe” have recorded 
several facts and grounds. One of the grounds for arrest relates to the 
formulation of the excise policy with the intent to obtain kickbacks/bribes. What 
has been discussed above in the arguments raised by Arvind Kejriwal relates 
to corruption amounting Rs.45 crores to facilitate Goa elections for the AA 
Party. However, the “reasons to believe” also refer to the policy itself and that 
it was vitiated on the ground of criminality, viz. to promote cartelization and 
benefit from those providing bribes or kickbacks. We have briefly referred to 
the terms of the excise policy, albeit for clarity we would like to reproduce the 
findings recorded in the case of Manish Sisodia v. Central Bureau of 
Investigation55, a judgment authored by one of us (Sanjiv Khanna, J.), the 
relevant portion of which reads as under: 
“22. However, there is one clear ground or charge in the 
complaint filed under the PML Act, which is free from perceptible 
legal challenge and the facts as alleged are tentatively supported 
by material and evidence. This discussion is equally relevant for 
the charge-sheet filed by the CBI under the PoC Act and IPC. We 
would like to recapitulate the facts as alleged, which it is stated 
establish an offence under Section 3 of the PML Act and the PoC 
Act. These are: 

54 (2009). 
55. 

• 
In a period of about ten months, during which the new excise 
policy was in operation, the wholesale distributors had earned 
Rs. 581,00,00,000 (rupees five hundred eighty one crores 
only) as the fixed fee. 
• 
The one time licence fee collected from 14 wholesale 
distributors was about Rs. 70,00,00,000 (rupees seventy 
crores only). 
• 
Under the old policy 5% commission was payable to the 
wholesale distributors/licensees. 
The difference between the 12%; minus 5% of the wholesale 
profit margin plus Rs. 70,00,00,000/-; it is submitted, would 
constitute proceeds of crime, an offence punishable under the 
PML Act. The proceeds of crime were acquired, used and 
were in possession of the wholesale distributors who have 
unlawfully benefitted from illegal gain at the expense of the 
government exchequer and the consumers/ buyers. Relevant 
portion of the criminal complaint filed by the DoE dated 
04.05.2023, reads: 
 
“One of the reasons given by Sh Manish Sisodia is to 
compensate the wholesaler for increased license fee from Rs. 
5 lacs to Rs. 5 Cr. During this policy period, 14 LI licences 
were given by Excise Department, by raising the license fee 
for LI to Rs. 5 Cr in the entire period of operation of the Delhi 
Excise Policy 2021-2022, the Govt. has earned Rs. 75.16 Cr 
from the license fee of LI (as per Excise department 
communication dated 11.04.2023) (RUD 34). On the other 
hand the excess profit earned by the wholesalers during this 
period is to the tune of Rs. 338 Cr. (7% additional profit 
earned due to increase from 5% to 12%, Rs. 581 Cr being the 
total profit of LI as informed by Excise department). Therefore 
there is no logical correlation between the license fee 
increase and the profit margin increase. Whereas this excess 
profit margin benefit could have been passed on to the 
consumers in form of lower MRP. Contrary to the claim that 
the policy was meant to benefit the public or the exchequer, 
it was rather a conspiracy to ensure massive illegal gains to 
a select few private players/individuals/entities.” 
 
23. The charge-sheet under the PoC Act includes offences for 
unlawful gains to a private person at the expense of the public 
exchequer. Reference in this regard is made to the provisions of 
Sections 7, 7A, 8 and 12 of the PoC Act. 
 
24. Clauses (a) and (b) to Section 7 of the PoC Act apply: (a) 
when a public servant obtains, accepts or intends to obtain from 
another person undue advantage with the intent to perform or fail 
to improperly or to forbear or cause forbearance to cause by 
himself or by another person; (b) obtains or accepts or attempts 
to obtain undue advantage from a person as a reward or 

dishonest performance of a public duty or forbearance to perform 
such duty, either by himself or by another public servant. 
Explanation (2) construes the words and expression, “obtains, 
accepts or attempts to obtain”, as to cover cases where a public 
servant obtains, accepts or intends to obtain any undue 
advantage by abusing his position as a public servant or by using 
his personal interest over another public servant by any other 
corrupt or illegal means. It is immaterial whether such person 
being a public servant accepts or attempts to obtain the undue 
advantage directly or through a third party. 
 
25. On this aspect of the offences under the PoC Act, the CBI has 
submitted that conspiracy and involvement of the appellant - 
Manish Sisodia is well established. For the sake of clarity, without 
making any additions, subtractions, or a detailed analysis, we 
would like to recapitulate what is stated in the chargesheet filed 
by the CBI against the appellant - Manish Sisodia: 
 
• 
The existing excise policy was changed to facilitate and get 
kickbacks and bribes from the wholesale distributors by 
enhancing their commission/fee from 5% under the old policy 
to 12% under the new policy. Accordingly, a conspiracy was 
hatched to carefully draft the new policy, deviating from the 
expert opinion/views to create an eco-system to assure unjust 
enrichment of the wholesale distributors at the expense of 
government exchequer or the consumer. The illegal income 
(proceeds of crime, as per the DoE) would partly be recycled 
and returned in the form of bribes. 
• 
Vijay Nair, who was the middleman, a go-between, a member 
of AAP, and a co-confident of the appellant - Manish Sisodia, 
had interacted with Butchi Babu, Arun Pillai, Abhishek 
Boinpally and Sarath Reddy, to frame the excise policy on 
conditions and terms put forth and to the satisfaction and 
desire of the liquor group. 
• 
Vijay Nair and the members of the liquor group had meetings 
on different dates, including 16.03.2021, and had prepared 
the new excise policy, which was handed over to Vijay Nair. 
Thereupon, the commission/fee, which was earlier fixed at 
minimum of 5%, was enhanced to fixed fee of 12% payable 
to wholesale distributor. 
• 
The appellant - Manish Sisodia was aware that three liquor 
manufacturers have 85% share in the liquor market in Delhi. 
Out of them two manufacturers had 65% liquor share, while 
14 small manufacturers had 20% market share. As per the 
term in the new excise policy - each manufacturer could 
appoint only one wholesale distributor, through whom alone 
the liquor would be sold. At the same time, the wholesale 
distributors could enter into distribution agreements with 
multiple manufacturers. This facilitated getting kickbacks or 

bribes from the wholesale distributors having substantial 
market share and turnover. 
• 
The licence fee payable by the wholesale distributor was a 
fixed amount of Rs. 5,00,00,000/- (rupees five crores only). It 
was not dependant on the turnover. The new policy facilitated 
big wholesale distributors, whose outpour towards the licence 
fee was fixed. 
• 
The policy favoured and promoted cartelisation. Large 
wholesale distributors with high market share because of 
extraneous reasons and kickbacks, were ensured to earn 
exorbitant profits. 
• 
Mahadev Liquor, who was a wholesale distributor for 14 small 
manufacturers, having 20% market share, was forced to 
surrender the wholesale distributorship licence. 
• 
Indo Spirit, the firm in which the liquor group had interest, was 
granted whole distributor licence, in spite of complaints of 
cartelisation etc. which were overlooked. The complainant 
was forced to take back his complaint. 
• 
The excess amount of 7% commission/fee earned by the 
wholesale distributors of Rs. 338,00,00,000/- (rupees three 
hundred thirty eight crores only) constitute an offence as 
defined under Section 7 of the PoC Act, relating to a public 
servant being bribed. (As per the DoE, these are proceeds of 
crime). This amount was earned by the wholesale distributors 
in a span of ten months. This figure cannot be disputed or 
challenged. Thus, the new excise policy was meant to give 
windfall gains to select few wholesale distributors, who in turn 
had agreed to give kickbacks and bribes. 
• 
No doubt, VAT and excise duty was payable separately. 
However, under the new policy the VAT was reduced to mere 
1%. 
• 
Vijay Nair had assured the liquor group that they would be 
made distributor of Pernod Ricard, one of the biggest players 
in the market. This did happen.” 

64. 
During the course of arguments, we had specifically asked the learned counsel 
appearing for Arvind Kejriwal to address arguments on facts. He did not, 
however, address arguments on the said aspect.56 As noticed above, the arrest 
of Arvind Kejriwal is on several counts, which are independent and separate 
from each other. 
 
56 It was also submitted on behalf of Arvind Kejriwal that he would not like to argue on the question of 
applicability of Section 70 of the PML Act to political parties or the issue whether he can be prosecuted 
being the person in-charge and responsible. 

65. 
Arguments raised on behalf of Arvind Kejriwal, which tend to dent the 
statements and material relied upon by the DoE in the “reasons to believe”, 
though worthy of consideration, are in the nature of propositions or deductions. 
They are a matter of discussion as they intend to support or establish a point of 
view on the basis of inferences drawn from the material. It is contended that the 
statements relied upon by the DoE have been extracted under coercion, a fact 
that is contested and has to be examined and decided. This argument does not 
persuade us, given the limited power of judicial review, to set aside and quash 
the “reasons to believe”. Accepting this argument would be equivalent to 
undertaking a merits review. 
 
66. 
Arvind Kejriwal can raise these arguments at the time when his application for 
bail is taken up for hearing. In bail hearings, the court’s jurisdiction is wider, 
though the fetters in terms of Section 45 of the PML Act have to be met. Special 
Court would have to independently apply its mind, without being influenced by 
the opinion recorded in the “reasons to believe”. To adjudicate on a bail 
application, pleas and arguments of Arvind Kejriwal and the DoE, including the 
material that can be relied on and the inferences possible shall be examined. 
The court will have to undertake the balancing exercise. 
 
67. 
It has been strenuously urged on behalf of Arvind Kejriwal that the arrest would 
falter on the ground that the “reasons to believe” do not mention and record 
reasons for “necessity to arrest”. The term “necessity to arrest” is not mentioned 
in Section 19(1) of the PML Act. However, this expression has been given 

judicial recognition in Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar,57 which lays down that 
“necessity to arrest” must be considered by an officer before arresting a person. 
This Court observed that the officer must ask himself the questions – why 
arrest?; is it really necessary to arrest?; what purpose would it serve?; and what 
object would it achieve? 
 
68. 
This Court in Mohammed Zubair v. State of NCT of Delhi,58 has held that 
power to arrest is not unbridled. The officer must be satisfied that the arrest is 
necessary. Where the power is exercised without application of mind, and by 
disregarding the law, it amounts to abuse of the law. 
 
69. 
In Joginder Kumar v. State of Uttar Pradesh,59 the distinction between the 
power to arrest and the necessity and need to arrest60, is explained in the 
following terms: 
“20…No arrest can be made because it is lawful for the police 
officer to do so. The existence of the power to arrest is one thing. 
The justification for the exercise of it is quite another. The police 
officer must be able to justify the arrest apart from his power to do 
so. Arrest and detention in police lock-up of a person can cause 
incalculable harm to the reputation and self-esteem of a person. 
No arrest can be made in a routine manner on a mere allegation 
of commission of an offence made against a person. It would be 
prudent for a police officer in the interest of protection of the 
constitutional rights of a citizen and perhaps in his own interest 
that no arrest should be made without a reasonable satisfaction 
reached after some investigation as to the genuineness and bona 
fides of a complaint and a reasonable belief both as to the 
person's complicity and even so as to the need to effect arrest. 
Denying a person of his liberty is a serious matter. The 
recommendations of the Police Commission merely reflect the 
constitutional concomitants of the fundamental right to personal 
liberty and freedom. A person is not liable to arrest merely on the 
 
57 (2014), 
58 (2022) SCC OnLine SC 897 
59 (1994). 
60 Necessity to arrest is not a precondition and safeguard mentioned in Section 19 of the PML Act, albeit 
treated as a part of the general law and exercise of the power to arrest. The legislature being aware of 
this interpretation has not excluded the application of this principle in Section 19 of the PML Act. suspicion of complicity in an offence. There must be some 
reasonable justification in the opinion of the officer effecting the 
arrest that such arrest is necessary and justified. Except in 
heinous offences, an arrest must be avoided if a police officer 
issues notice to person to attend the Station House and not to 
leave the Station without permission would do.” 

70. 
Recently, Siddharth v. State of Uttar Pradesh,61 relied on Joginder Kumar 
(supra), to observe: 
“10. We may note that personal liberty is an important aspect of 
our constitutional mandate. The occasion to arrest an accused 
during investigation arises when custodial investigation becomes 
necessary or it is a heinous crime or where there is a possibility 
of influencing the witnesses or accused may abscond. Merely 
because an arrest can be made because it is lawful does not 
mandate that arrest must be made. A distinction must be made 
between the existence of the power to arrest and the justification 
for exercise of it [Joginder Kumar v. State of U.P., (1994): 1994 SCC (Cri) 1172]. If arrest is made routine, it can cause 
incalculable harm to the reputation and self-esteem of a person. 
If the investigating officer has no reason to believe that the 
accused will abscond or disobey summons and has, in fact, 
throughout cooperated with the investigation we fail to appreciate 
why there should be a compulsion on the officer to arrest the 
accused.” 
 
Thus, time and again, courts have emphasised that the power to arrest must 
be exercised cautiously to prevent severe repercussions on the life and liberty 
of individuals. Such power must be restricted to necessary instances and must 
not be exercised routinely or in a cavalier fashion. 
 
71. 
In Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra), a substantive threshold test is not laid 
down on the ‘necessity to arrest’. However, in paragraph 88 of the judgment, 
the Court has observed that the safeguard provided in Section 19(1) of the PML 
Act is to ensure fairness, objectivity and accountability of the authorised officer 
in forming opinion, as recorded in writing, regarding necessity to arrest a person 
 
61 (2022). involved in the offence of money laundering. Similar observations are made in 
paragraphs 15 and 22 of Pankaj Bansal (supra). 
 
72. 
However, we must observe that in paragraph 32 of V. Senthil Balaji (supra), it 
is held that an authorised officer is not bound to follow the rigours of Section 
41A of the Code as there is already an exhaustive procedure contemplated 
under the PML Act containing sufficient safeguards in favour of the arrestee. 
Thereafter, in paragraph 40 of V. Senthil Balaji (supra), it is observed: 
“40. To effect an arrest, an officer authorised has to assess and 
evaluate the materials in his possession. Through such materials, 
he is expected to form a reason to believe that a person has been 
guilty of an offence punishable under the PMLA, 2002. 
Thereafter, he is at liberty to arrest, while performing his 
mandatory duty of recording the reasons. The said exercise has 
to be followed by way of an information being served on the 
arrestee of the grounds of arrest. Any non-compliance of the 
mandate of Section 19(1) of the PMLA, 2002 would vitiate the 
very arrest itself. Under sub-section (2), the authorised officer 
shall immediately, after the arrest, forward a copy of the order as 
mandated under sub-section (1) together with the materials in his 
custody, forming the basis of his belief, to the adjudicating 
authority, in a sealed envelope. Needless to state, compliance of 
sub-section (2) is also a solemn function of the arresting authority 
which brooks no exception.” 
 
73. 
In Prabir Purkayastha (supra), this Court went beyond the rigours of the PML 
Act/UAPA. Drawing a distinction between “reasons to arrest” and “grounds for 
arrest”, it held that while the former refers to the formal parameters, the latter 
would require all such details in the hands of the investigating officer 
necessitating the arrest. Thus, the grounds of arrest would be personal to the 
accused. 
 
74. 
Therefore, the issue which arises for consideration is whether the court while 
examining the validity of arrest in terms of Section 19(1) of the PML Act will also 
go into and examine the necessity and need to arrest. In other words, is the 

mere satisfaction of the formal parameters to arrest sufficient? Or is the 
satisfaction of necessity and need to arrest, beyond mere formal parameters, 
required? We would concede that such review might be conflated with 
stipulations in Section 41 of the Code which lays down certain conditions for 
the police to arrest without warrant: 
o Section 41(1)(ii)(a) – preventing a person from committing further 
offence. o Section 41(1)(ii)(b) – proper investigation of the offence. o Section 41(1)(ii)(c) – preventing a person from disappearing or 
tampering with evidence in any manner. o Section 41(1)(ii)(d) – preventing the person from making any inducement 
or threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case 
so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the court or police. o Section 41(1)(ii)(e) – to ensure presence of the person in the Court, 
whenever required, which without arresting cannot be ensured. 
However, Section 19(1) of the PML Act does not permit arrest only to 
conduct investigation. Conditions of Section 19(1) have to be satisfied. 
Clauses (a), (c), (d) and (e) to Section 41(1)(ii) of the Code, apart from other 
considerations, may be relevant. 
 
75. 
In Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra), this Court has held that when a person 
applies for bail or anticipatory bail under the PML Act, the conditions stipulated 
in Section 437/438/439 of the Code would equally apply, in addition to Section 
45 of the PML Act. Therefore, it is urged that necessity to arrest, in the case of 
arrest under Section 19(1), would be an additional factor required to be 

considered beyond the conditions and factors stipulated in Section 19(1) of the 
PML Act. 
 
76. 
DoE submits that the test of “necessity to arrest” is satisfied in view of Arvind 
Kejriwal failing to appear despite the issuance of 9 summons dated 30.10.2023, 
18.12.2023, 22.12.2023, 12.01.2024, 31.01.2024, 14.02.2024, 21.02.2024, 
26.02.2024, and 16.03.2024. It is also submitted that arrest is a part and parcel 
of investigation intended to secure evidence, leading to discovery of material 
facts and relevant information as held in P. Chidambaram v. Directorate of 
Enforcement.62 
 
77. 
On behalf of Arvind Kejriwal, it is submitted that there was no necessity to arrest 
on 21.03.2024. The RC/ECIR were registered in the month of August 2022. 
Further, most of the material relied upon in the “reasons to believe” are prior to 
July 2023. The statements under Section 50 of the PML Act and under Section 
164 of the Code, or otherwise, of Magunta Srinivasulu Reddy, Raghav 
Magunta, Siddharth Reddy, etc., relate to the period prior to July 2023. Thus, it 
was not necessary to arrest Arvind Kejriwal on 21.03.2024 based on the said 
material. Lastly, in Pankaj Bansal (supra), this Court observed: 
“28. Mere non-cooperation of a witness in response to the 
summons issued under Section 50 of the Act of 2002 would not 
be enough to render him/her liable to be arrested under Section 
19…” 
 
78. 
As per the data available on the website of the DoE, as on 31.01.202363, 5,906 
ECIRs were recorded. However, search was conducted in 531 ECIRs by issue 
of 4,954 search warrants. The total number of ECIRs recorded against ex-MPs, 
 
62 (2019). 
63 The data post 31.01.2023 has not been updated. 

MLAs and MLCs was 176. The number of persons arrested is 513. Whereas 
the number of prosecution complaints filed is 1,142. The data raises a number 
of questions, including the question whether the DoE has formulated a policy, 
when they should arrest a person involved in offences committed under the 
PML Act. 
 
79. 
We are conscious that the principle of parity or equality enshrined under Article 
14 of the Constitution cannot be invoked for repeating or multiplying irregularity 
or illegality. If any advantage or benefit has been wrongly given, another person 
cannot claim the same advantage as a matter of right on account of the error 
or mistake. However, this principle may not apply where two or more courses 
are available to the authorities. The doctrine of need and necessity to arrest 
possibly accepts the said principle. Section 45 gives primacy to the opinion of 
the DoE when it comes to grant of bail. DoE should act uniformly, consistent in 
conduct, confirming one rule for all. 
 
80. 
One of the developments in the last decade is acceptance of the principle of 
proportionality, especially when fundamental rights such as right to life and 
liberty are involved. This Court in Chairman, All India Railway Recruitment 
Board v. K. Shyam Kumar64 referred to a decision of the House of Lords in R 
v. Secretary of State,65 wherein the House of Lords had stressed that when 
human rights issues are concerned, proportionality is an appropriate standard 
of review. 

64 (2010). 
65 (1991) 1 All ER 710. 

81. 
The proportionality test66 is more precise and sophisticated than other 
traditional grounds of review. The court is required to assess the balance struck 
by the decision maker, not merely whether it is within the range of rational or 
reasonable decisions. In this manner, proportionality goes further than the 
traditional grounds of review as it requires attention to the relative weight 
according to interest and considerations. State of Uttar Pradesh v. Lal,67 
which refers to several other cases, states that the proportionality test 
safeguards fundamental rights of citizens to ensure a fair balance between 
individual rights and public interest. It requires the court to judge whether the 
action taken was really needed and whether it was within the range of courses 
of action which could be reasonably followed. Proportionality is more concerned 
with the aims and intentions of the decision maker and whether the decision 
maker has achieved more or less the correct balance or equilibrium. 
 
82. 
The principle of proportionality has been followed by this Court in several 
decisions such as Modern Dental College & Research Centre v. State of 
Madhya Pradesh,68 K.S. Puttaswamy (Retired) and Anr. (Aadhar) v. Union 
of India and Anr. (5J),69 and Anuradha Bhasin v. Union of India and 
Others70. 

66 The test of proportionality comprises four steps: (i) The first step is to examine whether the 
act/measure restricting the fundamental right has a legitimate aim (legitimate aim/purpose). (ii) The 
second step is to examine whether the restriction has rational connection with the aim (rational 
connection). (iii) The third step is to examine whether there should have been a less restrictive alternate 
measure that is equally effective (minimal impairment/necessity test). (iv) The last stage is to strike an 
appropriate balance between the fundamental right and the pursued public purpose (balancing act). 
67 (2006). 
68 (2016). 
69 (2019). 
70 (2020). 

83. 
Recently, the Constitution Bench applied the doctrine of proportionality to strike 
down the Electoral Bond Scheme in Association for Democratic Reforms v. 
Union of India71. In a way, the present case also relates to funding of elections, 
an issue which was examined in some depth in Association for Democratic 
Reforms (supra). 
 
84. 
In view of the aforesaid discussion, and as Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra) 
is a decision rendered by a three Judge Bench, we deem it appropriate to refer 
the following questions of law for consideration by a larger Bench: 

Whether the “need and necessity to arrest” is a separate ground to 
challenge the order of arrest passed in terms of Section 19(1) of the PML 
Act? 

Whether the “need and necessity to arrest” refers to the satisfaction of 
formal parameters to arrest and take a person into custody, or it relates 
to other personal grounds and reasons regarding necessity to arrest a 
person in the facts and circumstances of the said case? 

If questions (a) and (b) are answered in the affirmative, what are the 
parameters and facts that are to be taken into consideration by the court 
while examining the question of “need and necessity to arrest”? 
 
85. 
As we are referring the matter to a larger Bench, we have to, despite our 
findings on “reasons to believe”, consider whether interim bail should be 
granted to Arvind Kejriwal. Given the fact that right to life and liberty is 
sacrosanct, and Arvind Kejriwal has suffered incarceration of over 90 days, and 
that the questions referred to above require in-depth consideration by a larger 
 
71 (2024). 

Bench, we direct that Arvind Kejriwal may be released on interim bail in 
connection with case ECIR No. HIU-II/14/2022 dated 22.08.2022, on the same 
terms as imposed vide the order dated 10.05.2024 which reads: 

he shall furnish bail bonds in the sum of Rs.50,000/- with one surety of the 
like amount to the satisfaction of the Jail Superintendent; 

he shall not visit the Office of the Chief Minister and the Delhi Secretariat; 

he shall be bound by the statement made on his behalf that he shall not 
sign official files unless it is required and necessary for obtaining 
clearance/approval of the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi; 

he will not make any comment with regard to his role in the present case; 
and 

he will not interact with any of the witnesses and/or have access to any 
official files connected with the case. 
The interim bail may be extended, or recalled by the larger Bench. 
 
86. 
We are conscious that Arvind Kejriwal is an elected leader and the Chief 
Minister of Delhi, a post holding importance and influence. We have also 
referred to the allegations. While we do not give any direction, since we are 
doubtful whether the court can direct an elected leader to step down or not 
function as the Chief Minister or as a Minister, we leave it to Arvind Kejriwal to 
take a call. Larger Bench, if deemed appropriate, can frame question(s) and 
decide the conditions that can be imposed by the court in such cases. 
 
87. 
Accordingly, the Registry is directed to place the matter before the Hon’ble 
Chief Justice of India for constitution of an appropriate Bench, and if 
appropriate, a Constitution Bench, for consideration of the aforesaid questions. 

The questions framed above, if required, can be reformulated, substituted and 
added to. 
 
88. 
The observations made in this judgment are for deciding the present appeal 
and will not be construed as findings on merits of the case/allegations. Facts, 
as alleged, have to be established and proved. Application for regular bail, if 
pending consideration or required to be decided, shall be decided on its own 
merits.