C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3088-3089 OF 2020 
 
BHARTI AIRTEL LIMITED AND ANOTHER... 
APPELLANTS 

VERSUS 

VIJAYKUMAR V. IYER AND OTHERS... 
RESPONDENTS 

SANJIV KHANNA, J. 

The present appeals raise an interesting question on the right 
to claim set-off in the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process, 
when the Resolution Professional proceeds in terms of clause (a) 
to sub-section (2) of Section 25 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code, 20161 to take custody and control of all the assets of the 
corporate debtor. 
 
2. 
In order to decide the issue raised in these appeals, we are required 
to refer to the facts in brief: 
 
2.1 
In April 2016, Bharti Airtel Limited and Bharti Hexacom Limited2 
 
1 For short, ‘IBC’. 
2For short- ‘The appellants’ or ‘Airtel entities’. 
JUDGMENT 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

entered into eight spectrum trading agreements with Aircel Limited 
and Dishnet Wireless Limited3 for purchase of the right to use the 
spectrum allocated to the latter in the 2300 MHz band. The 
agreement was contingent on approval of the Department of 
Telecommunications4, Government of India. The DoT for grant of 
approval demanded bank guarantees in relation to certain licence 
dues and spectrum usage dues from the Aircel entities. Challenging 
this direction, the Aircel entities approached the Telecom Disputes 
Settlement and Appellate Tribunal5. By the interim order dated 3rd 
June 2016, TDSAT directed Aircel entities to submit the bank 
guarantees. As the Aircel entities did not have the means to procure 
and submit the bank guarantees for approximately Rs.453.73 
crores, they approached the Airtel entities to submit bank 
guarantees on their behalf to the DoT. 
2.2 
In terms of the eight spectrum transfer agreements, the Airtel 
Entities were to pay Rs.4,022.75 crores to the Aircel entities. The 
Airtel entities and Aircel entities entered into three Letters of 
Understanding whereby the Airtel entities agreed to furnish the 
bank guarantees to the DOT on behalf of the Aircel entities. The 
Airtel entities were to deduct Rs.586.37 crores from the 
 
3For short- ‘Aircel entities’. 
4 For short- ‘DoT’. 
5 For short- ‘the TDSAT’. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

consideration payable to the Aircel entities under the spectrum 
transfer agreements. On the Aircel entities replacing the bank 
guarantees furnished by the Airtel entities and the Airtel entities 
receiving the bank guarantees from the DOT, Rs.411.22 crores 
were payable by the Airtel entities to the Aircel entities. 
2.3 
TDSAT vide order dated 9th January 2018 held that the DOT’s 
demand of Rs.298 crores against the Aircel entities was untenable, 
and directed the DoT to return the bank guarantees to the Aircel 
entities. However, the bank guarantees were not returned by the 
DoT, which preferred before this 
Court. Cross-appeals were filed by Aircel entities. 
2.4 
This Court by order dated 28th November 2018 held at the interim 
stage, that the order of the TDSAT dated 9th January 2018, insofar 
as bank guarantees are concerned, shall be given effect to. 
However, the DoT did not return the bank guarantees. 
2.5 
In view of the aforesaid, the Airtel entities wrote to the bank seeking 
confirmation of cancellation of the bank guarantees. As the banks 
were reluctant, the Airtel entities approached this Court, which vide 
order dated 8th January 2019, directed that the bank guarantees 
shall be cancelled and shall not be used for any purpose 
whatsoever. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

2.6 
 Thereupon the Airtel entities made a payment of Rs.341.80 crores 
due to the Aircel entities on 10th January 2019. The balance amount 
of Rs.145.20 crores was set-off by the Airtel entities on the ground 
that this amount was owed by the Aircel entities to the Airtel entities. 
According to Airtel entities, Rs.145.20 crores was the adjusted or 
the net amount payable by the Aircel entities towards operational 
charges, SMS charges and interconnect usage charges6 to the 
Airtel entities. 
2.7 
In the meanwhile, Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process was 
initiated against Aircel entities, namely Aircel Limited and Dishnet 
Wireless Limited. The Adjudicating Authority7, Mumbai Bench, 
admitted the petitions against Aircel Limited and Dishnet Wireless 
Limited vide the orders dated 12th March 2018 and 19th March 2018. 
2.8 
Claims on account of the interconnect charges were filed by Bharti 
Airtel Limited, including the claim on behalf of Telenor (India) 
Communications Private Limited8, in light of Telenor’s merger with 
Bharti Airtel Limited, effective from 14th May 2018. Claim was also 
filed by Bharti Hexacom Limited. The total claim by the Airtel 
Entities was Rs.203.46 crores. However, the Airtel entities also 
 
6For short- ‘interconnect charges’. 
7 Section 5(1) of IBC– “Adjudicating Authority”, for the purposes of this Part, means National Company 
Law Tribunal constituted under Section 408 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013). 
8 For short- ‘Telenor India’. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

owed Rs.64.11 crores towards interconnect charges to the Aircel 
entities. 
2.9 
The claims submitted by the Airtel entities were admitted by the 
Resolution Professional to the extent of Rs.112 crores. Claim on 
account of receivable of about Rs.5.85 crores owed by Aircel 
entities to Telenor India, which had been merged with Bharti Airtel 
Limited, was not accepted. 
2.10 By the letter dated 12th January 2019, the Resolution Professional 
for Aircel Limited, Dishnet Wireless Limited and Aircel Cellular 
Limited, wrote to Bharti Airtel Limited, stating that they had suo 
moto adjusted an amount of Rs.112.87 crores from the amount of 
Rs.453.73 crores payable by Airtel entities to Aircel entities, 
consequent to the discharge and cancellation of the bank 
guarantees. Bharti Airtel Limited was asked to pay Rs.112.87 
crores to Aircel entities, which were undergoing Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process, failing which the Resolution 
Professional would be obligated to take steps for recovery. The 
Airtel entities objected on several grounds, and also claimed set-off 
of the amount due to them by the Aircel entities from the amount 
payable by them to the Aircel entities. Their reply and claim for set-
off was rejected by the Resolution Professional. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

2.11 The Airtel entities thereupon approached the Adjudicating Authority 
in Mumbai, who, vide order dated 1st May 2019 held that the Airtel 
entities had a right to set off Rs.112.87 crores from the payment, 
which was retained, and due and payable to Aircel entities. 
2.12 This order was challenged by the Resolution Professional before 
the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal9. The NCLAT vide 
order dated 17th May 2019 allowed the appeal, inter alia, holding 
that set-off is violative of the basic principles and protection 
accorded under any insolvency law. Set-off is antithetical to the 
objective of the IBC. Reference was made to the non-obstante 
provisions in the form of Section 238 of the IBC. As moratorium 
under Section 14(4) applies till the date of completion of the 
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process, which is till the resolution 
plan is approved or the liquidation order is passed, to permit set-off 
will be contrary to law. Further, the set-off being claimed is in 
respect of two separate and unrelated transactions. 
Meaning of set-off and types and principles of set-off. 
 
3. 
Set-off in generic sense recognises the right of a debtor to adjust 
the smaller claim owed to him against the larger claim payable to 
his creditor.10 Philip R. Wood11 calls it a form of payment. Palmer12 
 
9 For short- ‘NCLAT’. 
10 Philip R. Wood, Set-off and Netting, Derivatives, Clearing Systems, (Sweet & Maxwell 2007). 
11 Ibid. 
12 Kelly R. Palmer, The Law of Set Off in Canada (Canada Law Book 1993). 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

notes a distinction between ‘set-off’ as in accounting, and ‘set-off’ 
as a defence. The former focuses on the practical effect of set-off 
which results in discharge of reciprocal obligations, while the latter 
focuses on set-off pleaded as a defence to a claim, albeit not as a 
‘sword’. 
 
4. 
Set-off is given legal preference for three reasons. First, in 
economic terms, set-off is a form of security recognised in law. It is, 
however, not a security in a strict sense, but a right that enhances 
provision of credit and acts as a stimulus to trade and commerce 
by giving a degree of confidence to parties dealing with each other. 
Secondly, it helps reduce litigation, promotes economy of time and 
is an efficient method in resolving debt between parties. Thirdly, 
natural equity requires that cross-demands should compensate 
each other by deducting the lesser sum from the greater. 
 
5. 
At least five different meanings can be ascribed to the term ‘set-off’, 
namely, (a) statutory or legal set-off; (b) common law set-off; (c) 
equitable set-off; (d) contractual set-off; and (e) insolvency set-off.13 
It is observed that the streams of common law and equity on the 
right of set-off have flown together and have so combined as to be 
 
13 Jurong Aromatics Corporation Pte Ltd. and Others v. BP Singapore Pte Ltd. and Another, (2018) 
SGHC 215. (High Court of Republic of Singapore) 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

in the modern era indistinguishable from one another.14 It is 
necessary to briefly explain the contours of contractual set-off, 
statutory/legal set-off, equitable set-off and insolvency set-off. 
 
6. 
Contractual set-off is a matter of agreement, rather than a separate 
application of set-off. The parties are free to mutually agree on the 
outcomes they desire. Being consensual, when expressly stated, 
the normal rules of set-off regarding mutuality of credits or debts, 
liquid debts, and connected debts – aspects relevant and noticed 
below while dealing with statutory/legal set-offs or even insolvency 
set-off – may not apply. The contract, however, should be within 
bounds of legality and public policy.15 Further, the normal 
requirements of the law of contracts, viz. intention to create legal 
relationship, acceptance, consideration etc. should be established 
for a valid contractual set-off.16 
 
7. 
Ascertaining the applicability of contractual set-off requires an 
assessment of the understanding whether the right is conferred by 
the agreement, as the court gives effect to the intention of the 
parties as to how they should deal.17 The right to set-off may be 
explicit in the words of the agreement, or can be gathered by 
 
14 Federal Commerce and Navigation Co. v. Molena Alpha Inc., (1978) Q.B. 927. (Lord Denning) 
15 Palmer, supra note 12, at 263. 
16 Palmer, supra note 12, at 263. 
17Ministre du Revenu national c. Caisse Populaire du bon Conseil, (S.C.C.) (Supreme 
Court of Canada) 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

existence of oral or implied agreement to set-off, reflecting an 
understanding to the said effect. There are earlier judgments in 
common law countries that suggest that courts may rely on the 
equitable foundations of set-off to relax the evidentiary burden 
required to prove an agreement to set-off.18 It is suggested that 
courts accept slighter evidence of agreement to set-off than is 
usually required in order to establish disputed facts,19 but this is too 
broad a statement. Rather, the courts should consider that netting 
of cross dues is both legitimate and equitable, and in that context 
make an assessment of the relevant facts to decide whether or not 
the set-off rights are conferred. 
 
8. 
Statutory or legal set-off is created by a statute. For example, Order 
VIII Rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 190820 states that where 
a suit for recovery of money is filed, the defendant can claim set-off 
against the plaintiff’s demand for any ascertained sum of money 
 
18 Jeffs v. Wood, [1723] 2 Eq Ca. Ab. 10. 
19 Canadian Encyclopedic Digest, Release 3, “Personal Property” by Gloria Mintah, § 187, CD-ROM 
(Thomson Reuters Canada Limited, August 2009); See also Palmer, supra note 12, at 263. 
20 Order VIII Rule 6. Particulars of set-off to be given in written statement.—(1) Where in a suit for 
the recovery of money the defendant claims to set-off against the plaintiff's demand any ascertained 
sum of money legally recoverable by him from the plaintiff, not exceeding the pecuniary limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Court, and both parties fill the same character as they fill in the plaintiff's suit, the 
defendant may, at the first hearing of the suit, but not afterwards unless permitted by the Court, present 
a written statement containing the particulars of the debt sought to be set-off. 
(2) Effect of set-off.—The written statement shall have the same effect as a plaint in a cross-suit so as 
to enable the Court to pronounce a final judgment in respect both of the original claim and of the set-
off, but this shall not affect the lien, upon the amount decreed, of any pleader in respect of the costs 
payable to him under the decree. 
(3) The rules relating to a written statement by a defendant apply to a written statement in answer to a 
claim of set-off. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

legally recoverable by the defendant from the plaintiff, but not 
exceeding the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of the court. It 
requires that both the parties should fill the same character as they 
fill in the plaintiff’s suit. The defendant may, at the first hearing of 
the suit, and not afterwards, unless permitted by the court, present 
the written statement containing particulars of debts sought to be 
set-off.21 For set-off in law, the obligations existing between the two 
parties must be debts which are for liquidated sums or money 
demands which can be ascertained with certainty. Both the debts 
must be mutual cross-obligations, that is, cross-claims between the 
parties in the same right.22 
 
9. 
A few judgments of this Court and the High Courts allow the 
defendant to claim equitable set-off in respect of an unascertained 
sum of money payable as damages. Equitable set-off can also be 
claimed in respect of an ascertained sum of money.23 However, the 
claim for an equitable set-off must have a connection between the 
plaintiff’s claim for the debt and the defendant’s claim to set-off, 
which would make it inequitable to drive the defendant to a separate 
suit.24 It has been accordingly held that the claim for set-off should 
 
21 For the purpose of the present decision, we need not examine the contours and conditions of Order 
VIII Rule 6 CPC. 
22 Citibank Canada v. Confederation of Life Insurance Company, 42 CRB (3)(d) 288. 
23 Ramdhari v. Premanand, 19 Cal WN 1183. 
24 Maheswari Metals & Metal Refinery, Bangalore v. Madras State Small Industries Corporation, AIR 
1974 Mad 39. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

arise out of the same transaction, or transactions which can be 
regarded as one transaction. Equitable set-off is allowed in 
common law, as distinguished from legal set-off, which is allowed 
by the court only for an ascertained sum of money and is a statutory 
right. We shall be subsequently examining the right to equitable set-
off while examining the provisions of the IBC. 
 
10. 
Rory Derham on the law of set-offs observes that insolvency set-
offs should not be equated with equitable set-offs.25 This statement 
reflects the development of law in the United Kingdom, which has 
resulted in enactment of special provisions on set-off in case of 
insolvency. We need not examine in detail the law as applicable to 
insolvency set-off in the United Kingdom for the present decision, 
albeit it is relevant to state that they are broader and wider than the 
provisions of equitable set-off. Insolvency set-off under the law of 
the United Kingdom is permitted when there are mutual debts, 
mutual credits and other mutual dealings between the parties at the 
relevant cut-off time, which is essentially the stage of 
commencement of the liquidation process. We shall subsequently 
examine the term “mutual dealings” as applicable to liquidation 
proceedings in India. 
 
25 Rory Derham, Derham on the Law of Set-Off (Oxford University Press 4th ed. 2010). 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

Analysis of the provisions of IBC relating to the Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process, liquidation proceedings and 
application to the facts of present case. 
 
11. 
In the present case we are examining and concerned with the 
provisions as applicable to the Corporate Insolvency Resolution 
Process in Chapter II Part II of the IBC, which consists of the 
compendium of Sections from 6 to 32A of the IBC. In the course of 
our discussion, we would also be referring to Section 53 of the IBC, 
which is a part of Chapter III Part II, and relates to the liquidation 
process. 
 
12. 
At the outset we should record, that there is a difference between 
the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process and the liquidation 
process of the IBC. The Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process 
focuses on and fosters rehabilitation, revival and resolution of the 
corporate debtor, whereas the liquidation process focuses on the 
constellation of assets of the company in liquidation, and 
distribution and payment to the creditors from the liquidation estate 
in terms of the order of preference set out in the insolvency statute. 
 
13. 
Unlike the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 or the Companies 
Act, 2013, IBC in the case of Corporate Insolvency Resolution 
Process does not give the indebted creditors the right to set-off 
against the corporate debtor. The earlier enactments – the 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

Companies Act, 1956 vide Section 529, and the Companies Act, 
2013 vide Section 325 (now omitted) – did permit set-off per the 
Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, which enactment is now repealed. 
Accordingly, under the Companies Acts, in terms of the provisions 
of Section 46 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, indebted 
creditors’ right to set-off against the corporate debtor was statutorily 
recognised 
subject 
to 
satisfaction 
of 
certain 
conditions. 
Significantly, in the case of partnerships and individual 
bankruptcies, Section 17326 of the IBC permits set-off. Regulation 
29 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Liquidation 
Process) Regulations, 201627 provides for mutual credits and set-
off and reads: 
“29. Mutual credits and set-off.— Where there are 
mutual dealings between the corporate debtor and 
another party, the sums due from one party shall be set 
off against the sums due from the other to arrive at the 
net amount payable to the corporate debtor or to the 
other party.” 
 
The title of the Liquidation Regulations states that they shall 
apply to the process under Chapter III Part II of the IBC. In other 
 
26 Section 173. Mutual credit and set-off.—(1) Where before the bankruptcy commencement date, 
there have been mutual dealings between the bankrupt and any creditor, the bankruptcy trustee shall— 
(a) take an account of what is due from each party to the other in respect of the mutual dealings and 
the sums due from one party shall be set-off against the sums due from the other; and 
(b) only the balance shall be provable as a bankruptcy debt or as the amount payable to the bankruptcy 
trustee as part of the estate of the bankrupt. 
(2) Sums due from the bankrupt to another party shall not be included in the account taken by the 
bankruptcy trustee under sub-section (1), if that other party had notice at the time they became due 
that an application for bankruptcy relating to the bankrupt was pending. 
27 For short- ‘the Liquidation Regulations’. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

words, the Liquidation Regulations are not applicable to Chapter II 
Part II of the IBC, which relates to the Corporate Insolvency 
Resolution Process. 
 
14. 
Section 36(4) in Chapter III Part II of the IBC28 deals with the 
exclusion of assets that do not form part of the liquidation estate. 
Section 36(4) permits the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of 
India29 to specify assets which could be subject to set-off on account 
of mutual dealings between the corporate debtor and the creditor. 
When an asset is excluded from the liquidation estate, it is not 
available for distribution in the liquidation process. It follows that if 
a creditor exercises and is allowed set-off, then in terms of Section 
36(4) of the IBC this creditor is given a preferred status over others, 
including the secured creditors, to the extent of the set-off value. 

28 Section 36 (4). The following shall not be included in the liquidation estate assets and shall 
not be used for recovery in the liquidation— 
(a) assets owned by a third party which are in possession of the corporate debtor, including— 
(i) assets held in trust for any third party; 
(ii) bailment contracts; 
(iii) all sums due to any workman or employee from the provident fund, the pension fund and the 
gratuity fund; 
(iv) other contractual arrangements which do not stipulate transfer of title but only use of the assets; 
and 
(v) such other assets as may be notified by the Central Government in consultation with any financial 
sector regulator; 
(b) assets in security collateral held by financial services providers and are subject to netting and set-
off in multilateral trading or clearing transactions; 
(c) personal assets of any shareholder or partner of a corporate debtor as the case may be provided 
such assets are not held on account of avoidance transactions that may be avoided under this Chapter; 
(d) assets of any Indian or foreign subsidiary of the corporate debtor; or 
(e) any other assets as may be specified by the Board, including assets which could be subject to set 
off on account of mutual dealings between the corporate debtor and any creditor. 
29 For short- ‘the Board’. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

15. 
The Liquidation Regulations have been framed in exercise of 
powers conferred on the Board by Sections 5, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 
39, 40, 41, 43, 45, 49, 50, 51, 52, 54, 196 and 208 read with Section 
240 of the IBC. Notwithstanding the omission in the Liquidation 
Regulations to refer to Section 36(4) of the IBC, set-off on account 
of mutual dealings is permitted in terms of Regulation 29 of the 
Liquidation Regulations. The sums due mutually can be set off to 
arrive at the net amount payable to the corporate debtor or the other 
party. The exclusion will result in reduction of the liquidation estate 
and therefore has consequences as noticed above. In the present 
case, we are not concerned with what is to be included and is a 
part, or not a part of the liquidation estate. 
 
16. 
The expression ‘mutual dealings’ is the condition to be satisfied for 
insolvency set-off under Regulation 29. We will examine what is 
meant by the expression ‘mutual dealings’, and how insolvency set-
off is different from contractual, statutory and equitable set-off. 
 
17. 
Insolvency set-off under the United Kingdom insolvency law was 
examined in Re.: Bank of Credit and Commerce International 
SA (No. 8) 30, to imply that the set-off must relate to dealings prior 
to bankruptcy. It states in explicit terms that the requirement of 
 
30 [1996] Ch. 245. (Appeal Committee of the House of Lords) 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

mutuality is central to bankruptcy set-off and must be rigorously 
enforced. It is held that it is not the function of an insolvency set-off 
to confer a benefit to a debtor who has not been a part of mutual 
dealings, or to give preference to a creditor who has secondary or 
no liability. The insolvency set-off regime in the United Kingdom is 
wider than statutory/legal set-off or equitable set-off. However, 
there is a requirement that the debt should have been provable in 
the insolvency process. 
17.1 An earlier decision in Stein v. Blake31 had held that the bankruptcy 
set-off applies to all claims from mutual credits or dealings prior to 
bankruptcy, including claims, which at the time of bankruptcy were 
due but not payable, unascertained or contingent. This is 
supplemented by the United Kingdom insolvency set-off regime 
permitting the estimation of liabilities and calculation of trends. The 
parties are not required at any particular time to meet and calculate 
the extent of each other’s liabilities. Further, the account is a 
deemed account by which the claim and counterclaim are 
automatically reduced to a net balance. The original choses in 
action, that is, the claim and the counterclaim, are in effect replaced 
by a claim to a net balance. We must also note that the provisions 
 
31 [1996] A.C. 243. (House of Lords) 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

of Section 323 of the Insolvency Act, 1986, as applicable in the 
United Kingdom uses the expressions “mutual credits, mutual 
debts, or other mutual dealings between the bankrupt and any 
creditor of the bankrupt, proving or claiming to prove for a 
bankruptcy debt.” Further, Rule 2.85 of the Insolvency Rules, 1986, 
applicable to the administration, which is similar to the Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process, states that at the time of 
distribution, only the balance (if any) of the account held by the 
creditor is provable in the administration. Alternatively, the balance 
(if any) owed to the company is payable to the administrator as a 
part of the assets, subject to the exceptions as provided. 
17.2 There are also decisions as in the case of National Westminster 
Bank Ltd. v. Halesowen Presswork & Assemblies Ltd.32, which 
highlight the mandatory nature of insolvency set-off in the United 
Kingdom. The Insolvency Rules, 1986 imply that the right to set-off 
co-exists with the moratorium during administration, because of the 
time at which the dues owed to each party are calculated.33 The set-
off does not occur automatically once the company enters into the 
administration process. It applies once the intention to distribute the 
assets is announced by the administrator. Also, the doctrine of set-
 
32 1972 AC 785. 
33 Derham, supra note 25, ¶6.124. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

off does not apply in case of company voluntary arrangement under 
Part I of the Insolvency Act, 1986. Rory Derham observes that the 
insolvency set-off section not being expressly applicable to a 
company voluntary arrangement, any set-off, in the absence of 
contractual right of set-off, does not apply. He observes that the 
right to set-off in the absence of contractual right to set-off depends 
on the statute of set-off and equitable set-off. Further, a claim 
against the corporate debtor incurred after initiation of the 
administration cannot be set-off against the debtor’s cross-claim for 
lack of mutuality. A claim against the debtor after initiation of 
administration is not against the corporate debtor itself. 
 
18. 
The High Court of Australia in Gye v. McIntyre34 states that the 
word ‘mutual’ conveys the notion of reciprocity rather than that of 
correspondence. Mutuality means that the demands must be 
between the same parties and they must be held in the same 
capacity, or right or interest. Mutuality is concerned with the status 
of the parties and their relationship with each other, and not with 
the nature of the claims themselves. There must be identity 
between the persons beneficially interested in the claims and the 
person against whom the claim existed. Therefore, an obligation 
 an instrument may be set-off against a simple contract 
 
34 (1991) 171 CLR 609. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

debt, and a secured debt may be set-off against an unsecured 
creditor. The court, however, expressed that the requirement of 
same parties means that A’s right to sue B cannot be set-off against 
A’s debt to C or that a joint demand cannot be set-off against a 
separate demand. 
 
19. 
The Court of Appeal of Republic of Singapore in BP Singapore Pte 
Ltd v. Jurong Aromatics Corp Pte Ltd and Others35 observes 
that the requirement of mutuality will fail in respect of prior claims 
against the debtor company, where the receiver (read – Resolution 
Professional) carries on business of the debtor company under a 
specific agreement to which the creditor and the corporate debtor 
are also parties. 
 
20. 
The Court of Appeal of Republic of Singapore in BP Singapore Pte 
Ltd. (supra) had also examined whether the claim of set-off in the 
said case was available under the head ‘equitable set-off’. The 
court observed that it is not necessary that the claim and cross-
claim should arise on the same contract, albeit it should be a close 
and inseparable relationship or connection between the dealings 
and the transactions which give rise to the respective claims, such 
that it would offend one’s sense of fairness or justice to allow one’s 
 
35 (2020) SGCA 09. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

claim to be enforced without regard to the other. The law relating to 
equitable set-off in India is explained in paragraph 9 supra. Claim 
for equitable set-off should arise out of the same transaction, or 
transactions that can be regarded as one transaction. There should 
be a connection between the plaintiff’s claim for the debt and the 
defendant’s claim for set-off, which would make it inequitable to 
drive the defendant to a separate suit. 
 
21. 
On the question of mutual dealings, Airtel entities have referred to 
the judgment of the High Court of Kerala in Gokul Chit Funds and 
Trades Private Ltd. v. Thoundasseri Kochu Ouseph Vareed 
and Others36, which we believe allows set-off in terms of the Kerala 
Insolvency Act, 1955. In the context of mutual dealings, it observes 
that mutuality can exist when there are even several distinct and 
independent transactions, albeit between the same parties 
functioning in the same right or capacity. It is not necessary that the 
same should arise out of a single transaction. When the 
transactions between the parties, which are connected, give rise to 
reciprocal claims and demands on account of the parties acting on 
the same right or capacity, principle of mutuality will be satisfied. 
Thus, the contention that each kuri is a distinct and separate 
transaction was not accepted so as to defeat the mandatory right 
 
 Ker 68. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

to set-off observing that rights and liabilities the 
different chit fund transactions should be allowed to be adjusted 
against each other. 
 
22. 
In light of the aforesaid discussion, the expression ‘mutual dealings’ 
for the purpose of Regulation 29 of the Liquidation Regulations, is 
wider than the statutory set-off postulated under Order VIII Rule 6 
of CPC, as well as, equitable set-off under the common law as 
applicable in India. Insolvency set-off applies when demands are 
between the same parties. There must be commonality of identity 
between the person who has made the claim and the person 
against whom the claim exists. Even when there are several distinct 
and independent transactions, mutuality can exist between the 
same parties functioning in the same right or capacity. Mutual 
dealings are not so much concerned with the nature of the claims, 
but with the relationship and apposite identity of the parties giving 
rise to the respective claims, such that it would offend one’s sense 
of fairness or justice to allow one to be enforced without regard to 
the other. 
 
23. 
The relationship and the nature of identity of the Corporate Debtor 
undergo a change on the commencement of the Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process. Set-off of the dues payable by the 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

Corporate Debtor for a period prior to the commencement of the 
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process cannot be made and is 
not permitted in law from the dues payable to the Corporate Debtor 
post the commencement of the Corporate Insolvency Resolution 
Process.37 Further, a debtor cannot, after notice of assignment of 
his debt by the creditor, improve his position as regards set-off by 
acquiring debts incurred by the assignor creditor which are payable 
to a third party. This will not meet the mandate of mutual dealing. 
This will be contrary to equity and would amount to misuse of the 
provision for insolvency set-off.38 One must also be on guard 
against misuse of insolvency set-off in case of voluntary winding 
up. 
 
24. 
Insolvency set-off as a proposition mitigates against the doctrine of 
pari passu. Insolvency set-off gives primacy and an overriding 
effect to the creditor who is entitled to set-off mutual credits. When 
cross demands are set-off, the assets available for distribution 
amongst the general body of creditors, would be depleted in favour 
of a single creditor with a set-off entitlement. This consequently 
 
37 The position may be different where the dues are payable by the debtor to the Corporate Debtor, in 
which case the liquidator may seek adjustment as a form of payment by the debtor. The reason is that 
the liquidator is under a statutory obligation to recover the dues from the debtor. Adjustment in such 
cases is statutory or legal set-off under the IBC/Companies Act. Insolvency set-off in Regulation 29 will 
not apply for want of mutuality. 
38 This will not satisfy the requirements of legal/statutory set-off and equitable set-off under the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

results in reduction of the dividend payable. In other words, it puts 
and grants priority to the creditor, even an operational creditor, to 
the extent of the set-off. Some jurists have doubted the efficacy of 
the justification that right to set-off acts as a stimulus to trade and 
commerce on the ground that rarely any party would treat the 
possibility of set-off as a form of security. The principle of pari passu 
though not explicitly mentioned in the IBC, is apparent as the edifice 
of Section 53 read with Section 52 of the IBC, as these provisions 
create a liquidation hierarchy with the stipulation that each class of 
creditors shall rank equally among each other. The same class of 
creditors should be given equal treatment. As set-offs can mitigate 
against the pari passu principle, they should be allowed when 
mandated, or can be justified by law. 
 
25. 
Apart from the pari passu principle which refers to treating creditors 
of the same class in the same manner, the United Kingdom 
insolvency law also relies on the common law principle of anti-
deprivation. The principle encapsulates that a person cannot 
contract to obtain a more beneficial position in the event of 
bankruptcy, than what the law otherwise provides. A contract which 
states that a man’s property shall remain his until his bankruptcy, 
and in that event shall go to someone else, is not a valid contract. 
Both, the pari passu principle and the anti-deprivation principle 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

sprout from the common ground that parties cannot contract out of 
an insolvency legislation. Their distinction lies in their impacts. The 
pari passu principle is aimed at ensuring that all creditors get their 
proportional dues by preventing any one creditor from getting more 
than their deserved share.39 The anti-deprivation principle on the 
other hand aims at conservation of the insolvent estate for the 
benefit of the creditors.40 
 
26. 
Having examined the different concepts of set-off including 
insolvency set-off, we would now like to examine the contentions 
raised by the parties with reference to the provisions of the 
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process under the IBC. 
 
27. 
The IBC is an Act to consolidate and amend the laws relating to 
reorganisation and insolvency resolution of corporate persons, 
partnership firms and individuals in a time bound manner for 
maximisation of value of assets of such persons, to promote 
entrepreneurship, availability of credit and balance the interest of 
stakeholders, etc. The IBC codifies the law of insolvency and 
bankruptcy. The IBC is a complete code in itself, except where it 
refers and permits application of the provisions of other 
 
39 Belmont Park Investments v. BNY Corporate Trustee Services Ltd. [2012] 1 AC 383. 
40 In the present decision, we are not examining the extent of, and the manner in which the anti-
deprivation principle is applicable in India. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

enactments, as has been consistently held by this Court in Indian 
Overseas Bank v. RCM Infrastructure Ltd. and Another41, 
Innoventive Industries Limited v. ICICI Bank and Another42, 
Embassy Property Developments Private Limited. v. State of 
Karnataka and Others43, and V. Nagarajan v. SKS Ispat and 
Power Limited and Others44. 
 
28. 
Section 23845 of the IBC states that the provisions of the Code 
would override other laws. The provisions of this Code shall have 
effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in 
any other law for the time being in force. 
 
29. 
Section 243 deals with the repeal of certain enactments and also 
incorporates the savings clause. Sub-section (1) states that 
Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 is hereby repealed. Sub-section (2) 
does not apply in the present case. Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 
did not apply to the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process 
stage. 
 
30. 
Given the aforesaid legal position, we do not think that the 
provisions of statutory set-off in terms of Order VIII Rule 6 of CPC 
 
41 (2022). 
42 (2018). 
43 (2020). 
44 (2022). 
45 Section 238. Provisions of this Code to override other laws.—The provisions of this Code shall 
have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

or insolvency set-off as permitted by Regulation 29 of the 
Liquidation Regulations can be applied to the Corporate Insolvency 
Resolution Process. The aforesaid rule would be, however, subject 
to two exceptions or situations. The first, if at all it can be called an 
exception, is where a party is entitled to contractual set-off, on the 
date which is effective before or on the date the Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process is put into motion or commences. 
The reason is simple. The Corporate Insolvency Resolution 
Process does not preclude application of contractual set-off. During 
the moratorium period with initiation of the Corporate Insolvency 
Resolution Process, recovery, legal proceedings etc. cannot be 
initiated, enforced or remain in abeyance. Besides the moratorium 
effect, the terms of the contract remain binding and are not altered 
or modified. 
 
31. 
The foundation of contractual set-off is based on the same ground 
as in the case of equitable set-off, which is impeachment of title, 
albeit contractual set-off is a result of mutual agreement that 
permits set-off and adjustment. Therefore, if a debtor’s title to sue 
is impeached before the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process 
is set into motion, so should the title of the Resolution Professional, 
who in terms of Section 25 of the IBC has the duty to preserve and 
protect assets of the corporate debtor, including continuing the 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

business operations of the corporate debtor. The Resolution 
Professional takes the debtor’s property subject to all clogs and 
fetters affecting it in the hands of the debtor. 
 
32. 
The second exception will be in the case of ‘equitable set-off’ when 
the claim and counter claim in the form of set-off are linked and 
connected on account of one or more transactions that can be 
treated as one. The set-off should be genuine and clearly 
established on facts and in law, so as to make it inequitable and 
unfair that the debtor be asked to pay money, without adjustment 
sought that is fully justified and legal. The amount to be adjusted 
should be a quantifiable and unquestionable monetary claim, as the 
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process is a time-bound 
summary procedure. It is not a civil suit where disputed questions 
of law and facts are adjudicated after recording evidence. Set-off of 
this nature does not require legal proceedings. Further, set-off of 
money is to be given against money alone. It will not apply to 
assets. Lastly, being an equitable right, it can be denied when grant 
of relief will defeat equity and justice. 
 
33. 
We would in fact borrow the term ‘transactional set-off’46 instead of 
equitable set-off, when we describe the second exception. The 
 
46 See Derham, supra note 25 and Gerard McCormack, Set-off under the European Insolvency 
Regulation (and English Law), 29 IIR 100, 100-117 (2020). 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

reason is that the second exception refers to an ascertained 
amount, which is a requirement for legal set-off under Order VIII 
Rule 6 of CPC and at the same time relies on equitable right when 
the statute is silent and there is no reason to deny set-off under the 
common law. It is an equitable right because the transactions are 
close and connected, harbingering the claim and the counterclaim. 
It would be manifestly unjust to bifurcate the connected 
transactions to accept and enforce the claim of one party without 
adjusting the amount due to the second party. This, in our opinion, 
does not contradict the eclipse by way of moratorium, because the 
transactions are treated as singular and one. When transactions 
are closely connected, a claim for transactional set-off during the 
moratorium period on a claim by the Resolution Professional, is by 
way of a defence to protect the legitimate expectation and respect 
legal certainty. 
 
34. 
Thus, while accepting contractual and transactional set-off on the 
conditions specified, we have struck a balance with the doctrines of 
pari passu and anti-deprivation, which we believe is just and fair. 
Insolvency set-off in terms of Regulation 29 of the Liquidation 
Regulations is statutory. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

35. 
In the context of the present case, the aforesaid legal position takes 
care of the argument raised on behalf of the appellant Airtel entities 
that the Resolution Professional had allowed set-off of about Rs. 
64 crores which was due and payable by the corporate debtor 
Aircel entities under the operational services agreement, the SMSs 
services agreement, and the interconnect usage agreements prior 
to commencement of the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process 
from the dues payable by the corporate debtor (Aircel entities) to 
the Airtel entities. The contractual set-off had occurred prior to the 
commencement date. This aspect has been further elucidated in 
paragraph 50 below. 
 
36. 
The decision of the House of Lords in British Eagle International 
Airlines Ltd v. Compagnie Nationale Air France47 demonstrates 
the interaction between the contractual set-off mechanism and the 
set-off rules as applicable to insolvency in the United Kingdom. In 
this case, the company under liquidation was a member of 
International Airport Transport Association which had a clearing 
house system for ticket sales by member airlines. All payments 
were channelised through the clearing house and at the end of the 
accounting period, all debits and credits due to transactions were 
 
47 1975 1 WLR 758. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

totalled to arrive at a figure for a net debit or credit. In the said case, 
British Eagle went into liquidation and were net debtors to the 
clearing house. They had a claim against Air France. The House of 
Lords held that Air France was bound to pay the liquidator the 
money owed to British Eagles.48 The majority judgment also 
observed that the clearing house medium was possibly analogous 
to that of secured creditors, albeit without creation and registration 
of security interests. Therefore, preference to the clearing house 
agent would be contrary to public policy. 49 
 
37. 
Our finding that the IBC is a complete code relying upon the 
opening part of the enactment and Sections 238 and 243 takes care 
and nullifies the argument raised by the appellant Airtel entities that 
they are entitled to statutory set-off or insolvency set-off, in the 
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Proceedings under Chapter II 
Part II of the IBC. Regulation 29 of the Liquidation Regulations does 
not apply to Part II of the IBC. The legislation or even the legislative 
intent permits neither statutory set-off, nor insolvency set-off. In 
support of our conclusion, we would like to refer to the statutory 
 
48 McCormack, supra note 46. 
49 The contractual and consequently the legal position has undergone a change as the IATA clearing 
house rules have since been amended. Therefore, this judgment should be read and understood with 
caution. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

provisions, and meet the arguments to the contrary raised by the 
appellants. 
 
38. 
This brings us to the argument raised by the Airtel entities who have 
placed reliance on Section 30(2)(b)(ii) and Section 53 of the IBC. 
The relevant provisions of the said Sections read as under: 
“30. Submission of resolution plan. – 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
(2) The resolution professional shall examine each 
resolution plan received by him to confirm that each 
resolution plan- 
 
(b) provides for the payment of debts of operational 
creditors in such manner as may be specified by the 
Board which shall not be less than— 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
(ii) the amount that would have been paid to such 
creditors, if the amount to be distributed under the 
resolution plan had been distributed in accordance with 
the order of priority in sub-section (1) of Section 53, 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
53. Distribution of assets.— (1) Notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in any law enacted 
by the Parliament or any State Legislature for the time 
being in force, the proceeds from the sale of the 
liquidation assets shall be distributed in the following 
order of priority and within such period and in such 
manner as may be specified, namely— 
 
(a) the insolvency resolution process costs and the 
liquidation costs paid in full; 
 
(b) the following debts which shall rank equally between 
and among the following— 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

(i) workmen's dues for the period of twenty-four 
months preceding the liquidation commencement 
date; and 
 
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor in the event 
such secured creditor has relinquished security in 
the manner set out in Section 52; 
 
(c) wages and any unpaid dues owed to employees 
other than workmen for the period of twelve months 
preceding the liquidation commencement date; 
 
(d) financial debts owed to unsecured creditors; 
 
(e) the following dues shall rank equally between and 
among the following:— 
 
(i) any amount due to the Central Government and 
the State Government including the amount to be 
received on account of the Consolidated Fund of 
India and the Consolidated Fund of a State, if any, 
in respect of the whole or any part of the period of 
two years preceding the liquidation commencement 
date; 
 
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor for any amount 
unpaid following the enforcement of security 
interest; 
 
(f) any remaining debts and dues; 
 
(g) preference shareholders, if any; and 
 
(h) equity shareholders or partners, as the case may be. 
 
(2) Any contractual arrangements between recipients 
under sub-section (1) with equal ranking, if disrupting 
the order of priority under that sub-section shall be 
disregarded by the liquidator. 
 
(3) The fees payable to the liquidator shall be deducted 
proportionately from the proceeds payable to each 
class of recipients under sub-section (1), and the 
proceeds to the relevant recipient shall be distributed 
after such deduction. 
 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section— 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

(i) it is hereby clarified that at each stage of the 
distribution of proceeds in respect of a class of 
recipients that rank equally, each of the debts will either 
be paid in full, or will be paid in equal proportion within 
the same class of recipients, if the proceeds are 
insufficient to meet the debts in full; and 
 
(ii) the term “workmen's dues” shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to it in Section 326 of the 
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).” 

39. 
The Airtel entities have contested the conclusion by urging that 
Section 30 of the IBC seeks to ensure that the assets and liabilities 
of the corporate debtor, as recorded in the resolution plan, 
correspond to the liquidation estate of the corporate debtor in the 
event of liquidation. The provision is to ensure smooth transition 
between reorganisation under the Corporate Insolvency Resolution 
Process and the liquidation process. In case a contrary view is 
taken, anomalies will arise. In the event the corporate debtor 
undergoes liquidation, Section 36(4)(e) and Regulation 29 would 
apply. However, if the Resolution Professional proceeds in terms of 
Section 25 and secures the assets from the creditors, the creditors 
would not be entitled to claim set-off during the course of the 
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process, which is earlier in the 
point of time. 
 
40. 
The arguments are fallacious and should not be accepted. Sub-
section (2)(b)(ii) to Section 30 does not support the contention of 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

the Airtel entities. Sub-section (2) to Section 30 deals with the 
resolution plan and the quantum of payment required to be made 
when considering a resolution plan under Chapter II Part II of the 
IBC. The provision requires that the Resolution Professional shall 
examine each resolution plan received by him to confirm that each 
plan provides for payment of debts of the operational creditor in the 
manner as may be specified by the Board. The Board has not 
specified the manner in which payment of debts to the operational 
creditor shall be made. However, the stipulation that the payment 
of debts to the operational creditor shall not be less than the amount 
that the operational creditors are entitled to in terms of the order of 
priority in sub-section (1) to Section 53 of the IBC is mandatory. 
 
41. 
There are several reasons why in our opinion clause (ii) to sub-
section (2)(b) of Section 30 does not support the plea of insolvency 
set-off. The section does not make Chapter III Part II, that is, 
Section 36(4)(e) or Regulation 29, applicable to the Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process under Chapter II Part II of the IBC. 
Secondly, clause (ii) to Section 30(2)(b) deals with the amounts to 
be paid to the creditors and not the amount payable by the creditors 
to the corporate debtor. Thirdly, clause (ii) to Section 30(2)(b) has 
appliance when the resolution plan is being considered for 
approval. Fourthly, and for the reasons elaborated earlier, and in 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

view of the specific legislative mandate as incorporated and 
reflected in Chapter II Part II of the IBC, we should hold that the 
provisions of the IBC relating to Corporate Insolvency Resolution 
Process do not recognise the principle of insolvency set-off. We 
would not extend it by implication, when the legislature has not 
accepted applicability of mutual set-off at the initial stage, that is, 
the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process stage. 
 
42. 
The judgment of this Court in Ebix Singapore Private Limited v. 
Committee of Creditors of Educomp Solutions Limited and 
Another.50, that one of the objects of the IBC is to provide for a 
comprehensive and a time-bound framework with smooth transition 
in between organisation and liquidation, has no application and 
relevance to the context and issue in question. The observations 
were made in the context of the time bound framework specified in 
the IBC and the need to adhere to the timelines. Reorganisation or 
resolution process should not get prolonged or continued 
indefinitely. 
 
43. 
Similarly, the decision in Swiss Ribbons Private Limited and 
Another v. Union of India and Others51, which refers to a claim 
for set-off being considered by the Resolution Professional during 
 
50 (2022). 
51 (2019). 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

the resolution process, is an obiter dicta and not a ratio decidendi 
to the issue in question. The judgment states that a set-off between 
the corporate debtor and a financial creditor is a rarity. It also 
observes that it is not the case that legitimate set-offs may not be 
considered at all, and that they can be considered at the stage of 
filing proof of claims. These observations were made to differentiate 
between financial and operational creditors, and how the process 
of filing an application for initiating the resolution process is distinct 
viz. the financial creditors and operational creditors under the IBC. 
Whether the set-off should be considered at the stage of filing of 
proof of claims during the resolution process was not an issue 
before the court in Swiss Ribbons (supra). These observations are 
not ratio decidendi when we apply the inversion test and other tests 
for the issue in question.52 
 
44. 
The judgment of this Court in The Official Liquidator of High 
Court of Karnataka v. Smt. V. Lakshmikutty53 had applied 
Section 46 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 and had 
accordingly permitted insolvency set-off on interpretation and 
application of Sections 529 and 530 of the Companies Act, 1956. 
In that context, it is observed that the English courts, on 
 
52 Career Institute Educational Society v. Om Shree Thakurji Educational Society,. 
53 (1981). 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

interpretation of corresponding provisions of the English 
Companies Act, had taken a similar view. In the present matter, we 
are dealing with the provisions of the IBC. Secondly, the corporate 
debtor is not an insolvent company undergoing liquidation process, 
but is undergoing the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process. 
 
45. 
Similarly, the reliance placed by Airtel entities on Section 60(5)54 of 
the IBC, which confers jurisdiction on the Adjudicatory Authority to 
entertain and dispose of any application or proceeding by or against 
a corporate debtor, including claims against any of the subsidiaries 
or any question of priority or question of law and facts, arising out 
of or in relation to insolvency resolution or liquidation proceeds of 
the corporate debtor, does not come to the aid of the Airtel entities. 
These are enabling provisions which entitle the Adjudicating 
Authority to go into several aspects to aid and assist the Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process. They cannot be read as allowing a 
creditor/debtor to claim set-off in the Corporate Insolvency 
Resolution Process. 

54 Section 60 Adjudicating authority for corporate persons.— 
(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, the 
National Company Law Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to entertain or dispose of— 
(a) any application or proceeding by or against the corporate debtor or corporate person; 
(b) any claim made by or against the corporate debtor or corporate person, including claims by or 
against any of its subsidiaries situated in India; and 
(c) any question of priorities or any question of law or facts, or in relation to the insolvency 
resolution or liquidation proceedings of the corporate debtor or corporate person under this Code. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

46. 
Relying upon several decisions under the United Kingdom 
Insolvency Act and Rules, it has been argued that insolvency set-
off is self-executing. Reliance is placed on Innoventive Industries 
Ltd. (supra), wherein it is observed that the English Insolvency Act 
has served as a model for the IBC. We do not agree that insolvency 
set-off under the IBC is automatic and self-executing. We do not 
find any provision in the IBC which states so. In the context of the 
IBC, insolvency set-off is neither automatic, nor self-executing. 
 
47. 
Airtel entities have also argued that the definitions of ‘claim’ and 
‘debt’ in sub-sections (6) and (11) of Section 3 of the IBC buttress 
the argument that set-off under the IBC is self-executing.55 The 
argument is self-serving and evasive because neither clause uses 
the expression ‘set-off’, nor is it implied. We would not extend on 
and remodel the definitions on the basis of predisposed and self-
serving suppositions. 
 
48. 
Therefore, we would reject the argument that insolvency set-off is 
automatic and self-executing. Self-execution may be acceptable in 
cases of contractual set-off, as held above. 
 
55 Section 3 Definitions. — 
(6) “claim” means—(a) a right to payment, whether or not such right is reduced to judgment, fixed, 
disputed, undisputed, legal, equitable, secured or unsecured; 
(b) right to remedy for breach of contract under any law for the time being in force, if such breach gives 
rise to a right to payment, whether or not such right is reduced to judgment, fixed, matured, unmatured, 
disputed, undisputed, secured or unsecured. 
(11) “debt” means a liability or obligation in respect of a claim which is due from any person and 
includes a financial debt and operational debt. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

49. 
Reference is also made to the UNCITRAL Legislative Guide on 
Insolvency Law56 which states that right to set-off is essential to 
avoid misuse of insolvency proceedings by a corporate debtor. The 
said guide states that insolvency law of set-off of mutual obligations 
 pre-commencement transactions or activities of the 
debtor leads to commercial predictability and availability of credit. It 
checks strategic misuse of the insolvency proceedings. In the 
context of Chapter II Part II of the IBC, we are not concerned with 
the liquidation estate or the liquidation process. At this stage, we 
are examining the question of rehabilitation and revival of the 
corporate debtor. The focus and objective is entirely different. 
Therefore, in our opinion, the said guide is of no avail or instructive 
to us. Further, the provisions relating to Chapter II Part II being 
explicit and not ambiguous, do not require purposive interpretation. 
We should, however, take on record that the UNCITRAL guide 
does distinguish between the set-off obligations maturing prior to 
the commencement of the insolvency proceedings and set-off 
obligations 
after 
the 
commencement 
of 
the 
insolvency 
proceedings.57 Only the former should be permitted in insolvency 
 
56 UNCITRAL Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law, Chapter G. p.155-156 (2005). 
57 Ibid. 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

proceedings, while the latter should be disallowed or allowed to a 
limited extent. 
 
50. 
On the aspect of mutual dealings and also equity, it is to be noted 
that adjustment of the inter-connect charges are under a separate 
and distinct agreement. The telephone service providers use each 
other’s facilities as the caller or the receiver may be using a different 
service provider. Accordingly, adjustments of set-off are made on 
the basis of contractual set-off. These are also justified on the 
ground of equitable set-off. The set-off to this extent has been 
permitted and allowed by the Resolution Professional. The 
transaction for purchase of the right to use the spectrum is an 
entirely different and unconnected transaction. The agreement to 
purchase the spectrum encountered obstacles because the DoT 
had required bank guarantees to be furnished. Accordingly, Airtel 
entities, on the request of Aircel entities had furnished bank 
guarantees on their behalf. The bank guarantees were returned 
and accordingly Airtel entities became liable to pay the balance 
amount in terms of the letters of understanding. The amounts have 
become payable post the commencement of the Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process. For the same reason, we will also 
reject the argument that by not allowing set-off, new rights are being 
created and, therefore, Section 14 of the IBC will not be operative 

C.A. Nos. 3088-3089 of 2020 

and applicable. Moratorium under Section 14 is to grant protection 
and prevent a scramble and dissipation of the assets of the 
corporate debtor. The contention that the “amount” to be set-off is 
not part of the corporate debtor’s assets in the present facts is 
misconceived and must be rejected. 
 
Conclusion 
 
51. 
Having considered the contentions raised by the appellant Airtel 
entities in detail, and in light of the provisions of the IBC relating to 
the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process, we do not find any 
merit in the present appeals and the same are dismissed. There 
will be no order as to costs. 

…