IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Appeal No. of 2024 
(@ ) 

Baba Natarajan Prasad 

 …Appellant 
 
Versus 
 
M. Revathi 

 …Respondent 
 
With 
 
Criminal Appeal No. of 2024 
(@ ) 

JUDGMENT 

C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
Salmond defined ‘crime’ as an act deemed by law 
to be harmful for society as a whole although its 
immediate victim may be an individual. Long-long ago, 
Kautilya said: “it is the power of punishment alone which 
when exercised impartially in proportion to guilt and 
irrespective of whether the person punished is the king’s 

son or the enemy, that protects this world and the next”. In 
the decision in State of Punjab v. Bawa Singh1, this Court 
held that it is the duty of every court to award proper 
sentence having regard to the nature of the offence and 
the manner in which it was executed or committed. The 
sentencing courts are expected to consider all the 
relevant facts and circumstances bearing on the question 
of sentence and proceed to impose a sentence 
commensurate with the gravity of the offence. The court 
must not only keep in view the rights of the victim but 
also the society at large while considering the imposition 
of appropriate punishment. Meagre sentence imposed 
solely on account of lapse of time without considering the 
degree of the offence will be counterproductive in the 
long run and against the interest of the society, it was 
further held. In Bawa Singh’s case (supra), this Court 
referred to the earlier decisions in Hazara Singh v. Raj 
Kumar & Ors.2, and Shailesh Jasvantbhai & Anr. v. State 
of Gujarat & Ors.3, with agreement, in paragraphs 13 
and 14 thereof, as under:- 
“13. In Hazara Singh v. Raj Kumar, this Court has 
observed that: 
 
1 (2015) 
2 (2013) 
3 (2006) 

“10. … it is the duty of the courts to 
consider all the relevant factors to impose an 
appropriate sentence. The legislature has 
bestowed upon the judiciary this enormous 
discretion in the sentencing policy, which 
must be exercised with utmost care and 
caution. The punishment awarded should be 
directly proportionate to the nature and the 
magnitude of the offence. The benchmark of 
proportionate sentencing can assist the 
Judges in arriving at a fair and impartial 
verdict.” 
 
This Court further observed that: 
 
“11. … The cardinal principle of 
sentencing policy is that the sentence 
imposed on an offender should reflect the 
crime he has committed and it should be 
proportionate to the gravity of the offence. 
This Court has repeatedly stressed the central 
role of proportionality in sentencing of 
offenders in numerous cases.” 
14. In Shailesh Jasvantbhai v. State of Gujarat, the 
Apex Court opined that: 
 
“7. The law regulates social interests, 
arbitrates conflicting claims and demands. 
Security of persons and property of the 

people is an essential function of the State. It 
could be achieved through instrumentality of 
criminal law. Undoubtedly, there is a cross-
cultural conflict where living law must find 
answer to the new challenges and the courts 
are required to mould the sentencing system 
to meet the challenges. The contagion of 
lawlessness would undermine social order 
and lay it in ruins. Protection of society and 
stamping out criminal proclivity must be the 
object of law which must be achieved by 
imposing appropriate sentence. Therefore, 
law as a cornerstone of the edifice of ‘order’ 
should meet the challenges confronting the 
society. Friedman in his Law in Changing 
Society stated that: ‘State of criminal law 
continues to be–as it should be–a decisive 
reflection of social consciousness of society.’ 
Therefore, in operating the sentencing 
system, law should adopt the corrective 
machinery or deterrence based on factual 
matrix. By deft modulation, sentencing 
process be stern where it should be, and 
tempered with mercy where it warrants to be. 
The facts and given circumstances in each 
case, the nature of the crime, the manner in 

which it was planned and committed, the 
motive for commission of the crime, the 
conduct of the accused, the nature of weapons 
used and all other attending circumstances 
are relevant facts which would enter into the 
area of consideration. 

8. Therefore, undue sympathy to 
impose inadequate sentence would do more 
harm to the justice system to undermine the 
public confidence in the efficacy of law and 
society could not long endure under such 
serious threats. It is, therefore, the duty of 
every court to award proper sentence having 
regard to the nature of the offence and the 
manner in which it was executed or 
committed, etc.” 
 
3. 
Besides the decisions in Hazara Singh and 
Shailesh Jasvantbhai’s cases (supra), this Court also 
referred to the decisions in Ahmed Hussein Vali 
Mohammed Saiyed & Anr. v. State of Gujarat4, State of 
Madhya Pradesh v. Bablu5, and State of Madhya 
Pradesh v. Surendra Singh6 therein. Thereupon, in 
 
4 (2009) 
5 (2014) 
6 (2015) 

paragraph 17 of Bawa Singh’s case (supra) this Court 
held thus:- 
“17. Recently, in State of M.P. v. Bablu and 
State of M.P. v. Surendra Singh, after considering 
and following the earlier decisions, this Court 
reiterated the settled proposition of law that one of 
the prime objectives of criminal law is the 
imposition 
of 
adequate, 
just, 
proportionate 
punishment which commensurate with gravity, 
nature of crime and the manner in which the 
offence is committed. One should keep in mind the 
social interest and conscience of the society while 
considering the determinative factor of sentence 
with gravity of crime. The punishment should not 
be so lenient that it shocks the conscience of the 
society. It is, therefore, solemn duty of the court to 
strike a proper balance while awarding the 
sentence as awarding lesser sentence encourages 
any criminal and, as a result of the same, the 
society suffers.” 
 
4. 
Thus, the clamour or claim for comeuppance viz., 
deserved punishment proportionate to the gravity of the 
offence is a continuous and continuing demand based on 
civic sense and unfailing in categories of serious 
offences where more than individual interest is also 

involved, the above rule of proportionality in providing 
punishment is not failed as otherwise it will impact the 
society. At the same time, we may hasten to add that we 
shall not be understood to have held that imposition of 
sentence on such offenders shall be to satisfy the society 
and we are only on the point that following the rule of 
proportionality in imposing punishment would promote 
and bring order and orderliness in society. 
5. 
The case on hand unfolds as grievance of grave 
deviation of the principle of sentencing thus laid down 
by this Court and it carries a consequential prayer for 
enhancement of punishment for conviction for the 
offence under Section 494 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 
(for short, ‘I.P.C.’). The appellant-complainant assails 
the 
common 
judgment 
passed 
in 
Crl. 
Appeal 
Nos.647/2021 
and 
635/2021 
respectively 
in 
the 
captioned appeals dated 26.08.2022 of the High Court of 
Judicature at Madras to the extent it imposed only a flea-
bite sentence for the conviction of the respondent-
accused for the offence under Section 494 I.P.C., and 
confirmed the acquittal of the co-accused of the said 
respondents. The fact is that despite the restoration of 
the conviction entered against them by the trial Court 
after reversing their acquittal by the First Appellate 

Court and the consequential imposition of sentence, the 
respondents in both the appeals who were accused 
Nos.1 and 2 have not chosen to challenge the common 
judgment dated 26.08.2022. 
 
Facts leading to the appeals 
6. 
The appellant herein is the husband of the 
respondent in the former appeal and he filed a private 
complaint under Section 200 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, (for short the ‘Cr.P.C.’) against the said 
respondent and the respondent in the latter appeal, for 
having committed offence punishable under Section 494 
I.P.C. In fact, on the ground of abetting them for 
committing the said offence the parents of the 
respondent in the former appeal were also arraigned as 
accused. For the sake of convenience, hereafter in this 
judgment, the respondent in the former appeal and the 
respondent in the latter appeal are referred to only as 
accused No.1 and 2 respectively, viz., their respective 
order of status before the trial Court. 
7. 
The allegation in the complaint was that the first 
accused who is his wife, pending the proceedings for 
dissolution of their marriage between them before the 
Family Court, Coimbatore, and during subsistence of 

their nuptial bond, married the second accused and that 
in the wedlock of the first accused with the second 
accused a child was born. Therefore, the appellant 
accused them of committing bigamous marriage and the 
parents of the first accused were accused of abetting 
them for committing the said offence. After the 
culmination of the trial, the trial Court acquitted the 
parents of the first accused who were accused Nos.3 and 
4, and convicted the first and second accused, under 
Section 494 I.P.C., and sentenced them to undergo one-
year rigorous imprisonment each and imposed a fine of 
Rs. 2,000/- each. In default of payment of fine they were 
ordered to suffer three months simple imprisonment. 
Aggrieved by the conviction and the consequently 
imposed sentence, first and second accused filed Crl. 
Appeal Nos.249/2019 and 250/2019 respectively. The 
appellant 
herein 
filed 
appeal 
as 
Crl. 
Appeal 
No.273/2019 against the acquittal of the parents of the 
first accused, viz., accused Nos.3 and 4 before the trial 
Court and filed Crl. Appeal No.304/2019 seeking 
enhancement of the sentence given to the first and 
second accused. As per common judgment dated 
19.04.2021, the court of Additional District and Sessions 
Judge-III, 
Coimbatore, 
dismissed 
the 
Appeal 

Nos.273/2019 and 304/2019 filed by the appellant herein 
and allowed Crl. Appeal Nos.249/2019 and 250/2019 
filed by the accused Nos.1 and 2 and acquitted them. 
Aggrieved by the said common judgment, the appellant 
filed Crl. Appeal Nos.635/2021 and 647/2021 against the 
acquittal of accused Nos.1 and 2 and a common appeal 
viz., Crl. Appeal No.648/2021 against the dismissal of his 
appeals viz., Crl. Appeal Nos.273/2019 and 304/2019. In 
and vide the said appeals the appellant prayed to set 
aside the common order dated 19.04.2021 reversing the 
conviction of accused Nos.1 and 2 and confirming the 
acquittal of accused Nos.3 and 4. The appellant also 
sought for enhancement of the sentence of one-year 
rigorous imprisonment imposed on accused Nos.1 and 2 
contending that it is too inadequate. 
8. 
We have already noted that despite the restoration 
of the conviction for the offence under Section 494 I.P.C., 
entered against accused Nos.1 and 2 they have not 
chosen to challenge the same and at the same time they 
preferred to undergo the sentence imposed therefor. 
Naturally, in the said circumstances, against the 
conviction no argument was advanced on behalf of 
accused Nos.1 and 2 and their contention was that no 

interference with the impugned order is invited in the 
captioned appeals. 
9. 
Heard Sh. R. Basanth, learned senior counsel 
appearing for the appellant, and Sh. Ratnakar Das, 
learned counsel appearing for the respondent. 
10. 
The learned senior counsel appearing for the 
appellant herein would submit that a scanning of the 
judgment of the trial Court would reveal that the Court 
had appropriately appreciated the evidence on record 
and convicted accused Nos.1 and 2 upon satisfying itself 
that the ingredients to attract the offence punishable 
under Section 494 I.P.C., have been made out by the 
appellant. Furthermore, it is submitted that a bare 
perusal of the impugned judgment would reveal that the 
High Court had rightly considered the contentions of the 
appellant herein against the reversal of their conviction 
by the First Appellate Court that it was founded on 
surmises and conjectures. We are of the considered 
view that no more narrative on the correctness of the 
reversal of the judgment of the First Appellate Court by 
the High Court under the impugned judgment is 
required as the indisputable and undisputed position is 
that its reversal was accepted by accused Nos.1 and 2 
and they had undergone the sentence imposed by the 

High Court consequent to the reversal of the First 
Appellate Court’s judgment. We may note here that the 
learned senior counsel for the appellant would submit 
that the appellant had not accepted any compensation 
and in the same breath, would further submit that the 
appellant did not want any such compensation. 
11. 
In the aforesaid circumstances, the sole question 
surviving for consideration is whether the High Court 
was right in not restoring the sentence imposed for the 
conviction under Section 494 I.P.C., by the trial Court 
when it accepted the contentions of the appellant and 
reversed the acquittal of accused Nos.1 and 2 and 
restored the conviction entered on them by the trial 
Court. In other words, the question is whether the High 
Court had shown undeserving leniency and sympathy to 
accused Nos.1 and 2 even after finding that they have 
committed the serious offence of bigamy punishable 
under Section 494 I.P.C., and whether they were let off 
with a flea-bite sentence and whether an enhancement of 
sentence is invited? 
12. 
In this context, we may say that we are not oblivious 
of the position of law laid down by this Court in Dalbir 
Singh & Ors. v. State of Punjab7. In the said decision this 
 
7 (1979) 

Court held that decision on question of sentence could 
never be regarded as precedent. Bearing in mind the 
said decision, we will proceed to consider the question 
based on the rule of proportionality in providing 
punishment followed by this Court. In this context, it is 
to be noted that under the impugned common judgment 
the High Court after restoring conviction for the offence 
under Section 494 I.P.C., sentenced accused Nos.1 and 2 
to undergo imprisonment till the rising of the court and 
to pay a fine of Rs.20,000/- each with default sentence to 
undergo simple imprisonment for a period of three 
months. It was also ordered that out of the total fine 
amount paid, a sum of Rs. 20,000/- shall be paid to the 
appellant as compensation. 
13. 
We will consider the requirement or otherwise of 
enhancement of the corporeal sentence imposed on 
accused Nos.1 and 2 based on the settled principle of 
sentencing being followed by this Court that it is the 
solemn duty of the Court to strike a proper balance 
awarding sentence proportionate to the gravity of the 
offence committed by the accused concerned upon his 
conviction for serious offence(s). For considering the 
said question, it is only appropriate to look into the 
question whether the offence under Section 494 I.P.C., is 

regarded as a serious offence. The appellant herein 
contended that a reading of Section 494 I.P.C., would 
reveal that the said offence, if proved to have been 
committed, the offender deserves no leniency as it is a 
serious offence. To buttress the said contention, the 
learned senior counsel relied on the decision of this 
Court in Gopal Lal v. State of Rajasthan8, wherein this 
Court held that where the offence of bigamy is proved, 
the Court could not take a lenient view. 
14. 
A reading of Sections 494 and 495 I.P.C., would 
reveal that the legislature viewed the offence of bigamy 
as a serious offence. Though no minimum sentence is 
prescribed under Section 494 I.P.C., the maximum 
sentence of imprisonment prescribed thereunder for a 
conviction thereunder is seven years of imprisonment of 
either description. It is also to be noted that the said 
offence is compoundable only by the husband or wife of 
the person so marrying with the permission of the Court. 
The same offence under Section 494 I.P.C., with 
concealment of former marriage from person with whom 
subsequent marriage is contracted would visit the 
offender with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to ten years and with fine. This 
 
8 (1979) 

offence, which is an aggravated form of bigamy, is non-
compoundable. The decision in Gopal Lal’s case 
(supra), and the prescription of maximum corporeal 
sentence imposable under Sections 494 and 495 I.P.C., 
would undoubtedly suggest that the offence under 
Section 494 I.P.C., has to be treated as a serious offence. 
15. 
When once it is found that an offence under Section 
494 I.P.C., is a serious offence, the circumstances 
obtaining in this case would constrain us to hold that the 
imposition of ‘imprisonment till the rising of the court’ is 
not a proper sentence falling in tune with the rule of 
proportionality in providing punishment as mentioned 
hereinbefore. 
16. 
 It is a fact that earlier certain High Courts 
maintained a view that sentencing an accused to 
undergo ‘imprisonment till the rising of the court’ would 
be no sentence at all, according to law. (See the 
decisions in Shew Shankar Singh v. The State and Ors.9, 
Assan Musaliarakath Kunhi Bava In Re.10, and The 
Public Prosecutor v. Kanniappan11). In the said 
decisions of the Madras High Court, it was held that a 
sentence of ‘imprisonment till the rising of the court’ is an 
 
9 MANU/WB/0349/1968 
 Mad 226 
 Mad 424 

evasion of the statutory provision. In this context, it is 
also to be noted that a contra view was taken by a 
Division Bench of the Madras High Court in Muthu 
Nadar, In Re.12. The Division Bench held that unless the 
penal provision provides any fixed term as the minimum, 
the court has full discretion to pass a sentence of 
imprisonment for any period if it would be fit. In the 
decision in Prahlad Dnyanoba Gajbhiye v. State of 
Maharashtra and Anr.13, the High Court of Bombay held 
that every confinement of person and every restraint of 
liberty of free men is imprisonment. It is to be noted that 
taking into account the proviso to Section 418(1), Cr.P.C., 
in the decision in Raveendran v. Food Inspector, 
Pinarayi Panchayat14, the High Court of Kerala held that 
the proviso to Section 418(1), Cr.P.C., recognises 
sentence of detention till the rising of court is 
imprisonment of the description simple imprisonment. 
We refer to the aforesaid decisions and provisions to say 
that now it cannot be said that imposing a sentence of 
‘imprisonment till the rising of the court’ is impermissible 
or an action amounting to evasion of statutory 
 
 Mad 313 
13 (1994) Cri LJ 2555 
14 1977 KLT 155 

provision(s). The said provision viz., Section 418(1), 
Cr.P.C., and its proviso reads thus:- 
“418. Execution of sentence of imprisonment. — 

Where 
the 
accused 
is 
sentenced 
to 
imprisonment for life or to imprisonment for a term 
in cases other than those provided for by section 
413, the Court passing the sentence shall forthwith 
forward a warrant to the jail or other place in which 
he is, or is to be, confined, and, unless the accused 
is already confined in such jail or other place, shall 
forward him to such jail or other place, with the 
warrant: 
Provided that where the accused is sentenced 
to imprisonment till the rising of the Court, it shall 
not be necessary to prepare or forward a warrant 
to a jail, and the accused may be confined in such 
place as the Court may direct.” 
 
17. 
The proviso to Section 418(1), Cr.P.C., together 
with the penal provision under Section 494 I.P.C., 
prescribing no minimum imprisonment, but only the 
maximum, 
would 
definitely 
make 
imposition 
of 
‘imprisonment till the rising of the court’ intra vires. 
18. 
This will take us to the next question as to whether 
such a flea-bite sentence is sufficient when a conviction 
is entered under Section 494 I.P.C., only because no 

minimum sentence is prescribed thereunder. We have 
already noted that in the matter of awarding sentence for 
conviction of an offence which may impact the society, it 
is not advisable to let off an accused after conviction with 
a flea-bite sentence. We may hasten to add that we are 
not oblivious of the decision of this Court in Adamji 
Umar Dalal v. State of Bombay15, wherein this Court 
held that zeal to crush the evil should not carry the Court 
away from its judicial mind, and the sentence should not 
be so unduly harsh as to defeat the ends of justice. But 
then, the decision in State of Karnataka v. Krishna alias 
Raju16 is also equally relevant. This Court, while 
enhancing the sentence observed, after characterising 
the punishment as unconscionably lenient or a ‘flea-bite’ 
sentence, that consideration of undue sympathy in 
such cases will lead to miscarriage of justice and 
undermine confidence of the public in the efficacy of the 
criminal justice system. In short, there cannot be any 
doubt with respect to the position that in imposing 
sentence the Court is to take into consideration the 
nature of the offence, circumstances under which it was 
committed, degree of deliberation shown by the 
offender, antecedents of the offender upto the time of 
 
 SC 14 
16 (1987) 

sentence, etc., and, in the absence of any exceptional 
circumstances, impose sentence in tune with the rule of 
proportionality in providing punishment though it falls 
within the realm of judicial discretion. 
19. 
Now bearing in mind all the aforesaid provisions 
and decisions, if the question whether accused Nos.1 and 
2 are granted a proper sentence or what was granted 
was only a flea-bite sentence, we have no option but to 
hold that imposition of sentence of ‘imprisonment till the 
rising of the court’ upon conviction for an offence under 
Section 494 I.P.C., on them was unconscionably lenient 
or a flea-bite sentence. 
20. 
Certain circumstances revealed from the evidence 
on record cannot go unnoticed while deciding the 
question of proper sentence. Earlier, the appellant 
herein filed HMOP 515/2012 before the Family Court, 
Coimbatore, seeking divorce. In the judgment of the 
trial Court, taking note of the evidence adduced, it was 
noted that the first accused had filed a petition seeking 
interim maintenance in the above HMOP and based on a 
petition in that regard the Court had ordered the 
appellant to pay Rs. 5,000/- per month to the first accused 
and she had received the maintenance till 13.07.2017. 
The evidence would further show that a child was born 

to the first and second accused in their wedlock in 
November, 2017. The evidence on record would reveal 
that on 22.01.2019, the first accused herself filed HMOP 
No.84 of 2019 seeking dissolution of her marriage with 
the appellant. In such circumstances, it is evident that 
the first accused married the second accused while the 
marriage between the appellant and the first accused 
was subsisting and not only that, during its subsistence, 
she had also begotten a child through the second 
accused. Taking into account all the circumstances, it can 
be said that undeserving leniency was shown in the case 
on hand. But then, taking into account the fact that the 
child born to the first and second accused was aged less 
than two years when the trial Court passed the sentence 
and that no minimum term of imprisonment is prescribed 
for the conviction under Section 494 I.P.C., and that the 
maximum sentence imposable for conviction thereunder 
is seven years, we are of the considered view that the 
trial Court had virtually struck a balance in fixing the 
term of one year as the corporeal sentence. But then, 
taking note of the fact that the said child is now aged only 
about six years and the sentence for the conviction under 
Section 494 I.P.C., can be of both descriptions. We think 
it appropriate to use our judicial discretion to modify the 

sentence imposed under the impugned judgment. 
Accordingly, we modify the term of the sentence 
awarded to accused Nos.1 and 2 for the conviction under 
Section 494 I.P.C., to six months each, making the nature 
of the sentence as simple imprisonment for the said 
period. We further modify the fine imposed by reducing 
the same from Rs. 20,000/- each to Rs. 2,000/- each, as 
originally awarded by the trial Court. Needless to say, 
that the default sentence therefor, awarded by the trial 
Court i.e., to undergo simple imprisonment for three 
months is also restored. If in terms of the impugned 
judgment, accused Nos.1 and 2 had already deposited 
Rs. 20,000/-, after making deduction in terms of the 
sentence of fine mentioned hereinbefore, the balance 
amount shall be refunded to them in accordance with the 
law. In the said circumstances, accused Nos.1 and 2 shall 
surrender before the trial Court so as to serve out the 
unserved period of sentence imposed on them by this 
judgment. Taking note of the fact that the child of 
accused Nos.1 and 2 is now aged only about 6 years, we 
further order that firstly the second accused shall 
surrender before the trial Court, within a period of 3 
weeks from today to serve out the rest of the sentence. 
Upon his release from the jail, on suffering the sentence, 

the first accused shall surrender before the Court to 
serve her remaining period of sentence and such 
surrender shall be made by the first accused within a 
period of 2 weeks from the release of the second accused 
from the jail. This arrangement shall not be treated as a 
precedent as it was ordered in these special 
circumstances. In case the accused Nos.1 and 2 do not 
surrender in terms of this judgment on their own, the trial 
Court shall resort to appropriate steps in accordance 
with law to place them in custody and make them suffer 
the sentence as mentioned hereinbefore. The appeals 
are allowed as above. 
21. 
Pending application(s) are disposed of. 

……………………, J. 
 (C.T. Ravikumar) 

……………………, J. 
 (Sanjay Kumar) 
New Delhi; 
July 15, 2024