IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

DR. BHIM RAO AMBEDKAR VICHAR 
MANCH BIHAR, PATNA 
 
VERSUS 
THE STATE OF BIHAR & ORS. 
 
WITH 
CIVIL APPEAL NO……..OF 2024 
( SLP 
 
ASHISH RAJAK 

VERSUS 
THE STATE OF BIHAR & ORS. 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
VIKRAM NATH, J. 
1. 
Application(s) for intervention/impleadment is/are 
allowed. 
2. 
Leave granted in SLP (. 
3. 
These two appeals assail the correctness of the 
judgment and order dated 3rd April, 2017 passed by 
the Division Bench of the Patna High Court whereby 

a group of four (4) writ petitions and one Letters 
Patent Appeal were decided by a common judgment 
dismissing all the five cases. The challenge in the 
writ petitions and the appeal before the Division 
Bench of the High Court was to a Notification dated 
1st July, 2015, whereby the State Government had 
passed a resolution based upon consideration of 
recommendations 
by 
the 
State 
Backward 
Commission which had recommended that in the 
list of Extremely Backward Classes published under 
the Bihar Reservation of Vacancies in Posts and 
Services (for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes 
and other Backward Classes) Act, 1991, the caste 
“Tanti-Tantwa” recorded at Serial No.33 be deleted 
and the said “Tanti-Tantwa” be merged in the 
Scheduled Castes list with the caste 'Pan/Sawasi' 
mentioned at Serial No.20 so that they could get 
benefit of the Scheduled Castes. The operative part 
of the Resolution as contained in the aforesaid 
Notification 
dated 
01.07.2015 
is 
reproduced 
hereunder in the original Hindi language: 
"अत: राज्य सरकार ने भली-भांतत विचारोपरांत तनर्णय ललया 
है कक वपछडे िर्गो के ललए राज्य आयोर्ग की उपययणक्त सलाह 
के आलोक में बिहार पदो एिां सेिाओ की ररक्क्तयो में 
आरक्षर् (अनयसूचचत जाततयो, अनयसूचचत जनजाततयो एिां 
अन्य वपछडे िर्गो के ललए) अचितनयम 1991 की अत्यांत 

वपछडे िर्गो की सूची (अनयसूची-1) के क्रमांक-33 पर दजण 
"तांती (ततिा)” जातत को विलोवपत कर ददया जाए ताकक 
तांती (ततिा) को अनयसूचचत जातत की सूची में क्रमाांक-20 
पर दजण पान/स्िासी के साथ समािेशन पर अनयसूचचत जातत 
का लाभ लमल सके।" 
 
4. 
The challenge in the writ petitions and the LPA 
before the Division Bench was to the second part of 
the said Resolution quoted above whereby “Tanti-
Tantwa” caste was sought to be merged with Entry-
20 of the Scheduled Castes list namely, the caste of 
'Pan/Sawasi' and to extend all benefits of the 
Scheduled Castes. 
5. 
The challenge was mainly on the ground that the 
State 
Government 
had 
no 
competence/ 
authority/power to add a caste or sub-caste to any 
entry in the Scheduled Castes list notified under the 
Presidential Order under Article 341 of the 
Constitution of India. Once the list under the 
Presidential Order is published, thereafter, any 
amendment, addition, deletion or modification to the 
said list can be made only by law enacted by 
Parliament and not otherwise. Before the High Court, 
the respondent-State of Bihar as also other private 
respondents took up a plea that the impugned 
Notification dated 01.07.2015 does not meddle with 
the Presidential Order and the list published 

thereunder but, in fact, it was only that “Tanti-
Tantwa” were one and the same as 'Pan/Sawasi' 
except that they had the special title within the caste 
of 'Pan/Sawasi' and were being referred to as 
“Tanti-Tantwa” in the State of Bihar and, therefore, 
it was not a case of alteration of the list but only of 
clarification. 
It 
was 
also 
submitted 
by 
the 
respondents before the High Court that the State 
Government was bound by the recommendations 
made by the State Backward Commission and had, 
therefore, rightly deleted “Tanti-Tantwa” from the 
list of Extremely Backward Classes and merged with 
the Entry-20 of 'Pan/Sawasi' in the list of Scheduled 
Castes published in 1976. 
6. 
The High Court accepted the submissions of the 
respondents, as noted above and, accordingly, 
dismissed the writ petitions as also the LPA, filed by 
the appellants vide impugned judgment dated 
03.04.2017. 
7. 
It is this order of the High Court dated 3rd April, 2017 
which is under challenge in the present two appeals. 
8. 
We have heard Smt. Indira Jai Singh, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing for the appellants in both the 
appeals, Sri Ranjeet Kumar, learned Senior Counsel 
for the respondent-State of Bihar, Sri Salman 
Khurshid, Sri Rakesh Dwivedi and Sri V. Giri, 

learned Senior Counsel for the intervenors and Ms. 
Aishwarya 
Bhati, 
learned 
Additional 
Solicitor 
General for the Union of India. 
9. 
We will now deal with the following aspects in order 
to arrive at a just and proper conclusion. 

 What the Constitution of India provides regarding 
preparation of list for Scheduled Castes for different 
States. 

How a list declared under the Presidential Order can 
be altered, modified or amended. 

 What does the Constitution provide regarding the 
Backward Classes for every State. 

 The entries in the Presidential Order of 1950 and 
the subsequent Amendments made by the Parliament in 
the list published under the Presidential Order of 1950. 

What the State decides regarding the Backward 
Classes. 

The correspondence between the State of Bihar and 
the Central Government/Union of India. 

The stand of the Union of India before the High Court 
and before this Court. 
(8) The arguments advanced on behalf of the appellants, 
respondents and the intervenors. 

Analysis of the arguments. 
(10) Conclusion. 

10. “Scheduled Castes” is defined in the Constitution 
under Article 366(24) thereof. It reads as follows: 
“366(24). "Scheduled Castes" means such 
castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups 
within such castes, races or tribes as are 
deemed under article 341 to be Scheduled 
Castes for the purposes of this Constitution.” 
 
11. Article 341 confers power on the President of India 
to specify the castes, races or tribes or parts of or 
groups within castes, races or tribes which, for the 
purpose of the Constitution, be deemed to be 
Scheduled Castes in relation to that State or Union 
Territory. Further, sub-Clause 2 of Article 341 
provides that the Parliament may, by law, include or 
exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes specified 
in a Notification issued under Clause-1 any caste, 
race or tribe or part of or group within any caste, 
race or tribe. It further creates a prohibition that, 
save as aforesaid, a Notification issued under 
Clause-1 shall not be varied by any subsequent 
Notification. Article 341 of the Constitution reads as 
follows: 
“Article 341. (1) The President may with 
respect to any State or Union territory, and 
where it is a State, after consultation with the 
Governor thereof, by public notification, specify 

the castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups 
within castes, races or tribes which shall for the 
purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be 
Scheduled Castes in relation to that State or 
Union territory, as the case may be. 
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude 
from the list of Scheduled Castes specified in a 
notification issued under clause (1) any caste, 
race or tribe or part of or group within any caste, 
race or tribe, but save as aforesaid a 
notification issued under the said clause shall 
not be varied by any subsequent notification.” 
12. From a plain reading of the above Article and in 
particular sub-Clause 2, two things are clear – first, 
the list specified under the Notification under 
Clause-1 can be amended, altered only by law made 
by Parliament and, second, it prohibits that but for 
a law made by Parliament a notification issued 
under sub-Clause-1 cannot be varied by any 
subsequent notification. That is to say that neither 
the Central Government, nor the President can 
make 
any 
amendments 
or 
changes 
in 
the 
notification issued under Clause-1 specifying the 
castes in relation to the States or Union territory, as 
the case may be. 

13. Another aspect to be noted from a plain reading of 
the above Article is that, it does not deal with merely 
castes, races or tribes but also parts of or groups 
within castes, races or tribes, therefore, if any 
change is to be made with respect to inclusion or 
exclusion not only of any caste, race or tribe but also 
of a part of or group within any of the caste, race or 
tribe the same has to be done by law made by the 
Parliament. 
14. The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 
was first notified on 10th August, 1950 and 
published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary on 
11th August, 1950. With respect to the State of Bihar, 
the following list was mentioned in the Schedule as 
“Part II-Bihar”: 
 
“1. Throughout the State: 
 
1. 
Bauri 
 
2. 
Bantar 
 
3. 
Bhogta 
 
4. 
Chamar 
 
5. 
Chaupal 
 
6. 
Dhobi 
 
7. 
Dom 
 
8. 
Dusadh, including Dhari or Dharhi 
 
9. 
Ghasi 
 
10. Halalkhor 
 
11. Hari, including Mehtar 
 
12. Kanjar 
 
13. Kurariar 
 
14. Lalbegi 
 
15. Mochi 

16. Musahar 
 
17. Nat 
 
18. Pan 
 
19. Pasi 
 
20. Rajwar 
 
21. Turi” 
 
15. 'Pan Caste' was specified as a Scheduled Caste 
throughout the State of Bihar under the above 
notification mentioned at Serial No.18. 
16. The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders 
(Amendment) Act, 1956, which was enacted by the 
Parliament being Act No.63 of 1956, with respect to 
the State of Bihar and the Entry of the caste with 
which these appeals relate to, at Serial No.18 'Pan' 
as originally mentioned in the order of 1950, was 
replaced by 'Pan or Sawasi'. 
17. In the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
Orders (Amendment) Bill, 1967 enacted by the 
Parliament in the 20th year of the Republic of India, 
the list with respect to the State of Bihar mentioned 
in Part-III of the Schedule at Serial No.20, the 
following Entry of the Castes was made as 'Pan; 
Sawasi, Tanti-Tantwa'. This bill never came to be 
enacted as an Act of Parliament and accordingly 
must have lapsed. 
18. The next Amendment then came was the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) 

Act, 1976 was enacted by the Parliament in the 27th 
year of the Republic of India, according to which, 
Entry-20 in Part-III of the Schedule with respect to 
the State of Bihar, the entry remained the same as 
that in the 1956 Amendment i.e. 'Pan, Sawasi'. 
19. By the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders 
(Second Amendment) Act, 2002 enacted by the 
Parliament in the 53rd year of the Republic of India, 
Entry 20 for the State of Bihar was substituted by 
'Pan, Sawasi, Panr'. 
20. Article 338-B of the Constitution provides that the 
State Government may establish Commission for 
Backward Classes. 
21. The legislature of the State of Bihar enacted the 
Bihar State Commission for Backward Classes Act, 
1993 (State Act No.12 of 1993) for establishing a 
State Commission for Backward Classes and to 
provide 
for 
matters 
connected 
therewith 
or 
incidental thereto. Section 9 of the said Act defines 
the functions of the Commission; Section 10 defines 
the powers of the Commission and Section 11 
provides that the State Government shall do a 
periodic revision of lists of Backward Classes every 
ten years and in doing so would consult the 
Commission. 

22. Further, the legislature of the State of Bihar enacted 
the Bihar Reservation of Vacancies in Posts and 
Services (for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes 
and other Backward Classes) Act, 1991 (Act No.3 of 
1992) and under the said Act it declared the lists of 
Extremely Backward Classes wherein at Serial 
No.33, “Tanti-Tantwa” was shown as one of the 
castes falling in the Extremely Backward Classes. 
23. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
Union of India has filed an application for 
impleadment and has made its stand clear in the 
said application, which is supported by an affidavit 
and is registered as IA No.100468 of 2024. In 
paragraph 8 of the said application, it is stated that 
the 
Government 
of 
Bihar 
vide 
letter 
dated 
05.08.2011 had recommended inclusion of “Tanti-
Tantwa” in the list of Scheduled Castes as a 
synonym of 'Pan, Sawasi, Panr'. The said proposal 
of the State was examined as per settled modalities 
in consultation with the Registrar General of India 
(in short 'RGI'), who did not support the said 
proposal vide its comments dated 24.01.2013. The 
observations of the RGI were conveyed to the State 
Government on 31.01.2013 to review/further justify 
the recommendations in the light of the comments 
made by the RGI. It further mentions that the 

response of the State Government in the matter was 
awaited. Thus, till date “Tanti-Tantwa” caste has 
not been included in the list of Schedule Castes of 
the State of Bihar and, as such, its members are not 
entitled to Scheduled Castes' status. Paragraph-9 
further mentions that the Department had received 
references 
from 
the 
Union 
Public 
Service 
Commission as also the Department of Personnel 
and Training, Government of India to show that 
Members of “Tanti-Tantwa” community, who were 
otherwise appearing at Serial No.48 of the Central 
List of Other Backward Classes were being issued 
Scheduled Castes Certificates in the name of 'Pan, 
Sawasi, Panr' in view of the State Government's 
Resolution dated 01.07.2015. 
24. Paragraph 10 clearly states that under Article 341 of 
the Constitution and the Constitution (Schedule 
Castes) Order, 1950 and its Amendments, “Tanti-
Tantwa” Caste, which does not appear in the list of 
Scheduled Castes of Bihar cannot be issued 
Scheduled Castes Certificates treating them to be 
'Pan, Sawasi, Panr' at Serial No.20 of the list of 
Scheduled Castes of Bihar. The Ministry had written 
more than half a dozen letters right from 2015, 2016, 
2018, 2019 and 2020 requesting the Government of 
Bihar to issue necessary instructions to the 

Authorities empowered to not to issue Scheduled 
Castes Certificates to members of “Tanti-Tantwa” 
in the name of 'Pan, Sawasi, Panr'. In paragraph-11, 
it is stated that the Government of Bihar informed 
the Central Ministry that as the Resolution dated 
01.07.2015 was challenged before the Patna High 
Court and the High Court had upheld its legality vide 
judgment dated 03.04.2017, as such, issuance of 
Scheduled Castes Certificates to the members of 
“Tanti Tantwa” and extension of benefits of 
Scheduled Castes to them was legally permissible. 
Paragraph 
nos.13, 

and 

support 
the 
submissions of the appellants in assailing the 
correctness of the impugned judgment of the High 
Court dated 3rd April, 2017. Thus, the Union of India 
has fully supported the appellants. 
Submissions on behalf of the appellants. 
25. Ms. Indira Jai Singh referring to the Constitutional 
provisions contained in Articles 366(24) and 341 
submitted 
that 
the 
impugned 
Notification/ 
Resolution dated 01.07.2015 cannot stand and 
needs to be quashed, as the State Government had 
no competence power or Authority to direct the 
inclusion of “Tanti-Tantwa” in the lists notified 
under Article 341. According to her, any amendment 
or change in the specified lists of Scheduled Castes 

notified under Article 341 can only by a law enacted 
by the Parliament. The State has no role to play in 
tinkering with the lists notified under Article 341. 
26. It was also submitted on behalf of the appellants 
that the State was fully aware that it had no 
authority or competence to amend the list as it had 
itself written to the Central Government for 
inclusion of “Tanti-Tantwa” in Entry-20 of the list 
of Scheduled Castes for the State of Bihar along with 
'Pan, Sawasi, Panr'. The said request of the State 
Government made in the year 2011, was not 
accepted in view of the comments made by the RGI 
in January, 2013 and the same were duly 
communicated to the State vide letter dated 
31.01.2013. By the said letter, it was also requested 
that the State may further review and provide 
further justification in support of their request for 
including “Tanti-Tantwa” in the lists of Scheduled 
Castes. The State chose not to give any reply to the 
same and instead in a totally mala fide manner in 
order to illegally extend benefit to the “Tanti-
Tantwa” castes, it issued the Notification dated 
01.07.2015 whereby “Tanti-Tantwa” castes were to 
be treated as Scheduled Castes and extended all 
benefits. The State has to be put to strict proof to 
explain, as to why, they had directed for merger of 

“Tanti-Tantwa” in the lists of Scheduled Castes 
with 'Pan, Sawasi, Panr'. 
27. It is also the submission of Ms. Jai Singh that the 
Notification dated 01.07.2015 cannot be severed so 
as to retain its first part of deleting/removing 
“Tanti-Tantwa” 
from 
the 
list 
of 
Extremely 
Backward Classes notified under the 1992 Act and 
to quash the second part only, which directed for 
merger of “Tanti-Tantwa” with 'Pan, Sawasi Panr' 
at Entry-20 of the Scheduled Castes lists for the 
State of Bihar. According to her, if the impugned 
Notification is partly quashed and partly upheld, 
then the caste “Tanti-Tantwa” would be left 
nowhere and would not be entitled to any 
reservation or benefit either as Extremely Backward 
Class or as Scheduled Caste. She, thus, submitted 
that the impugned notification is non-severable and 
deserves to be quashed as a whole. 
28. She has further submitted that request of the State 
of Bihar as also the Intervenors to continue to extend 
the benefits already granted during this period to the 
members of the “Tanti-Tantwa” caste, should not 
be accepted. According to her, the exercise by the 
State of issuing the Notification dated 01.07.2015 
was clearly mala fide and deliberate mischief on its 
part. The continous issuance of Scheduled Castes 

Certificates to the members of “Tanti-Tantwa” 
community despite repeated directions by the 
Central Government not to issue such certificates 
clearly reflects the defiance of the State Government 
not to correct itself rather continue with impunity to 
issue certificates and treat them as Scheduled Caste. 
29. In the process of issuing such certificates and 
extending benefits of Scheduled Castes, the State 
has deprived the genuine members of the Scheduled 
Castes community covered under the lists published 
under Article 341, which should be restored back to 
the Scheduled Caste community. She also referred 
to an order dated 22.11.2021 passed by this Court 
in the appeal filed by Ashish Rajak, wherein this 
Court had clearly provided that all appointments are 
subject to the outcome of these proceedings. 
30. She further submitted that members of “Tanti-
Tantwa” community may be extended benefits 
available to them under the Extremely Backward 
Classes by the State of Bihar, but under no 
circumstances, should such members of “Tanti-
Tantwa” community, who have benefited under the 
completely illegal and mala fide exercise of the State, 
be allowed to continue on a reserved seat of the 
Scheduled Caste taking advantage of the Resolution 
dated 01.07.2015. 

31. She has also very fairly submitted that she would 
not have any objection to the State not making any 
recovery from the beneficiaries of such illegal 
appointments 
and 
in 
accommodating 
such 
candidates under the Extremely Backward Class 
quota/reservation but in no case should such 
candidates be allowed to withhold the seats reserved 
for the Scheduled Castes which should be forthwith 
returned to the Schedule Castes for the benefit of the 
notified castes only. 
32. On the other hand, Sri Ranjeet Kumar, learned 
Senior Counsel appearing for the State of Bihar tried 
to justify the Resolution dated 01.07.2015 by urging 
that the Resolution is only clarificatory and nothing 
more; that the statutory and socio historical factors 
surrounding the controversy warrant that “Tanti-
Tantwa” be treated as synonymous with 'Pan, 
Sawasi'. The State has only acted on the 
recommendation of the State Commission for 
Extremely Backward Classes dated 02.02.2015 and, 
as such, no fault can be found with the resolution of 
the State. He has further referred to the following 
socio 
historical 
factors 
and 
other 
statutory 
provisions considered by the Commission while 
making the recommendation: 

“A. In Chapter 11, Para 11.3 of the first 
report 
of 
the 
Backward 
Commission, 
Personnel 
Department, 
Backward 
Commission, Pan is mentioned as Tanti. 
B. In the 10th Report of 1978-80 of the Bihar 
Legislative Assembly for the welfare of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, 
the committee accepted the report of 
Mungeri Lal Aayog in which it was reported 
that the persons called Tanti are actually 
Pan and hence entitled to benefits granted 
to the Scheduled Castes. 
C. In 1967, a bill was placed before the 
Parliament, in which it was proposed in the 
context 
of 
Bihar 
State 
that 
Pan/Swasi/Tanti/Tatwa 
should 
be 
enlisted in the Scheduled Castes for the 
State of Bihar but the same was not 
appreciated by the Parliament. 
D. The report of Kaka Kalekar Backward 
Commission recommended to the State that 
the 
caste 
Tanti/Tatwa 
should 
be 
incorporated with Pan. 
E. 
The 
Department 
of 
Personnel 
Administrative Reforms and Rajbhasha, 
Jharkhand vide its letter No.1107 dated 
01.03.2004 on the basis of the report of 
Jharkhand Tribal Welfare and Research 

Institute requested the Home Ministry, 
Government of India, that Tanti/Tatwa and 
Pan are the same caste and hence should 
be considered as a synonym of Pan/Swasi. 
F. 
In the book “ Tribes and Caste of 
Bengal” by HH Rizley, pg. 155, it is 
mentioned that Pan/Swasi and Tanti are 
synonymous and come from the Weaver 
community. 
G. 
The 
synonymity 
between 
these 
castes were further ascertained by the 
ethnographic report prepared by A.N. Sinha 
Institute, Patna. 
H. 
The social conditions and cultural 
backgrounds of these castes are the same, 
and it is the usual practice to establish 
matrimonial relations among them. 
I. 
A similar finding is found in the 
Central Government report. 
J. 
The National Backward Commission, 
now a Constitutional Body, has also 
recommended for deletion of Tanti/Tantwa 
from the list of Backward Classes as they 
are synonymous of Pan/Sawasi.” 
 
33. His further submission is that recommendation 
made by the State Commission is binding on the 
State and Judicial review in such matters may not 

be permissible except in an extreme case of 
perversity or otherwise. He also referred to the 
recommendation of the National Commission for 
Backward Classes made on 29.03.2022 regarding 
synonymity of “Tanti-Tantwa” with 'Pan, Sawasi'. 
Lastly, it was submitted that in the event this Court 
agrees with the submissions of the appellants and 
decides to quash the Resolution dated 01.07.2015, 
then the benefits/rights already accrued to the 
members belonging to the caste of “Tanti-Tantwa” 
as Scheduled Castes may not be affected on the 
principles of equity and good conscience. Reliance 
was placed upon a judgment of this Court in the 
case of State of Maharashtra Vs. Keshao 
Vishwanath Sonone1. In particular, reliance was 
placed upon paragraphs 115 & 116 of the said 
judgment having a coram of three Hon'ble Judges. 
34. Lastly, it was submitted that as the matter is still 
pending for consideration before the Union of India 
based on the recommendations of the National 
Commission 
for 
Backward 
Classes 
dated 
29.03.2022, direction may be issued to Union of 
India to take a decision within a fixed timeframe and, 
in the meantime, the present appeals may be kept 
pending. 
 
1 (2021) 

35. Insofar as the private respondents and other 
intervenors are concerned, their submission is akin 
and in support of the submission of Mr. Ranjeet 
Kumar to the effect that all those members of 
“Tanti-Tantwa” community, who had derived 
advantage/benefit of Scheduled Castes under the 
Certificates issued to them pursuant to the 
Resolution dated 01.07.2015 may not be adversely 
affected and may be protected on the principles of 
equity and good conscience. 
36. Having considered the submissions advanced, we 
have no hesitation in holding that the Resolution 
dated 01.07.2015 was patently illegal, erroneous as 
the 
State 
Government 
had 
no 
competence/ 
authority/power to tinker with the lists of Scheduled 
Castes 
published 
under 
Article 

of 
the 
Constitution. The submission of the respondent-
State that Resolution dated 01.07.2015 was only 
clarificatory is not worth considering for a moment 
and deserves outright rejection. Whether or not it 
was synonymous or integral part of the Entry-20 of 
the lists of Schedule Castes, it could not have been 
added without any law being made by the 
Parliament. The State knew very well that it had no 
authority and had accordingly forwarded its request 
to the Union of India in the year 2011. The said 

request was not accepted and returned for further 
comments/justification/review. Ignoring the same, 
the State proceeded to issue the Circular dated 
01.07.2015. The State may be justified in deleting 
“Tanti-Tantwa” from the Extremely Backward 
Classes list on the recommendation of the State 
Backward Commission, but beyond that to merge 
“Tanti-Tantwa” with 'Pan, Sawasi, Panr' under 
Entry 20 of the list of Scheduled Castes was nothing 
short of mala fide exercise for whatever good, bad or 
indifferent reasons, the State may have thought at 
that moment. Whether synonymous or not, any 
inclusion or exclusion of any caste, race or tribe or 
part of or group within the castes, races or tribes has 
to be, by law made by the Parliament, and not by 
any other mode or manner. 
37. The submission that the recommendation of the 
Commission for Extremely Backward Classes was 
binding on the State, is not a question to be 
determined here, inasmuch as, even if we accept the 
submission, such recommendation could relate only 
to the Extremely Backward Classes. Whether or not 
to include or exclude any caste in the list of 
Extremely Backward Class would be within the 
domain of the Commission. The Commission would 
have no jurisdiction to make recommendation with 

respect to any caste being included in the Scheduled 
Castes lists and, even if it makes such a 
recommendation, right or wrong, the State has no 
authority to proceed to implement the same when it 
was fully aware that the Constitution does not 
permit it to do so. The Provisions of Article 341 sub-
Clause 1 and sub-Clause 2 are very clear and 
discrete. There is no ambiguity or vagueness 
otherwise requiring any interpretation other than 
what is mentioned therein. The State of Bihar has 
tried to read something in order to suit its own ends 
for whatever reason, we are not commenting on the 
same. 
38. The High Court fell in serious error in upholding the 
said Notification on a completely wrong premise 
without referring to Article 341 of the Constitution. 
39. Now comes the question with regard to protecting 
those Members of “Tanti-Tantwa” community who 
were extended benefit of Scheduled Castes pursuant 
to the Resolution dated 01.07.2015. In the present 
case, the action of the State is found to be mala fide 
and de hors the constitutional provisions. The State 
cannot be pardoned for the mischief done by it. 
Depriving the members of the Scheduled Castes 
covered by the lists under Article 341 of the 
Constitution is a serious issue. Any person not 

deserving and not covered by such list if extended 
such benefit for deliberate and mischievous reasons 
by the State, cannot take away the benefit of the 
members 
of 
the 
Scheduled 
Castes. 
Such 
appointments would under law on the findings 
recorded would be liable to be set aside. However, as 
we have found fault with the conduct of the State 
and not of any individual member of the “Tanti-
Tantwa” community, we do not wish to direct that 
their services may be terminated or that recovery 
may be made for illegal appointments or withdrawal 
of other benefits which may have been extended. We 
are of the view that all such posts of the Scheduled 
Castes reserved quota which have been extended to 
the members of the “Tanti-Tantwa” community 
appointed subsequent to the Resolution dated 
01.07.2015 be returned to the Scheduled Castes 
Quota and all such members of the “Tanti-Tantwa” 
community, who have been extended such benefit 
may be accommodated under their original category 
of Extremely Backward Classes, for which the State 
may take appropriate measures. 
40. Accordingly, the Appeals succeed and are allowed. 
41. The impugned Resolution dated 01.07.2015 is, 
hereby, quashed. 

42. It is further directed that such posts of the 
Scheduled Castes Quota which had been filled up by 
members of “Tanti-Tantwa” community availing 
benefit on the basis of Resolution dated 01.07.2015 
may be returned to the Scheduled Castes category 
and such candidates of “Tanti-Tantwa” community 
be accommodated by the State in their original 
category of Extremely Backward Classes by taking 
appropriate measures. 
43. Pending applications, if any, disposed of. 
 
……………………………………J. 
(VIKRAM NATH) 

……………………………………J. 
 (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 
NEW DELHI 
JULY 15, 2024