IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
( SLP (Crl.)No.16417 of 2023) 

SHAILENDRA KUMAR 
SRIVASTAVA 

VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH 
& ANR. 

JUDGMENT 
 
VIKRAM NATH, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The judicial system of our country often finds 
itself grappling with the pervasive issues of 
prolonged 
delay 
and 
suspected 
political 
influence within the legal proceedings. The 
present case highlights the alarming trend 
where 
cases, 
particularly 
those 
involving 
influential figures, face significant delays, 
obstructing the administration of justice. The 
undue 
influence 
wielded 
by 
powerful 

individuals further exacerbates the situation, 
raising 
concerns 
about 
fairness 
and 
impartiality. This underscores the urgent need 
to address systemic flaws and ensure timely 
resolution of legal disputes. 
3. 
Under normal circumstances, we could have 
disposed of this appeal with a request to the 
High Court to decide the pending revision 
petitions expeditiously. However, considering 
the grave and sensitive nature of the issue, 
notices were issued not only to the respondent-
State but also to respondent no. 2 who is the 
beneficiary of the withdrawal order. 
4. 
The present appeal arises out of the impugned 
order 
dated 
18.07.2023 
passed 
by 
the 
Allahabad High Court in whereby the hearing of a batch of 
criminal revision petitions was adjourned at the 
request of the counsel for the accused persons 
for the sixth time. The criminal revision 
petitions being heard together before the High 
Court have been filed by the accused persons as 
well as the mother of the present appellant, who 
is the widow of one of the deceased persons, 

against the order of the Trial Court dated 
19.05.2012 
whereby 
the 
application 
for 
withdrawal of prosecution under Section 321, 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 19731 was allowed 
for one of the accused persons, Chhote Singh, 
but was dismissed with respect to the other nine 
accused persons. 
5. 
Criminal Revision Nos. 1678 of 2012, 1874 of 
2012, and 1900 of 2012 have been filed by the 
accused persons against dismissal of their 
application for withdrawal of prosecution under 
Section 321, CrPC and has been filed by the mother of the 
present appellant challenging the grant of 
permission for withdrawal of the prosecution 
against accused Chhote Singh. 
6. 
The facts leading to the filing of the above 
criminal revision petitions are as follows: 
6.1 
First Information Report dated 30.05.1994 
was registered by complainant Rajendra 
Kumar Srivastava, uncle of the present 
appellant, for offences under Sections 147, 
 
1 CrPC 

148, 149, 307, 302, Indian Penal code, 
18602, against five named accused persons, 
namely Rudra Pal Singh alias Lalle, Raja 
Singh, Karan Singh alias Kalle, Chunna 
Singh, Santavan Singh, and against two 
unknown persons. It was alleged by the 
complainant that on the same day at around 
12:30 PM, he along with his elder brothers 
Jagdish Sharan Srivastava and Rajkumar 
alias Raja Bhaiya, nephew Kuldeep Singh, 
and two persons from their village, Virendra 
Singh and Ramkaran Singh, was sitting in 
the complainant’s house and talking when 
the accused persons, armed with guns, 
entered through the front gate. One of the 
accused persons, Rudrapal Singh alias Lalle 
challenged them and alleged that the victims 
had been making police complaints against 
him for kidnapping and selling opium, and 
therefore they had come to teach the victims 
a lesson. The accused persons fired 
indiscriminately owing to which Rajkumar 
and Jagdish Sharan got injured and fell 
 
2 IPC 

down, and later succumbed to their injuries. 
Virendra Singh was also injured. The 
complainant was also fired at by Chunna 
Singh and Santavan Singh but got saved 
because he was laid down on the ground. 
6.2 During the investigation, names of accused 
Chhote Singh and Ganga Singh came up in 
light of those previously arrayed as unknown 
persons. Three others, Akhilesh Kumar, 
Surendrapal Singh and Krishna Murari were 
found to be involved in the conspiracy for the 
incident 
by 
the 
investigating 
agency. 
Therefore, chargesheet was filed by the 
Investigating Officer against ten accused 
persons for offences under Sections 147, 148, 
149, 307, 120B, 302, IPC and Sections 27, 
30, Arms Act, 1959. 
6.3 Accused Rudrapal Singh alias Lalle was 
absconding and was declared as proclaimed 
offender. Thus Sessions Trial No. 17/1995 
was committed to the Court of Sessions 
against the other nine accused persons. 
Subsequently Sessions Trial No. 66/2004 

against Rudrapal Singh alias Lalle was also 
committed to the Court of Sessions. 
6.4 Accused Chhote Singh was elected as 
Member of Legislative Assembly from the 
ruling party in Uttar Pradesh in the year 
2007. 
6.5 The Governor of Uttar Pradesh, vide a 
Government 
Order, 
Serial 
No. 
– 
901WC/Seven-Justice-5-2007-361 
WC/ 
2007, dated 16.04.2008, addressed to the 
District Magistrate, Jalaun, Orai, granted 
permission to the Public Prosecutor to 
submit an application before the Trial Court 
seeking withdrawal of prosecution of Chhote 
Singh. 
6.6 The above Government Order was modified to 
further grant permission to the Public 
Prosecutor to file an application seeking 
withdrawal of the prosecution of other 
accused persons as well. 
6.7 Both the applications filed under Section 
321, 
CrPC, 
seeking 
withdrawal 
of 
prosecution were heard and disposed of 
together by the Trial Court vide order dated 

19.05.2012. The Trial Court allowed the 
withdrawal of prosecution against accused 
Chhote Singh observing that the image of 
accused Chhote Singh is good among the 
public and he is a respected citizen of the 
society. The public has shown its trust in him 
by electing him to the Legislative Assembly. 
Further it was noted that Chhote Singh had 
not been named in the FIR and the reasons 
for the same were not made clear by the 
complainant. Additionally, since no other 
serious cases were registered against him, 
the Trial Court considering all the factors 
found no reason to allow the prosecution to 
continue against Chhote Singh. With respect 
to other accused persons, the application 
seeking withdrawal of prosecution was 
simply 
rejected 
without 
providing 
any 
reasons. 
6.8 The remaining accused persons, whose 
application under Section 321, CrPC was 
rejected, filed three separate criminal revision 
petitions challenging the order of the Trial 
Court which came to be registered as, Criminal 
Revision No. 1874 of 2012 and Criminal 
Revision No. 1900 of 2012. A separate 
criminal revision petition was filed by the 
mother of the present appellant, widow of 
deceased 
Jagdish 
Sharan 
Srivastava, 
challenging the withdrawal of prosecution 
against 
accused 
Chhote 
Singh 
being 
permitted by the Trial Court, and the same 
was registered as Criminal Revision No. 2107 
of 2012. 
6.9 All the four criminal revisions were tagged to 
be heard together before the High Court and 
vide order dates 30.05.2012 it was directed 
that no coercive action shall be taken against 
the revisionist – accused persons. 
6.10 During the long pendency of the criminal 
revision petitions before the High Court, the 
Trial Court issued non-bailable warrants 
against the accused persons on 18.08.2017. 
One of the accused persons, Chunna Singh, 
preferred a Transfer Petition seeking transfer 
of his trial but the same was rejected by the 
High Court on 20.05.2019 holding that the 

petition had not been moved with a fair 
motive and it appeared to be a well thought 
out tactic to delay the conclusion of the trial. 
By the same order, the High Court noted that 
the trial had been lingering on for past 24 
years and directed the Trial Court to expedite 
the trial and decide the same within a period 
of four months, with a further direction to not 
grant any adjournment. 
6.11 On 05.02.2020 all the criminal revision 
petitions were finally heard together and 
judgment was reserved and Trial Court 
record 
was 
summoned. 
The 
judgment 
reserved was never pronounced, and the 
criminal revision petitions were again listed 
for hearing before a different bench on 
14.07.2022. Since the Trial court record was 
submitted to the High Court the trial 
remained pending in the meantime. 
6.12 The criminal revision petitions were listed for 
hearing before the High Court on 14.07.2022 
but the hearing was adjourned on account of 
illness slip circulated on behalf of the counsel 
for the accused persons. Subsequently the 

hearing of the criminal revision petitions was 
adjourned five more times. It was last listed 
on 18.07.2023 and was again adjourned to 
be heard on 26.07.2023. 
7. 
It is this order of adjournment dated 18.07.2023 
that is challenged before us by the son of 
deceased Jagdish Sharan Srivastava who is 
seeking intervention of this Court in the case on 
the ground that grave injustice has been caused 
to the appellant and his family as the trial has 
been pending for almost three decades on 
account of the prolonged pendency of the 
criminal revision petitions for twelve years. The 
accused 
persons 
have 
been 
seeking 
adjournments in the criminal revision petitions 
as a delay tactic to prolong the trial, thus 
aggravating the suffering of the deceased’s 
family and delaying the process of justice. 
8. 
We have heard the learned counsel for all the 
parties and have also perused the material 
produced on record. The learned counsel for the 
appellant has contended that the entire trial is 
held up owing to the pendency of the criminal 
revision petitions and the Trial Court record 

being retained with the High Court. They have 
further brought to the notice of this Court that 
the matter was being listed before the High 
Court only after applications for listing were 
filed on behalf of the present appellant and 
despite the same it was repeatedly adjourned on 
the request of the Respondents. It is also the 
appellant’s contention that the victim’s revision 
petition was tagged with the revision petitions of 
the accused persons and thus the same is being 
used by the accused persons to delay the trial 
despite 
their 
applications 
lacking 
any 
substance. Furthermore, they have contended 
that the State mechanically granted permission 
to the Public Prosecutor to withdraw the 
prosecution against the accused persons. The 
grant of permission for the withdrawal of 
prosecution with respect to accused Chhote 
Singh was also granted by the Trial Court owing 
to his political standing and for no other cogent 
reasons. Similarly, other accused persons are 
also influential people and have succeeded in 
delaying the trial period for an indefinite period 
and are continuing to do the same. 

9. 
Learned counsel for Respondent No.1, State of 
Uttar Pradesh, while admitting that the accused 
persons have been using several dilatory tactics 
to delay the conclusion of the hearing in the 
criminal revision petitions, also submitted that 
the mother of the appellant in one of her 
applications seeking dismissal of the accused 
persons’ application under Section 321, CrPC 
had admitted that after examination of all the 
witnesses and conclusion of the arguments in 
Sessions Trial No. 17/1995 the matter was fixed 
for 26.07.2004 but due to stay order of the High 
Court the Judgment could not be pronounced. 
The State further submitted that it does not 
have any role in the adjournments which were 
sought by the accused persons and that they 
could not stop the accused persons from 
exercising one of their rights to seek parity with 
accused Chhote Singh. 
10. On the contrary, the learned counsel for 
Respondent No.2, Chhote Singh, has contended 
that it is actually the present appellant who has 
been 
seeking 
adjournments 
and 
thereby 
delaying the proceedings in the criminal 

revision petitions before the High Court. Since 
the appellant has not approached this Court 
with clean hands, it is merely on the ground of 
suppression of fact that the present appeal 
deserves to be dismissed. 
11. It is apparent that this case presents concerning 
circumstances wherein politically influential 
individuals, accused of a double murder in 
broad daylight, have evaded trial for almost 
three decades. We also acknowledge that it is 
evident from the Trial Court’s order dated 
19.05.2012 that political power has been 
leveraged 
to 
secure 
the 
withdrawal 
of 
prosecution of accused Chhote Singh. While the 
other nine accused were put to trial and their 
applications rejected without a reasoned order, 
this order being challenged by both, accused 
persons and the victims, has remained pending 
before the High Court for twelve years and the 
resultant stagnation in trial proceedings is 
deeply troubling. Given the gravity of the 
situation and the risk of miscarriage of justice, 
urgent action is warranted. 

12. Considering the material on record and the 
political influence of accused Chhote Singh and 
the Trial Court’s casual approach towards the 
accusations against the then sitting Member of 
Legislative Assembly in allowing withdrawal of 
his prosecution, this court is of the opinion that 
merely because an accused person is elected to 
the Legislative Assembly cannot be a testament 
to their image among the general public. 
Matters of a gruesome crime akin to the double 
murder in the present case do not warrant 
withdrawal of prosecution merely on the ground 
of good public image of an accused named in the 
charge sheet after thorough investigation. 
Contrary to the Trial Court’s view, such 
withdrawal cannot be said to be allowed in 
public interest. This reasoning cannot be 
accepted especially in cases of involvement of 
influential people. 
13. Additionally, the High Court in repeatedly 
allowing the adjournment requests has only 
allowed the accused persons to deploy dilatory 
tactics to delay their trial and have failed to 
ensure that the justice system is set in motion 

and is not halted due to the lamentable specter 
of political influence. 
14. We had sent notice to the accused Chhote 
Singh, who is Respondent No.2 in the present 
Appeal, and have heard the case on its merits 
with regard to the application under Section 
321, CrPC which was filed by Respondent No.2 
and allowed by the Trial Court. In the light of 
the discussion made above, we are inclined to 
set aside the withdrawal of prosecution of 
accused Chhote Singh as allowed by the Trial 
Court. 
15. Complainant 
has 
approached 
this 
Court 
challenging the repetitive adjournments in their 
criminal revision petitions against withdrawal of 
Respondent No.2’s prosecution, thus we are 
only deciding with respect to the case of 
Respondent No.2. Other accused persons are 
not before us; thus we are not going into the 
merits of their applications seeking withdrawal 
of prosecution. However, acknowledging the 
extensive delay already caused in the case, we 
are inclined to request the High Court to ensure 
that 
justice 
is 
not 
further 
delayed 
or 

compromised- due to political influence or any 
other extraneous factors. 
16. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed, the Criminal 
Revision No. 2107 of 2012 pending before the 
High Court of Allahabad is allowed, and order 
dated 19.05.2012 passed by the Court of 
Additional Sessions Judge (Temporary Ex Cadre 
Court-01), at Jalaun, Orai, is set aside only with 
respect to Respondent No.2 herein. 
17. In light of the aforementioned concerns, this 
Court directs the registry to send a copy of this 
order to the registry of the Allahabad High 
Court. Additionally, the parties before the High 
Court are also at liberty to bring this order to 
the notice of the High Court in the pending 
revisions by the accused. Thereafter, the High 
Court shall, considering the observations made 
by this Court, re-evaluate the remaining cases 
and decide the other pending criminal revision 
petitions for the withdrawal of prosecution as 
prayed by the remaining nine accused persons. 
18. Lastly, this Court emphasizes the paramount 
importance of ensuring progression of the trial 
without further delay. The High Court shall 

retain with it only copies of the Trial Court 
record for its perusal and consideration in 
disposing of the criminal revision petitions of 
the accused persons pending before it, and send 
back the original record to the Trial Court for 
expeditious conclusion of the criminal trial 
which has been pending for almost three 
decades now. 
19. Pending application(s), if any, is/are disposed 
of. 

……………………………………J. 
(VIKRAM NATH) 

……………………………………J. 
 (SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA) 
NEW DELHI 
JULY 15, 2024