IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._303 OF 2024 
( S.L.P. (CRL.) NO. 12301 OF 2023) 

KUSHA DURUKA 

… Appellant(s) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF ODISHA 

… Respondent(s) 

JUDGMENT 
 
RAJESH BINDAL, J. 

Leave granted. 
2. 
 
This is another case in which an effort has been made to 
pollute the stream of administration of justice. 
3. 
 
About three decades ago, this Court in Chandra Shashi v. 
Anil Kumar Verma1 was faced with a situation where an attempt was 
made to deceive the Court and interfere with the administration of 
justice. The litigant was held to be guilty of contempt of court. It was 
 
1 (1995) 

a case in which husband had filed fabricated document to oppose the 
prayer of his wife seeking transfer of matrimonial proceedings. 
Finding him guilty of contempt of court, he was sentenced to two 
weeks’ imprisonment by this Court. This Court observed as under: 
"1. 
 The stream of administration of justice has to 
remain unpolluted so that purity of court's atmosphere 
may give vitality to all the organs of the State. Polluters of 
judicial firmament are, therefore, required to be well 
taken care of to maintain the sublimity of court's 
environment; so also to enable it to administer justice 
fairly and to the satisfaction of all concerned. 
2. 
 Anyone who takes recourse to fraud, deflects 
the course of judicial proceedings; or if anything is done 
with oblique motive, the same interferes with the 
administration of justice. Such persons are required to be 
properly dealt with, not only to punish them for the 
wrong done, but also to deter others from indulging in 
similar acts which shake the faith of people in the 
system of administration of justice. 
* 
 
* 
 
* 
14. 
 The legal position thus is that if the 
publication be with intent to deceive the court or one 
made with an intention to defraud, the same would be 
contempt, as it would interfere with administration of 
justice. It would, in any case, tend to interfere with the 
same. This would definitely be so if a fabricated 

documents is filed with the aforesaid mens rea. In the 
case at hand the fabricated document was apparently to 
deceive the court; the intention to defraud is writ large. 
Anil Kumar is, therefore, guilty of contempt." 
4. 
 
In K.D. Sharma Vs. Steel Authority of India Limited and 
others2 it was observed by this Court: 
"39. 
 If the primary object as highlighted in 
Kensington Income Tax Commrs., (1917) 1 KB 486: 
86 LJKB 257: 116 LT 136 (CA) is kept in mind, an 
applicant who does not come with candid facts and 
"clean breast" cannot hold a writ of the court with "soiled 
hands". Suppression or concealment of material facts is 
not an advocacy. It is a jugglery, manipulation, 
manoeuvring or misrepresentation, which has no place in 
equitable and prerogative jurisdiction. If the applicant 
does not disclose all the material facts fairly and truly 
but states them in a distorted manner and misleads the 
court, the court has inherent power in order to protect 
itself and to prevent an abuse of its process to discharge 
the rule nisi and refuse to proceed further with the 
examination of the case on merits. If the court does not 
reject the petition on that ground, the court would be 
failing in its duty. In fact, such an applicant requires to be 
dealt with for contempt of court for abusing the process 
of the court." 

[emphasis supplied] 
 
2 (2008) 

5. 
 
In Dalip Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others3, this 
Court noticed the progressive decline in the values of life and the 
conduct of the new creed of litigants, who are far away from truth. It 
was observed as under: 
"1. 
 For many centuries Indian society cherished 
two basic values of life i.e. "satya" (truth) and "ahinsa" 
(non- violence). Mahavir, Gautam Buddha and Mahatma 
Gandhi guided the people to ingrain these values in 
their daily life. Truth constituted an integral part of the 
justice- delivery system which was in vogue in the pre-
Independence era and the people used to feel proud to 
tell truth in the courts irrespective of the consequences. 
However, post- Independence period has seen drastic 
changes in our value system. The materialism has 
overshadowed the old ethos and the quest for personal 
gain has become so intense that those involved in 
litigation do not hesitate to take shelter of falsehood, 
misrepresentation and suppression of facts in the court 
proceedings. 
 
2. 
In the last 40 years, a new creed of litigants 
has cropped up. Those who belong to this creed do not 
have any respect for truth. They shamelessly resort to 
 
3 (2010) 

falsehood and unethical means for achieving their goals. 
In order to meet the challenge posed by this new 
creed of litigants, the courts have, from time to time, 
evolved new rules and it is now well established that a 
litigant, who attempts to pollute the stream of justice or 
who touches the pure fountain of justice with tainted 
hands, is not entitled to any relief, interim or final.” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
 
6. 
 
In Moti Lal Songara Vs. Prem Prakash appu and 
another4, this Court, considering the issue regarding concealment of 
facts before the Court, observed that "court is not a laboratory where 
children come to play”, and opined as under: 
"19. 
 The second limb of the submission is whether 
in the obtaining factual matrix, the order passed by the 
High Court discharging the accused-respondent is 
justified in law. We have clearly stated that though the 
respondent was fully aware about the fact that charges 
had been framed against him by the learned trial Judge, 
yet he did not bring the same to the notice of the 
revisional court hearing the revision against the order 
taking cognizance. It is a clear case of suppression. It was 
within the special knowledge of the accused. Any one 
who takes recourse to method of suppression in a court 
of law, is, in actuality, playing fraud with the court, and 
 
4 (2013) 

the maxim supressio veri, expression faisi, i.e., 
suppression of the truth is equivalent to the expression of 
falsehood, gets attracted. We are compelled to say so 
as there has been a calculated concealment of the fact 
before the revisional court. It can be stated with certitude 
that the accused- respondent tried to gain advantage by 
such factual suppression. The fraudulent intention is writ 
large. In fact, he has shown his courage of ignorance and 
tried to play possum. 
 
20. 
 The High Court, as we have seen, applied the 
principle 
"when 
infrastructure 
collapses, 
the 
superstructure is bound to collapse". However, as the 
order has been obtained by practising fraud and 
suppressing material fact before a court of law to gain 
advantage, the said order cannot be allowed to stand."

(emphasis supplied) 
 
7. 
 
 It was held in the judgments referred to above that one of 
the two cherished basic values by Indian society for centuries is 
"satya" (truth) and the same has been put under the carpet by the 
petitioner. Truth constituted an integral part of the justice-delivery 
system in the pre-Independence era, however, post-Independence 
period has seen drastic changes in our value system. The materialism 
has overshadowed the old ethos and the quest for personal gain has 

become so intense that those involved in litigation do not hesitate to 
take shelter of falsehood, misrepresentation and suppression of facts 
in the court proceedings. In the last 40 years, the values have gone 
down and now a litigants can go to any extent to mislead the court. 
They have no respect for the truth. The principle has been evolved to 
meet the challenges posed by this new breed of litigants. Now it is well 
settled that a litigant, who attempts to pollute the stream of justice or 
who touches the pure fountain of justice with tainted hands, is not 
entitled to any relief, interim or final. Suppression of material facts 
from the court of law, is actually playing fraud with the court. The 
maxim supressio veri, expression faisi, i.e. suppression of the truth is 
equivalent to the expression of falsehood, gets attracted. Its nothing 
but degradation of moral values in the society, may be because of our 
education system. Now we are more happy to hear anything except 
truth; read anything except truth; speak anything except truth and 
believe anything except truth. Someone rightly said that `Lies are very 
sweet, while truth is bitter, that's why most people prefer telling lies.' 

8. 
 
In a recent matter, this Court again came across a litigant 
who had tried to overreach the Court by concealing material facts in 
Saumya Chaurasia v. Directorate of Enforcement5. It was a case 
where the appellant before this Court had challenged the order 
passed by the High Court6 rejecting his bail application. He was 
accused of committing various crimes under the Indian Penal Code 
and the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002. His bail 
application was rejected by the High Court on 23.06.2023. In the 
pleadings before this Court, it was mentioned that the High Court had 
committed gross error in not considering the chargesheet dated 
08.06.2023 and the cognizance order dated 16.06.2023, which clearly 
suggested that there was error apparent on the fact of it. The fact 
which was available on record was that an order in the bail application 
was reserved by the High Court on 17.04.2023 and pronounced on 
23.06.2023. Having some suspicion, this Court directed the appellant 
to file an affidavit to clarify the aforesaid position. There was no 
specific reply given to the aforesaid query to the Court. Rather vague 
statements were made. Considering the facts available, this Court 
observed that there was a bold attempt by and on behalf of the 
appellant therein to misrepresent the facts for challenging the order 
 
5 2023 INSC 1073 
6 High Court of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in Miscellaneous Crl. Case No.1258/2023 

impugned therein, regarding the conduct of the parties and the 
counsel, this Court made the following observations: 
“14. 
 
It cannot be gainsaid that every party 
approaching the court seeking justice is expected to 
make full and correct disclosure of material facts and 
that every advocate being an officer of the court, 
though appearing for a particular party, is expected to 
assist the court fairly in carrying out its function to 
administer the justice. It hardly needs to be 
emphasized 
that 
a 
very 
high 
standard 
of 
professionalism and legal acumen is expected from 
the 
advocates 
particularly 
designated 
Senior 
advocates appearing in the highest court of the 
country so that their professionalism may be followed 
and emulated by the advocates practicing in the High 
Courts and the District Courts. Though it is true that the 
advocates would settle the pleadings and argue in the 
courts on instructions given by their clients, however 
their duty to diligently verify the facts from the record 
of the case, using their legal acumen for which they are 
engaged, cannot be obliviated.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
8.1. 
Finally, this Court dismissed the appeal with costs of 
₹1,00,000/-. 

9. 
 
In Pradip Sahu v. The State of Assam7 the accused who 
was found to be guilty of concealing material facts from the court and 
against him the High Court8 had directed for taking appropriate legal 
action, had challenged the order passed by the High Court before this 
Court. In the aforesaid case, first bail application filed by the appellant 
there was dismissed by the High Court9, thereafter he moved second 
bail application before the High Court in which notice was issued on 
30.11.2021. During the pendency of the aforesaid application before 
the High Court, the appellant therein moved fresh bail application 
before the Trial Court on 01.12.2021, which was granted on the same 
day. The aforesaid facts came to the notice of the High Court on 
08.12.2021 when a report of the Registrar (Judicial) was received, who 
was directed to conduct the enquiry in the matter. However, on an 
apology tendered by the appellant therein and also considering the 
facts as stated that he belonged to Tea Tribe community and his 
brother, a cycle mechanic, who was also pursuing the case, did not 
appreciate the intricacy of the law. As a result of which, the mistake 
occurred. This Court, having regard to the unqualified apology 

8 Gauhati High Court 
9 On 11.11.2021 

tendered by the appellant therein, had set aside the order passed by 
the High Court to file FIR/complaint against the appellant therein. 
10. 
 
May be in the facts of the aforesaid case, this Court had 
accepted unconditional apology tendered by the appellant therein 
and the given facts situation accepted his apology but it is established 
that there is a consistent effort by the litigants to misrepresent the 
Court wherever they can. 
11. 
 
The prayer in the present appeal is for grant of bail 
pending trial. The appellant claimed that he is in custody since 
03.02.2022 in connection with crime10 registered under Section 
20(b)(ii)(C) of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 
1985. The allegation in the FIR is that the appellant and the co-accused 
Gangesh Kumar Thakur angesh Thakur were in exclusive and 
conscious possession of 23.8 kg Ganja and were transporting the 
same. 
12. 
 
The appellant and his co-accused Gangesh Kumar Thakur 
angesh Thakur filed an application for release on bail pending 
trial before the Sessions Judge-cum-Special Judge, Malkangiri 
immediately after their arrest on 03.02.2022. The same was rejected 
 
10 FIR No. 29 dated 03.02.2022, at P.S. Orkel, District Malkaganj, Odisha 

vide order dated 04.02.2022. At that stage even the chargesheet had 
not been filed. 
12.1 
Being aggrieved against the order of rejection of the bail 
application by the Sessions Judge, the appellant filed first bail 
application11 before High Court. While the same was pending the co-
accused Gangesh Thakur also filed bail application12 before the High 
Court. The High Court vide order dated 17.01.2023 allowed the bail 
application filed by Gangesh Kumar Thakur angesh Thakur. 
However, the bail application filed by the appellant was dismissed 
vide impugned order dated 06.03.2023. Aggrieved against the same, 
the appellant filed the SLP13 before this Court. Notice in the same was 
issued on 22.09.2023. When the matter was listed on 08.11.2023, 
learned counsel for the State sought time to file counter affidavit. On 
06.12.2023, the learned counsel for the appellant pointed out that 
during the pendency of the present matter before this Court, the High 
Court vide order dated 11.10.2023 had granted bail to the appellant. 
As he did not have hard copy of the order passed by the High Court, 
he placed before us a soft copy of the said order through his mobile 
phone. On a reading of the aforesaid order, this Court found that the 
 
11 BLAPL No. 1855 of 2022 
12 BLAPL NO. 11709 of 2022 

same neither mentioned the fact that it was the second bail 
application14 filed by the appellant nor pendency of the SLP before 
this Court, in which notice had already been issued. Taking the matter 
seriously and deprecating such a practice this Court passed the 
following order on 06.12.2023: 
“This petition has been filed assailing the correctness 
of order dated 6th March, 2023 passed by the High Court of 
Orissa at Cuttack in BLAPL No. 1855 of 2022, ‘Kusha Duruka 
Versus State of Odisha’ whereby the prayer for bail was 
rejected. Notice was issued by this Court on 22nd September, 
2023. 
Today the learned counsel for the petitioner informs 
this Court that during the pendency of this petition, the High 
Court has granted bail to the petitioner on 11th October, 
2023. He has placed before us a soft copy of the said order 
through his mobile, according to which BLAPL No. 10860 of 
2023 was allowed apparently on the ground of parity 
extended to another co-accused. 
From reading of the said order, we find that it neither 
mentions that it was the second bail application filed by the 
petitioner before the High Court nor does it reflects any 
reference to the petition pending before this Court in which 
notice had already been issued in September, 2023. 
 
14 BLAPL No. 10860 of 2023 

We seriously deprecate such practice by the litigant 
and the counsel. 
We accordingly, direct that original record of the said 
bail application, allowed by the High Court on 11th October, 
2023, be called for forthwith. 
We further direct that this order be communicated to 
the Hon’ble Chief Justice as also the Registrar of the High 
Court 
of 
Orissa 
forthwith 
(today 
itself) 
and 
the 
aforementioned file of BLAPL No. 10860 of 2023 titled ‘Kusha 
Duruka Versus Versus State of Odisha’ be immediately 
sealed and thereafter be forwarded to this Court. 
We also request the Hon’ble the Chief Justice to obtain 
comments of the learned Judge as to whether he was 
apprised of the aforesaid two facts as recorded earlier in this 
order regarding the bail application being the second bail 
application and the secondly the pendency of the present 
petition. 
The State of Odisha will also file its comments as to 
whether the public prosecutor appearing for the State of 
Odisha pointed out such facts or not. 
The report shall be submitted by the Secretary, 
Department of Law and Justice of the State of Odisha as also 
by the Joint Secretary or the Additional Secretary (Law) 
attached to the High Court. 
List this matter again on 13th December, 2023.” 

13. 
 
In terms of the aforesaid order, this Court received the 
original record pertaining to second bail application filed by the 
appellant in which he was granted bail by the High Court vide order 
dated 11.10.2023; a report dated 08.12.2023 from the High Court along 
with a note from the Hon’ble Judge who had dealt with the bail 
application filed by the appellant and passed the order on 11.10.2023; 
affidavit of Special Secretary, Home Department, Government of 
Odisha dated 11.12.2023 and affidavit and report of Principal 
Secretary, Law Department, Government of Odisha dated 12.12.2023. 
14. 
 
Before we deal with the matter, we deem it appropriate to 
note down the dates and events in a tabular form. 
DATE 
EVENTS 
03.02.2022 FIR No.29 dated 03.02.2022 was registered at 
Police 
Station 
Orkel, 
District 
Malkangiri, 
Odisha, under Section 20(b)(ii)(C) of the 
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances 
Act, 1985. 
03.02.2022 The appellant as well as co-accused were 
arrested. 
04.02.2022 The first bail application filed by the appellant 
as well as the co-accused was rejected by the 
Sessions Judge-cum-Special Judge, Malkangiri 
(Special G.R. Case No.38/2022). 

The appellant approached the High Court for 
grant of bail by filing bail application bearing 
BLAPL No. 1855 of 2022. 
 
The co-accused Gangesh Kumar Thakur angesh Thakur approached the High Court for 
grant of bail by filing bail application bearing 
BLAPL No.11709 of 2022. 
 
As is evident from the records available before 
this Court, bail application filed by the appellant 
was assigned to Judge ‘A’15. 
 
During the pendency of the bail application 
filed by the appellant, the bail application filed 
by the co-accused Gangesh Kumar Thakur was 
listed before Judge ‘B’9. 
17.01.2023 The bail application filed by the co-accused 
Gangesh Kumar Thakur angesh Thakur was 
allowed by Judge ‘B’; The order does not 
suggest that the State Counsel had pointed 
before the court that there is another bail 
application filed by the co-accused (the 
appellant) pending consideration before the 
court. 
06.03.2023 The bail application filed by the appellant was 
rejected by Judge ‘A’; the High Court had 
specifically recorded in the order that the co-
accused Gangesh Kumar Thakur angesh 
 
15 We are consciously not mentioning the name of the Hon’ble Judge 

Thakur had been released vide order dated 
17.01.2023. 
21.07.2023 Aggrieved against the order rejecting the bail 
application filed by the appellant, SLP was filed 
before this Court. 
15.09.2023 During the pendency of the matter before this 
Court, second bail application filed by the 
appellant was rejected by the Sessions Judge-
cum-Special Judge, Malkangiri. 
The argument raised by the appellant that the 
co-accused has already been granted the bail, 
is noticed in the order. It does not record the 
fact that a petition filed by the appellant seeking 
bail is pending before this Court. 
21.09.2023 While the matter was pending before this Court, 
the appellant filed second bail application 
before the High Court and the same was not 
disclosed before this Court. 
22.09.2023 Notice in the SLP was issued to the respondent. 
11.10.2023 During pendency of the matter before this Court 
Judge ‘B’ granted bail to the appellant. 
08.11.2023 Learned counsel for the State appeared and 
sought time for filing counter affidavit to the SLP. 
Though the High Court had already granted bail 
to the appellant but still it was not pointed out 
when the matter was taken up by this Court. 
06.12.2023 Learned counsel for the appellant pointed out 
before this Court that the appellant had already 

been released by the High Court. This Court 
called for explanation and the record of the case 
from the High Court. 
 
15. 
 
In the Affidavit dated 11.12.2023 filed by the Principal 
Secretary, Law Department, Govt. of Odisha, while narrating the facts 
of the case, it was stated that the learned counsel appearing for the 
State in the High Court did not have the knowledge of the fact that the 
first bail application filed by the appellant was rejected on 06.03.2023 
by the High Court and also regarding filing of the SLP by the petitioner 
before this Court. 
15.1 
The contents of para of the aforesaid affidavit are extracted 
below: 
“It is submitted that the State Counsel before the 
Hon’ble High Court of Orissa was not aware of the fact 
that, earlier BLAPL No.1855/2022 was rejected vide 
order dated 06.03.2023 as well as the fact of filing of 
S.L.P.(Crl.)No.12301/2023. A copy of report of the 
State Counsel is as ANNEXURE-A” 
 
15.2 
Along with the affidavit a report from the State Counsel was 
also annexed. It was mentioned therein that in second bail application 
though the appellant had disclosed about filing of his first bail 

application, he had not disclosed any fact regarding pendency of the 
SLP before this Court. It was further mentioned that in the list of dates 
the factum of rejection of earlier bail application or filing of the SLP 
was not mentioned. Even at the time of hearing this fact was not 
disclosed. Learned State Counsel did not have any instructions from 
the Inspector Incharge regarding pendency of the present petition 
before this Court. 
15.3 
To similar effect is the affidavit filed by the Special 
Secretary, Home Department, Govt. of Odisha. 
16. 
 
In compliance to the order dated 06.12.2023 passed by this 
Court, a report has been received from the High Court. The comments 
of Judge ‘B’, as requested, were annexed with the report and original 
file of second bail application of appellant was also received from the 
High Court. It is mentioned therein that at the time of hearing of the 
second bail application, the court was not apprised of the factum of 
pendency of the SLP before this Court, in which notice had already 
been issued on 22.09.2023. 
16.1 
A copy of Standing Order No.2 of 2023, in partial 
modification of earlier Standing Order No.1 of 2020 issued by the High 
Court on 21.05.2023, was annexed with the report. It was issued in 
pursuance to the observation made by this Court in Pradhani Jani v. 

The State of Odisha16. The Standing Order was issued with reference 
to the listing of the bail applications under Sections 438 and 439 
Cr.P.C. Para 2 of the Standing Order with reference to the bail 
applications under Section 439 Cr.P.C. is extracted below: 
“2. The subsequent bail applications under 
section 439 Cr.P.C. including applications for 
interim bail shall be listed before the Hon'ble Judge 
who, at the earliest, decided any of the earlier bail 
applications under section 439 Cr.P.C. the same FIR (decided on merit or disposed of as 
withdrawn/not pressed). In the event the Hon'ble 
Judge is not available on account of superannuation, 
transfer etc. or recuses, the said application shall be 
listed before the Hon'ble Judge who next disposed 
of any of those bail applications, and so on. If none 
of the Hon'ble Judges who decided the earlier bail 
applications is available, the application shall be 
listed before the regular Bench as per roster.” 
 
17. 
 
In substance, it was directed that the Stamp Reporting 
Section will verify in case any bail application the same 
FIR has been disposed of earlier. The Stamp Reporting Section shall 
furnish complete details. The subsequent bail applications are to be 
listed before the same Judge. However, in case of non-availability or 

superannuation of the that Judge, alternate system has been provided. 
It is further directed that while listing the subsequent bail application, 
final order(s) of earlier bail application(s) the same FIR 
shall be tagged. To put the record straight, the order passed by this 
Court in Pradhani Jani’s case (supra) is extracted hereinbelow: 
“3. 
The perusal of the paper books would 
reveal that various applications filed by various 
accused have been entertained by different learned 
Single Judges of the same High Court. In many of the 
High Courts, the practice followed is that the 
applications the same FIR should be 
placed before one Judge. However, it appears that it is 
not the practice in Orissa High Court. In the present 
case, we have come across orders passed by at least 
three different Judges in the applications of various 
accused same FIR. 
4. 
 
Such 
a practice leads to anomalous 
situation. Certain accused are granted bail whereas 
certain accused for the very same crime having similar 
role are refused bail. 
5. 
 
We, therefore, quash and set aside the 
impugned order dated 31.01.2023 and remand the 
matter back to the High Court. The High Court is 
requested to consider the effect of the orders passed by 
the other coordinate Benches and pass orders afresh. 

The same shall be done within a period of one month 
from today. 
6. 
 
The Registrar (Judicial) of the Registry of this 
Court is directed to forward a copy of this order to the 
Registrar General of the Orissa High Court, who is 
requested to take note of the aforesaid and consider 
passing appropriate order so that contrary orders in the 
same crime are avoided.” 
 
18. 
 
A perusal of the paper book in second bail application 
shows that there is a report annexed by the Registry in the matter. It 
mentioned about the earlier two bail applications filed in the FIR in-
question. The first bail application filed by the appellant was disposed 
of on 06.03.2023. Bail application filed by the co-accused Gangesh 
Kumar Thakur was disposed of on 17.01.2023. The next one was the 
second bail application filed by the appellant. Though Standing Order 
No.2 of 2023 directed the Registry to annex all the orders passed in 
the earlier bail applications by different accused in the same FIR, 
however, the order passed by the High Court in the case of the 
appellant, rejecting his earlier bail application, does not form part of 
the bail application before the High Court. Only the order dated 
17.01.2023 passed in the bail application, filed by the co-accused 
Gangesh Kumar Thakur was annexed. Further, in the list of dates and 
events, the appellant did not mention regarding disposal of his earlier 

bail application by the High Court and also filing of the SLP in this 
Court. Though, just below the name of the parties, the appellant had 
mentioned the number of earlier bail application filed by him. Even 
in the body of the bail application, the appellant has conspicuously 
remained silent about the dismissal of his earlier bail application by 
the High Court and filing of the SLP before this Court. During the 
pendency of the matter before this court a fresh bail application was 
filed not only before the Trial Court but even before the High Court. 
The High Court even granted bail to the appellant. In the bail 
application filed before the High Court, it was not mentioned that the 
same was second bail application filed by the appellant. This Court 
cannot comment on the contents of the bail application filed before the 
Sessions Judge as the copy thereof is not available on record here. 
19. 
It is further evident from the order dated 17.01.2023 vide 
which bail application, BLAPL NO.11709 of 2022 of the co-accused 
Gangesh Kumar Thakur was allowed by the High Court by Judge ‘B’. 
Learned State Counsel did not point out the factum of pendency of 
another bail application filed by the co-accused the same 
FIR at that stage. The concerned investigating officer must be aware 
of this fact but had not pointed out the same before the court. 

20. 
 
In our opinion, to avoid any confusion in future it would be 
appropriate to mandatorily mention in the application(s) filed for grant 
of bail: 

Details and copies of order(s) passed in the 
earlier bail application(s) filed by the petitioner which 
have been already decided. 

Details of any bail application(s) filed by the 
petitioner, which is pending either in any court, below the 
court in question or the higher court, and if none is 
pending, a clear statement to that effect has to be made. 
 This court has already directed vide order 
passed in Pradhani Jani’s case (supra) that all bail 
applications filed by the different accused in the same FIR 
should be listed before the same Judge except in cases 
where the Judge has superannuated or has been 
transferred or otherwise incapacitated to hear the matter. 
The system needs to be followed meticulously to avoid any 
discrepancies in the orders. 

In case it is mentioned on the top of the bail 
application or any other place which is clearly visible, that 
the application for bail is either first, second or third and so 
on, so that it is convenient for the court to appreciate the 
arguments in that light. If this fact is mentioned in the order, 
it will enable the next higher court to appreciate the 
arguments in that light. 

The registry of the court should also annex a 
report generated from the system about decided or 

pending bail application(s) in the crime case in question. 
The same system needs to be followed even in the case of 
private complaints as all cases filed in the trial courts are 
assigned specific numbers (CNR No.), even if no FIR 
number is there. 

It should be the duty of the Investigating 
Officer/any officer assisting the State Counsel in court to 
apprise him of the order(s), if any, passed by the court with 
reference 
to 
different 
bail 
applications 
or 
other 
proceedings in the same crime case. And the counsel 
appearing for the parties have to conduct themselves truly 
like officers of the Court. 
21. 
 
Our suggestions are with a view to streamline the 
proceedings and avoid anomalies with reference to the bail 
applications being filed in the cases pending trial and even for 
suspension of sentence. 
22. 
Though considering the conduct of the petitioner, one of 
the option available was to cancel his bail, however, we do not 
propose to take such an extreme step in the case in hand. However, 
this can be the option exercised by the Court if the facts of the case so 
demand seeing the conduct of the parties. 
23. 
 
The present appeal is, accordingly, dismissed as 
infructuous. However, still we deem it appropriate to burden the 
appellant with a token cost of ₹10,000/-, which shall be deposited by 

him with Mediation and Conciliation Centre, attached to Orissa High 
Court, within a period of eight weeks from today. Within two weeks 
thereafter, proof of deposit be furnished in this Court. 
24. 
 
A copy of the order be sent to the Registrars General of all 
the High Courts to be placed before the Chief Justices for correction 
of the system, wherever required, as this Court comes across similar 
issues from different High Courts. 
25. 
 
The original record received from the High Court be sent 
back. 

…..………………….…..J 
 (VIKRAM NATH) 

…………………………..J 
(RAJESH BINDAL) 
 
New Delhi 
January 19, 2024.