IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 290 OF 2014 

DELHI TRANSPORT CORPORATION. 

VERSUS 
 
ASHOK KUMAR SHARMA 
 
 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

ORDER 
 
1. 
This appeal by special leave has been preferred by the 
appellant-Delhi Transport Corporation(hereinafter being referred 
to as ‘Corporation’) for assailing the judgment dated 12th March, 
2013 rendered by the learned Division Bench of the Delhi High 
Court dismissing the W.P.(C) No. 7661 of 2010 preferred by the 
appellant-Corporation questioning the legality and validity of the 
judgment and final order dated 1st July, 2010 passed by the 
Central 
Administrative 
Tribunal, 
Principal 
Bench, 
New 
Delhi(hereinafter being referred to as ‘Tribunal’). The Tribunal 
accepted the Original Application(for short ‘OA’) No. 1592 of 2009 
filed by the respondent(hereinafter being referred to as ‘charged 
officer’) and set aside the order dated 24th April, 2009 passed by 

the Chairman-cum-Managing Director(hereinafter being referred 
to as the ‘CMD’) thereby, dismissing the respondent from service. 
2. 
We have heard and considered the submissions advanced at 
bar and have gone through the impugned judgment and the 
material available on record. 
3. 
Ex facie, we find that the action of the appellant-Corporation 
in dismissing the respondent from service suffered from fatal 
lacuna of having been arrived at with sheer non-application of 
mind in addition to being non-speaking. 
4. 
Undisputed facts as available on record indicate that a 
memorandum of charge dated 19th December, 2006 was issued to 
the charged officer and a disciplinary enquiry was held by the 
Commissioner for Departmental Inquiries, Central Vigilance 
Commission who was appointed as the enquiry authority by the 
CMD, appellant-Corporation vide order dated 9th July, 2007. The 
Enquiry Officer conducted enquiry and held seven out of the eight 
charges proved against the charged officer. A show cause notice 
dated 15th April, 2009 was issued to the charged officer by the 
CMD. 
5. 
The charged officer approached the Tribunal by filing OA No. 
1054 of 2009 for assailing the show cause notice dated 15th April, 

2009 on the ground that the CMD was neither the appointing 
authority nor the disciplinary authority of the charged officer. 
6. 
The Tribunal, while disposing of OA No. 1054 of 2009, 
directed the Enquiry Authority to first decide the question of 
competence of the Enquiry Authority and thereafter, deal with the 
merits of the case. The charged officer was permitted to make a 
representation against the show cause notice. Accordingly, the 
charged officer submitted a detailed representation dated 27th 
April, 2009 to the appellant-Corporation. The charged officer was 
to retire from the services of the appellant-Corporation on 30th 
April, 2009. 
7. 
It is averred on behalf of the appellant-Corporation that in 
view of the impending retirement of the charged officer, an agenda 
was circulated to the Board of Directors of the Corporation under 
Regulation 11 of the DTC Meeting Regulations, 1981 incorporating 
a list of issues drafted by the CMD in the following terms: - 
“(viii) The CMD submitted the following issues for consideration 
of the Board of Directors: 
 
"(i) To accord the approval for Show Cause Notice 
(Annexure-IV) proposing to impose the penalty of 
'Dismissal from the services of the Corporation' as it 
was issued by the Chairman- cum-Managing Director 
in anticipation of the approval of the DTC Board due 
to paucity of time as the Charged Officer is to retire 
on 30-4-2009 on attaining the age of superannuation. 

(ii) To take a decision in the matter by considering the 
facts of the case and the reply submitted by the 
Charged Officer in response to Show Cause Notice 
dated 15-4-2009(Annexure-IV) with regard to the 
imposition of the penalty of 'Dismissal from the 
services of the Corporation'. List of Penalties is at 
Annexure-VI. 
 
(iii) To the Chairman-cum-M.D. to issue necessary 
Orders imposing the penalty as may be approved by 
the Board, upon Shri A.K. Sharma, Dy. CGM." 
 
8. 
As a sequel to the above, a Resolution No. 14 of 2009 was 
drawn under the signatures of the CMD on 29th April, 2009, as per 
which the Board members considered the agenda item; the reply 
of the charged officer and accorded their approval to the show 
cause notice dated 15th April, 2009 issued earlier to the charged 
officer and recommended to dismiss him from service. 
9. 
 Resultantly, the order dated 29th April, 2009 dismissing the 
charged officer from service came to be passed by the CMD. The 
charged officer i.e. the respondent herein filed OA No. 1592 of 2009 
before the Tribunal for assailing the afore-stated dismissal order 
which came to be allowed by the Tribunal vide judgment dated 1st 
July, 2010. 
10. The appellant-Corporation unsuccessfully challenged the 
order passed by the Tribunal by filing W.P. (C) No. 7661 of 2010 
before the learned Division Bench of the Delhi High Court which 
dismissed the same vide order dated 12th March, 2013. Being 

aggrieved, the appellant-Corporation has preferred the instant 
appeal by special leave. 
11. This Court issued notice to the respondent vide order dated 
16th August, 2013. Leave in the matter was granted on 10th 
January, 2014. 
Submission on behalf of the appellant-Corporation:- 
12. Learned counsel, Ms. Monika Gusain, representing the 
appellant-Corporation vehemently and fervently contended that 
the agenda which contained the details of the charges attributed 
to the appellant was circulated amongst the Board members; who 
applied their mind to the agenda item; took a well considered 
decision approving the show cause notice dated 15th April, 2009; 
and also approved the proposed penalty of dismissal from services 
of the Corporation against the charged officer. 
13. She urged that approval to impose the penalty of dismissal 
from services upon the charged officer was a collective decision of 
the Board members whereby, the entire material on record was 
considered including the reply of the charged officer. Hence, there 
is no reason to cast a doubt that the members of the Board of 
Directors failed to make an objective consideration of the agenda 

item with proper application of mind. She thus implored the Court 
to accept the appeal and reverse the impugned judgment. 
Submissions on behalf of the respondent-in-person - Charged 
officer:- 
 
14., the respondent appearing-in-person contended 
that the minutes of meeting dated 29th April, 2009 reflect total non- 
application of mind. The minutes contain not even a whisper of 
expression of opinion by any of the members of the Board on the 
merits of the matter and thus, the resolution approving dismissal 
of the respondent from service is ex facie bad in the eyes of law and 
was rightly interfered with by the Tribunal. He further submitted 
that the High Court was perfectly justified in affirming the decision 
of the Tribunal and implored the Court to dismiss the instant 
appeal filed by appellant-Corporation. 
15. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced on behalf of the appellant and the 
respondent appearing-in-person and have gone through the 
impugned judgments and so also the contentious Resolution dated 
29th April, 2009. 
Discussion and Conclusions:- 
16. We find that firstly, there is a serious question mark on ex 
post facto approval by the Board to the show cause notice dated 

15th April, 2009 issued by the CMD to the charged officer. It is a 
settled principle of administrative law that the Disciplinary 
Authority must indicate an independent application of mind to the 
findings in the enquiry report followed by opportunity of hearing 
to the charged officer and only thereafter, the order imposing a 
major penalty can be passed against the charged officer. Law is 
also well settled that the Disciplinary Authority must afford an 
opportunity of hearing to the charged officer before proceeding to 
impose the major penalty like dismissal from service. Neither of 
these two mandatory compliances were admittedly made by the 
Board. 
17. Furthermore, the agenda item which was circulated by the 
CMD for consideration of the Board(reproduced supra) clearly 
indicates that the Board was to take a decision in the matter while 
considering the facts of the case and the reply submitted by the 
charged officer in response to the show cause notice dated 15th 
April, 2009. However, other than giving a blind approval to the 
show cause notice and the agenda item albeit referring to the reply 
of the charged officer, the Board's Resolution dated 29th April, 2009 
does not reflect any independent or objective application of mind 
by the members of the Board to the enquiry report either 

individually or collectively. In this regard, reference may be made 
to the judgment rendered by this Court in the case of A.L. Kalra 
v. Project & Equipment Corporation of India Ltd.1 the relevant 
paragraph thereof is reproduced hereinbelow for the sake of ready 
reference:- 
“29. The situation is further compounded by the fact that the 
disciplinary authority which is none other than Committee of 
Management of the Corporation while accepting the report of the 
inquiry officer which itself was defective did not assign any reasons 
for accepting the report of the inquiry officer. After reproducing the 
findings of the inquiry officer, it is stated that the Committee of 
Management agrees with the same. It is even difficult to make out 
how the Committee of Management agreed with the observations of 
the inquiry officer because at one stage while recapitulating the 
evidence the inquiry officer unmistakably observed that appellant 
was subjected to double punishment and at other place, it was 
observed that granting extension of time and acceptance of 
documents and balance advance would tantamount to extending 
the time which would make the affair look wholly innocuous. This 
shows utter non-application of mind of the Disciplinary Authority 
and the order is vitiated.” 
 
18. In addition thereto, we have gone through the enquiry report 
which has been placed on record with the appeal. We find that the 
very foundation of the impugned action i.e. the enquiry report 
suffers from a fatal lacuna which goes to the root of the matter 
thereby vitiating the proceedings. On going through the report, we 
find that the Enquiry Officer categorically noted(at page No. 39 of 
the paper-book) that the prosecution neither listed nor produced 
 
1 (1984) 

any witness during regular hearing and that the prosecution case 
was closed with the consent of the Presenting Officer. 
19. Upon a pertinent query being put to Ms. Gusain in this 
regard, she candidly conceded that no witness was examined on 
behalf of the prosecution during the course of departmental 
enquiry which fact is also borne out from the enquiry 
report(Annexure P-1). 
20. This Court in the case of Roop Singh Negi v. Punjab 
National Bank and Others 2 categorically held that even in a case 
of ex parte enquiry, it is essential that the department must lead 
evidence of witnesses to bring home the charges levelled against 
the delinquent employee. 
21. Ms. Gosain feebly tried to convince the Court that the 
documents(Exhibits 51-53) which were marked in support of the 
department’s case, conclusively establish the guilt of the charged 
officer for the charges framed against him. As per Ms. Gusain, 
these documents were admitted by the charged officer. However, 
the enquiry report nowhere records that any document was 
admitted by the charged officer. Since no evidence was led on 
behalf of the department in the enquiry proceedings, there is no 
 
2 (2009) 

escape from the conclusion that the enquiry report is based on no 
evidence whatsoever. 
22. Consequently, we are of the view that the Tribunal committed 
no error whatsoever while accepting the original application 
preferred by the respondent and the learned Division Bench of the 
High Court rightly refused to interfere in the judgment of the 
Tribunal. 
23. As a result of the above discussion, the appeal is hereby 
dismissed as being devoid of merit. No order as to costs. 
24. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

(SANDEEP MEHTA) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (R. MAHADEVAN) 
New Delhi; 
July 18, 2024