IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 ( SLP (C) NO. 3792 OF 2024) 

SBI GENERAL INSURANCE CO. LTD. 
 …APPELLANT 

 VERSUS 

KRISH SPINNING 

 …RESPONDENT 
 
WITH 

( SLP(C) No. 7220 OF 2024) 

JUDGMENT 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

J. B. PARDIWALA, J.: 
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following 
parts: - 
INDEX 
 
A. FACTUAL MATRIX... 3 
B. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT... 14 
C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT... 16 
D. ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION... 18 
E. ANALYSIS... 19 
i. Whether the execution of a discharge voucher towards the full and final settlement 
between the parties would operate as a bar to invoke arbitration?... 21 
a. Whether the arbitration agreement contained in a substantive contract survives even 
after the underlying contract is discharged by “accord and satisfaction”?... 25 
ii. What is the scope and standard of judicial scrutiny that an application under 
Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 can be subjected to when a plea of “accord and 
satisfaction” is taken by the defendant?... 31 
iii. What is the effect of the decision of this Court in In Re: Interplay Between 
Arbitration Agreements under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1966 and the 
Indian Stamp Act 1899 on the scope of powers of the referral court under Section 
11 of the Act, 1996?... 65 
a. Arbitral Autonomy... 66 
b. Negative Competence-Competence... 69 
c. Judicial Interference under the Act, 1996... 71 
F. CONCLUSION... 84 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

1. 
Leave granted. 
 
2. 
Since the issues raised in both the captioned appeals are the same, the 
subject-matter also being the same and the parties are also the same, they 
were taken up analogously for hearing and are being disposed of by this 
common judgment and order. 
 
3. 
The SLP(C) No. 7220 of 2024 arises from the impugned judgment and 
order dated 22.09.2023 passed by the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad 
in wherein the High Court after 
assigning detailed reasons for allowing the application filed by the 
respondent for the appointment of an arbitrator, directed that the said 
application be listed before the appropriate bench in accordance with the 
roster for the purpose of passing appropriate order for appointment of 
arbitrator. 
 
4. 
The SLP(C) No. 3792 of 2024 arises from the impugned judgment and 
order dated 01.12.2023 passed by the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad 
in wherein relying upon the judgment 
and order dated 22.09.2023 referred to above passed by a co-ordinate 
bench in the self-same arbitration application, the High Court allowed the 
application of the respondent for the appointment of an arbitrator and 
thereby appointed Justice K.A. Puj, former Judge of the High Court of 
Gujarat as an arbitrator to resolve the disputes between the parties. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

A. FACTUAL MATRIX 
 
5. 
The appellant, SBI General Insurance Co. Ltd., is a Private Sector General 
Insurance Company engaged in the business of providing general 
insurance to its customers, having one of its offices at 1st floor, Shukan 
Business Centre, Swastik Cross Road, C.G. Road, Navrangpura, 
Ahmedabad. 
 
6. 
The respondent, M/s Krish Spinning, is a partnership firm registered under 
the provisions of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932, and is engaged in the 
business of manufacturing and spinning of cotton filaments at its factory 
premises situated at Survey No. 845, Ghodasar, Nenpur, Taluka 
Memdabad. 
 
7. 
The respondent obtained a standard fire and special perils (material 
damage) insurance policy from the appellant on 31.03.2018 for a total sum 
insured of Rs 7,20,00,000/- with the period of insurance being 31.03.2018 
to 30.03.2019. 
 
8. 
During the period of insurance cover, two incidents of fire took place at the 
factory premises of the respondent, as a result of which the respondent 
suffered loss of assets such as cotton stocks in the form of raw materials, 
semi-finished goods, electrical installations, plant and machinery. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

9. 
The first incident of fire took place on 28.05.2018 in which the respondent 
claims to have suffered a total loss amounting to Rs 1,76,19,967/-. The 
second incident of fire took place on 17.11.2018 wherein the respondent 
claims to have suffered a total loss amounting to Rs 6,32,25,967/-. It is 
pertinent to observe that the present appeals pertain only to the dispute 
arising from the settlement of claim relating to the first incident of fire 
which took place on 28.05.2018. 
 
10. After the first incident of fire that took place, M/s Paresh Shah & Associates 
was appointed as the surveyor by the appellant company on 29.05.2018 under 
Section 64UM of the Insurance Act, 1938. The surveyor visited the factory 
premises of the respondent on a number of occasions between 29.05.2018 and 
29.08.2018 for the purpose of assessing the extent of loss suffered by the 
respondent in the fire accident, and accordingly prepared the final survey 
report dated 30.12.2018. In the said report, it was inter alia observed that the 
fire could not have been caused by any external factor, and that it could have 
been caused by spontaneous combustion due to humid temperatures. The 
quantum of loss suffered by the respondent, after accounting for deductions 
under multiple heads was assessed by the surveyor at Rs 84,19,579/-. 
 
11. Although the respondent had initially submitted its claim bill dated 
27.07.2018 claiming Rs 1,76,19,967/- from the appellant, yet on 
24.12.2018, a consent letter was issued by the respondent to the surveyor 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

accepting the assessment of loss made by the surveyor, i.e., at Rs 
84,19,579/-. In the consent letter, the respondent stated that in view of the 
detailed discussion it had with the surveyor as regards the volumetric 
calculation of the quantity of cotton bales said to have been damaged, it 
was ready to accept the quantity to be 3,17,085.30 kg as against its initial 
claim of 4,41,111.58 kg. 
 
12. After addressing the consent letter as aforesaid to the surveyor, the 
respondent signed an advance discharge voucher dated 04.01.2019, 
confirming the receipt of Rs 84,19,579/- from the appellant as the full and 
final settlement towards their claim. The discharge voucher also stated, 
inter alia, that the respondent was discharging the appellant of the liability 
arising under its claim. 
 
13. Subsequent to the signing of the advance discharge voucher, the appellant 
released the claim settlement amount of Rs 84,08,957/- on 31.01.2019. 
 
14. Thereafter, in relation to the claim the second fire incident, 
the appellant released a total amount of Rs 4,86,67,050/- in three 
instalments. The third and final instalment of Rs 2,23,67,050/- was 
released on 14.10.2019. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

15. On 25.10.2019, that is eleven days after the receipt of the third and final 
instalment in relation to the claim the second fire incident, 
the respondent dropped one letter by hand delivery at the office of the 
appellant. The respondent, inter alia, stated in the said letter that a copy of 
the surveyor’s final assessment report was not provided to it despite earlier 
requests. The respondent alleged that it had to sign the final discharge 
voucher as it was badly in need of money. The respondent further stated in 
its letter that it had been unable to take any action due to non-receipt of the 
surveyor’s report. The appellant refused to accept the letter and returned it 
back to the respondent. The contents of the letter are reproduced 
hereinbelow: 

 “Date:- 25/10/2019 
To, 
The Manager, 
SBI General Insurance Company, 
Ahmedabad. 
 
Subject: - Fire claim no.513768 for loss dated 28/05/2018. 
 
Respected Sir, 
In connection to the above, we have requested you to 
provide the copy of the complete survey report along with 
all enclosures thereof to enable us to understand the 
calculations made by the surveyor to arrive at the gross 
and net loss / damage. Please note that despite our request, 
we have not received the copy of survey report, which 
shows your arrogant approach. 
At this stage, we wish to inform you that you have taken 
our consent on the amount assessed by the surveyor. We 
have signed the working sent by you. During the said 
period, there was another fire in our factory, in which the 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

entire stock, building, plant and machinery have been 
damaged and we were badly in need of money, hence 
considering you being a reputed insurance company, you 
must have examined the assessment made by the surveyor 
and on that trust bearing in mind, we have signed the 
working sheet of assessments and voucher is also signed 
by us in your office as you have informed that we would 
get the payment immediately. But the same was also 
delayed beyond reasonable time. 
 
Now, since our auditors and bankers would like to know 
the grounds considering which, the balance amount of our 
claim is not considered by you / surveyor, you are once 
again requested to provide the copy of survey report along 
with all the documents submitted to you by the surveyor, 
based on which, the claim has been settled and paid by you. 
 
Since we have not received the copy of surveyor report, we 
are unable to take further action. Once again, you are 
requested to provide the copy of survey report along with 
all enclosures thereof. 
 
Please consider this letter as a notice. 
 
Yours Faithfully 
For KRISH SPINNING” 

16. The respondent, on the same day, sent an email to the appellant with a copy 
of the aforesaid letter calling upon the respondent to take appropriate and 
necessary action. The contents of the said email are reproduced 
hereinbelow: 
“Sir, 
 
This is in reference to the above subject, today at around 
04:00 pm, or personnel visited your office to hand over a 
letter requesting you to provide the complete survey report 
of our fire claim no.-513768 for loss dated 28/05/2018. 
You, in turn returned the letter without accepting it, asking 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

to get the letter signed by our Mr. Ashwinkumar N. Kacha 
and resubmit the same. 
 
We wish to inform that Mr. Ashwinkumar Kacha is busy 
with medical emergency, and we will submit the letter 
signed by him, when he is relieved from the medical 
emergency. Attached herewith, is the copy of the said letter 
for your kind reference and necessary action. 
 
Thanks & Regards” 
 
17. The appellant replied to the aforesaid letter as well as the email vide the 
letter dated 07.11.2019 refuting the allegations of the respondent by stating 
that the assessment of loss was personally explained by the surveyor to the 
representative of the respondent who in turn had taken an informed 
decision of accepting the settlement amount and signing the consent letter 
and the advance discharge voucher. A copy of the survey report was also 
provided to the respondent along with the reply letter. The contents of the 
said reply letter are reproduced hereinbelow: 
“SBI GENERAL INSURANCE 
 
Dt: 07/11/2019 
 
To 
M/s Krish Spinning 
Survey No. 845, Nenpur Haidarvas Road, 
Ghodsar Gam, 
Tal: Mehmdabad, 
Gujarat-387110 
(M): 9377071329 
 
Dear Sir, 
Re: Claim No. 513768 under Policy No. 9006820 Date of 
Loss: 28/05/2018 Sub: Reply of Your letter dated 
25/10/2019 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

We refer to your letter dated 25/10/2019, wherein you have 
made reference of previous communications asking for 
copy of survey report. We have reviewed our records and 
we regret to inform that we are not able to locate any 
communication in our record through which a request was 
made seeking copy of Survey Report of Surveyor M/s 
Paresh Shah & Associates. Unless proved otherwise, we 
are accordingly considering your letter dated 25/10/2019 
as first communication requesting for copy of survey 
report. 
 
We reiterate that loss assessment was personally explained 
to Mr. Ashwin kacha from your office on 24th December 
2018 at our Ahmedabad office and only after 
understanding the assessment, Mr. Kacha had taken an 
informed decision of signing the consent letter. This 
consent letter was also followed with an advance 
discharge voucher which was submitted by your office in 
response to our settlement offer. 
 
Furthermore, the payment remittance for claim settlement 
amount was carried out on 8th January 2019 which is 
within 15 days from the date of submission of consent letter 
and thus there was no delay beyond reasonable time as 
alleged in your letter. 
 
As requested in your referred letter, we are pleased to 
attach copy of survey report that forms basis of claim 
remittance. You may also note that loss assessment arrived 
by surveyor in attached survey report is in line with loss 
workings reviewed with Mr. Kacha. 
 
Yours Sincerely 
For SBI General Insurance Company Ltd., 

Authorized Signatory” 
 
18. On 02.03.2020, the respondent issued a legal notice calling upon the 
appellant to release the balance payment of the claim amount arising out 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

of the first fire incident. The respondent, in the said notice, alleged, inter 
alia, that he had signed the consent letter and the advance discharge 
voucher under the apprehension that if he would not have signed the said 
documents, then the claim in relation to the second fire incident, which was 
pending on the date of the signing of the discharge voucher, would have 
been detrimentally affected. Thus, the discharge voucher could be said to 
have been signed under coercion, undue influence, and without free will 
and volition of the respondent. The respondent further stated that it had 
sent the protest letter dated 25.10.2019 immediately after receiving the 
final instalment in relation to the claim the second fire 
incident. The respondent further stated that in the event of the appellant’s 
denial or failure to pay the balance amount within a period of 15 days, the 
legal notice should be treated as notice invoking arbitration. 
 
19. The appellant replied to the aforesaid legal notice on 16.03.2020 refuting 
the allegations made by the respondent, alleging them to be mala fide and 
an after-thought. The appellant stated that the discharge voucher signed by 
the respondent was unqualified and on his own free will and volition. It 
was further stated by the appellant that the amount being claimed by the 
respondent was not due in the first place, thereby making the dispute not 
one of quantum but one of liability, and therefore the arbitration agreement 
would not be attracted to the dispute raised. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

20. As the parties were unable to arrive at any amicable resolution of the 
dispute, and as no arbitrator was nominated by the appellant in response to 
the notice invoking arbitration, the respondent, on 25.10.2021 filed a 
petition for the appointment of arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter “the Act, 1996”) 
before the High Court. 
 
21. The case of the respondent before the High Court was that as against the 
loss of Rs 1,76,19,967/- suffered by it, the appellant company paid only Rs 
84,19,579/- and thus it was not completely indemnified. It was also argued 
that the appellant had not explained why at the time of obtaining the 
consent letter an amount of Rs 92,00,388/- was deducted from the total 
amount claimed. 
 
22. The appellant, on the other hand, contested the arbitration petition filed by 
the respondent on the ground that the claim raised by the respondent herein 
was stale and having once signed the consent letter dated 24.12.2018, it 
was not open for it to turn around and raise a dispute. The appellant also 
contended that it was open for the court to look into the question of 
arbitrability at the stage of deciding the Section 11 petition. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

23. The High Court, having regard to the aforesaid submissions of the parties, 
held that the dispute in question was falling in the realm of adjudication 
and the same is the function to be discharged by an arbitrator. Placing 
reliance on the decision of this Court in Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. v. Dicitex Furnishing Ltd. reported in (2020), the High Court 
held that if the dispute existing between the parties could be referred to 
arbitration under the arbitration agreement, then appointment of arbitrator 
has to follow. Some pertinent observations made by the High Court are 
extracted hereinbelow: 
“6. Therefore, on one hand, the company has taken a stand 
that the petitioner is paid the amounts due and payable under 
the policy and that there is no need to refer the disputes to the 
arbitration under clause 13 of the policy, on the other hand, 
the petitioner disputes such case on various grounds. It was 
stated that amount of Rs. 92,00,388/-is wrongfully deducted 
while making payment of Rs. 84,19,579/ inasmuch as total 
claim lodged was Rs. 1,76,19,967/-. 
 
6.1 Therefore, the above aspects indeed travels to the 
adjudicatory realm, which is the function to be discharged by 
the arbitrator. When the claim is disputed, it is the arbitrator 
who may competently decide the claim. Arbitrability of the 
dispute is also to be decided by the arbitrator. While 
exercising the powers under section 8 of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996, such questions cannot be gone into 
by this Court and when there is an arbitration clause, the 
aspects are to be decided by the arbitrator for such purpose. 
 
6.2 Following observations of the Supreme Court in Oriental 
Insurance Company Ltd. vs. Dicitex Furnishing Ltd. 
[(2020) ], may be pertinently noticed, 
 
"...an application under Section 11(6) is in the 
form of a pleading which merely seeks an order 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

of the court, for appointment of an arbitrator. It 
cannot be conclusive of the pleas or contentions 
that the claimant or the concerned party can 
take, in the arbitral proceedings. At this stage, 
therefore, the court which is required to ensure 
that an arbitrable dispute exists, has to be prima 
facie convinced about the genuineness or 
credibility of the plea of coercion; it cannot be 
too particular about the nature of the plea, 
which necessarily has to be made and 
established 
in 
the 
substantive 
(read: 
arbitration) proceeding. If the court were to take 
a contrary approach and minutely examine the 
and plea judge its credibility or reasonableness, 
there would be a danger of its denying a forum 
to the applicant altogether, because rejection of 
the application would render the finding (about 
the finality of the discharge and its effect as 
satisfaction) 
final, 
thus, 
precluding 
the 
applicant of itsright event to approach a civil 
court." 
 
6.3 In the proceedings under section 8 of the Arbitration Act, 
it is not the function of the Court to examine in detail, the 
extant and nature of dispute, if dispute exist is referable to 
the arbitration clause occurring in the agreement between 
the parties, the appointment of arbitrator has to follow. 
 
6.4 It is observed that this Court has not expressed any 
opinion on merits of the dispute and arbitrability thereof. 
 
6.5 In view of the above discussion, the prayer made in the 
present application for appointment of arbitrator shall have 
to be adverted to. 
 
7. In the result, the Registry is directed to list the same before 
the appropriate Bench in accordance with roster for the 
purpose of passing the order regarding appointment of 
arbitrator.” 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

24. The aforesaid observations were made by the High Court in its order dated 
22.09.2023 which has been impugned by the appellant in SLP(C) No. 7220 
of 2024. After making the above quoted observations in favour of the 
respondent, the High Court directed that the arbitration application be 
listed before an appropriate bench in accordance with the roster. In 
pursuance of the said order, the matter came to be listed before the Chief 
Justice of the High Court, wherein an order for appointment of arbitrator 
was passed. The said order dated 01.12.2023 has been impugned by the 
appellant in SLP(C)No. 3792 of 2024. 
 
B. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT 
 
25. Mr Ketan Paul, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, 
submitted that a full and final settlement was arrived at between the parties 
thereby indicating that a distinct understanding was arrived at between 
them. No plea or assertion has been made by the respondent, nor any prima 
facie evidence has been adduced to establish that the appellant had made 
the execution of the discharge voucher a pre-condition to the payment of 
the claim, or offered the amount on a “take it or leave it basis”. Seen thus, 
the test laid down by this Court in paragraph 52(iv) of the National 
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Boghara Polyfab reported in (2009) can 
neither be said to have been alleged nor satisfied. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

26. It was further submitted that there has been an inordinate delay on the part 
of the respondent in levelling allegations of coercion. Such allegations 
came to be so levelled for the first time in the arbitration notice dated 
02.03.2020, that is, almost 14 months after the payment of the subject 
claim and five months after the payment of the second claim. The counsel 
submitted that the claim amount as per the assessment of the loss by the 
surveyor was known to the respondent since 24.12.2018, thereby 
indicating that the allegations of coercion were an afterthought. 
 
27. In support of his aforesaid submission, the counsel placed reliance on the 
decision of this Court in NTPC Ltd. v. SPML Infra Ltd. reported in (2023) 
SCC OnLine SC 389. He submitted that even when examined through the 
“eye of the needle” test, the claim could be said to be deadwood and the 
arbitration application ought to have been rejected by the High Court on 
this count alone. The counsel also placed reliance on the decision of this 
Court in New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Genus Power Infrastructure 
Ltd. reported in (2015) to submit that arbitration ought to be 
refused in case of inordinate delay in raising the dispute or levelling 
allegations of coercion by the party seeking the referral of disputes to 
arbitration. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

28. One another submission made by the counsel was that the pleadings of the 
respondent lack the basic material particulars about any alleged coercion 
and the poor financial condition of the respondents. It was further 
submitted that even in the arbitration notice all that the respondents have 
stated is that had they not signed the discharge voucher in respect of the 
first claim, their second claim also would have been affected. 
 
29. The counsel submitted that the letter dated 25.10.2019 addressed by the 
respondent cannot be said to be a protest letter as the letter only asked for 
a copy of the surveyor’s report to be provided and no allegation of any 
coercion or any demand for any amount was even raised in the said letter. 
The counsel finally submitted that a discharge voucher for effecting the full 
and final settlement in relation to the second claim was also signed by the 
respondent on 30.09.2019, which was accepted and no dispute has been 
raised in the last five years, which indicates that the appellant acted in a 
bona fide manner as per the prescribed norms. 
 
C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT 
 
30. Ms Savita Singh, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondent, at the outset submitted that her client had to succumb before 
the surveyor on account of acute economic distress and also on account of 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

pendency of huge amount of claim with the appellant, i.e., around Rs 8 
crore cumulatively the two claims. The respondent was also 
under pressure from other financial institutions from whom loan had been 
availed. 
 
31. The counsel further submitted that the circumstances were such that her 
client had to issue the discharge voucher, otherwise payment towards the 
admitted amount would not have been released and her client would have 
been put in immense difficulties. She submitted that mere signing of the 
discharge voucher by her client would not imply that there was consensus 
in arriving at the full and final settlement. The counsel submitted that the 
coercion, though subtle, was very much real and thus in such a situation 
where the settlement is not voluntary, but under duress, the arbitration 
clause can be invoked to refer the disputes to arbitration. 
 
32. The counsel also submitted that it cannot be said that there was an 
inordinate delay in raising the plea of coercion as the letter dated 
25.09.2019 was sent by her client to the appellant within 11 days of the 
receipt of final payment in relation to the second insurance claim. 
However, the appellant provided a copy of the surveyor’s report only on 
07.11.2019 based on which the notice of arbitration was issued on 
02.03.2020. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

33. The counsel, in the last, submitted that the issues raised by the appellant 
are subject matter of arbitration by the tribunal and not of the referral court, 
which has to limit its scrutiny to the issue of arbitrability in view of the 
settled position of law. 
 
D. ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION 
 
34. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone 
through the materials on record, the following three questions fall for our 
consideration: - 
 
i. 
Whether the execution of a discharge voucher towards the full and 
final settlement between the parties would operate as a bar to invoke 
arbitration? ii. 
What is the scope and standard of judicial scrutiny that an 
application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 can be subjected to 
when a plea of “accord and satisfaction” is taken by the defendant? iii. 
What is the effect of the decision of this Court in In Re: Interplay 
Between Arbitration Agreements under the Arbitration and 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

Conciliation Act 1966 and the Indian Stamp Act 1899 on the scope 
of powers of the referral court under Section 11 of the Act, 1996? 
 
E. 
ANALYSIS 
 
35. Clause 13 of the insurance policy issued in favour of the respondent 
contains the following arbitration clause: 
“13) If any dispute or difference shall arise as to the quantum 
to be paid under this Policy (liability being otherwise 
admitted) such difference shall independently of all other 
questions be referred to the decision of a sole arbitrator to be 
appointed in writing by the parties to or if they cannot agree 
upon a single arbitrator within 30 days of any party invoking 
arbitration the same shall be referred to a panel of three 
arbitrators, comprising of arbitrators, one to be appointed by 
each of the parties to the dispute/difference and the third 
arbitrator to be appointed by such two arbitrators and 
arbitration shall be conducted under and in accordance with 
the provision of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. 
 
It is clearly agreed and understood that no dispute or 
difference shall be referrable to arbitration as hereinbefore 
proved, if the Company has disputed or not accepted liability 
under or in respect of this policy. It is hereby expressed 
stipulated and declared that it shall be a condition precedent 
to any right of action or suit upon this Policy that the award 
by such arbitrator/arbitrators of the amount of the loss or 
damaged shall be first obtained” 
 
36. A preliminary objection was raised on behalf of the appellant that the 
arbitration clause as contained in the insurance policy referred to above is 
not attracted in the present case as there is no admission of liability on the 
part of the appellant, whereas the said arbitration clause envisages 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

reference to arbitration only in cases where liability is admitted and there 
is a dispute as regards the quantum of liability. 
 
37. However, we find no merit in the aforesaid submission of the appellant. It 
is evident from the record that the appellant had admitted its liability with 
respect to the first claim and had even disbursed an amount of Rs 
84,19,579/- in pursuance of the signing of the advance discharge voucher 
by the respondent. Thus, it is clearly a case of admission of liability by the 
appellant. However, the quantum of liability is in dispute as the amount 
claimed by the respondent is at variance with the amount admitted by the 
appellant. Thus, the dispute being one of quantum and not of liability, it 
falls within the ambit of the conditional arbitration clause as contained in 
the insurance policy. 
 
38. One another preliminary objection raised by the appellant was that the 
claim sought to be referred to arbitration is a deadwood claim and thus the 
application for appointment of arbitrator ought to have been rejected at the 
outset by the High Court. It is clear from the facts as discussed in the 
preceding paragraphs that the notice invoking arbitration was sent by the 
respondent to the appellant on 02.03.2020 and the petition seeking 
appointment of arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 was filed 
before the High Court on 25.10.2021. Thus, the arbitration petition was 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

filed before the High Court much prior to the expiry of the limitation period 
of three years. Further, the notice invoking arbitration was also sent by the 
respondent well within time from the date of the accrual of the cause of 
action. Considered thus, it cannot, by any stretch of imagination, be said 
that the claim is a deadwood claim or the arbitration application before the 
High Court was time-barred. 
 
39. Having rejected the aforesaid two preliminary objections raised by the 
appellant, the question that now remains to be examined is whether, in the 
facts of the present case, the respondent could have invoked arbitration 
after having signed the consent letter dated 24.12.2018 and the advance 
discharge voucher dated 04.01.2019. i. Whether the execution of a discharge voucher towards the full and final 
settlement between the parties would operate as a bar to invoke 
arbitration? 
 
40. A contract between parties can come to an end by the performance thereof 
by both the parties, that is, by the fulfilment of all the obligations in terms 
of the original contract. This is referred to as discharge by performance. 
Alternatively, the contract may also be discharged by substitution of certain 
new obligations in place of the obligations contained in the original 
contract, and subsequent performance of the substituted obligations. The 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

substituted obligations are referred to as ‘accord’ and the discharge of the 
substituted obligations is referred to as ‘satisfaction’. It is referred to as 
discharge by “accord and satisfaction” or by “full and final settlement” in 
common parlance. 
 
41. A written confirmation of discharge by “accord and satisfaction” can also 
be in the form of a full and final discharge voucher or a No-Dues or a No-
Claims Certificate issued by one of the parties acknowledging that there 
are no outstanding claims and that such a party has received the full and 
final payment to its satisfaction. In the insurance sector, the general 
practice is that the insurer obtains undated discharge vouchers from the 
insured in advance by making the insured to sign on dotted lines before 
processing the payment in respect of the claims of the insured. 
 
42. The concept of discharge of a contract by “accord and satisfaction” is 
embodied in Section 63 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, which provides 
that the promisee may, inter alia, accept any substituted obligation in place 
of the original promise made to him, and such acceptance on the part of the 
promisee would amount to the discharge of the contract. Section 63 along 
with the illustrations is reproduced hereinbelow: 
“63. Promisee may dispense with or remit performance of 
promisee.—Every promisee may dispense with or remit, 
wholly or in part, the performance of the promisee made to 
him, or may extend the time for such performance, or may 
accept instead of it any satisfaction which he thinks fit. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

Illustrations 
 
(a) A promises to paint a picture for B. B afterwards forbids 
him to do so. A is no longer bound to perform the promise. 
 
(b) A owes B 5,000 rupees. A pays to B, and B accepts, in 
satisfaction of the whole debt, 2,000 rupees paid at the time 
and place at which the 5,000 rupees were payable. The whole 
debt is discharged. 
 
(c) A owes B 5,000 rupees. C pays to B 1,000 rupees, and B 
accepts them, in satisfaction of his claim on A. This payment 
is a discharge of the whole claim. 
 
(d) A owes B, under. a contract, a sum of money, the amount 
of which has not been ascertained. A, without ascertaining 
the amount, gives to B, and B, in satisfaction thereof, accepts, 
the sum of 2,000 rupees. This is a discharge of the whole debt, 
whatever may be its amount. 
 
(e) A owes B 2,000 rupees, and is also indebted to other 
creditors. A makes an arrangement with his creditors, 
including B, to pay them a [composition] of eight annas in 
the rupee upon their respective demands. Payment to B of 
1,000 rupees is a discharge of B’s demand.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
43. The Privy Council in Payana Reena Saminathan v. Pana Lana 
Palaniappa reported in (1913-14) 41 IA 142 defined the term “accord and 
satisfaction” as follows: 
 “… The ‘receipt’ given by the appellants and accepted by 
the respondent, and acted on by both parties proves 
conclusively that all the parties agreed to a settlement of all 
their existing disputes by the arrangement formulated in the 
‘receipt’. It is a clear example of what used to be well known 
as common law pleading as ‘accord and satisfaction by a 
substituted agreement’. No matter what were the respective 
rights of the parties inter se they are abandoned in 
consideration of the acceptance by all for a new agreement. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

The consequence is that when such an accord and 
satisfaction takes place the prior rights of the parties are 
extinguished. They have in fact been exchanged for the new 
rights; and the new agreement becomes a new departure, and 
the rights of all the parties are fully represented by it.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

44. As discussed in the preceding paragraphs, the appellant has contested that 
once a full and final settlement was arrived at between the parties, the 
insurance contract between the parties could be said to have been 
discharged. Once the contract stood discharged, it was not open to the 
respondent to resile from the settlement and invoke the arbitration clause, 
as no obligations remained to be fulfilled under the contract pursuant to the 
discharge of the contract. In other words, it is the contention of the 
appellant that as no arbitrable disputes remained after a full and final 
settlement was arrived at, there was nothing left to be referred to the 
arbitrator and hence the appointment of arbitrator being an exercise in 
futility, should not have been undertaken by the High Court. 
 
45. To answer the aforesaid contention of the appellant, the question that needs 
to be considered is whether the “full and final settlement” of claims arising 
under a contract, is by itself sufficient to preclude any future arbitration in 
respect of such settled claims? 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

46. It is indeed so that once a contract has been fully performed, it can be said 
to have been discharged by performance. Once the contract has been 
discharged by performance, neither any right to seek performance, nor any 
obligation to perform remains under it. 
 
47. However, whether there has been a discharge of contract or not is a mixed 
question of law and fact, and if any dispute arises as to whether a contract 
has been discharged or not, such a dispute is arbitrable as per the 
mechanism prescribed under the arbitration agreement contained in the 
underlying contract. a. Whether the arbitration agreement contained in a substantive 
contract survives even after the underlying contract is discharged by 
“accord and satisfaction”? 
 
48. Arbitration for the purpose of resolving any dispute pertaining to any claim 
which has been “fully and finally settled” between the parties can only be 
invoked if the arbitration agreement survives even after the discharge of 
the substantive contract. 
 
49. The arbitration agreement, by virtue of the presumption of separability, 
survives the principal contract in which it was contained. Section 16(1) of 
the Act, 1996 which is based on Article 16 of the UNCITRAL Model Law 
on International Commercial Arbitration, 1985 (hereinafter, “Model 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

Law”) embodies the presumption of separability. There are two aspects to 
the doctrine of separability as contained in the Act, 1996: - 
i. 
An arbitration clause forming part of a contract is treated as an 
agreement independent of the other terms of the contract. ii. 
A decision by the arbitral tribunal declaring the contract as null and 
void does not, ipso facto, make the arbitration clause invalid. 
 
50. The doctrine of separability was not part of the legislative scheme under 
the Arbitration Act, 1940. However, with the enactment of the Act, 1996, 
the doctrine was expressly incorporated. This Court in National 
Agricultural Coop. Marketing Federation India Ltd. v. Gains Trading 
Ltd. reported in (2007), while interpreting Section 16 of the 
Act, 1996, held that even if the underlying contract comes to an end, the 
arbitration agreement contained in such a contract survives for the purpose 
of resolution of disputes between the parties. 
 
51. The fundamental premise governing the doctrine of separability is that the 
arbitration agreement is incorporated by the parties to a contract with the 
mutual intention to settle any disputes that may arise under or in respect of 
or with regard to the underlying substantive contract, and thus by its 
inherent nature is independent of the substantive contract. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

52. In Heyman v. Darwins Ltd. reported in [1942] AC 356, it was held by the 
House of Lords that the repudiation or breach of a contract does not 
extinguish the arbitration agreement as it survives for the purpose of 
resolution of any outstanding claims the breach. It was 
observed thus: 
"I am, accordingly, of the opinion that what is commonly 
called repudiation or total breach of a contract, whether 
acquiesced in by the other party or not, does not abrogate the 
contract, though it may relieve the injured party of the duty 
of further fulfilling the obligations which he has by the 
contract undertaken to the repudiating party. The contract is 
not put out of existence, though all further performance of the 
obligations undertaken by each party in favour of the other 
may cease. It survives for the purpose of measuring the 
claims the breach, and the arbitration clause 
survives for determining the mode of their settlement. The 
purposes of the contract have failed, but the arbitration 
clause is not one of the purposes of the contract." 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
53. Thus, even if the contracting parties, in pursuance of a settlement, agree to 
discharge each other of any obligations arising under the contract, this does 
not ipso facto mean that the arbitration agreement too would come to an 
end, unless the parties expressly agree to do the same. The intention of the 
parties in discharging a contract by “accord and satisfaction” is to relieve 
each other of the existing or any new obligations under the contract. Such 
a discharge of obligations under the substantive contract cannot be 
construed to mean that the parties also intended to relieve each other of 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

their obligation to settle any dispute pertaining to the original contract 
through arbitration. 
 
54. Although ordinarily no arbitrable disputes may subsist after execution of a 
full and final settlement, yet any dispute pertaining to the full and final 
settlement itself, by necessary implication being a dispute or 
in relation to or under the substantive contract, would not be precluded 
from reference to arbitration as the arbitration agreement contained in the 
original contract continues to be in existence even after the parties have 
discharged the original contract by “accord and satisfaction”. 
 
55. The aforesaid position of law has also been consistently followed by this 
Court as evident from many decisions. In Boghara Polyfab (supra), while 
rejecting the contention that the mere act of signing a “full and final 
discharge voucher” would act as a bar to arbitration, this Court held as 
follows: 
“44. … None of the three cases relied on by the appellant lay 
down a proposition that mere execution of a full and final 
settlement receipt or a discharge voucher is a bar to 
arbitration, even when the validity thereof is challenged by 
the claimant on the ground of fraud, coercion or undue 
influence. Nor do they lay down a proposition that even if the 
discharge of contract is not genuine or legal, the claims 
cannot be referred to arbitration. […]” 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

56. Again, in R.L. Kalathia and Company v. State of Gujarat reported in 
(2011), it was re-iterated that the mere issuance of the no-dues 
certificate would not operate as a bar against the raising of genuine claims 
even after the date of issuance of such certificate. The relevant observations 
are extracted hereinbelow: 
“13. From the above conclusions of this Court, the following 
principles emerge: 
 
(1) Merely because the contractor has issued "no-dues 
certificate", if there is an acceptable claim, the court cannot 
reject the same on the ground of issuance of "no-dues 
certificate". 
 
(ii) Inasmuch as it is common that unless a discharge 
certificate is given in advance by the contractor, payment of 
bills are generally delayed, hence such a clause in the 
contract would not be an absolute bar to a contractor raising 
claims which are genuine at a later date even after 
submission of such "no-claim certificate". 
 
(iii) Even after execution of full and final discharge 
voucher/receipt by one of the parties, if the said party is able 
to establish that he is entitled to further amount for which he 
is having adequate materials, he is not barred from claiming 
such amount merely because of acceptance of the final bill by 
mentioning "without prejudice" or by issuing "no-dues 
certificate". 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
57. The position that emerges from the aforesaid discussion is that there is no 
rule of an absolute kind which precludes arbitration in cases where a full 
and final settlement has been arrived at. In Boghara Polyfab (supra), 
discussing in the context of a case similar to the one at hand, wherein the 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

discharge voucher was alleged to have been obtained on ground of 
coercion, it was observed that the discharge of a contract by full and final 
settlement by issuance of a discharge voucher or a no-dues certificate 
extends only to those vouchers or certificates which are validly and 
voluntarily executed. Thus, if the party said to have executed the discharge 
voucher or the no dues certificate alleges that the execution was on account 
of fraud, coercion or undue influence exercised by the other party and is 
able to establish such an allegation, then the discharge of the contract by 
virtue of issuance of such a discharge voucher or no dues certificate is 
rendered void and cannot be acted upon. 
 
58. It was further held in Boghara Polyfab (supra) that the mere execution of 
a full and final settlement receipt or a discharge voucher would not by itself 
operate as a bar to arbitration when the validity of such a receipt or voucher 
is challenged by the claimant on the ground of fraud, coercion or undue 
influence. In other words, where the parties are not ad idem over accepting 
the execution of the no-claim certificate or the discharge voucher, such 
disputed discharge voucher may itself give rise to an arbitrable dispute. 
 
59. Once the full and final settlement of the original contract itself becomes a 
matter of dispute and disagreement between the parties, then such a dispute 
can be categorised as one arising “in relation to” or “in connection with” 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

or “upon” the original contract which can be referred to arbitration in 
accordance with the arbitration clause contained in the original contract, 
notwithstanding the plea that there was a full and final settlement between 
the parties. ii. What is the scope and standard of judicial scrutiny that an application 
under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 can be subjected to when a plea of 
“accord and satisfaction” is taken by the defendant? 
 
60. Whether the issue as regards the validity of the full and final settlement is 
to be determined by the referral court acting under Section 11 of the Act, 
1996 or by the arbitral tribunal has been considered in a number of 
decisions of this Court. Some of these decisions have also delineated the 
extent and standard of enquiry which can be undertaken at the stage of 
Section 11 petition. We shall discuss these decisions in detail for the benefit 
of the exposition of the law on the subject. 
 
61. One of the earliest decisions dealing with the issue of “full and final 
settlement” in the specific context of an application for appointment of 
arbitrator under the Arbitration Act, 1940 was rendered by a two-Judge 
Bench of this Court in Damodar Valley Corporation v. K.K. Kar reported 
in (1974). It was observed, inter alia, that any dispute arising in 
relation to the validity of the discharge by “accord and satisfaction” would 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

be covered by the arbitration agreement contained in the original contract, 
and thus should be referred to the arbitral tribunal for determination. The 
relevant observations are extracted hereinbelow: 
“4. On these facts the short question for determination is: 
where one of the parties refers a dispute or disputes to 
arbitration and the other party takes a plea that there was a 
final settlement of all claims, is the Court, on an application 
under Sections 9(b) and 33 of the Act, entitled to enquire into 
the truth and validity of the averment as to whether there was 
or was not a final settlement on the ground that if that was 
proved, it would bar a reference to the arbitration inasmuch 
as the arbitration clause itself would perish. xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
6. It appears to us that the question whether there has been 
a full and final settlement of a claim under the contract is 
itself a dispute arising “upon” or “in relation to” or “in 
connection with” the contract. These words are wide enough 
to cover the dispute sought to be referred. The respondent's 
contention is that the contract has been repudiated by the 
appellant unilaterally as a result of which he had no option 
but to accept that repudiation because if the appellant was 
not ready to receive the goods he could not supply them to 
him or force him to receive them. In the circumstances, while 
accepting the repudiation, without conceding that the 
appellant had a right to repudiate the contract, he could 
claim damages for breach of contract. Such a claim for 
damages is a dispute or difference which arises between 
himself and the appellant and is ‘upon’ or ‘in relation to’ or 
‘in connection with’ the contract. 
 
7. The contention that has been canvassed before us is that 
as there has been a full and final settlement under the 
contract, the rights and obligations under the contract do not 
subsist and consequently the arbitration clause also perishes 
along with the settlement. If so, the dispute whether there has 
or has not been a settlement cannot be the subject of an 
arbitration. There is, in our view, a basic fallacy underlying 
this submission. A contract is the creature of an agreement 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

between the parties and where the parties under the terms of 
the contract agree to incorporate an arbitration clause, that 
clause stands apart from the rights and obligations under that 
contract, as it has been incorporated with the object of 
providing a machinery for the settlement of disputes arising 
in relation to or in connection with that contract. The 
questions of unilateral repudiation of the rights and 
obligations under the contract or of a full and final settlement 
of the contract relate to the performance or discharge of the 
contract. Far from putting an end to the arbitration clause, 
they fall within the purview of it. A repudiation by one party 
alone does not terminate the contract. It takes two to end it, 
and hence it follows that as the contract subsists for the 
determination of the rights and obligations of the parties, the 
arbitration clause also survives. This is not a case where the 
plea is that the contract is void, illegal or fraudulent etc. in 
which case, the entire contract along with the arbitration 
clause is non est, or voidable. […]” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
62. In Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. vs. Amar Nath Bhan Prakash reported 
in (1982) it was observed by this Court that the question 
whether there was discharge of the contract by “accord and satisfaction” or 
not is a dispute liable to be resolved by the arbitral tribunal and the court 
ought to appoint an arbitrator in such matters when a party approaches it 
seeking relief for the same. It was observed thus: 
“1. It appears from the order of the High Court impugned in 
the appeal that the High Court has not correctly appreciated 
the position that the question whether there was discharge of 
the contract by accord and satisfaction or not, is a dispute 
 the contract and is liable to be referred to 
arbitration and hence the application of the Respondent 
under Section 20 of the Indian Arbitration Act should have 
been allowed and the matters in dispute between the parties, 
including the question whether or not there was discharge of 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

the contract by accord and satisfaction should have been 
referred to arbitration.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
63. However, the position on the issue witnessed a change with subsequent 
decisions of this Court in P.K. Ramaiah and Company v. Chairman and 
Managing Director, National Thermal Power Corporation reported in 
1994 Supp (3) SCC 126 and Nathani Steels Ltd. v. Associated 
Constructions reported in 1995 Supp (3) SCC 324. 
 
64. In P.K. Ramaiah (supra), the decision in Damodar Valley (supra) was 
distinguished on facts, and it was held that once “full and final settlement” 
is arrived at, no arbitral dispute subsists, and hence there can be no referral 
to arbitration. The relevant observations made therein are as follows: 
“6. [….] If there is an arbitrable dispute, it shall be referred 
to the named arbitrator. But there must exist a subsisting 
dispute. Admittedly the appellant acknowledged in writing 
accepting the correctness of the measurements as well as the 
final settlement and received the amount. Thereafter no 
arbitrable dispute arise for reference. xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
8. […] Accordingly, we hold that the appellant having 
acknowledged 
the 
settlement 
and 
also 
accepted 
measurements and having received the amount in full and 
final settlement of the claim, there is accord and satisfaction. 
There is no existing arbitrable dispute for reference to the 
arbitration. The High Court is, therefore, right in its finding 
in this behalf. The appeals are dismissed but in the 
circumstances without costs.” 
 
65. In Nathani Steels (supra), relying upon the decision in P.K. Ramaiah 
(supra) it was observed thus: 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

“3. […] It would thus be seen that once there is a full and 
final settlement in respect of any particular dispute or 
difference in relation to a matter covered under the 
Arbitration clause in the contract and that dispute or 
difference is finally settled by and between the parties, such 
a dispute or difference does not remain to be an arbitrable 
dispute and the Arbitration clause cannot be invoked even 
though for certain other matters, the contract may be in 
subsistence. […]” 

66. It is important to note that the aforesaid four decisions were rendered in the 
context of appointment of arbitrator under the Arbitration Act, 1940. With 
the introduction of the Act, 1996, a different regime came into being insofar 
as the question of appointment of arbitrator is concerned. In Jayesh 
Engineering Works v New India Assurance Co. Ltd. reported in (2000), dealing with an application for appointment of arbitrator 
under the Act, 1996, a position similar to the one taken in Amar Nath 
(supra) was taken by this Court. It was held thus: 
“1. […] Whether any amount is due to be paid and how far 
the claim made by the Appellant is tenable are matters to be 
considered by the Arbitrator. In fact, whether the contract 
has been fully worked out and whether the payments have 
been made in full and final settlement are questions to be 
considered by the Arbitrator when there is a dispute 
regarding the same. […]” 

67. While the aspect of “accord and satisfaction” in the specific context of the 
appointment of arbitrator has been discussed by this Court on numerous 
occasions, we also deem it necessary to refer to and discuss some important 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

decisions touching upon the contours of the power of the referral court 
under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 as they directly affect the issue at hand. 
 
68. The role to be played by the Chief Justice or his designate in the 
appointment of an arbitrator has been at the heart of number of decisions 
of this Court. In Konkan Railway Corpn. Ltd. v. Rani Construction (P) 
Ltd. reported in (2002), a five-Judge Bench of this Court 
observed that the power exercised by the referral court under Section 11 of 
the Act, 1996 is an administrative power and thus the Chief Justice or his 
designate do not have to decide any preliminary issue at that stage. 
Accordingly, it held that any issues pertaining to non-arbitrability, validity 
and existence of the arbitration agreement are to be decided by the 
arbitrator. 
 
69. The aforesaid view occupied the field till a seven-Judge Bench of this 
Court in SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd. reported in (2005), 
characterised the power conferred upon the Chief Justice or his designate 
under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 as a judicial power and not merely 
administrative power. This Court held that the Chief Justice or his 
designate had the right to decide all preliminary issues at the referral stage 
under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996. The Court took such view on the 
premise that Section 16 of the Act, 1996, which empowers the Arbitral 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

Tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction, applies only when the parties go 
before the Tribunal without having taken recourse to Sections 8 or 11 
respectively of the Act, 1996 first. 
 
70. In Boghara Polyfab (supra), this Court examined the extent of judicial 
interference at the stage of referral under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 as 
laid down in SBP & Co. (supra) and elucidated three categories of issues 
which could arise before the referral court as follows: 
“22.1. The issues (first category) which the Chief Justice/his 
designate will have to decide are: 
(a) Whether the party making the application has approached 
the appropriate High Court. 
(b) Whether there is an arbitration agreement and whether 
the party who has applied under Section 11 of the Act, is a 
party to such an agreement. 
 
22.2. The issues (second category) which the Chief 
Justice/his designate may choose to decide (or leave them to 
the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal) are: 
(a) Whether the claim is a dead (long-barred) claim or a live 
claim. 

Whether 
the 
parties 
have 
concluded 
the 
contract/transaction by recording satisfaction of their mutual 
rights and obligation or by receiving the final payment 
without objection. 
 
22.3. The issues (third category) which the Chief Justice/his 
designate should leave exclusively to the Arbitral Tribunal 
are: 
(i) Whether a claim made falls within the arbitration clause 
(as for example, a matter which is reserved for final decision 
of a departmental authority and excepted or excluded from 
arbitration). 
(ii) Merits or any claim involved in the arbitration.” 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

71. The decision in Boghara Polyfab (supra) was followed in a number of 
subsequent decisions of this Court. In Union of India v. Master 
Construction Co. reported in (2011), this Court held that while 
deciding an application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996, the referral 
court must satisfy itself that the allegations raised against the full and final 
discharge voucher were at least prima facie bona fide and genuine. 
Applying the said reasoning to the facts before it, this Court held that the 
dispute was not a bona fide one and declined to refer the matter to 
arbitration. The relevant extracts are reproduced hereinbelow: 
“18. In our opinion, there is no rule of the absolute kind. In 
a case where the claimant contends that a discharge voucher 
or a no-claim certificate as been obtained by fraud and the 
other side contests the correctness, the Chief Justice must 
look into this aspect to find out at least, prima facie whether 
or not the dispute is bona fide and genuine. Where the dispute 
raised by the claimant with regard to validity of the discharge 
voucher or no-claim certificate or settlement agreement, 
prima facie, appears to be lacking in credibility, there may 
not be a necessity to refer the dispute for arbitration at all. xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
23. The present case in our opinion appears to be a case 
falling in the category of exception noted in Boghara 
Polyfab[(2009) ](p.284, para 25). As to the 
financial duress or coercion, nothing of this kind is 
established prima facie. Mere allegation that no-claim 
certificates have been obtained under financial duress and 
coercion, without there being anything more to suggest that, 
does not lead to an arbitrable dispute. The conduct of the 
contractor clearly shows that “no-claim certificates” were 
given by it voluntarily, the contractor accepted the amount 
voluntarily and the contract was discharged voluntarily.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

72. In New India Assurance (supra), this Court, relying upon Boghara 
Polyfab (supra) and Master Construction Co. (supra), upon examining the 
Section 11 petition held that a mere bald assertion of fraud, undue influence 
or coercion would not warrant referral of disputes to arbitration, if the 
matter had already been fully and finally settled between the parties. The 
relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow: 
“10. In our considered view, the plea raised by the 
Respondent is bereft of any details and particulars, and 
cannot be anything but a bald assertion. Given the fact that 
there was no protest or demur raised around the time or soon 
after the letter of subrogation was signed, that the notice 
dated 31.03.2011 itself was nearly after three weeks and that 
the financial condition of the Respondent was not so 
precarious that it was left with no alternative but to accept 
the terms as suggested, we are of the firm view that the 
discharge in the present case and signing of letter of 
subrogation were not because of exercise of any undue 
influence. Such discharge and signing of letter of subrogation 
was voluntary and free from any coercion or undue influence. 
In the circumstances, we hold that upon execution of the letter 
of subrogation, there was full and final settlement of the 
claim. Since our answer to the question, whether there was 
really accord and satisfaction, is in the affirmative, in our 
view no arbitrable dispute existed so as to exercise power 
Under Section 11 of the Act. The High Court was not 
therefore justified in exercising power Under Section 11 of 
the Act.” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 
73. The net effect of the decisions in SBP & Co. (supra) and Boghara Polyfab 
(supra) was that the scope for interference available to the referral courts 
when acting under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 was substantially expanded. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

The referral courts were conferred with the discretion to conduct mini trials 
and indulge in the appreciation of evidence on the issues concerned with 
the subject matter of arbitration. The Law Commission of India in its 246th 
report took note of the issue of significant delays being caused to the 
arbitral process due to enlarged scope of judicial interference at the stage 
of appointment of arbitrator and suggested as follows: 
i. 
First, that the power of appointment conferred upon the Chief 
Justice be devolved on to the Supreme Court and the High Court, as 
the case may be; and 
ii. 
Secondly, the power of appointment under Section 11 be clarified to 
be an administrative power and not a judicial one. iii. 
Thirdly, the scope of interference under Sections 8 and 11 
respectively of the Act, 1996 be restricted only to those cases where 
the court finds that no arbitration agreement exists or is null and 
void. 
 
74. The Law Commission suggested the insertion of Section 11(6-A) in the 
Act, 1996. The aforesaid recommendations of the Commission were taken 
note of by the Parliament and accordingly the Act, 1996 was amended in 
2015 to incorporate Section 11(6-A), which reads thus: 
“(6A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High 
Court, while considering any application under sub-
section (4) or 
sub-section (5) or 
sub-section (6), 
shall, 
notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any Court, 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

confine to the examination of the existence of an arbitration 
agreement.” 
 
75. Interestingly, Section 11(6-A) was omitted by the 2019 amendment to the 
Act, 1996 on the basis of a report of the High-Level Committee to Review 
the Institutionalisation of Arbitration Mechanism in India. However, in the 
absence of the omission being notified, Section 11(6-A) of the Act, 1996 
continues to remain on the statute book and thus has to be given effect as 
such. 
 
76. The impact of the addition of Section 11(6-A) was elaborately discussed 
by this Court in Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd reported in 
(2017) as follows: 
“48. […] From a reading of Section 11(6-A), the intention of 
the legislature is crystal clear i.e. the court should and need 
only look into one aspect—the existence of an arbitration 
agreement. What are the factors for deciding as to whether 
there is an arbitration agreement is the next question. The 
resolution to that is simple—it needs to be seen if the 
agreement contains a clause which provides for arbitration 
pertaining to the disputes which have arisen between the 
parties to the agreement. xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
59. The scope of the power under Section 11(6) of the 1996 
Act was considerably wide in view of the decisions in SBP 
and Co. [(2005) ] and Boghara Polyfab [(2009) ]. This position continued till the amendment 
brought about in 2015. After the amendment, all that the 
courts need to see is whether an arbitration agreement 
exists—nothing more, nothing less. The legislative policy and 
purpose is essentially to minimise the Court's intervention at 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

the stage of appointing the arbitrator and this intention as 
incorporated in Section 11(6-A) ought to be respected.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
77. Despite the decision in Duro Felguera (supra), this Court in United India 
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Antique Art Exports Pvt. Ltd. reported in (2019), while dealing with the issue of “full and final settlement” in the 
context of appointment of an arbitrator, held that mere bald allegation by a 
party that the discharge voucher was obtained under coercion or undue 
influence would not entitle it to seek referral of the dispute to arbitration 
unless it is able to produce prima facie evidence of the same during the 
course of proceedings under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996. Important 
paragraphs from the said decision are extracted hereinbelow: 
“15. From the proposition which has been laid down by this 
Court, what reveals is that a mere plea of fraud, coercion or 
undue influence in itself is not enough and the party who 
alleged is under obligation to prima facie establish the same 
by placing satisfactory material on record before the Chief 
Justice or his Designate to exercise power under Section 
11(6) of the Act, which has been considered by this Court 
in New India Assurance Co. Ltd. case [...] 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
17. It is true that there cannot be a rule of its kind that mere 
allegation of discharge voucher or no claim certificate being 
obtained by fraud/coercion/undue influence practised by 
other party in itself is sufficient for appointment of the 
arbitrator unless the claimant who alleges that execution of 
the discharge agreement or no claim certificate was obtained 
on account of fraud/coercion/undue influence practised by 
the other party is able to produce prima facie evidence to 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

substantiate the same, the correctness thereof may be open 
for the Chief Justice/his Designate to look into this aspect to 
find out at least prima facie whether the dispute is bona fide 
and genuine in taking a decision to invoke Section 11(6) of 
the Act. 
 
18. In the instant case, the facts are not in dispute that for the 
two incidents of fire on 25-9-2013 and 25-10-2013, the 
appellant Company based on the Surveyor's report sent 
emails on 5-5-2016 and 24-6-2016 for settlement of the 
claims for both the fires dated 25-9-2013 and 25-10-2013 
which was responded by the respondent through email on the 
same date itself providing all the necessary information to the 
regional office of the Company and also issued the discharge 
voucher in full and final settlement with accord and 
satisfaction. Thereafter, on 12-7-2016, the respondent 
desired certain information with details, that too was 
furnished and for the first time on 27-7-2016, it took a U-turn 
and raised a voice of undue influence/coercion being used by 
the appellant stating that it being in financial distress was left 
with no option than to proceed to sign on the dotted lines. As 
observed, the phrase in itself is not sufficient unless there is 
a prima facie evidence to establish the allegation of 
coercion/undue influence, which is completely missing in the 
instant case. 
 
19. In the given facts and circumstances, we are satisfied that 
the discharge and signing the letter of subrogation was not 
because of any undue influence or coercion as being claimed 
by the respondent and we find no difficulty to hold that upon 
execution of the letter of subrogation, the claim was settled 
with due accord and satisfaction leaving no arbitral dispute 
to be examined by an arbitrator to be appointed under 
Section 11(6) of the Act. 
 
20. The submission of the learned counsel for the respondent 
that after insertion of sub-section (6-A) to Section 11 of the 
Amendment Act, 2015 the jurisdiction of this Court is 
denuded and the limited mandate of the Court is to examine 
the factum of existence of an arbitration and relied on the 
judgment in Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram Port 
Ltd. [Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd., (2017) 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024: (2017) 4 SCC (Civ) 764] The exposition in this 
decision is a general observation about the effect of the 
amended provisions which came to be examined under 
reference to six arbitrable agreements (five agreements for 
works and one corporate guarantee) and each agreement 
contains a provision for arbitration and there was serious 
dispute between the parties in reference to constitution of 
Arbitral Tribunal whether there has to be Arbitral Tribunal 
pertaining to each agreement. In the facts and circumstances, 
this Court took note of sub-section (6-A) introduced by the 
Amendment Act, 2015 to Section 11 of the Act and in that 
context observed that the preliminary disputes are to be 
examined by the arbitrator and are not for the Court to be 
examined within the limited scope available for appointment 
of arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act. Suffice it to say 
that appointment of an arbitrator is a judicial power and is 
not a mere administrative function leaving some degree of 
judicial intervention; when it comes to the question to 
examine the existence of a prima facie arbitration agreement, 
it is always necessary to ensure that the dispute resolution 
process does not become unnecessarily protracted. 
 
21. In the instant case, prima facie no dispute subsisted after 
the discharge voucher being signed by the respondent 
without any demur or protest and claim being finally settled 
with accord and satisfaction and after 11 weeks of the 
settlement of claim a letter was sent on 27-7-2016 for the first 
time raising a voice in the form of protest that the discharge 
voucher was signed under undue influence and coercion with 
no supportive prima facie evidence being placed on record in 
absence thereof, it must follow that the claim had been settled 
with accord and satisfaction leaving no arbitral dispute 
subsisting under the agreement to be referred to the 
arbitrator for adjudication. 
 
22. In our considered view, the High Court has committed a 
manifest error in passing the impugned order and adopting a 
mechanical process in appointing the arbitrator without any 
supportive evidence on record to prima facie substantiate 
that an arbitral dispute subsisted under the agreement which 
needed to be referred to the arbitrator for adjudication.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

78. It is pertinent to observe that in Antique Art (supra) the Court placed 
reliance on the decisions in Master Construction (supra) and New India 
Assurance (supra). Both these decisions were delivered before the 
insertion of Section 11(6-A) by the 2015 amendment to the Act, 1996. 
Thus, this Court in Antique Art (supra) failed to take into account the 
legislative intent behind the introduction of Section 11(6-A), which was 
also succinctly explained in Duro Felguera (supra). 
 
79. A three-Judge Bench of this Court in Mayavati Trading Private Limited v. 
Pradyut Deb Burman reported in (2019) overruled the decision 
in Antique Art (supra) and clarified that the position of law existing prior 
to the 2015 amendment to the Act, 1996 under which referral courts had 
the power to examine the aspect of “accord and satisfaction” had come to 
be legislatively overruled by Section 11(6-A) of the Act, 1996. The Court, 
while affirming the reasoning given in Duro Felguera (supra), observed 
thus: 
“10. This being the position, it is clear that the law prior to 
the 2015 Amendment that has been laid down by this Court, 
which would have included going into whether accord and 
satisfaction has taken place, has now been legislatively 
overruled. This being the position, it is difficult to agree with 
the reasoning contained in the aforesaid judgment [United 
India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Antique Art Exports (P) Ltd., 
(2019): (2019) 2 SCC (Civ) 785], as Section 
11(6-A) is confined to the examination of the existence of an 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

arbitration agreement and is to be understood in the narrow 
sense as has been laid down in the judgment in Duro 
Felguera, SA [Duro Felguera, SA v. Gangavaram Port Ltd., 
(2017): (2017) 4 SCC (Civ) 764] — see paras 48 
& 59 
11. We, therefore, overrule the judgment in Antique Art 
Exports (P) Ltd. [United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Antique 
Art Exports (P) Ltd., (2019): (2019) 2 SCC (Civ) 
785] as not having laid down the correct law but dismiss this 
appeal for the reason given in para 3 above.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 
 
80. A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Uttarakhand Purv Sainik Kalyan 
Nigam Ltd. v. Northern Coal Field Ltd. reported in (2020) was 
called upon to determine the scope of judicial interference at the stage of 
Section 11(6) petition wherein the plea of claims being time barred was 
taken by the defendant. Referring to the principal of competence-
competence enshrined in Section 16 of the Act, 1996 and the legislative 
intent behind the introduction of Section 11(6-A) to Act, 1996 by the 2015 
amendment, this Court held that the issue of limitation being a mixed 
question of law and fact should be best left to the tribunal to decide. The 
referral court should restrict its examination to whether an arbitration 
agreement between the parties exists. The relevant observations are 
reproduced hereinbelow: 
“7.10. In view of the legislative mandate contained in Section 
11(6-A), the Court is now required only to examine the 
existence of the arbitration agreement. All other preliminary 
or threshold issues are left to be decided by the arbitrator 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

under Section 16, which enshrines the kompetenz-kompetenz 
principle. 
 
7.11. The doctrine of “kompetenz-kompetenz”, also referred 
to as “compétence-compétence”, or “compétence de la 
recognized”, implies that the Arbitral Tribunal is empowered 
and has the competence to rule on its own jurisdiction, 
including determining all jurisdictional issues, and the 
existence or validity of the arbitration agreement. This 
doctrine is intended to minimise judicial intervention, so that 
the arbitral process is not thwarted at the threshold, when a 
preliminary objection is raised by one of the parties. The 
doctrine of kompetenz-kompetenz is, however, subject to the 
exception i.e. when the arbitration agreement itself is 
impeached as being procured by fraud or deception. This 
exception would also apply to cases where the parties in the 
process of negotiation, may have entered into a draft 
agreement as an antecedent step prior to executing the final 
contract. […]7.12. The legislative intent underlying the 1996 
Act is party autonomy and minimal judicial intervention in 
the arbitral process. Under this regime, once the arbitrator 
is appointed, or the tribunal is constituted, all issues and 
objections are to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal. 
 
7.13. In view of the provisions of Section 16, and the 
legislative policy to restrict judicial intervention at the pre-
reference stage, the issue of limitation would require to be 
decided by the arbitrator. Sub-section (1) of Section 16 
provides that the Arbitral Tribunal may rule on its own 
jurisdiction, “including any objections” with respect to the 
existence or validity of the arbitration agreement. Section 16 
is as an inclusive provision, which would comprehend all 
preliminary issues touching upon the jurisdiction of the 
Arbitral Tribunal. The issue of limitation is a jurisdictional 
issue, which would be required to be decided by the 
arbitrator under Section 16, and not the High Court at the 
pre-reference stage under Section 11 of the Act. Once the 
existence of the arbitration agreement is not disputed, all 
issues, including jurisdictional objections are to be decided 
by the arbitrator. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

7.14. In the present case, the issue of limitation was raised 
by the respondent Company to oppose the appointment of 
the arbitrator under Section 11 before the High Court. 
Limitation is a mixed question of fact and law. In ITW 
Signode 

Ltd. v. CCE [ITW 
Signode 

Ltd. v. CCE, (2004) ] a three-Judge Bench of this 
Court held that the question of limitation involves a question 
of jurisdiction. The findings on the issue of limitation would 
be a jurisdictional issue. Such a jurisdictional issue is to be 
determined having regard to the facts and the law. Reliance 
is also placed on the judgment of this Court in NTPC 
Ltd. v. Siemens Atkeingesellschaft [NTPC Ltd. v. Siemens 
Atkeingesellschaft, (2007) ], wherein it was held 
that the Arbitral Tribunal would deal with limitation under 
Section 16 of the 1996 Act. If the tribunal finds that the claim 
is a dead one, or that the claim was barred by limitation, the 
adjudication of these issues would be on the merits of the 
claim. Under sub-section (5) of Section 16, the tribunal has 
the obligation to decide the plea; and if it rejects the plea, 
the arbitral proceedings would continue, and the tribunal 
would make the award. Under sub-section (6) a party 
aggrieved by such an arbitral award may challenge the 
award under Section 34. […]” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
81. In Union of India v. Pradeep Vinod Construction Company reported in 
2019 INSC 1241 this Court left the issue of “accord and satisfaction” to be 
decided by the arbitrator and held thus: 
“16. […] On behalf of the Respondent, it has been seriously 
disputed that issuance of "No Claim" certificate as to the 
supplementary agreement recording accord and satisfaction 
as on 06.05.2014 (CA No. 6400/2016) and issuance of "No 
Claim" certificate on 28.08.2014 (CA No. 6420/2016) that 
they were issued under compulsion and due to undue 
influence by the railway authorities. We are not inclined to 
go into the merits of the contention of the parties. It is for the 
arbitrator to consider the claim of the Respondent(s) and the 
stand of the Appellant-railways. This contention raised by the 
parties are left open to be raised before the arbitrator.” 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

82. Thereafter, a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Vidya Drolia & Ors v. 
Durga Trading Corporation reported in (2021) extensively dealt 
with the scope of powers of the referral court under Section 8 and 11 
respectively of the Act, 1996. It held, inter alia, that Sections 8 and 11 of 
the Act, 1996 are complementary to each other and thus the aspect of 
‘existence’ of the arbitration agreement, as specified under Section 11 
should be seen along with its ‘validity’ as specified under Section 8. This 
Court also held that the exercise of power of prima facie judicial review to 
examine the existence of arbitration agreement also includes going into the 
validity of the arbitration agreement and this does not go against the 
principles of competence-competence and the presumption of separability. 
It further held that the prima facie review of the aspects related to non-
arbitrability may also be undertaken. The relevant observations are 
extracted hereinbelow: 
“147.4. Most jurisdictions accept and require prima facie 
review by the court on non-arbitrability aspects at the 
referral stage. 
 
147.5. Sections 8 and 11 of the Arbitration Act are 
complementary provisions as was held in Patel Engg. 
Ltd. [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) ] The 
object and purpose behind the two provisions is identical to 
compel and force parties to abide by their contractual 
understanding. This being so, the two provisions should be 
read as laying down similar standard and not as laying down 
different and separate parameters. Section 11 does not 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

prescribe any standard of judicial review by the court for 
determining whether an arbitration agreement is in 
existence. Section 8 states that the judicial review at the stage 
of reference is prima facie and not final. Prima facie standard 
equally applies when the power of judicial review is exercised 
by the court under Section 11 of the Arbitration Act. 
Therefore, we can read the mandate of valid arbitration 
agreement in Section 8 into mandate of Section 11, that is, 
“existence of an arbitration agreement”. 
 
147.6. Exercise of power of prima facie judicial review of 
existence as including validity is justified as a court is the 
first forum that examines and decides the request for the 
referral. Absolute “hands off” approach would be 
counterproductive and harm arbitration, as an alternative 
dispute resolution mechanism. Limited, yet effective 
intervention is acceptable as it does not obstruct but 
effectuates arbitration. 
 
147.7. Exercise of the limited prima facie review does not in 
any way interfere with the principle of competence-
competence and separation as to obstruct arbitration 
proceedings but ensures that vexatious and frivolous matters 
get over at the initial stage. 
 
147.8. Exercise of prima facie power of judicial review as to 
the validity of the arbitration agreement would save costs and 
check harassment of objecting parties when there is clearly 
no justification and a good reason not to accept plea of non-
arbitrability. […] 
 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
 
147.11. The interpretation appropriately balances the 
allocation of the decision-making authority between the court 
at the referral stage and the arbitrators' primary jurisdiction 
to decide disputes on merits. The court as the judicial forum 
of the first instance can exercise prima facie test jurisdiction 
to screen and knock down ex facie meritless, frivolous and 
dishonest litigation. Limited jurisdiction of the courts ensures 
expeditious, alacritous and efficient disposal when required 
at the referral stage.” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

83. This Court further held that the referral court, while exercising its powers 
under Sections 8 and 11 respectively of the Act, 1996 could exercise its 
powers to screen and knock down ex facie meritless, frivolous and 
dishonest litigation so as to ensure expeditious and efficient disposal at the 
referral stage. 
“148. Section 43(1) of the Arbitration Act states that the 
Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to arbitrations as it applies 
to court proceedings. Sub-section (2) states that for the 
purposes of the Arbitration Act and Limitation Act, 
arbitration shall be deemed to have commenced on the date 
referred to in Section 21. Limitation law is procedural and 
normally disputes, being factual, would be for the arbitrator 
to decide guided by the facts found and the law applicable. 
The court at the referral stage can interfere only when it is 
manifest that the claims are ex facie time-barred and dead, 
or there is no subsisting dispute. All other cases should be 
referred to the Arbitral Tribunal for decision on merits. 
Similar would be the position in case of disputed “no-claim 
certificate” or defence on the plea of novation and “accord 
and satisfaction”. As observed in Premium Nafta Products 
Ltd. [Fili Shipping Co. Ltd. v. Premium Nafta Products Ltd., 
2007 UKHL 40: 2007 Bus LR 1719 (HL)], it is not to be 
expected that commercial men while entering transactions 
inter se would knowingly create a system which would 
require that the court should first decide whether the contract 
should be rectified or avoided or rescinded, as the case may 
be, and then if the contract is held to be valid, it would require 
the arbitrator to resolve the issues that have arisen.” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 
84. Speaking in the specific context of “limitation” and “accord and 
satisfaction”, this Court in Vidya Drolia (supra) held that the procedural 
and factual disputes, like the one in the present litigation, should be left for 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

the arbitrator to decide, who in turn, would be guided by the facts as 
determined by him and the law applicable. However, while re-iterating the 
position established in Mayavati Trading (supra), i.e., the principal of 
minimal interference at the stage of Section 11(6) petitions by referral 
courts in light of the introduction of Section 11(6-A) to the Act, 1996, this 
Court in Vidya Drolia (supra) carved out an exceptional category of cases 
in which interference by the referral court was permissible thus: 
“154.1. Ratio of the decision in Patel Engg. Ltd. [SBP & 
Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) ] on the scope of 
judicial review by the court while deciding an application 
under Sections 8 or 11 of the Arbitration Act, post the 
amendments by Act 3 of 2016 (with retrospective effect from 
23-10-2015) and even post the amendments vide Act 33 of 
2019 (with effect from 9-8-2019), is no longer applicable. 
 
154.2. Scope of judicial review and jurisdiction of the court 
under Sections 8 and 11 of the Arbitration Act is identical but 
extremely limited and restricted. 
 
154.3. The general rule and principle, in view of the 
legislative mandate clear from Act 3 of 2016 and Act 33 of 
2019, and the principle of severability and competence-
competence, is that the Arbitral Tribunal is the preferred first 
authority to determine and decide all questions of non-
arbitrability. The court has been conferred power of “second 
look” on aspects of non-arbitrability post the award in terms 
of sub-clauses (i), (ii) or (iv) of Section 34(2)(a) or sub-clause 
(i) of Section 34(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act. 
 
154.4. Rarely as a demurrer the court may interfere at 
Section 8 or 11 stage when it is manifestly and ex facie 
certain that the arbitration agreement is non-existent, invalid 
or the disputes are non-arbitrable, though the nature and 
facet of non-arbitrability would, to some extent, determine 
the level and nature of judicial scrutiny. The restricted and 
limited review is to check and protect parties from being 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

forced to arbitrate when the matter is demonstrably “non-
arbitrable” and to cut off the deadwood. The court by default 
would refer the matter when contentions relating to non-
arbitrability are plainly arguable; when consideration in 
summary 
proceedings 
would 
be 
insufficient 
and 
inconclusive; when facts are contested; when the party 
opposing arbitration adopts delaying tactics or impairs 
conduct of arbitration proceedings. This is not the stage for 
the court to enter into a mini trial or elaborate review so as 
to usurp the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal but to affirm 
and uphold integrity and efficacy of arbitration as an 
alternative dispute resolution mechanism.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
85. As is clear from the aforesaid extract, Vidya Drolia (supra) held that 
although the arbitral tribunal is the preferred first authority to determine 
the questions pertaining to non-arbitrability, yet the referral court may 
exercise its limited jurisdiction to refuse reference to arbitration in cases 
which are ex-facie frivolous and where it is certain that the disputes are 
non-arbitrable. 
 
86. The decision of this Court in Vidya Drolia (supra) was subsequently relied 
upon by a two-Judge Bench of this Court in DLF Home Developers Ltd. v. Rajapura Homes (P) Ltd. reported in (2021) wherein it was 
held that the prima facie review as laid down in Vidya Drolia (supra), in 
exceptional cases, warrants interference by the court to protect the wastage 
of public money. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

“21. The jurisdiction of this Court under Section 11 is 
primarily to find out whether there exists a written agreement 
between the parties for resolution of disputes through 
arbitration and whether the aggrieved party has made out a 
prima facie arbitrable case. The limited jurisdiction, 
however, does not denude this Court of its judicial function 
to look beyond the bare existence of an arbitration clause to 
cut the deadwood. A three-Judge Bench in Vidya 
Drolia [Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corpn., (2021), paras 236, 237, 244.3, 244.4, 244.5, 244.5.1-244.5.3: (2021) 1 SCC (Civ) 549], has eloquently clarified that this 
Court, with a view to prevent wastage of public and private 
resources, may conduct “prima facie review” at the stage of 
reference to weed out any frivolous or vexatious claims.” 

87. In BSNL v. Nortel Networks (India) (P) Ltd., reported in (2021), this Court explained the scope of primary examination regarding the 
aspect of non-arbitrability in the context of time-barred claims as laid down 
in Vidya Drolia (supra) thus: 
“45. In a recent judgment delivered by a three-Judge Bench 
in Vidya 
Drolia v. Durga 
Trading 
Corpn. [Vidya 
Drolia v. Durga Trading Corpn., (2021): (2021) 1 
SCC (Civ) 549], on the scope of power under Sections 8 and 
11, it has been held that the Court must undertake a primary 
first review to weed out “manifestly ex facie non-existent and 
invalid arbitration agreements, or non-arbitrable disputes”. 
The prima facie review at the reference stage is to cut the 
deadwood, where dismissal is barefaced and pellucid, and 
when on the facts and law, the litigation must stop at the first 
stage. Only when the Court is certain that no valid arbitration 
agreement exists, or that the subject-matter is not arbitrable, 
that reference may be refused. 
 
45.1. […] While exercising jurisdiction under Section 11 as 
the judicial forum, the court may exercise the prima facie test 
to screen and knockdown ex facie meritless, frivolous, and 
dishonest litigation. Limited jurisdiction of the courts would 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

ensure expeditious and efficient disposal at the referral stage. 
At the referral stage, the Court can interfere “only” when it 
is “manifest” that the claims are ex facie time-barred and 
dead, or there is no subsisting dispute. […]” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
88. The decision in Vidya Drolia (supra) was applied in the context of “accord 
and satisfaction” by a two-Judge Bench of this Court in Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited v. NCC Limited reported in (2023). It was 
held that although the referral court under Section 11 of the 1996 Act may 
look into the aspect of “accord and satisfaction”, yet it is advisable that in 
debatable cases and disputable facts, more particularly in reasonably 
arguable cases, the determination of whether accord and satisfaction was 
actually present or not should be left to the arbitral tribunal. This Court also 
expressed disagreement with the High Court which had held that post the 
insertion of Section 11(6-A) to the Act, 1996, the scope of interference of 
the referral court in a Section 11 petition was limited to the aspect of 
examining the existence of a binding arbitration agreement qua the parties 
before it. Relevant extracts are reproduced hereinbelow: 
“90. […] Therefore, even when it is observed and held that 
such an aspect with regard to “accord and satisfaction” of 
the claims may/can be considered by the Court at the stage 
of deciding Section 11 application, it is always advisable 
and appropriate that in cases of debatable and disputable 
facts, good reasonably arguable case, the same should be 
left to the Arbitral Tribunal. Similar view is expressed by 
this Court in Vidya Drolia [Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading 
Corpn., (2021): (2021) 1 SCC (Civ) 549]. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

91. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, 
though it is specifically observed and held that aspects with 
regard to “accord and satisfaction” of the claims can be 
considered by the Court at the stage of deciding Section 
11(6) application, in the facts and circumstances of the 
case, the High Court has not committed any error in 
observing that aspects with regard to “accord and 
satisfaction” of the claims or where there is a serious 
dispute will have to be left to the Arbitral Tribunal. 
 
92. However, at the same time, we do not agree with the 
conclusion arrived at by the High Court that after the 
insertion of sub-section (6-A) in Section 11 of the 
Arbitration Act, scope of inquiry by the Court in Section 11 
petition is confined only to ascertain as to whether or not a 
binding arbitration agreement exists qua the parties before 
it, which is relatable to the disputes at hand. 
 
93. We are of the opinion that though the Arbitral Tribunal 
may have jurisdiction and authority to decide the disputes 
including the question of jurisdiction and non-arbitrability, 
the same can also be considered by the Court at the stage of 
deciding Section 11 application if the facts are very clear 
and glaring and in view of the specific clauses in the 
agreement binding between the parties, whether the dispute 
is non-arbitrable and/or it falls within the excepted clause. 
Even at the stage of deciding Section 11 application, the 
Court may prima facie consider even the aspect with regard 
to “accord and satisfaction” of the claims. 
 
94. Now, so far as the submission on behalf of the respective 
parties on the decision of the General Manager on notified 
claims in SLP 
(C) No. 13161 of 2019 is concerned, the General Manager 
has decided/declared that the claims are not arbitrable 
since they had been settled and the arbitration agreement 
has been discharged under Clause 6.7.2.0 of GCC and no 
longer existed/subsisted. As observed hereinabove, the 
claims had been settled or not is a debatable and disputable 
question, which is to be left to be decided by the Arbitral 
Tribunal. Therefore, matters related to the notified claims 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

in the facts and circumstances of the case also shall have to 
be left to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal as in the fact 
situation the aspect of “accord and satisfaction” and 
“notified claims” both are interconnected and interlinked.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 
 
89. We find it difficult to agree with the dictum of law as laid in Indian Oil 
(supra). While the dictum in Vidya Drolia (supra) allows for interference 
by the referral court, it only allows so as an exception in cases where ex-
facie meritless claims are sought to be referred to arbitration. However, the 
view taken in Indian Oil (supra) takes a position which was taken by this 
Court in Boghara Polyfab (supra), wherein it was held that the issue of 
accord and satisfaction could either be decided by the referring authority 
or be left for the arbitrator to decide. This pre-2015 position, as was also 
pointed in Mayavati Trading (supra), was legislatively overruled by the 
2015 amendment to the Act, 1996 and the introduction of Section 11(6-A). 
Thus, in our view, the intention of this Court in Vidya Drolia (supra) was 
not to hold that despite the 2015 amendment, the position regarding 
“accord and satisfaction” would continue to be one which was taken in 
Boghara Polyfab (supra). Vidya Drolia (supra) only went a step ahead 
from the position in Mayavati Trading (supra) to create an exception that 
although the rule is to refer all questions of “accord and satisfaction” to the 
arbitral tribunal, yet in exceptional cases and in the interest of expediency, 
ex facie meritless claims could be struck down. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

90. In NTPC Ltd. v. SPML Infra Ltd. reported in (2023), a two-
Judge Bench of this Court was again faced with the issue of “accord and 
satisfaction” in the context of a Section 11 petition for appointment of 
arbitrator. Placing reliance on Vidya Drolia (supra), this Court gave the 
“Eye of the Needle” test to delineate the contours of the power of 
interference which the referral court may exercise under Section 11 of the 
Act, 1996. The first prong of the said test requires the court to examine the 
validity and existence of the arbitration agreement which includes an 
examination of the parties to the agreement and the privity of the applicant 
to the contract. The second prong of the test requires the court to, as a 
general rule, leave all questions of non-arbitrability to the arbitral tribunal 
and only as a demurrer reject the claims which are ex-facie and manifestly 
non-arbitrable. However, it was clarified that the standard of the aforesaid 
scrutiny is only prima facie, that is, unlike the pre-2015 position, the 
scrutiny does not entail elaborate appreciation of evidence and conduct of 
mini trials by the referral courts. The relevant observations made therein 
are reproduced hereinbelow: 
“24. Following the general rule and the principle laid down 
in Vidya Drolia [Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corpn., 
(2021): (2021) 1 SCC (Civ) 549], this Court has 
consistently been holding that the Arbitral Tribunal is the 
preferred first authority to determine and decide all questions 
of non-arbitrability. In Pravin Electricals (P) Ltd. v. Galaxy 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

Infra & Engg. (P) Ltd. [Pravin Electricals (P) Ltd. v. Galaxy 
Infra & Engg. (P) Ltd., (2021), paras 29, 30: 
(2021) 3 SCC (Civ) 307], Sanjiv Prakash v. Seema 
Kukreja [Sanjiv Prakash v. Seema Kukreja, (2021): (2021) 4 SCC (Civ) 597], and Indian Oil Corpn. 
Ltd. v. NCC Ltd. [Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. v. NCC Ltd., (2023): (2023) 1 SCC (Civ) 88], the parties were 
referred to arbitration, as the prima facie review in each of 
these cases on the objection of non-arbitrability was found to 
be inconclusive. Following the exception to the general 
principle that the Court may not refer parties to arbitration 
when it is clear that the case is manifestly and ex facie non-
arbitrable, 
in BSNL v. Nortel 
Networks 

Ltd. [BSNL v. Nortel Networks (India) (P) Ltd., (2021): (2021) 3 SCC (Civ) 352] (hereinafter “Nortel 
Networks”) and Secunderabad Cantonment Board v. B. 
Ramachandraiah 
& 
Sons [Secunderabad 
Cantonment 
Board v. B. Ramachandraiah & Sons, (2021): 
(2021) 3 SCC (Civ) 335], arbitration was refused as the 
claims of the parties were demonstrably time-barred. 
 
Eye of the needle 
25. The abovereferred precedents crystallise the position of 
law that the pre-referral jurisdiction of the Courts under 
Section 11(6) of the Act is very narrow and inheres two 
inquiries. The primary inquiry is about the existence and the 
validity of an arbitration agreement, which also includes an 
inquiry as to the parties to the agreement and the applicant's 
privity to the said agreement. These are matters which 
require a thorough examination by the Referral Court. The 
secondary inquiry that may arise at the reference stage itself 
is with respect to the non-arbitrability of the dispute. 
 
26. As a general rule and a principle, the Arbitral Tribunal 
is the preferred first authority to determine and decide all 
questions of non-arbitrability. As an exception to the rule, 
and rarely as a demurrer, the Referral Court may reject 
claims 
which 
are manifestly 
and 
ex 
facie 
non-
arbitrable [Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corpn., (2021), para 154.4: (2021) 1 SCC (Civ) 549] […] 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

27. The standard of scrutiny to examine the non-arbitrability 
of a claim is only prima facie. Referral Courts must not 
undertake a full review of the contested facts; they must only 
be confined to a primary first review [Vidya Drolia v. Durga 
Trading Corpn., (2021), para 134: (2021) 1 SCC 
(Civ) 549] and let facts speak for themselves. This also 
requires the Courts to examine whether the assertion on 
arbitrability is bona fide or not. [Vidya Drolia v. Durga 
Trading Corpn., (2021): (2021) 1 SCC (Civ) 549] 
The prima facie scrutiny of the facts must lead to a clear 
conclusion that there is not even a vestige of doubt that the 
claim is non-arbitrable. [BSNL v. Nortel Networks (India) 
(P) Ltd., (2021), para 47: (2021) 3 SCC (Civ) 
352] On the other hand, even if there is the slightest doubt, 
the rule is to refer the dispute to arbitration [Vidya 
Drolia v. Durga Trading Corpn., (2021), para 154.4: (2021) 1 SCC (Civ) 549].” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
91. The justification given in NTPC v. SPML (supra) for allowing the scrutiny 
of arbitrability at the stage of Section 11 petition was that the referral court 
is under a duty to protect the parties from being forced to arbitrate when 
the matter is demonstrably non-arbitrable, and any interference by the 
referral court preventing such ex-facie meritless arbitration could be 
termed as legitimate. It was observed thus: 
“28. The limited scrutiny, through the eye of the needle, is 
necessary and compelling. It is intertwined with the duty of 
the Referral Court to protect the parties from being forced to 
arbitrate when the matter is demonstrably non-arbitrable. It 
has been termed as a legitimate interference by Courts to 
refuse reference in order to prevent wastage of public and 
private resources [Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corpn., 
(2021), para 139: (2021) 1 SCC (Civ) 549]. 
Further, as noted in Vidya Drolia [Vidya Drolia v. Durga 
Trading Corpn., (2021): (2021) 1 SCC (Civ) 549], 
if this duty within the limited compass is not exercised, and 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

the Court becomes too reluctant to intervene, it may 
undermine the effectiveness of both, arbitration and the 
Court [Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corpn., (2021), para 139: (2021) 1 SCC (Civ) 549]. Therefore, this Court 
or a High Court, as the case may be, while exercising 
jurisdiction under Section 11(6) of the Act, is not expected 
to act mechanically merely to deliver a purported dispute 
raised by an applicant at the doors of the chosen arbitrator, 
as explained in DLF Home Developers Ltd. v. Rajapura 
Homes (P) Ltd. [DLF Home Developers Ltd. v. Rajapura 
Homes (P) Ltd., (2021), paras 22, 26: 2021 SCC 
OnLine SC 781, paras 18, 20]” 
 
92. The position that emerges from the aforesaid discussion of law on the 
subject as undertaken by us can be summarised as follows: - 
 
i. 
There were two conflicting views which occupied the field under the 
Arbitration Act, 1940. While the decisions in Damodar Valley 
(supra) and Amar Nath (supra) took the view that the disputes 
pertaining to “accord and satisfaction” should be left to the arbitrator 
to decide, the view taken in P.K. Ramaiah (supra) and Nathani 
Steels (supra) was that once a “full and final settlement” is entered 
into between the parties, no arbitrable disputes subsist and therefore 
reference to arbitration must not be allowed. ii. 
Under the Act, 1996, the power under Section 11 was characterised 
as an administrative one as acknowledged in the decision in Konkan 
Railway (supra) and this continued till the decision of a seven-Judge 
Bench in SBP & Co. (supra) overruled it and significantly expanded 
the scope of judicial interference under Sections 8 and 11 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

respectively of the Act, 1996. The decision in Jayesh Engineering 
(supra) adopted this approach in the context of “accord and 
satisfaction” cases and held that the issue whether the contract had 
been fully worked out and whether payments had been made in full 
and final settlement of the claims are issues which should be left for 
the arbitrator to adjudicate upon. iii. 
The decision in SBP & Co. (supra) was applied in Boghara Polyfab 
(supra) and it was held by this Court that the Chief Justice or his 
designate, in exercise of the powers available to them under Section 
11 of the Act, 1996, can either look into the question of “accord and 
satisfaction” or leave it for the decision of the arbitrator. However, 
it also specified that in cases where the Chief Justice was satisfied 
that there was indeed “accord and satisfaction”, he could reject the 
application for appointment of arbitrator. The prima facie standard 
of scrutiny was also expounded, stating that the party seeking 
arbitration would have to prima facie establish that there was fraud 
or coercion involved in the signing of the discharge certificate. The 
position elaborated in Boghara Polyfab (supra) was adopted in a 
number of subsequent decisions, wherein it was held that a mere bald 
plea of fraud or coercion was not sufficient for a party to seek 
reference to arbitration and prima facie evidence for the same was 
required to be provided, even at the stage of the Section 11 petition. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

iv. 
The view taken by SBP & Co. (supra) and Boghara Polyfab (supra) 
was seen by the legislature as causing delays in the disposal of 
Section 11 petitions, and with a view to overcome the same, Section 
11(6-A) was introduced in the Act, 1996 to limit the scope of enquiry 
under Section 11 only to the extent of determining the “existence” 
of an arbitration agreement. This intention was acknowledged and 
given effect to by this Court in the decision in Duro Felguera 
(supra) wherein it was held that the enquiry under Section 11 only 
entailed an examination whether an arbitration agreement existed 
between the parties or not and “nothing more or nothing less”. v. 
Despite the introduction of Section 11(6-A) and the decision in Duro 
Felguera (supra), there have been diverging views of this Court on 
whether the scope of referral court under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 
includes the power to go into the question of “accord and 
satisfaction”. In Antique Art (supra) it was held that unless some 
prima facie proof of duress or coercion is adduced by the claimant, 
there could not be a referral of the disputes to arbitration. This view, 
however, was overruled in Mayavati Trading (supra) which 
reiterated the view taken in Duro Felguera (supra) and held that 
post the 2015 amendment to the Act, 1996, it was no more open to 
the Court while exercising its power under Section 11 of the Act, 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

1996 to go into the question of whether “accord and satisfaction” 
had taken place. vi. 
The decision in Vidya Drolia (supra) although adopted the view 
taken in Mayawati Trading (supra) yet it provided that in 
exceptional cases, where it was manifest that the claims were ex-
facie time barred and deadwood, the Court could interfere and refuse 
reference to arbitration. Recently, this view in the context of “accord 
and satisfaction” was adopted in NTPC v. SPML (supra) wherein 
the “eye of the needle” test was elaborated. It permits the referral 
court to reject arbitration in such exceptional cases where the plea of 
fraud or coercion appears to be ex-facie frivolous and devoid of 
merit. 
 
93. Thus, the position after the decisions in Mayavati Trading (supra) and 
Vidya Drolia (supra) is that ordinarily, the Court while acting in exercise 
of its powers under Section 11 of the Act, 1996, will only look into the 
existence of the arbitration agreement and would refuse arbitration only as 
a demurrer when the claims are ex-facie frivolous and non-arbitrable. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

iii. What is the effect of the decision of this Court in In Re: Interplay Between 
Arbitration Agreements under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1966 
and the Indian Stamp Act 1899 on the scope of powers of the referral court 
under Section 11 of the Act, 1996? 
 
94. A seven-Judge Bench of this Court, in In Re: Interplay Between 
Arbitration Agreements under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1966 
and the Indian Stamp Act 1899 reported in 2023 INSC 1066, speaking 
eruditely through one of us, Dr Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud, Chief Justice 
of India, undertook a comprehensive analysis of Sections 8 and 11 
respectively of the Act, 1996 and, inter alia, made poignant observations 
about the nature of the power vested in the Courts insofar as the aspect of 
appointment of arbitrator is concerned. Some of the relevant observations 
made by this Court in In Re: Interplay (supra) are extracted hereinbelow: 
“179. […] However, the effect of the principle of 
competence-competence is that the arbitral tribunal is vested 
with the power and authority to determine its enforceability. 
The question of enforceability survives, pending the curing of 
the defect which renders the instrument inadmissible. By 
appointing a tribunal or its members, this Court (or the High 
Courts, as the case may be) is merely giving effect to the 
principle enshrined in Section 16. The appointment of an 
arbitral tribunal does not necessarily mean that the 
agreement in which the arbitration clause is contained as 
well as the arbitration agreement itself are enforceable. The 
arbitral tribunal will answer precisely these questions. xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
185. The corollary of the doctrine of competence-competence 
is that courts may only examine whether an arbitration 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

agreement exists on the basis of the prima facie standard of 
review. The nature of objections to the jurisdiction of an 
arbitral tribunal on the basis that stamp-duty has not been 
paid or is inadequate is such as cannot be decided on a prima 
facie basis. Objections of this kind will require a detailed 
consideration of evidence and submissions and a finding as 
to the law as well as the facts. Obligating the court to decide 
issues of stamping at the Section 8 or Section 11 stage will 
defeat the legislative intent underlying the Arbitration Act. 
 
186. The purpose of vesting courts with certain powers under 
Sections 8 and 11 of the Arbitration Act is to facilitate and 
enable arbitration as well as to ensure that parties comply 
with arbitration agreements. The disputes which have arisen 
between them remain the domain of the arbitral tribunal 
(subject to the scope of its jurisdiction as defined by the 
arbitration clause). The exercise of the jurisdiction of the 
courts of the country over the substantive dispute between the 
parties is only possible at two stages: 
 
a. If an application for interim measures is filed under 
Section 9 of the Arbitration Act; or 
 
b. If the award is challenged under Section 34. 
 
Issues which concern the payment of stamp-duty fall within 
the remit of the arbitral tribunal. The discussion in the 
preceding segments also make it evident that courts are not 
required to deal with the issue of stamping at the stage of 
granting interim measures under Section 9.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
95. We would like to analyse and elaborate some of the observations from the 
aforesaid decision which are highly pertinent to the dispute at hand. a. Arbitral Autonomy 
 
96. The principle of judicial non-interference permeates the scheme of the Act, 
1996. The principle of competence-competence as contained in Section 16 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

of the Act, 1996 indicates that the arbitral tribunal enjoys sufficient 
autonomy from the national courts. The underlying principle behind 
arbitral autonomy and judicial non-interference is that when parties 
mutually decide to settle their disputes through arbitration, they surrender 
their right to agitate the same before the national courts. 
 
97. Section 5 of the Act, 1996 also minimises the supervisory role that the 
courts may play in the arbitral process. There are two facets to Section 5 – 
positive and negative. The positive facet allows the judicial authorities to 
exercise jurisdiction over matters expressly permitted under the Act, 1996. 
The negative aspect, on the other hand, prohibits the judicial authorities 
from intervening in the arbitral proceedings in situations where the arbitral 
tribunal has been conferred with exclusive jurisdiction. 
 
98. What follows from the negative facet of arbitral autonomy when applied 
in the context of Section 16 is that the national courts are prohibited from 
interfering in matters pertaining to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal, 
as exclusive jurisdiction on those aspects vests with the arbitral tribunal. 
The legislative mandate of prima facie determination at the stage of 
Sections 8 and 11 respectively ensures that the referral courts do not end 
up venturing into what is intended by the legislature to be the exclusive 
domain of the arbitral tribunal. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

99. Gary B. Born1 describes arbitral autonomy as intrinsically related to the 
‘right to arbitrate’, which in turn is a concomitant of freedom of contract, 
liberty of association and personal autonomy. He describes “the right of 
parties to resolve their disputes, with one another, in a manner of their 
own choosing” as “a basic aspect of individual autonomy and liberty, 
which is properly accorded protection in almost all developed legal 
systems.” He also stresses on the importance of autonomy of parties to 
arbitrate as giving effect to fundamental right to autonomy of parties and 
increasing their access to justice. Characterising the right to arbitrate as an 
important political right, he observes that “voluntary agreements, by free 
men and women, to resolve their disputes between themselves, in a manner 
which they structure, are the exercise of basic rights of liberty, association 
and property and a bulwark against governmental oppression.2” 
 
100. In Hayter v. Nelson reported in [1990] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 265, 272, it was 
observed that the “modern view in line with the basic principles of the 
English law of freedom of contract and indeed International Conventions 
is that there is no good reason why the Courts should strive to take matters 
 
1 Gary B. Born, Internation Commercial Arbitration, 3rd Ed. (2021), pp. 685 
2 Gary B. Born, Internation Commercial Arbitration, 3rd Ed. (2021), pp. 696 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

out of the hands of the tribunal into which the parties have by agreement 
undertaken to place them”. b. Negative Competence-Competence 
 
101. Section 16 of the Act, 1996 recognises the doctrine of competence-
competence and empowers the arbitral tribunal to rule on its own 
jurisdiction. The policy consideration for the same is, firstly, to recognise 
the intention of the parties in choosing arbitration as the method for 
resolving the disputes the contract and secondly, to prevent 
the parties from initiating parallel proceedings before courts and delaying 
the arbitral process. 
 
102. The negative aspect of competence-competence is aimed at restricting the 
interference of the courts at the referral stage by preventing the courts from 
examining the issues pertaining to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal 
before the arbitral tribunal itself has had the opportunity to entertain them. 
The courts are allowed to review the decision of the arbitral tribunal at a 
later stage. 
 
103. The principle of negative competence-competence has also been codified 
by the national statutory frameworks for international arbitration. For 
example, in French New Code of Civil Procedure, 1981 and the French 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

Decree No. 2011- 48 of 13 January 2011 Reforming the Law Governing 
Arbitration, the concept of negative competence-competence was codified 
based on the decision of Court of Appeal in Colmar Impex v. PAZ, 
reported in 1968 Rev. Arb. 149, 155 (Colmar Cour d’Appeal). In the said 
decision, it was observed that, “the principle is that the judge hearing a 
dispute has jurisdiction to determine his own jurisdiction. This necessarily 
implies that when that judge is an arbitrator, whose powers derive from 
the agreement of the parties, he has jurisdiction to examine the existence 
and validity of such agreement”. 
 
104. Supreme Court of the United States too has, on a number of occasions, 
consistently affirmed that by virtue of the separability presumption, where 
there is only a challenge to the validity or legality of the underlying 
contract, and no challenge to the existence, validity, or legality of the 
associated arbitration clause itself, the claims should be referred to 
arbitration. [See: Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & Conklin Manufacturing 
Co. reported in 388 U.S. 395 (U.S. S.Ct. 1967); Buckeye Check Cashing, 
Inc. v. Cardegna reported in 546 U.S. 440 (U.S. S.Ct. 2006)] 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

105. In the specific context of settlement of original contract, Gary Born3 writes 
that “US lower courts have repeatedly applied the separability 
presumption in holding that claims regarding the validity or enforceability 
of the underlying contract do not impeach the separable arbitration clause 
and for decisions by the arbitrators.” Referring to the cases in which the 
aforesaid principles have been applied, he writes “that approach has been 
opted in diverse settings including in the case of Ambulance Biling Sys., 
Inc. v. Gemini Ambulance Servs., Inc., 103 S.W.3d 507, 514-515 (Tex. App. 
2003) wherein arbitrators were given the power to decide regarding 
whether a settlement agreement was reached replacing or cancelling 
original agreement.” 
 
106. In Howsam v. Dean Witter Reynolds, Inc. reported in 537 U.S. 79, 84 
(U.S. S.Ct. 2002), it was observed by the US Supreme Court that "the 
presumption is that the arbitrator should decide allegation[s] of waiver, 
delay, or alike defense to arbitrability.” 
 
c. Judicial Interference under the Act, 1996 
 
107. The parties have been conferred with the power to decide and agree on the 
procedure to be adopted for appointing arbitrators. In cases where the 
 
3 Gary B. Born, Internation Commercial Arbitration, 3rd Ed. (2021), pp. 1251 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

agreed upon procedure fails, the courts have been vested with the power to 
appoint arbitrators upon the request of a party, to resolve the deadlock 
between the parties in appointing the arbitrators. 
 
108. Section 11 of the Act, 1996 is provided to give effect to the mutual 
intention of the parties to settle their disputes by arbitration in situations 
where the parties fail to appoint an arbitrator(s). The parameters of judicial 
review laid down for Section 8 differ from those prescribed for Section 11. 
The view taken in SBP & Co. (supra) and affirmed in Vidya Drolia (supra) 
that Sections 8 and 11 respectively of the Act, 1996 are complementary in 
nature was legislatively overruled by the introduction of Section 11(6-A) 
in 2015. Thus, although both these provisions intend to compel parties to 
abide by their mutual intention to arbitrate, yet the scope of powers 
conferred upon the courts under both the sections are different. 
 
109. The difference between Sections 8 and 11 respectively of the Act, 1996 is 
also evident from the scope of these provisions. Some of these differences 
are: 
i. 
While Section 8 empowers any ‘judicial authority’ to refer the 
parties to arbitration, under Section 11, the power to refer has been 
exclusively conferred upon the High Court and the Supreme Court. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

ii. 
Under Section 37, an appeal lies against the refusal of the judicial 
authority to refer the parties to arbitration, whereas no such 
provision for appeal exists for a refusal under Section 11. iii. 
The standard of scrutiny provided under Section 8 is that of prima 
facie examination of the validity and existence of an arbitration 
agreement. Whereas, the standard of scrutiny under Section 11 is 
confined to the examination of the existence of the arbitration 
agreement. iv. 
During the pendency of an application under Section 8, arbitration 
may commence or continue and an award can be passed. On the 
other hand, under Section 11, once there is failure on the part of the 
parties in appointing the arbitrator as per the agreed procedure and 
an application is preferred, no arbitration proceedings can 
commence or continue. 
 
110. The scope of examination under Section 11(6-A) is confined to the 
existence of an arbitration agreement on the basis of Section 7. The 
examination of validity of the arbitration agreement is also limited to the 
requirement of formal validity such as the requirement that the agreement 
should be in writing. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

111. The use of the term ‘examination’ under Section 11(6-A) as distinguished 
from the use of the term ‘rule’ under Section 16 implies that the scope of 
enquiry under section 11(6-A) is limited to a prima facie scrutiny of the 
existence of the arbitration agreement, and does not include a contested or 
laborious enquiry, which is left for the arbitral tribunal to ‘rule’ under 
Section 16. The prima facie view on existence of the arbitration agreement 
taken by the referral court does not bind either the arbitral tribunal or the 
court enforcing the arbitral award. 
 
112. The aforesaid approach serves a two-fold purpose – firstly, it allows the 
referral court to weed out non-existent arbitration agreements, and 
secondly, it protects the jurisdictional competence of the arbitral tribunal 
to rule on the issue of existence of the arbitration agreement in depth. 
 
113. Referring to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015, it was observed in In Re: Interplay 
(supra) that the High Court and the Supreme Court at the stage of 
appointment of arbitrator shall examine the existence of a prima facie 
arbitration agreement and not any other issues. The relevant observations 
are extracted hereinbelow: 
“209. The above extract indicates that the Supreme Court or 
High Court at the stage of the appointment of an arbitrator 
shall “examine the existence of a prima facie arbitration 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

agreement and not other issues”. These other issues not 
only pertain to the validity of the arbitration agreement, but 
also include any other issues which are a consequence of 
unnecessary judicial interference in the arbitration 
proceedings. Accordingly, the “other issues” also include 
examination and impounding of an unstamped instrument by 
the referral court at the Section 8 or Section 11 stage. The 
process of examination, impounding, and dealing with an 
unstamped instrument under the Stamp Act is not a 
timebound process, and therefore does not align with the 
stated goal of the Arbitration Act to ensure expeditious and 
time-bound appointment of arbitrators. […]” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
114. In view of the observations made by this Court in In Re: Interplay (supra), 
it is clear that the scope of enquiry at the stage of appointment of arbitrator 
is limited to the scrutiny of prima facie existence of the arbitration 
agreement, and nothing else. For this reason, we find it difficult to hold 
that the observations made in Vidya Drolia (supra) and adopted in NTPC 
v. SPML (supra) that the jurisdiction of the referral court when dealing 
with the issue of “accord and satisfaction” under Section 11 extends to 
weeding out ex-facie non-arbitrable and frivolous disputes would continue 
to apply despite the subsequent decision in In Re: Interplay (supra). 
 
115. The dispute pertaining to the “accord and satisfaction” of claims is not one 
which attacks or questions the existence of the arbitration agreement in any 
way. As held by us in the preceding parts of this judgment, the arbitration 
agreement, being separate and independent from the underlying 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

substantive contract in which it is contained, continues to remain in 
existence even after the original contract stands discharged by “accord and 
satisfaction”. 
 
116. The question of “accord and satisfaction”, being a mixed question of law 
and fact, comes within the exclusive jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal, if 
not otherwise agreed upon between the parties. Thus, the negative effect 
of competence-competence would require that the matter falling within the 
exclusive domain of the arbitral tribunal, should not be looked into by the 
referral court, even for a prima facie determination, before the arbitral 
tribunal first has had the opportunity of looking into it. 
 
117. By referring disputes to arbitration and appointing an arbitrator by exercise 
of the powers under Section 11, the referral court upholds and gives effect 
to the original understanding of the contracting parties that the specified 
disputes shall be resolved by arbitration. Mere appointment of the arbitral 
tribunal doesn’t in any way mean that the referral court is diluting the 
sanctity of “accord and satisfaction” or is allowing the claimant to walk 
back on its contractual undertaking. On the contrary, it ensures that the 
principal of arbitral autonomy is upheld and the legislative intent of 
minimum judicial interference in arbitral proceedings is given full effect. 
Once the arbitral tribunal is constituted, it is always open for the defendant 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

to raise the issue of “accord and satisfaction” before it, and only after such 
an objection is rejected by the arbitral tribunal, that the claims raised by 
the claimant can be adjudicated. 
 
118. Tests like the “eye of the needle” and “ex-facie meritless”, although try to 
minimise the extent of judicial interference, yet they require the referral 
court to examine contested facts and appreciate prima facie evidence 
(however limited the scope of enquiry may be) and thus are not in 
conformity with the principles of modern arbitration which place arbitral 
autonomy and judicial non-interference on the highest pedestal. 
 
119. Appointment of an arbitral tribunal at the stage of Section 11 petition also 
does not mean that the referral courts forego any scope of judicial review 
of the adjudication done by the arbitral tribunal. The Act, 1996 clearly 
vests the national courts with the power of subsequent review by which the 
award passed by an arbitrator may be subjected to challenge by any of the 
parties to the arbitration. 
 
120. The principle of subsequent judicial review has been enshrined in the US 
doctrine of “Second Look”. In a leading U.S. Supreme Court judgement of 
PacifiCare Health Systems, Inc. v. Book reported in 538, U.S. 401 (U.S. 
S. Ct. 2003), it was held that the question of non-arbitrability should be 
considered in the first instance by the arbitral tribunal. The Court observed 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

that, “since we do not know how the arbitrator will construe the remedial 
limitations, the question... whether they render the parties' agreements 
unenforceable is better left for initial arbitral consideration”. This 
doctrine has also been affirmed by judgements of the U.S. lower courts in 
cases of Dillon v. BMO Harris Bank, NA reported in 856 F.3d 330, 333 
(4th Cir. 2017) and Escobar v. Celebration Cruise Operator, Inc. reported 
in 805 F.3d 1279, 1288-89 (11th Cir. 2015) wherein it was reasoned that 
the issues of U.S. statutory law and arbitrability should be submitted first 
to arbitration, with the possibility of subsequent judicial review in 
recognition and enforcement proceedings. 
 
121. In a case with similar facts but where an arbitration agreement is not in 
existence, the claimant would have the recourse to approach a civil court 
with its claims. Even in such proceedings before the civil court, it would 
be open to the defendant to put forward the defence of “accord and 
satisfaction” on the basis of the discharge voucher. Similarly, it would be 
open to the claimant to allege that the voucher had been obtained under 
fraud, coercion or undue influence. In such a scenario, the civil court would 
consider the evidence as to whether there was any fraud, undue influence 
or coercion. If the civil court finds that there was none, then it would reject 
the claims at the outset. However, if it finds that the allegations of fraud 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

are true, then it would reject the discharge voucher and proceed to 
adjudicate the claims on merit. 
 
122. Once an arbitration agreement exists between parties, then the option of 
approaching the civil court becomes unavailable to them. In such a 
scenario, if the parties seek to raise a dispute, they necessarily have to do 
so before the arbitral tribunal. The arbitral tribunal, in turn, can only be 
constituted as per the procedure agreed upon between the parties. 
However, if there is a failure of the agreed upon procedure, then the duty 
of appointing the arbitral tribunal falls upon the referral court under Section 
11 of the Act, 1996. If the referral court, at this stage, goes beyond the 
scope of enquiry as provided under the section and examines the issue of 
“accord and satisfaction”, then it would amount to usurpation of the power 
which the parties had intended to be exercisable by the arbitral tribunal 
alone and not by the national courts. Such a scenario would impeach 
arbitral autonomy and would not fit well with the scheme of the Act, 1996. 
 
123. The power available to the referral courts has to be construed in the light 
of the fact that no right to appeal is available against any order passed by 
the referral court under Section 11 for either appointing or refusing to 
appoint an arbitrator. Thus, by delving into the domain of the arbitral 
tribunal at the nascent stage of Section 11, the referral courts also run the 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

risk of leaving the claimant in a situation wherein it does not have any 
forum to approach for the adjudication of its claims, if it Section 11 
application is rejected. 
 
124. Section 11 also envisages a time-bound and expeditious disposal of the 
application for appointment of arbitrator. One of the reasons for this is also 
the fact that unlike Section 8, once an application under Section 11 is filed, 
arbitration cannot commence until the arbitral tribunal is constituted by the 
referral court. This Court, on various occasions, has given directions to the 
High Courts for expeditious disposal of pending Section 11 applications. 
It has also directed the litigating parties to refrain from filing bulky 
pleadings in matters pertaining to Section 11. Seen thus, if the referral 
courts go into the details of issues pertaining to “accord and satisfaction” 
and the like, then it would become rather difficult to achieve the objective 
of expediency and simplification of pleadings. 
 
125. We are also of the view that ex-facie frivolity and dishonesty in litigation 
is an aspect which the arbitral tribunal is equally, if not more, capable to 
decide upon the appreciation of the evidence adduced by the parties. We 
say so because the arbitral tribunal has the benefit of going through all the 
relevant evidence and pleadings in much more detail than the referral court. 
If the referral court is able to see the frivolity in the litigation on the basis 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

of bare minimum pleadings, then it would be incorrect to doubt that the 
arbitral tribunal would not be able to arrive at the same inference, most 
likely in the first few hearings itself, with the benefit of extensive pleadings 
and evidentiary material. 
 
126. Before, we close the matter, it is necessary for us to clarify the dictum as 
laid in M/s Arif Azim Co. Ltd. v. M/s Aptech Ltd. reported in 2024 INSC 
155, so as to streamline the position of law and prevent the possibility of 
any conflict between the two decisions that may arise in future. 
 
127. In Arif Azim (supra), while deciding an application for appointment of 
arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996, two issues had arisen for 
our consideration: 
i. 
Whether the Limitation Act, 1963 is applicable to an application for 
appointment of arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996? If yes, whether the petition filed by M/s Arif 
Azim was barred by limitation? ii. 
Whether the court may decline to make a reference under Section 11 
of Act, 1996 where the claims are ex-facie and hopelessly time-
barred? 
 
128. On the first issue, it was observed by us that the Limitation Act, 1963 is 
applicable to the applications filed under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996. 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

Further, we also held that it is the duty of the referral court to examine that 
the application under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 is not barred by period 
of limitation as prescribed under Article 137 of the Limitation Act, 1963, 
i.e., 3 years from the date when the right to apply accrues in favour of the 
applicant. To determine as to when the right to apply would accrue, we had 
observed in paragraph 56 of the said decision that “the limitation period 
for filing a petition under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 can only commence 
once a valid notice invoking arbitration has been sent by the applicant to 
the other party, and there has been a failure or refusal on part of that other 
party in complying with the requirements mentioned in such notice.” 
 
129. Insofar as the first issue is concerned, we are of the opinion that the 
observations made by us in Arif Azim (supra) do not require any 
clarification and should be construed as explained therein. 
 
130. On the second issue it was observed by us in paragraph 67 that the referral 
courts, while exercising their powers under Section 11 of the Act, 1996, 
are under a duty to “prima-facie examine and reject non-arbitrable or dead 
claims, so as to protect the other party from being drawn into a time-
consuming and costly arbitration process.” 
 
131. Our findings on both the aforesaid issues have been summarised in 
paragraph 89 of the said decision thus: - 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

“89. Thus, from an exhaustive analysis of the position of law 
on the issues, we are of the view that while considering the 
issue of limitation in relation to a petition under Section 11(6) 
of the Act, 1996, the courts should satisfy themselves on two 
aspects by employing a two-pronged test – first, whether the 
petition under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 is barred by 
limitation; and secondly, whether the claims sought to be 
arbitrated are ex-facie dead claims and are thus barred by 
limitation on the date of commencement of arbitration 
proceedings. If either of these issues are answered against the 
party seeking referral of disputes to arbitration, the court may 
refuse to appoint an arbitral tribunal.” 
 
132. Insofar as our observations on the second issue are concerned, we clarify 
that the same were made in light of the observations made by this Court in 
many of its previous decisions, more particularly in Vidya Drolia (supra) 
and NTPC v. SPML (supra). However, in the case at hand, as is evident 
from the discussion in the preceding parts of this judgment, we have had 
the benefit of reconsidering certain aspects of the two decisions referred to 
above in the light of the pertinent observations made by a seven-Judge 
Bench of this Court in In Re: Interplay (supra). 
 
133. Thus, we clarify that while determining the issue of limitation in exercise 
of the powers under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996, the referral court should 
limit its enquiry to examining whether Section 11(6) application has been 
filed within the period of limitation of three years or not. The date of 
commencement of limitation period for this purpose shall have to be 
construed as per the decision in Arif Azim (supra). As a natural corollary, 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

it is further clarified that the referral courts, at the stage of deciding an 
application for appointment of arbitrator, must not conduct an intricate 
evidentiary enquiry into the question whether the claims raised by the 
applicant are time barred and should leave that question for determination 
by the arbitrator. Such an approach gives true meaning to the legislative 
intention underlying Section 11(6-A) of the Act, and also to the view taken 
in In Re: Interplay (supra). 
 
134. The observations made by us in Arif Azim (supra) are accordingly 
clarified. We need not mention that the effect of the aforesaid clarification 
is only to streamline the position of law, so as to bring it in conformity with 
the evolving principles of modern-day arbitration, and further to avoid the 
possibility of any conflict between the two decisions that may arise in 
future. These clarifications shall not be construed as affecting the verdict 
given by us in the facts of Arif Azim (supra), which shall be given full 
effect to notwithstanding the observations made herein. 
 
F. 
CONCLUSION 
 
135. The existence of the arbitration agreement as contained in Clause 13 of the 
insurance policy is not disputed by the appellant. The dispute raised by the 
claimant being one of quantum and not of liability, prima facie, falls within 
the scope of the arbitration agreement. The dispute regarding “accord and 

Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 3792/2024 & 7220/2024 

satisfaction” as raised by the appellant does not pertain to the existence of 
the arbitration agreement, and can be adjudicated upon by the arbitral 
tribunal as a preliminary issue. 
 
136. For all the aforesaid reasons, we uphold and affirm the appointment of 
Justice K.A. Puj, former Judge of the High Court of Gujarat as an arbitrator 
to resolve the disputes between the parties. 
 
137. The order staying the arbitration proceedings stands vacated. 
 
138. All legal contentions including objections available to the appellant are 
kept open to be taken up before the learned Arbitrator. 
139. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
…………………………………….CJI 
 (Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud) 
 
………………………………………J. 
(J.B. Pardiwala) 
 
………………………………………J. 
(Manoj Misra) 
New Delhi; 
18th July, 2024