IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
((C) No. 13486 OF 2007) 

RAJA GOUNDER AND OTHERS...APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
M. SENGODAN AND OTHERS...RESPONDENT(S) 

J U D G E M E N T 
 
S.V.N. BHATTI, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The Defendant Nos. 3 to 5 in O.S. No. 357 of 1985 before the Court 
of the Subordinate Judge, Sankari, Coimbatore District, Tamil Nadu, are 
the Appellants in the Civil Appeal. The Appellants assail the judgment and 
decree of the Trial Court and the High Court of Judicature at Madras, 
dismissing the suit filed by Respondent No. 1 and Respondent No. 2 for 
partition and separate possession of the plaint schedule properties. 

I. 
FACTUAL BACKGROUND 
3. 
A genealogy is prefaced to appreciate the relationship between the 
parties: - 
 
4. 
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in this Civil Appeal were the Plaintiffs in 
O.S. No. 357 of 1985 before the Trial Court filed for partition and separate 
possession of plaint schedule properties. The plaint schedule consists of 
three items of agricultural land in Amani, Kliyanoor, Agraharam and 
Pallipayam villages of Tiruchengode Taluk. The suit was filed against 
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 herein. During the pendency of the suit, the 
Appellants filed I.A. No. 1019 of 1987 and were impleaded by the Trial 
Court as Defendant Nos. 3, 4 and 5. 
5. 
Muthusamy Gounder is the propositus of the parties to the suit and 
the claim for partition arose on his demise in the year 1982. The plaint 
averments are that Respondent No. 1 is the son of the propositus through 

Respondent No. 2/Ramayee. Respondent No. 3 is also the son of the 
propositus through Respondent No. 4/Ammasi Ammal. The marriage of 
Respondent No. 2 with the propositus is alleged to have happened in the 
early 1950s. It is averred in the plaint that Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 lived 
together and had a common kitchen during the lifetime of Muthusamy 
Gounder. Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 claim that a coparcenary/joint Hindu 
family existed, and Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 inherited the plaint schedule 
properties. The plaint schedule properties are treated as joint 
family/ancestral properties. The demand of Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 
through legal notice dated 21.06.1984 did not result in a reply from 
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4, or result in partition, the suit for partition of 
plaint schedule into three equal shares was filed and allot to Respondent 
Nos. 1 and 3, each one such share. The other share notionally allotted to 
Muthusamy Gounder, and since he died in 1982, is divided and allotted to 
Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 in accordance with law. 
6. 
We have specifically referred to the share demanded by 
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in O.S. No. 357 of 1985 because the shares of 
the parties resulted in change with the impleadment of Appellants. 
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 filed written statements denying the factum of 
marriage between Respondent No. 2 and Muthusamy Gounder, stating 

that Respondent No. 1 alone is a member of the Hindu Undivided Family 
(HUF) of Muthusamy Gounder. 
6.1 
As a natural result of the denial of marriage and relationship 
between Muthusamy Gounder and Respondent No. 2, the other 
averments in the plaint, namely, the existence of coparcenary and 
ancestral properties; the rights of Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 for partition, 
are specifically denied. The Appellants as Defendant Nos. 3 to 5 claimed 
that Appellant Nos. 1 and 3 are the son and daughter, respectively, of 
Muthusamy Gounder through Appellant No. 2/Chinnammal. The 
Appellants further averred that upon the demise of the propositus, the 
parties to the suit have inherited the plaint schedule properties as the legal 
heirs of the late Muthusamy Gounder. The Appellants and other legal 
heirs of Muthusamy Gounder were in joint possession and enjoyment of 
the plaint schedule properties. Therefore, the Appellants, along with other 
legal heirs/successors of Muthusamy Gounder, pray for partition of the 
coparcenary headed by Muthusamy Gounder. The Trial Court considered 
the following issues: - 
1. Whether the Plaintiffs are entitled to the reliefs claimed 
in the suit? 
2. Whether Defendant Nos. 1 to 5 are also entitled to 
shares as legal heirs of the deceased Muthusamy 
Gounder in his estate? 

3. To what relief? 
 
7. 
The oral evidence of PW1 to 3 and DW1 to 5 was adduced. Ex. A-1 
to A-10 and Ex. B-1 to B-10 were marked by the parties. 
8. 
The Trial Court examined the claim for partition from the perspective 
of the existence of a coparcenary/joint Hindu family and that the extended 
family of Muthusamy Gounder through Respondent No. 2 and Appellant 
No. 2 as wives of Muthusamy Gounder. In fine, the Trial Court examined 
the existence of coparcenary with Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and Appellant 
No. 1, and the status of marriage of Respondent No. 2 and Appellant No. 
2 with Muthusamy Gounder, and a coparcenary existed with the extended 
family members. The Trial Court held that Respondent No. 4 herein 
admittedly is the first and legally wedded wife of Muthusamy Gounder. 
Appellant No. 2 and Respondent No. 2 did not produce evidence to prove 
the factum of the marriage with Muthusamy Gounder. The evidence 
adduced by the Appellants or Respondent Nos. 1 and 2, does not inspire 
the confidence of the Court to accord to them the status as wives of 
Muthusamy Gounder. The Trial Court records a categorical finding that 
Appellant No. 2 and Respondent No. 2 are not the wives of Muthusamy 
Gounder, and consequently, the status of the children through the 
extended family as coparceners was rejected. 

9. 
Appeal Nos. 394 and 929 of 1991 were filed before the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras by Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and the Appellants 
herein. Through the impugned judgment, the appeals filed at the instance 
of extended family members of Muthusamy Gounder, stood dismissed. 
The High Court, in all particulars, accepted the view of the Trial Court on 
the status of marriage claimed by Appellant No. 2 and Respondent No. 2 
as not established by the parties and the claim for partition on the footing 
of the existence of the coparcenary with the parties of the suit would not 
arise. The appeals stood dismissed by the common impugned judgment 
dated 26.09.2006. 
9.1 
Hence, the Civil Appeal at the instance of the Appellants in Appeal 
No. 929 of 1991. 
II. 
SUBMISSIONS 
We have heard the Counsel appearing for the parties. 
10. 
Advocate N.S. Nappinai, appearing for the Appellants, accepting the 
findings of fact recorded by the Courts below on the status of Respondent 
No. 2 and Appellant No. 2 as part of the extended family of Muthusamy 
Gounder, argues a substantive point viz., both the Courts below fell in a 
serious 
flaw 
in 
not 
moulding 
the 
relief 
from 
admitted 
circumstances/evidence particularly when the suit filed is for partition and 

separate possession of the plaint schedule properties. It is argued that the 
Appellants and Respondent Nos. 1 and 2, assuming failed in establishing 
the status of a valid marriage of Appellant No. 2 and Respondent No. 2 
with Muthusamy Gounder, still the entitlement of a share as sons/children 
of Muthusamy Gounder through the extended family of Muthusamy 
Gounder should have been considered. The documentary evidence 
shows that Muthusamy Gounder treated Appellant No. 1, Respondent No. 
1 and Respondent No. 3 as his sons. Therefore, Appellant No. 1 and 
likewise Respondent No. 1 even are children of Muthusamy Gounder 
through a void or voidable marriage, still the children of Muthusamy 
Gounder through extended family are entitled to a share in the half share 
of Muthusamy Gounder in the schedule properties. The Counsel places 
reliance on Revanasiddappa and another v. Mallikarjun and others1, 
for the proposition that the children of Appellant No. 2 and Respondent 
No. 2 will be entitled to a share in the property, which would have been 
allotted to Muthusamy Gounder in the notional partition of plaint schedule 
properties. The Counsel places reliance on Ex. B-6, a registered mortgage 
deed dated 01.11.1976, executed by Muthusamy Gounder in favour of 
Karuppana Gounder and on Ex. B-3 dated 27.04.1984, a joint patta in 
favour of Muthusamy Gounder and all his three sons. The unrebutted 
 
1 (2023) 

documentary evidence in Exs. B-3 and B-6 constitute, firstly, an admission 
in the form of a substantive piece of evidence by Muthusamy Gounder on 
the status of Appellant No. 1 and Respondent No. 1 as his sons, coupled 
with corroborative documentary evidence in Ex. B-4 and B-5, electoral 
rolls. Respondent No. 3 claims through the common propositus, i.e., 
Muthusamy Gounder, and these admissions are valid in law on 
Respondent No. 3. This is the best evidence from none other than the 
common propositus. The Appellants and Respondent No. 1 are entitled to 
a share in the share allotted to Muthusamy Gounder. Therefore, the 
Counsel argues that given the settled legal position on the status of sons 
of Muthusamy Gounder through Appellant No. 2 and Respondent No. 2, 
a decree for partition though not as prayed for, is passed, but a preliminary 
decree of partition firstly on plaint schedule properties between 
Muthusamy Gounder and Respondent No. 3 is made, and a further 
decree, distributing the share of Muthusamy Gounder to Appellant Nos. 1 
and 3 and Respondent Nos. 1 and 3 is rendered. 
11. 
Advocate Vinodh Kanna B., appearing for Respondent Nos. 3 and 
4, contends that the findings of fact recorded by the Courts below do not 
warrant reconsideration of evidence by this Court under Article 136 of the 
Constitution of India, and alternatively, the evidence is wanting on the 
status of Appellant Nos. 1 and 3 and Respondent No. 1 as the children of 

Muthusamy Gounder. The alternative argument now canvassed before 
the Supreme Court is not available in the circumstances of the case or 
from the material on record. The proof of status as children of Muthusamy 
Gounder is a condition precedent 
for applying the ratio 
of 
Revanasiddappa (supra), and there is no evidence on this crucial aspect 
to mould the relief. Therefore, the judgements impugned are sustainable 
in law and fact. He prays for the dismissal of the Civil Appeal. 
III. 
ANALYSIS 
12. 
We have perused the record and noted the rival contentions 
canvassed by the Counsel, briefly reiterated in this Civil Appeal, the claim 
for partition in the share notionally allotted to late Muthusamy Gounder is 
pressed for. Thus, it presupposes the Appellants do not press the claim 
as coparceners of the family of Muthusamy Gounder; however, from the 
material on record, they claim a share from the share as the children of 
Muthusamy Gounder. The claim for a share depends on the application 
and appreciation of Exs. B-3 to B-6. 
13. 
Sections 17 and 18 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (“the Act”) 
defines “admission” and “admission by party to proceeding or his agent”. 
Section 17 of the Act reads thus: - 
“17. Admission defined admission is a statement, oral or 
documentary, which suggests any inference as to any fact in issue 

or relevant fact, and which is made by any of the persons, and under 
the circumstances, hereinafter mentioned.” 
 
13.1 Admission is a conscious and deliberate act and not something that 
could be inferred. An admission could be a positive act of 
acknowledgement or confession. To constitute an admission, one of the 
requirements is a voluntary acknowledgement through a statement of the 
existence of certain facts during the judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings, 
which conclude as true or valid the allegations made in the proceedings or 
in the notice. The formal act of acknowledgement during the proceedings 
waives or dispenses with the production of evidence by the contesting 
party. The admission concedes, for the purpose of litigation, the 
proposition of fact claimed by the opponents as true. An admission is also 
the best evidence the opposite party can rely upon, and though 
inconclusive, is decisive of the matter unless successfully withdrawn or 
proved erroneous by the other side. 
13.2 The above being the position, pithily stated on what constitutes an 
admission, Section 17 of the Act does not come in aid to answer or 
appreciate the documentary evidence marked in the suit. Therefore, 
Section 17 has to be read along with Section 18 of the Act, which reads 
thus:- 
“18. Admission by party to proceeding or his agent.––
Statements made by a party to the proceeding, or by an agent to 

any such party, whom the Court regards, under the circumstances 
of the case, as expressly or impliedly authorised by him to make 
them, are admissions. by suitor in representative character.––Statements made by 
parties to suits suing or sued in a representative character, are not 
admissions, unless they were made while the party making them 
held that character. 
Statements made by –– 
(1) by party interested in subject-matter.––persons who have 
any proprietary or pecuniary interest in the subject-matter of the 
proceeding, and who make the statement in their character of 
persons so interested, or 
(2) by person from whom interest derived.––persons from whom 
the parties to the suit have derived their interest in the subject-
matter of the suit, are admissions, if they are made during the 
continuance of the interest of the persons making the statements..” 
 
13.3 Section 18 of the Act deals with: 
(i) admission by a party to a proceeding, 
(ii) his agent, 
(iii) by a suitor in a representative character, 
(iv) statements made by a party in trusted subject matter, 
(v) statements made by a person from whom interest is derived. 
 
The qualifying circumstances to merit as admission are subject to 
satisfying the requirements. 
 
14. 
The Privy Council in Gopal Das and another v. Sri Thakurji and 
others2, held that a statement made by a person is not only evidence 
 
 PC 83 

against the person but is also evidence against those who claim through 
him. Section 18 of the Act lays down the conditions and the requirements 
satisfied for applying to a statement as an admission. We keep in our 
perspective Sections 17 and 18 of the Act while appreciating Exs. B-3 and 
B-6. 
15. 
The Appellants rely on Exs. B-3 to B-6 to evidence that Muthusamy 
Gounder treated Appellant No. 1, Respondent No. 1 and Respondent No. 
3 as his sons. Now let us examine whether these exhibits, firstly, contain 
an admission on the relevant fact in issue and secondly, whether they 
satisfy the requirements under Section 18 of the Act. Ex. B-6 is the 
registered mortgage deed dated 01.11.1976 executed by Muthusamy 
Gounder/propositus in favour of one Karuppana Gounder. Sy. No. 66 of 
Pallipayam, Agraharam Village was the mortgage deed executed by 
Muthusamy Gounder in favour of Karuppana Gounder. The mortgaged 
property is one of the items in the schedule in O.S. No. 357 of 1985. 
Muthusamy Gounder in Ex. B-6 stated as follows: - 
“Mortgage deed executed in favour of Karuppannna Gounder, son 
of…Vellaya 
Gounder, 
residing 
at 
Vaagaikkadu, 
Cusba 
Elandaikkuttai Village, Thiruchengodu Taluk, Salem District. 
By Muthusamy Gounder (1) son of Sengoda Gounder, residing 
at Malagoundenpalayam, Kaliyanoor Ayan Village, - Do - Taluk, - 
Do - District, Guardian and father of the minors Subramani (2) Raja 
Gounder (3) and Sengodam (4), for himself and on behalf of the 
minors Nos. 2,3 and 4.” 

15.1 A mere perusal of the preface to Ex. B-6, mortgage deed, would 
show that Muthusamy Gounder treated Appellant No. 1, Respondent No. 
1 and Respondent No. 3 as his sons. The document was executed for 
himself and on behalf of his minor sons. The statement is made by 
Muthusamy Gounder during the subsistence of his interest in the property 
mortgaged. Respondent No. 3 definitely claims through Muthusamy 
Gounder for the half share notionally partitioned in favour of Muthusamy 
Gounder. The Appellants also rely on the patta dated 27.04.1984 
(Ex. B-3) standing in the name of Muthusamy Gounder and his sons; the 
voters lists, viz., Exs. B-4 and B-5, to show that Muthusamy Gounder and 
his sons lived as a family. By applying Sections 17 and 18 of the Act, we 
are convinced that Muthusamy Gounder made a statement describing 
Appellant No. 1 and Respondent No. 1 as his sons and treated as an 
admission by record. This statement satisfies the ingredients of Section 
18 of the Act. Further, in the absence of contrary evidence and withdrawal 
of admission or explained through admissible evidence, the admission in 
the mortgage deed, viz., Ex. B-6, coupled with the joint patta and voters 
lists, declares the status of Appellant No. 1, Respondent No. 1, along with 
Respondent No. 3 as the sons of Muthusamy Gounder. At this juncture, 
we notice that the status derived through an admission in Ex. B-3 vis-à-vis 
Appellant No.1 as a natural corollary could be extended to Appellant No. 

3 as a child/daughter of Muthusamy Gounder. This is an inescapable 
consequential conclusion which the Court has to record. 
15.2 We make a useful reference to the judgement reported in 
Nirmala v. Rukminibai3. The Division Bench of the High Court of 
Karnataka considered a dispute nearer to the circumstances with the case 
on hand. The decision made in this case decided the status of inheritance 
of one Narayanarao among the children born out of his second marriage. 
The Plaintiffs were the first wife and daughter of Narayanarao, who filed a 
suit for possession of the suit properties in the estate of Narayanarao, 
which devolved on the Defendants, i.e., Narayanarao’s second wife and 
children. The Trial Court decreed the suit in the Plaintiffs’ favour, against 
which the Defendants filed an appeal before the High Court of Karnataka. 
The Defendants relied on Section 18 of the Act to point out Narayanarao’s 
admission that he indeed treated the Defendants as his legally wedded 
wife and legitimate children. Accepting this argument, the High Court 
allowed the appeal holding that where the children from the first wife 
brought a suit for possession of their father’s property disputing the second 
marriage of their father, the admission of their deceased father that the 
defendant, as his legally wedded wife, was binding on the Plaintiffs. We 
are in agreement with the High Court of Karnataka’s consideration of the 
 
 Kar 247 

scope of the binding nature of admission by a common ancestor in a 
matter of inheritance under Section 18 of the Act. 
16. 
We are of the view that the statement in Ex. B-6 is a clear admission 
of Muthusamy Gounder as to how he treated Appellant No. 1, Respondent 
No. 1 and Respondent No. 3 as his sons. Respondent No. 3 is claiming 
through Muthusamy Gounder, the common predecessor in interest; 
therefore, the admission is binding on Respondent No. 3 as well. Hence, 
by treating Appellant Nos. 1 and 3 and Respondent Nos. 1 and 3 as 
successors in the interest of Muthusamy Gounder, the shares are worked 
out. Once the status of the parties, other than Respondent No. 3, is 
established as the extended family of the propositus, irrespective of 
whether the marriages of Appellant No. 2 and Respondent No. 2 with 
Muthusamy Gounder are void or voidable, denying the children of 
Muthusamy Gounder a share in the property of notional partitioned in 
favour of Muthusamy Gounder, is unsustainable in law and fact. Appellant 
No. 3 claims to be the daughter of Muthusamy Gounder, and the law, as 
applicable to the separate share of Muthusamy Gounder, grants an equal 
share to the daughter along with the sons of Muthusamy Gounder. 
17. 
The above discussion takes us to point out a common infirmity in the 
examination of issues by the Trial and the Appellate Courts. The suit is 
one for partition, and the shares are dependent upon the nature of status 

and the time at which the partition is decreed. It is axiomatic that the shares 
fluctuate not only with the happening of events in the family but also with 
the circumstances established by the parties to the lis. In the present case, 
the claim as a coparcenary is unacceptable for want of evidence on the 
factum of the marriage of Muthusamy Gounder with Appellant No. 2 and 
Respondent No. 2; the courts below ought to have considered the relief 
from admitted circumstances on record. Hence, the argument of 
Respondent No. 3 that the status of Appellant Nos. 1 and 3; and 
Respondent No. 1 as the children of Muthusamy Gounder is without 
evidence is untenable and rejected accordingly. At this stage, it is apposite 
to refer to the conclusions laid down in Revanasiddappa (supra):- 
“81. We now formulate our conclusions in the following terms: 
81.1. In terms of sub-section (1) of Section 16, a child of a marriage 
which is null and void under Section 11 is statutorily conferred with 
legitimacy irrespective of whether: (i) such a child is born before or 
after the commencement of the amending Act, 1976; (ii) a decree 
of nullity is granted in respect of that marriage under the Act and the 
marriage is held to be void otherwise than on a petition under the 
enactment; 
81.2. In terms of sub-section (2) of Section 16 where a voidable 
marriage has been annulled by a decree of nullity under Section 12, 
a child “begotten or conceived” before the decree has been made, 
is deemed to be their legitimate child notwithstanding the decree, if 
the child would have been legitimate to the parties to the marriage 
if a decree of dissolution had been passed instead of a decree of 
nullity; 
81.3. While conferring legitimacy in terms of sub-section (1) on a 
child born from a void marriage and under sub-section (2) to a child 
born from a voidable marriage which has been annulled, the 
legislature has stipulated in sub-section (3) of Section 16 that such 

a child will have rights to or in the property of the parents and not in 
the property of any other person; 
81.4. While construing the provisions of Section 3(j) of the HSA, 
1956 including the proviso, the legitimacy which is conferred by 
Section 16 of the HMA, 1955 on a child born from a void or, as the 
case may be, voidable marriage has to be read into the provisions 
of the HSA, 1956. In other words, a child who is legitimate under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of Section 16 of the HMA would, 
for the purposes of Section 3(j) of the HSA, 1956, fall within the 
ambit of the explanation “related by legitimate kinship” and cannot 
be regarded as an “illegitimate child” for the purposes of the proviso; 
81.5. Section 6 of the HSA, 1956 continues to recognise the 
institution of a joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara law 
and the concepts of a coparcener, the acquisition of an interest as 
a coparcener by birth and rights in coparcenary property. By the 
substitution of Section 6, equal rights have been granted to 
daughters, in the same manner as sons as indicated by sub-section 
(1) of Section 6; 
81.6. Section 6 of the HSA, 1956 provides for the devolution of 
interest in coparcenary property. Prior to the substitution of Section 
6 with effect from 9-9-2005 by the amending Act of 2005, Section 6 
stipulated the devolution of interest in a Mitakshara coparcenary 
property of a male Hindu by survivorship on the surviving members 
of the coparcenary. The exception to devolution by survivorship was 
where the deceased had left surviving a female relative specified in 
Class I of the Schedule or a male relative in Class I claiming through 
a female relative, in which event the interest of the deceased in a 
Mitakshara coparcenary property would devolve by testamentary or 
intestate succession and not by survivorship. In terms of sub-
section (3) of Section 6 as amended, on a Hindu dying after the 
commencement of the amending Act of 2005 his interest in the 
property of a joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara law will 
devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may 
be, under the enactment and not by survivorship. As a consequence 
of the substitution of Section 6, the rule of devolution by 
testamentary or intestate succession of the interest of a deceased 
Hindu in the property of a joint Hindu family governed by Mitakshara 
law has been made the norm; 
81.7. Section 8 of the HSA, 1956 provides general rules of 
succession for the devolution of the property of a male Hindu dying 
intestate. Section 10 provides for the distribution of the property 
among heirs of Class I of the Schedule. Section 15 stipulates the 
general rules of succession in the case of female Hindus dying 
intestate. Section 16 provides for the order of succession and the 
distribution among heirs of a female Hindu; 

81.8. While providing for the devolution of the interest of a Hindu in 
the property of a joint Hindu family governed by Mitakshara law, 
dying after the commencement of the amending Act of 2005 by 
testamentary or intestate succession, Section 6(3) lays down a legal 
fiction, namely, that “the coparcenary property shall be deemed to 
have been divided as if a partition had taken place”. According to 
the Explanation, the interest of a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener is 
deemed to be the share in the property that would have been 
allotted to him if a partition of the property has taken place 
immediately before his death irrespective of whether or not he is 
entitled to claim partition; 
81.9. For the purpose of ascertaining the interest of a deceased 
Hindu Mitakshara coparcener, the law mandates the assumption of 
a state of affairs immediately prior to the death of the coparcener, 
namely, a partition of the coparcenary property between the 
deceased and other members of the coparcenary. Once the share 
of the deceased in property that would have been allotted to him if 
a partition had taken place immediately before his death is 
ascertained, his heirs including the children who have been 
conferred with legitimacy under Section 16 of the HMA, 1955, will 
be entitled to their share in the property which would have been 
allotted to the deceased upon the notional partition, if it had taken 
place; and 
81.10. The provisions of the HSA, 1956 have to be harmonised with 
the mandate in Section 16(3) of the HMA, 1955 which indicates that 
a child who is conferred with legitimacy under sub-sections (1) and 
(2) will not be entitled to rights in or to the property of any person 
other than the parents. The property of the parent, where the parent 
had an interest in the property of a joint Hindu family governed 
under the Mitakshara law has to be ascertained in terms of the 
Explanation to sub-section (3), as interpreted above.” 

18. 
By applying the above principle on the entitlement of share to the 
children of void or voidable marriages, the judgements under appeal are 
liable to be set aside and are accordingly set aside. We allow the appeal 
by passing a preliminary decree of partition for the plaint schedule 
properties, firstly between Respondent No. 3 and Muthusamy Gounder. 
Secondly, in the notionally partitioned share of Muthusamy Gounder, his 

children, i.e., Appellant Nos. 1 and 3, Respondent No. 1 and Respondent 
No. 3 are allotted equal shares. 
19. 
Hence, a preliminary decree of partition, as indicated above, is 
passed. The appeal is allowed accordingly. No costs. 
 
……………… 
 [M.M. SUNDRESH] 

……………… 
 [S.V.N. BHATTI]