IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Kaushik Narsinhbhai Patel & Ors. 
…. Appellant(s) 
Versus 
 
M/s. S.J.R. Prime Corporation Private Limited. 
 
…Respondent(s) 
 
JUDGMENT 

C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J. 
 
1. 
The appellants, 46 in numbers, along with 
respondent Nos.2 to 6 herein (proforma respondents) 
filed Consumer Case No. 945 of 2019, against 
Respondent No.1 herein, complaining of deficiency in 
service raising various grounds, which culminated in the 
impugned order dated 15.09.2022 of the National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC), 
New Delhi. Allured by the representation of the first 
respondent-builder, each of the appellants booked 
separate flats in its declared project namely, ‘Fiesta 
Homes by SJR Prime’. A Construction Agreement dated 

31.03.2012 was entered into between the complainant 
and Respondent No.1 (Annexure P-2). Going by Clause 
6.1 of the Construction Agreement, possession of flats 
was liable to be handed over, after completion of the 
construction, on or before March, 2014, with a grace 
period of six months. However, considerable delay had 
occurred in completing and handing over possession of 
flats and as per the complainants, it was after about four 
years down the timeline that possession was handed 
over to them. Deficiency in construction aggravated the 
situation and made the appellants and the proforma 
respondents (hereinafter referred for brevity, ‘the 
complainants’ unless otherwise specifically mentioned) 
to approach the NCDRC by filing the aforesaid complaint 
seeking the following reliefs: - 
“i. Pay to each of the complainants & to each buyer 
having same interest, compensatory interest @ 
18% p.a. for abnormal & inordinate delay in 
handing over possession of flats to complainants, 
computing the total period of delay as indicated in 
Para 11.11 of the Consumer Complaint; 
ii. Refund the illegally charged car parking fee to 
complainants & to each buyer having same interest 
with an interest @ 18% p.a. & to hold the OP guilty 

of committing unfair and restrictive trade practice 
against the complainants & also against each 
buyer having same interest; 
iii. Refund to the complainants & to all buyers 
having same interest, the excess and illegally 
charged “legal fee” at the actual with an interest 
@ 18% p.a. and also to declare the OP guilty of 
committing unfair & restrictive trade practice 
against the complainants and also against each 
buyer having same interest; 
iv. Refund to the complainants & to all buyers 
having same interest, fee charged towards 
BESCOM & BWSSB charges after deducting as per 
actual with an interest @ 18% p.a. & also to 
declare the OP guilty of committing unfair and 
restrictive trade practice against the complainants 
& also against each buyer having same interest; 
and/or 
v. Direct OPs to provide in time bound manner, 
Green Jogging Track and Convenience Store as 
promised in Brochure, else pay compensation of 
Rupees Five Lakhs to each complainant and to 
each buyer having same interest; and/or 

vi. Pass any other and/or further relief, which this 
Hon’ble Commission thinks fit and proper, in the 
facts and circumstances of the case, in favour of the 
complainants and against the OP.” 
 
2. 
The complaint was partially allowed by the NCDRC 
as per the impugned order dated 15.09.2022. Before 
considering the rival contentions raised before us, it is 
worthwhile to refer to certain vital facts. 
3. 
The complainants filed Consumer Complaint 
No.945 of 2019 in May, 2019. Subsequent to its filing, the 
first respondent-builder issued certain e-mails to 
complainants between January, 2020 to June, 2020, 
addressing them individually and requiring them to 
contact its legal department in connection with the 
grievance raised in C.C. No.945 of 2019. Though this was 
done during the pendency of the Consumer Complaint, 
and that too, in respect of the grievance raised in C.C. 
No.945 of 2019, notice to the first respondent remained 
unserved. Thereupon, the NCDRC passed an order on 
27.01.2021 on the following lines: - 
“Notice of the complaint still remains unserved. 
Issue fresh notice of the Complaint along with all 
pending applications to the Opposite Party under 
Section 38 (3) (a) of the Consumer Protection Act, 

2019 making it clear that if the Opposite Party 
wishes to contest the allegations in the Complaint, 
it may file the Written Statement within thirty days 
of the receipt of notice in the complaint, failing 
which its right to file Written Statement may be 
closed.” 
 
4. 
The aforesaid order was challenged by the 
appellants before this Court in which was allowed as per (Annexure P-18, referred 
as such in the SLP) order dated 11.08.2021. Taking note 
of certain indisputable and undisputed factual position, 
this Court arrived at the conclusion that the first 
respondent-builder was well aware of the pendency of 
the C.C. No.945 of 2019 before the NCDRC and went on 
to hold thus: - 
“The conduct on the part of respondent-builder in 
not filing written statement does not entitle him to 
any further benefit. It must, therefore, be declared 
that the respondent has forfeited his right to have 
filed written statement and it is hereby declared 
so. 
 The appeal, therefore, stands allowed. The 
C.C.No.945 of 2019 shall now be proceeded 

further without the written statement of the 
respondent-builder. It shall however, be open to 
the respondent-builder to participate in the 
proceedings.” 
 
5. 
We will refer to the contentions raised based on 
Annexure P-18 order and its tenability or otherwise, a 
little later. Subsequent to Annexure P-18 order, NCDRC 
considered C.C. No.945 of 2019, which culminated in the 
order impugned in this appeal. 
6. 
Heard, Mr. Ajit Kumar Sinha, Senior Counsel 
appearing for the appellants and Mr. Balaji Srinivasan, 
learned counsel for the first respondent. 
7. 
A scanning of the impugned order would reveal 
that the NCDRC has recorded a clear finding that there 
occurred delay in handing over the flats to the 
appellants. As a necessary sequel to such finding and 
findings on the other allied grievance and claims, the 
impugned order was passed on 15.09.2022. The 
operative portion of the impugned order reads thus: - 
 
“In view of the aforesaid discussions, the complaint 
is partly allowed. The opposite party is directed to 
pay delayed compensation in the shape of interest 
@ 6 % per annum on the deposit of the 

complainants from due date of possession as 
determined for each buyer in the manner as 
provided in paragraph-8 of the judgment till the 
date of offer of possession and construct Green 
Jogging Track and Convenience Store, within a 
period of two months from the date of this 
judgement.” 
 
8. 
It is to be noted that despite the nature of the 
impugned order and creation of liability on the first 
respondent, as above, the complainants alone have 
chosen to prefer appeal and the first respondent No.1 
has not chosen to challenge the same. In the said 
circumstances, the findings of NCDRC on delayed 
handing over of the flats to the complainants and on non-
construction of Green Jogging Track and Convenience 
Store can only be taken as having become final. Ergo, 
the scope of this appeal is limited to a few questions, 
which we will discuss and deal with later. 
9. 
For a proper disposal of this appeal, it is apposite 
to refer to paragraph 8 of the impugned order, which 
reads as follows: - 
 
“In the present case, due date of possession was 
September, 2014, while “occupancy Certificate” 

was obtained 17.05.2017 and possession was 
delivered thereafter. The complainants have not 
given date-wise payment schedule. Schedule-E of 
this agreement contained “Construction Linked 
Payment 
Plan” 
under 
which, 
total 
sale 
consideration was payable in 12 instalments on 
different levels of the construction. As such for the 
purposes of delayed compensation, we think it 
appropriate that due date of possession will be 
considered after expiry of six month from the 
payment of 11th instalment by the home buyer. 
The developer would be entitled for further six 
months as grace period. The developer shall pay 
delayed compensation in the shape of interest @ 
6% per annum on the deposit of the complainants 
from the due date of possession as determined in 
accordance of above formula till the date of actual 
possession.” 
 
10. 
One of the main contentions of the appellants is that 
ignoring Annexure P-18 order of this Court, the NCDRC 
virtually permitted the first respondent to introduce facts 
to dispute their claims and complaints inasmuch as the 
opportunity offered to the first respondent by NCDRC to 

file written submissions was utilised by the first 
respondent to introduce new facts to resist their claims 
and contentions. Such newly introduced facts and factors 
by the first respondent through written submissions, 
obviously, weighed with NCDRC in adopting the formula 
followed in paragraph 8 of the impugned order, for the 
purpose of computation of compensation payable to the 
complainants, it is contended. 
11. 
We will straight away verify the verity of the 
aforesaid contentions with reference to Annexure P-18 
order dated 11.08.2021, firstly, to see whether the same 
was overreached and then, subject to its answer and 
consequences of its defiance. A bare perusal of 
Annexure P-21, which is the written submissions on 
behalf of the first respondent herein (opposite party 
therein) filed before the NCDRC and marked as such in 
this proceeding, without any peradventure would go to 
show that in and vide the said written submissions, the 
first respondent had introduced some pleadings to resist 
the claims and the contentions of the complainants in CC 
No.945 of 2019 and eventually, to offer its explanation for 
the delay in handing over possession of the flats. The 
raison d’etre for our remarks would be unravelled by a 

mere perusal of Annexure P-21. Paragraph 3 thereof, 
opens thus: - 
 
“The 
complainants 
do 
not 
deserve 
any 
compensation as,” 
(underline supplied) 
 
12. 
Thenceforth, under para 3 (i) to 3 (iii), the 
respondents gave the reasons therefor. Through 
paragraph 4 of Annexure P-21, the respondent 
introduced further reasons to support its stand that the 
complainants do not deserve compensatory interest for 
the delay in handing over possession of flats. It is to be 
noted that even after taking a stand at paragraph 5 
thereof that there was no delay at all from its part, the first 
respondent proceeded to explain the delay in 
paragraph 6. The statements made in the further 
paragraphs of Annexure P-21 also carry, either the case 
of the first respondent or its explanations/reasons to 
counter the claim of the complainants. To put it pithily, 
the first respondent, on being given the opportunity to 
file written submission, made use of it to make good its 
failure to file a written statement despite the fact that its 
right to file the same was declared as forfeited by this 
Court. 

13. 
We are at a loss to understand as to how, such an 
opportunity could have been utilised by the first 
respondent in defiance to the specific directions of this 
Court under Annexure P-18 order and to file a written 
submission of such a nature. Under Annexure P-18 
order, this Court declared that the first respondent had 
forfeited its right to file a written statement and then 
permitted, rather, directed to proceed further without 
the written statement of the first respondent-builder. 
True that even then its right to participate in the 
proceedings was protected, presumably, taking into 
account the position of law in that regard. We will deal 
with the scope of such permitted participation as also the 
consequence of the act of defiance of Annexure P-18 
order depending on its degree of defiance and its 
impact. In doing so, we will have to keep reminded of 
the principle of law that what cannot be done directly, 
cannot be done indirectly. 
 
14. 
The discussion as above, would take us to the next 
question as to what is the impact of forfeiture of 
opportunity to file written statement? We are fully aware 
of the fact that all the provisions in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, (for short ‘the CPC’) are not proprio 
vigore applicable to proceedings before Consumer 

Forums created under the Consumer Protection Act, 
2019, except to the extent it is provided under Section 38 
(9) of the Consumer Protection Act. Be that as it may, in 
the absence of specific provisions dealing with the 
consequence of forfeiture of the right to file a written 
statement, it is only appropriate to refer to the provisions 
and positions dealing with such situations in the CPC to 
know the general law on this question. In this context, it 
is worthy to refer to a decision of this Court in 
Nanda Dulal Pradhan & Anr. v. Dibakar Pradhan & 
Anr1. It was held therein thus: - 
“……as observed and held by this Court in the 
case of Sangram Singh (supra) on setting aside the 
ex parte decree and on restoration of the suit the 
parties to the suit shall be put to the same position 
as they were at the time when the ex parte 
judgment and decree was passed and the 
defendants may not be permitted to file the written 
statement as no written statement was filed. 
However, at the same time they can be permitted 
to participate in the suit proceedings and cross 
examine the witnesses. In that view of the matter 
the impugned judgment and order passed by the 

High Court is unsustainable. Still, on setting aside 
the ex parte judgment and decree, though the 
defendants who had not filed the written 
statement, can be permitted to participate in the 
suit and cross examine the witnesses. Therefore, 
the High Court is not right in observing that as no 
written statement was filed by the defendants, the 
reopening of the suit by setting aside ex parte 
judgment and decree will become futile. As 
observed hereinabove the High Court has not at all 
observed anything on the correctness of the order 
passed by the First Appellate Court setting aside 
the ex-parte judgment and decree on merits. 
 
15. 
Thus, 
the 
position 
is 
that 
even 
if 
the 
defendant/opposite party failed to file a written 
statement and, in that matter, even if forfeiture of the 
right to file written statement has occasioned it would not 
disentitle that party from participating in the further 
proceedings, without filing a written statement and in 
such circumstances, the said party would also be having 
the right to cross-examine the witness(es), if any, of the 
plaintiff/complainant. 

16. 
In the contextual situation, it is also appropriate to 
refer to Rule 1 & 2, Order VI of the CPC which reads 
thus:- 
“Pleading. - “Pleading” shall mean the plaint or 
written statement.” 
 
Rule 2, Order VI, in so far as, reads thus: - 
“(1) Every pleading shall contain, and contain 
only, a statement in a concise form of the material 
facts on which the party pleading relies for his 
claim or defence, as the case may be, but not the 
evidence by which they are to be proved.” 
 
17. 
The rigour of the rule of pleadings is evident from 
Rule 7 of Order VI, CPC, which mandates that ‘no 
pleading shall, except by way of amendment, raise any 
new ground of claim or contain any allegation of fact 
inconsistent with the previous pleadings of the party 
pleading the same’. 
18. 
In the context of the aforesaid provisions under the 
CPC, it is apt to refer to a decision of a Division Bench of 
the Karnataka High Court in Nalini Sunder v. GV 
Sunder2. It was held therein that a party could not make 
out a case on the basis of evidence for which he/she has 
 
 Kar 86 

laid no foundation in the pleadings. It is fairly settled 
that no amount of evidence can prove a case of a party 
who had not set up the same in his/her pleadings, it was 
further held therein. According to us, it is the correct 
proposition of law. In the absence of any specific 
provisions 
dealing 
with 
non-filing 
of 
written 
statements/forfeiture of the right to file a written 
statement, taking note of the general position as above, 
it can only be held that it should bar the opposite party 
in a proceeding before the Consumer Redressal Forums 
to bring in pleadings, indirectly to introduce its/his case 
and evidence to support such case. In the situations 
mentioned above, the right of the opposite party is 
confined to participate in the proceedings without filing 
a written statement and to cross-examine witness(es), if 
any, examined by the complainant(s). It be the position 
of law, the first respondent who is bound by Annexure P-
18 order could not have been permitted to introduce its 
case to defend the case of the complainants through 
written submissions though it was rightly permitted to 
participate in the proceedings. There is no case for the 
first respondent that it sought permission to cross-
examine Kaushik Narsinhbhai Patel who filed affidavit of 
evidence and produced documentary evidence. At any 

rate, no such case was put forth by the first respondent 
and no grievance of denial of such opportunity was also 
raised. In the circumstances expatiated above, in view 
of Annexure P-18 order the reply and objection filed by 
the first respondent herein in this proceeding also 
cannot be looked to the extent it carries pleadings 
relating its case, the reasons and objections which could 
have been let in through a written statement. In short, 
the first respondent could be permitted only to argue the 
legal questions arising based on authorities and 
provisions of law as also regarding lapses or laches and 
the consequential non-admissibility or otherwise of 
evidence, let in by the appellants. 
19. 
Having held as above, the next question to be 
looked into is whether NCDRC had given weight to any 
such pleadings and contentions taken by the first 
respondent in its written submissions and/or whether the 
decision of NCDRC is based on any fact, factors or data 
furnished by the first respondent beyond the extent 
permissible on account of the legal trammel of forfeiture 
of its opportunity to file a written statement. At this 
juncture, we may hasten to add that even when the 
defendant’s/opposite party’s right to file a written 
statement is forfeited that by itself will not make it 

obligatory on the part of the NCDRC to pass an order in 
favour of a complainant in case the complainant 
concerned failed to establish its case. This power is to 
be read into the jurisdiction of a body with adjudicating 
power. This is because there is distinct difference 
between a situation of non-filing of a written statement 
pursuant to a declaration that the opposite party had 
forfeited the right to file a written statement and absence 
of denial of specific pleadings of complainant in the 
written statement filed by an opposite party. Certainly, 
in the latter case, absence of denial of specific pleadings 
on facts they can be taken as admitted. In the case on 
hand, it is to be noted that actually as per order dated 
27.01.2021, NCDRC had granted time to the first 
respondent to file a written statement with a caution that 
in case of failure to file the same within the stipulated 
time, the right to file a written statement would be 
closed. It is this order dated 27.01.2021 that was 
challenged 
by 
the 
complainants 
that 
ultimately 
culminated in Annexure P-18 order of declaration of 
forfeiture. 
20. 
A close scrutiny of the impugned order in 
juxtaposition with the written submissions filed by the 
first respondent would go to show that NCDRC had not 

actually accepted the case of the first respondent raised 
in defence in its written submissions or in that matter, no 
reason or objection raised in the written statement was 
also adverted to, for rendering its decision on the 
complaint. In such circumstances, though the action on 
the part of the first respondent who suffered Annexure P-
18 order, in bringing on record its case and contentions 
to resist the case and contentions of the complainants, 
cannot be appreciated, the contention of the appellants 
based on the same became inconsequential. As stated 
earlier, in view of Annexure P-18 order, we are also not 
going to advert to any case, claims or contentions of the 
first respondent raised in its reply and objection filed in 
this proceeding, except to the legally permissible limit, 
in case any such material is available on record. We 
have already concurred with the decision of the 
Karnataka High Court in Nalini Sunder’s case (supra) 
that a party could not make out a case on the basis of 
evidence for which he/she had laid no foundation in the 
pleadings. In the absence of a written statement, 
naturally, there can be no pleadings, in the case, for the 
first respondent in the eyes of law. Though the first 
respondent participated in the proceeding before the 
NCDRC, it could not bring-forth anything admissible in 

view of the impact of forfeiture under Annexure P-18 
order. 
21. 
The discussion as above would lead to the last 
question as to whether the impugned order invites 
interference on any other ground. The core contention 
of the appellants that while passing the impugned order, 
NCDRC failed to consider the relevance and impact of 
Clause 6.1 of the Construction Agreement. No doubt, it 
is a matter that requires consideration. Clause 6 of the 
said Construction Agreement reads thus: - 
“6) COMPLETION & DELIVERY OF POSSESSION: 
6.1) The possession of the Schedule ‘C’ apartment 
in Schedule ‘A’ Property will be delivered by the 
Second Party to the First Party after completion of 
construction as far as possible on or before the 
month of March year 2014 with Six months grace 
period additionally. 
6.2) …. 
6.3) In case of delay in delivery of the apartment 
for reasons other than what is stated above, the 
Second Party is entitled to a grace period of Six 
months and if the delay persists, the Second Party 
shall pay the First Party damages at Rs. 2/- (Rupees 
Two Only) per Sq. Ft. super built up area per 

month of delay of the Schedule ‘C’ Apartment till 
delivery, provided the First Party has/ have paid 
all the amounts payable as per this Agreement and 
within the stipulated period and has not violated 
any of the terms of this agreement and Agreement 
to Sell….” 
 
22. 
A perusal of Clause 6.1 of the Construction 
Agreement would reveal that it specifically mentions the 
promised date for handing over the possession viz., the 
due date for handing over possession as ‘on or before 
March, 2014’. True that in terms of Clause 6.1, 
additionally, six months grace period is available to the 
first respondent-builder. Thus, going by the terms of 
Construction Agreement, the due date for handing over 
possession of flats could have been, rather should have 
been fixed only in terms of Clause 6.1 of the said 
Agreement. However, the impugned order would reveal 
that without considering Clause 6, the due date for 
handing over of possession of flats was fixed by the 
NCDRC by reckoning six months grace period from the 
date of payment of instalment No.11 (eleven), by the 
home buyer. Therefore, the question is which among the 
two methods is legally permissible. While the appellants 

contend that the former is bound to be followed in the 
matter of fixing the due date for handing over possession 
of flats, the first respondent would contend that the 
method adopted by the NCDRC is just and reasonable 
and there is no warrant or justifiable reason for any kind 
of interference. The decision in R.V. Prasannakumaar & 
others. V. Mantri Castles Private Limited & Another.3, 
referred to by the NCDRC, itself would answer this issue. 
In R.V. Prasannakumaar’s case (supra), going by the 
terms of the flat purchase agreement, possession of flats 
was liable to be handed over to the buyers on 
31.01.2014. In that case about two years delay had 
occurred in the matter of handing over of possession. 
Consequently, NCDRC took the due date for handing 
over of possession with reference to the flat purchase 
agreement and fixed it as 01.02.2014. The fixation of the 
due date for possession as 01.02.2014 was upheld by this 
Court in R.V. Prasannakumaar’s case (supra). If that be 
so, in the absence of any exceptional circumstances, 
NCDRC should have fixed the date for possession in the 
same 
manner 
as 
has 
been 
done 
in 
R.V. 
Prasannakumaar’s case (supra), viz., in terms of the 
conditions in the Construction Agreement. True that in 
 
3 (2020) 

view of the specific condition for grant of six months 
grace period additionally to the buyer, the due date for 
possession in terms of Clause 6.1 of the agreement ought 
to have been fixed by reckoning six months from March, 
2014, the promise date for handing over the flats 
mentioned in the Construction Agreement. A scanning 
of the impugned order would reveal no exceptional 
circumstances for making deviation from the formula 
followed in R.V. Prasannakumaar’s case (supra) for 
fixing the due date for possession. NCDRC observed 
that the complainants have failed to give date-wise 
payment schedule. We are at a loss to understand as to 
how that can be a reason for fixing the due date for 
possession in total disregard to the method adopted in 
R.V. Prasannakumaar’s case (supra). The discussion in 
paragraph 8 would suggest that NCDRC after taking into 
account the fact that Schedule-E of the agreement 
contained 
‘Construction 
Linked 
Payment 
Plan’ 
whereunder the sale consideration was to be paid in 12 
instalments on different levels of construction, formed 
the opinion that the fixation of due date for possession is 
closely linked with payment of instalments as mentioned 
in Schedule-E. We have no hesitation to hold that there 
is no rationale for such a conclusion for the reason that as 

it was arrived at without considering the relevant 
condition contained in Clause 6.1 of the Construction 
Agreement which relates to fixation of due date for 
possession. 
True 
that 
Schedule-E 
contained 
‘Construction Linked Payment Plan’ and it provides for 
payment in 12 instalments on different levels of 
construction. Certainly, it was so incorporated to 
obligate the buyer to pay the due instalment depending 
upon the stage of construction. Hence, delay in effecting 
construction 
cannot 
be 
a 
reason 
for 
denying 
compensation, which was also contemplated under 
Clause 6 of the Construction Agreement. The effect of 
‘Construction Linked Payment Plan’ is that it obligates 
the builder to complete construction up to a particular 
required level at the given point of time and upon such 
accomplishment, obligates the buyer to effect the due 
instalment. According to us, the non-furnishing of a date-
wise payment schedule could not have been a reason for 
deviating from the formula followed in the matter of 
fixation 
of 
due 
date 
of 
possession 
in 
R.V. 
Prasannakumaar’s case (supra). That apart, in the case 
on hand, the fact is that the complainants have effected 
the payment of sale consideration and were handed over 
possession of flats. The compensation is claimed by the 

complainants for the considerable concutation in 
construction and in handing over possession of flats. At 
any rate, in the circumstances obtained in this case and 
especially taking note of the fact that owing to the 
forfeiture of the right to file a written statement, the first 
respondent-builder did not make out any exceptional 
circumstance, the NCDRC was not justified in not 
following 
the 
formula 
followed 
in 
R.V. 
Prasannakumaar’s case (supra) in the matter of fixing 
the due date for possession for the purpose of computing 
compensation for the delay. In this context, it is also to 
be noted that in R.V. Prasannakumaar’s case (supra), 
the NCDRC found that payment in the shape of interest at 
the rate of 6% per annum on the deposit of home buyers 
from the due date of possession till the offer of 
possession is the adequate method to compensate the 
buyers for the delay. This court only found the course of 
action adopted by NCDRC as just and reasonable. In the 
case on hand, NCDRC rightly followed the same method 
adopted in R.V. Prasannakumaar’s case (supra) and the 
claimants are entitled to compensation in the shape of 
interest at 6% per annum from the due date of possession 
till the date on which the respective complainant-buyers 
are offered possession. In the said circumstances and in 

view of the decision in R.V. Prasannakumaar’s case 
(supra), on this issue, the only modification required is 
with respect to the method adopted for fixing the due 
date for possession, in the manner mentioned earlier. 
Though the complainants contended that they are 
entitled to be compensated in the manner provided 
under clause 6 of the agreement, in view of the decision 
in R.V. Prasannakumaar’s case (supra), we are of the 
view that compensation in the shape of interest at the rate 
of 6 % per annum for the period mentioned earlier would 
be in tune with the formula followed in R.V. 
Prasannakumaar’s case (supra). This is because such a 
course was adopted in R.V. Prasannakumaar’s case 

despite 
the 
stipulation 
for 
payment 
of 
compensation at the rate of Rs.3/sq. ft. per month for 
delayed handing over of possession. It is to be noted that 
in the case on hand, the stipulation for payment of 
compensation for delayed handing over of possession is 
only at the rate of Rs.2/sq. ft. per month. 
23. 
True that the complainants claimed for refund of 
charge for car parking fee charged, with interest. The 
same was declined by NCDRC by assigning the reason 
that the said question was decided in favour of the 
developer by NCDRC in CC/913/2016 viz., in RV 

Prassana Kumars 47 Ors. vs. Mantri Castles Pvt. Ltd. was confirmed by this Court in R.V. Prasannakumaar’s 
case (supra). In that view of the matter, we decline to 
interfere with the finding of NCDRC on the claim for 
refund of car parking charge. 
24. 
Paragraph 9 of the impugned order would reveal 
that the prayer for refund of legal fee realised by the 
developer for execution of conveyance deed was 
declined by NCDRC on the ground that the complainants 
had not adduced any evidence based on which legal fee 
could be determined by it. We are not inclined to 
interfere with the said finding of NCDRC, as well. The 
same is the position with respect to the claim for refund 
of legal fee charge for conveyance on the ground that it 
was charged excessively. As relates the prayer to 
provide Green Jogging Track and Convenience Store as 
promised in the brochure, NCDRC has already issued 
directions for constructing them within the time 
stipulated thereunder. 
25. 
In the circumstances, this appeal is allowed in part 
by modifying the formula formulated under paragraph 8 
of the impugned judgment by NCDRC in the matter of 
payment of compensation for delay in handing over 
possession of flats and it is ordered that the liability of the 

developer to pay interest at the rate of 6% per annum 
shall be from the due date for possession fixed as above 
viz., from September, 2014 till the date on which the 
respective complainant-buyers are offered possession. 
26. 
Needless to say, that NCDRC in execution of 
impugned order as modified by this judgment, shall 
verify with reference to each flat purchaser the date on 
which offer of possession has been made to him/her and 
fix the liability on the builder in the manner mentioned 
above. 
27. 
Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of. 
 
……………………, J. 
 (C.T. Ravikumar) 

……………………, J. 
 (Sanjay Kumar) 
 
New Delhi; 
July 22, 2024.