IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE / ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

The State of Punjab & Ors. 

 …Appellants 

Versus 
 
Davinder Singh & Ors. 

 …Respondents 

With 
C.A. No.6936 of 2015 
With 
C.A. No.5597 of 2010 
With 
W.P.(C) No. 21 of 2023 
With 
C.A. No.5593 of 2010 
With 
S.L.P.(C) No.30766 of 2010 
With 
S.L.P.(C) No. 8701 of 2011 
With 
S.L.P.(C) Nos.36500-36501 of 2011 
With 
T.C.(C) No.38 of 2011 

With 
T.P.(C) No.464 of 2015 
With 
W.P.(C) No.1477 of 2019 
With 
C.A. No.5586 of 2010 
With 
C.A. No.5598 of 2010 
With 
C.A. Nos. 5595-5596 of 2010 
With 
C.A. No.2324 of 2011 
With 
T.C.(C) No.37 of 2011 
With 
C.A. No.5589 of 2010 
With 
C.A. No.5600 of 2010 
With 
C.A. No.5587 of 2010 
With 
S.L.P.(C) Nos.5454-5459 of 2011 
With 
C.A. No.2318 of 2011 
With 
C.A. No.289 of 2014 
And With 
W.P.(C) No.562 of 2022 

JUDGMENT 
 
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 
 
A. 
Background... 5 
i. 
Relevant constitutional provisions... 5 
ii. The genesis of the reference to the Constitution Bench... 7 
iii. 
The judgment in Chinnaiah... 11 
iv. 
The reference... 16 
B. 
Submissions... 18 
i. 
Submissions of Petitioners... 18 
ii. Submissions of Respondents... 25 
C. 
Issues... 31 
D. 
Analysis... 32 
i. 
The jurisprudence on reservation... 32 
a. Reservation as an exposition of substantive equality... 32 
I. 
The competing visions of equality... 32 
II. The “efficiency” of reservation... 38 
III. 
The interplay of Article 16 and Article 335... 44 
ii. Permissibility of sub-classification under Article 14... 52 
a. The contours of Article 14... 53 
b. Sub-classification as a facet of equality... 55 
c. Micro-classification: the limits of sub-classification... 61 
iii. 
Sub-classification in reservations: tracing the journey through 
Balaji, Vasanth Kumar and Indra Sawhney... 63 

a. Indra Sawhney did not exclude sub-classification within the Scheduled 
Castes... 69 
iv. 
The import of the deeming fiction in Article 341... 72 
a. Chinnaiah on the deeming fiction in Article 341... 72 
b. Scope of deeming fiction... 74 
c. Article 341 does not create a deeming fiction... 76 
d. Article 341(1) read with Article 341(2) only proscribes exclusion from and 
inclusion in the Scheduled Castes List.... 81 
v. Historical and empirical evidence of inter-se backwardness within the 
Scheduled Castes... 88 
a. Identification of the depressed classes... 89 
b. Empirical evidence of heterogeneity... 96 
vi. 
The power of the State to sub-classify under Articles 15 and 16... 100 
vii. 
Criteria for sub-classification... 103 
a. The meaning of “Backward Class”... 104 
b. Inadequacy of representation in services of the State... 110 
c. The requirement of “effective” representation... 115 
d. Yardstick for sub-classification... 120 
viii. The limits of sub-classification... 122 
a. Model of special provisions... 122 
b. The caste-class conundrum... 128 
ix. 
Scope for judicial review... 131 
a. Inter-se backwardness... 131 
b. Adequacy of representation... 133 
E. 
Conclusion... 138 

PART A 

1. 
The reference to this Constitution Bench raises significant questions relating 
to the right to equal opportunity guaranteed by the Constitution. The principal 
issue is whether sub-classification of the Scheduled Castes for reservation is 
constitutionally permissible. 
 
A. 
Background 
i. 
Relevant constitutional provisions 
2. 
Article 14 of the Constitution stipulates that the State shall not deny to any 
person equality before the law or the equal protection of laws within the 
territory of India. Article 15(1) states that the State should not discriminate 
against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth 
or any of them. Article 15(4) stipulates that nothing in Article 15 shall prevent 
the State from making any special provision for the advancement of any 
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.1 
3. 
Article 16 deals with equality of opportunity in matters of public employment. 
Clause (1) of Article 16 guarantees equality of opportunity for all citizens in 
matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State. 
Clause (2) stipulates that no citizen shall be discriminated in or be ineligible 
for any employment or office under the State on the grounds only of religion, 
race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them. Clause (4) 
 
1 Article 15 (4) “Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of Article 29 shall prevent the State form making any 
special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.” 

PART A 

of the provision states that nothing in Article 16 shall prevent the State from 
making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of 
any backward class of citizens, which in the opinion of the State, is not 
adequately represented in the services under the State2. 
4. 
Article 366(24) of the Constitution defines the term ‘Scheduled Castes’ to 
mean such castes, tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, races or 
tribes as are deemed under Article 341 to be Scheduled Castes for the 
purposes of the Constitution. Article 341(1) grants the President the power to 
notify the castes, races or tribes (or parts of or groups within castes, races or 
tribes) which shall be deemed to be Scheduled Castes for a State or a Union 
Territory for the purposes of the Constitution. The President has been 
empowered to issue the notification with respect to a State in consultation 
with the Governor of the State. Article 341(2) stipulates that Parliament may 
by law include or exclude any caste, race, or tribe (or part of or group within 
any caste, race, or tribe) from the list of Scheduled Castes specified in the 
notification and that a notification issued under clause (1) shall not be varied 
by any subsequent notification. Article 341 is extracted below for reference: 
“Article 341. Scheduled Castes.- (1) The President may 
with respect to any State or Union Territory, and where 
it is a State after consultation with the Governor thereof, 
by public notification, specify the castes, races or 
tribes, or parts of or groups within castes, races, tribes 
which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be 
deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to that 
State or Union Territory, as the case may be. 
 
2 Article 16 (4) “Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for reservation of 
appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State is not 
adequately represented in the services under the State.” 

PART A 

(2) Parliament may by law include or exclude from the 
list of Scheduled Castes specified in a notification 
issued under clause (1) any caste, race, or tribe or part 
of or group within any caste, race or tribe, but save as 
aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause 
shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.” 
 
5. 
Articles 3423 and 342-A4 relate to notification of Scheduled Tribes and socially 
and educationally backward classes respectively and contain provisions pari 
materia to Article 341. ii. 
The genesis of the reference to the Constitution Bench 
6. 
The State Legislature of Punjab enacted the Punjab Scheduled Castes and 
Backward Classes (Reservation in Services) Act 20065. The long title 
stipulates that it is a statute to provide for reservation in services for the 
members of the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes and for matters 
incidental thereto. Section 2(f) defines “Scheduled Castes” as Scheduled 
Castes notified by the President under Article 341 of the Constitution by the 
Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order 1950, as amended from time to time. 
 
3 Article 342. Scheduled Tribes.-(1) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where 
it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the tribes or tribal 
communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which shall for the purposes of this 
Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may 
be. 
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification 
issued under clause (1) any tribe or tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or tribal community, 
but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent 
notification. 
4 Article 342A. Socially and educationally backward classes.—(1) The President may with respect to any 
State or Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public 
notification, specify 6 [the socially and educationally backward classes in the Central List which shall for the 
purposes of the Central Government] be deemed to be socially and educationally backward classes in 
relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may be. 
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the Central List of socially and educationally backward 
classes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any socially and educationally backward class, but 
save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent 
notification. 
5 “Punjab Act” 

PART A 

Section 4(2) provides that reservation of twenty-five percent shall be made 
for the members of the Scheduled Castes and twelve percent for Backward 
Classes while filing up vacancies by direct recruitment in services. Section 
4(5) stipulates that fifty percent of the vacancies of the quota reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes in direct recruitment shall be offered to Balmikis and 
Mazhabi Sikhs, if available, as a first preference from amongst the Scheduled 
Castes. 
7. 
Proceedings were instituted under Article 226 of the Constitution for 
challenging the validity of Section 4(5) of the Punjab Act. By a judgment dated 
29 March 2010, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana declared Section 4(5) 
unconstitutional, relying on the judgment of the Constitution Bench of this 
Court in EV Chinniah v. State of Andhra Pradesh6. 
8. 
Opposing the State’s appeal against the order of the High Court, the 
respondents relied upon the judgment of the Constitution Bench in Chinnaiah 
(supra). The State submitted that Chinnaiah (supra) does not apply to the 
controversy in hand and that the decision is in any event, not consistent with 
the judgment of the nine-Judge Bench in Indra Sawhney v. Union of India.7 
On 20 August 2014, a three-Judge Bench referred the correctness of 
Chinnaiah (supra) for consideration by a larger Bench. The three-Judge 
Bench observed that the judgment needs to be revisited, considering Article 
338, the judgment of this Court in Indra Sawhney (supra) and the interplay 
between Article 16 and Articles 338 and 341 of the Constitution. 
 
6 (2005) 
7 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 

PART A 

9. 
On 9 November 1994, the Government of Haryana issued a notification8 by 
which the Scheduled Castes in the State were classified into two categories - 
Blocks A and B - for the purposes of reservation. Block B consisted of 
Chamars, Jatia Chamars, Rahgars, Raigars, Ramdasias or Ravidasias. Block 
A consisted of the remaining thirty-six castes in the list of Scheduled Castes 
for the State. Within the quota reserved for Scheduled Castes in direct 
recruitment for Government jobs, fifty percent of the vacancies were to be 
offered to candidates from Block A and the other fifty percent were to be 
offered to candidates from Block B. The notification further stipulated that in 
case suitable candidates from Block A were unavailable, candidates from 
Block B should be recruited against those vacancies. Similarly, in the event 
that suitable candidates from Block B were unavailable, candidates from 
Block A should be recruited against those vacancies. Thus, preference would 
be given to castes belonging to Block A and Block B in the fifty per cent 
earmarked for them. Proceedings were initiated under Article 226 for 
challenging the constitutional validity of the notification. By a judgment dated 
6 July 2006, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana quashed the notification 
on the ground that the sub-classification of castes placed in the list of 
Scheduled Castes is unconstitutional in view of the judgment of this Court in 
Chinnaiah (supra). The Special Leave Petitions challenging the judgment of 
the High Court of Punjab and Haryana were tagged with the appeals involving 
the challenge to the Punjab Act. 
 
8 Notification No.22/5590-3-GS/111 

PART A 

10. The State Legislature of Tamil Nadu enacted the Tamil Nadu Arunthathiyars 
(Special Reservation of seats in educational institutions including private 
educational Institutions and of appointments or posts in services under State 
within the Reservation for the Scheduled Castes) Act 20099. The long title to 
the legislation states that it is an Act to provide for reservation of seats to 
Arunthathiyars in educational institutions, including private educational 
institutions in the State and for appointment in services under the State. The 
Tamil Nadu Act defines Arunthathiyars to mean the castes of Arunthathiyar, 
Chakkiliyan, Madari, Madiga, Pagadi, Thoti and Adi Andhra from the list of 
seventy-six Scheduled Castes notified by the President under Article 341, as 
amended from time to time.10 Section 3 stipulates that sixteen per cent of the 
seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes in educational institutions shall be 
offered to the Arunthathiyars, if available, having regard to the social and 
educational backwardness of the community. Section 4 makes a similar 
provision for the Arunthathiyars in recruitment to Government posts.11 
Proceedings under Article 32 of the Constitution were instituted before this 
Court for challenging the constitutional validity of the Tamil Nadu Act on the 
ground that it contravenes the judgment of this Court in Chinnaiah (supra). 
 
9 “Tamil Nadu Act” 
10 Tamil Nadu Act; Section 2(a) 
11 4. Notwithstanding anything contained in the 1994 Act or the 2006 Act or in any other law for the time being 
in force or in any judgment, decree or order of any Court or other authority, having regard to the social and 
educational backwardness of Arunthathiyars included in the Scheduled Castes, sixteen per cent of the 
appointments or posts reserved for the Scheduled Castes shall be offered to Arunthathiyars, if available, in 
appointments or posts in the services under the State, on preferential basis amongst the Scheduled Castes, 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this Act, “services under the State” includes the services under- 

The Government 

He legislature of the State 

Any local authority 

Any Corporation or Company owned or controlled by the Government; or 

Any other authority in respect of which the State Legislature has power to make laws 

PART A 

The batch of matters challenging the Tamil Nadu Act was tagged with the 
batch of matters challenging the Punjab Act. iii. 
The judgment in Chinnaiah 
11. A three - judge Bench of this Court was called upon to adjudicate on the 
validity of the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes (Rationalisation of 
Reservations) Act 2000. The Act was enacted following the recommendations 
of the Ramachandran Raju Commission constituted by the State 
Government. The Commission was tasked with ascertaining the groups 
among the Scheduled Castes in the State who had failed to avail of the 
benefits of reservations in college admissions and state public services. The 
Commission found inter-se backwardness among the Scheduled Castes in 
the state in matters of reservation in education and appointment. Accepting 
its findings - that there were inequalities among the Scheduled Castes as far 
as the distribution of the benefits of reservation was concerned - the State 
Government 
promulgated 
the 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Scheduled 
Castes 
(Rationalisation of Reservations) Ordinance 1999. While proceedings 
challenging the Ordinance were pending, the State enacted a law to replace 
Ordinance. Section 3, which provided for ‘Rationalisation of Reservations,’ 
apportioned the benefits of reservation among Scheduled Castes into four 
groups – Groups A, B, C and D - in varying percentages: 1% for Group A, 
7% for Group B, 6% for Group C and 1% for Group D respectively, subject to 
the availability of eligible candidates. The Andhra Pradesh High Court 
rejected challenges to the Act, leading to appeals which came to be decided 
by this Court in Chinnaiah (supra). 

PART A 

12. The appellants argued that the State legislature lacked legislative 
competence to enact the law. They argued that once enumerated in the 
Presidential List under Article 341 of the Constitution, the Scheduled Castes 
constitute a homogenous class, which is incapable of further subdivision/sub-
classification. Such a classification, they argued, amounted to tinkering with 
the Presidential List, in violation of Article 341(2) and Article 14 of the 
Constitution. 
13. The respondent-State on the other hand, argued that Article 341 allows the 
President to identify certain castes as Scheduled Castes and only Parliament 
can include or exclude entries from the List so created. The State argued that 
it could, in exercise of powers under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) decide the scope 
and extent of reservations. This power, they argued, was not limited by Article 
341 which operates in an entirely different field. The State urged that the Act 
of 2000 was a form of affirmative action and it did not exclude or include 
anyone from the Presidential List under Article 341. Such a sub-classification 
of the Scheduled Castes was claimed to be permissible under Article 16(4) 
for the same reason that this Court had held in Indra Sawhney (supra) that 
the backward classes could be divided into the ‘more backward’ and 
‘backward’, depending on inter-se backwardness. 
14. A Constitution Bench of this Court, speaking through Justice Santosh Hegde 
(for himself, Justice SN Variava and Justice BP Singh), Justice HK Sema and 
Justice SB Sinha unanimously held that the Andhra Pradesh Act was 
unconstitutional. 

PART A 

15. Justice Hegde examined whether the Andhra Pradesh Act tinkered with the 
Presidential List notified under Article 341 and held that the States have no 
power to deal with the Scheduled Castes except the maintenance of efficiency 
of administration. Justice Hegde observed that certain members of the 
Constituent Assembly sought to give power to the States to interfere with the 
list but the amendments to that effect were unsuccessful. Analysing the 
opinion of Justice Hegde, the following formulations emerge:12 
a. The Scheduled Castes form a class by themselves13 as elucidated in 
the opinions of Justice Krishna Iyer and Justice Fazl Ali in State of Kerala 
v. NM Thomas;14 
b. The purpose of the Act was to divide the castes in the Presidential List 
and then to distribute the 15% reservations for the Scheduled Castes in 
the state among four groups. The Act did not provide reservations for 
the first time but redistributed them by sub-classifying the Scheduled 
Castes. Reservations are not a constitutional mandate and once the 
state has fulfilled the obligation to reserve certain seats under Articles 
15(4) and 16(4), it cannot apportion reservations among sub-classes. 
Notwithstanding the purpose of such sub-classification, the State cannot 
claim legislative competence under Entry 41, List II and Entry 25, List III 
of the Seventh Schedule in order to divide the Scheduled Castes’ List. 
The pith and substance of the law in question was not traceable to these 
entries;15 
 
12 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Hegde, 13-19]. 
13 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Hegde, 20-26]. 
14 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Hegde, 82, 135 and 169]. 
15 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Hegde, 30-31]. 

PART A 

c. The Scheduled Castes constitute a class, and a classification already 
exists. The issue was whether a further classification is permissible 
within this class with the objective of providing reservations.16 The 
rationale of Indra Sawhney (supra), to the extent that it permitted sub-
classification of the Other Backward Classes17, did not apply to the 
Scheduled Castes.18 Sub-classification was akin to giving preference to 
a ‘miniscule proportion’ of the Scheduled Castes, over other groups and 
would be impermissible in view of Article 14;19 and 
d. The Constitution creates a legal fiction in terms of which the Scheduled 
Castes constitute a “class as a whole”. The States cannot sub-divide 
them. Such a sub-classification would tinker with the Presidential list and 
violate Article 14. If the benefits of reservation are not being distributed 
equitably, they can be supplemented by additional measures such as 
training, which would not be contrary to Articles 14 and 15.20 A further 
sub-classification amongst the Scheduled Castes would not be 
reasonable and a uniform yardstick must be adopted to give benefits to 
the Scheduled Castes.21 
16. In his concurring opinion, Justice HK Sema held that the purpose of 
reservations is to afford special protection to the members of the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes as a homogenous class of persons. Further 
classification of this class of people would amount to tinkering with the 
 
16 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Hegde, 38]. 
17 “OBCs” 
18 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Hegde, 38]. 
19 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Hegde, 39,40] 
20 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Hegde, 43] 
21 ibid. 

PART A 

Presidential List. This regrouping of a homogenous group would, also amount 
to reverse discrimination and be violative of Article 14.22 
17. In his concurring opinion, Justice SB Sinha held that Indra Sawhney (supra), 
while determining whether backward classes could be divided into more 
backward and backward classes, was not dealing with Scheduled Castes.23 
In that context, Justice Sinha observed: 
a. Unlike the Other Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes are treated as a separate class by the Scheduled Castes and 
Tribes Orders;24 
b. The State had failed to establish the reasonableness of its classification 
among the Scheduled Castes;25 
c. The Relli Community was the most backward community and hardly 
received any benefits of reservations. On the other hand, the Adi Andhra 
community was numerically larger and educationally better off compared 
to the Rellis. Both these groups were placed in Group A and Group D 
respectively and each was given the same 1% share in total 
reservations. The Act thus wrongly treated them alike despite apparent 
differences, without any basis;26 
d. Micro-classification was impermissible under Article 14;27 
 
22 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Sema, 49, 50] 
23 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Sinha, 75] 
24 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Sinha, 77] 
25 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Sinha, 81] 
26 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Sinha, 97]. 
27 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Sinha, 98]. Relied on Triloki Nath v. State of J&K 1969; State of UP 
v. Pradip Tandon 1975; Akhil Bhartiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh (Rly) v. Union of India (1981). 

PART A 

e. Backwardness of the class was the link holding this class together and 
a classification that is justifiable based on backwardness of the class 
cannot be based on backwardness of the caste;28 
f. Article 16(4) must be read with Article 335 and efficiency of 
administration cannot be sacrificed to benefit some castes out of the 
homogenous Scheduled Castes;29 and 
g. The validity of the sub-classification and not the extent of the reservation 
was in question. Therefore, the argument that the States have the 
prerogative to decide the extent of reservations was inapplicable.30 The 
State could certainly stipulate the legislative policy about the extent of 
reservations but it could not take away the benefit of reservations on the 
ground that certain groups among the Scheduled Castes have advanced 
in the hierarchy.31 
iv. 
The reference 
18. On 27 August 2020, in State of Punjab v. Davinder Singh32, a Constitution 
Bench held that the judgment in Chinnaiah (supra) requires to be revisited 
by a larger Bench of seven Judges because it failed to consider significant 
aspects bearing on the issue. These aspects have been formulated thus: 
a. In Indra Sawhney (supra),33 this Court held that it is constitutional to 
classify the backward class into the ‘backward’ and the ‘more backward’ 
 
28 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Sinha, 104]. 
29 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Sinha, 105]. 
30 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Sinha, 112,113]. 
31 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Sinha, 114]. 
32 (2020) 
33 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [Justice Reddy,803];[Justice Sawant, 524 and 525] 

PART A 

class of citizens. The provisions of Articles 341, 342, and 342A are pari 
materia. That being the case, this Court has to analyse how a contrary 
conclusion to the effect that sub-classification is permissible within the 
Backward Class but not within the Scheduled Castes, could be reached. 
In Indra Sawhney (supra) the phrase “Backward Classes” in Article 
16(4) was interpreted to include both socially and educationally 
backward classes and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes;34 
b. The Scheduled Castes are not a homogenous class35. Preferential 
treatment can be given to the most downtrodden of the class who are 
not adequately represented. Such a sub-classification is made to provide 
equality of opportunity, so as to achieve the purpose of reservation;36 
c. It would be open to the State, under Article 16(4), to grant the benefits 
of reservation on a rational basis to certain castes within the Scheduled 
Castes by fixing a reasonable quota of the reserved seats for them if 
they are inadequately represented;37 and 

34 (2020) [42] 
35 Relied on the observation of Justice Reddy in Indra Sawhney (supra) 
36 (2020) [50] 
37 (2020) [52, 56] 

PART B 

d. Preferential treatment to certain castes would not lead to the exclusion 
of other castes from the list prepared under Article 34138. In Jarnail 
Singh v. Lachhmi Narain Gupta39, this Court observed that the 
exclusion of the “creamy layer” from the Scheduled Castes for securing 
the benefit of reservation does not tinker with the Presidential List under 
Article 341. All the castes included in the list of Scheduled Castes are 
given the benefit of reservation even if they are sub-classified. 
 
B. 
Submissions 
19. 
The submissions of the counsel were restricted to the issue of whether the 
judgment of this Court in Chinnaiah (supra) requires to be reconsidered since 
the High Court had held that the Punjab Act and the Haryana Notification were 
unconstitutional solely for the reason that they are contrary to the above 
judgment. i. 
Submissions of Petitioners 
20. 
Mr Gurminder Singh, Advocate General for the State of Punjab and Mr 
Shadan Farasat, Additional Advocate General made the following 
submissions: 
a. The judgment in Chinnaiah (supra) erroneously treats the Scheduled 
Castes as an indivisible monolith/block; 

38 (2020) [35] 
39 (2018) 

PART B 

b. Preferential treatment promotes substantive equality. Chinnaiah(supra) 
is against the very idea of reservations which mandates protective 
discrimination based on relative backwardness; 
c. Justice SB Sinha’s judgment in Chinnaiah (supra) is self-contradictory. 
While it recognizes inter-se disparity among the Scheduled Castes, it 
holds the remedy to address this disparity to be unconstitutional. Once 
inter-se disparity is acknowledged, sub-classification of the class would 
be in pursuance of substantive equality; 
d. The State has the power to sub-classify because the enabling power to 
reserve seats includes ancillary and supplemental provisions such as 
preferences, concessions and exemptions; 
e. In Indra Sawhney (supra) this court has recognised internal differences 
between castes.40 Sub-classification within a class aligns with the 
opinion of Justice Mathew in NM Thomas (supra) holding that further 
classification within the class was possible;41 
f. The Scheduled Castes are not a homogenous group but face varying 
degrees of discrimination. The first part of the obligation under Article 
16(4) to ascertain backwardness has been accomplished by the 
President and subsequently, by the Parliament under Article 341. The 
second part of the enquiry about ‘inadequate representation’ is a 
 
40 Relied on Indra Sawhney (supra) [Justice Reddy, 802]. 
41 Relied on NM Thomas (supra) [Justice Mathew, 43] 

PART B 

mandate for the States. If the Scheduled Castes list were to be treated 
as a monolith, it would render the second part of Article 16(4) otiose and 
make the role of the States redundant; 
g. Sub-classification varies from the creamy layer principle since (i) 
economic advancement does not offset social discrimination faced by 
the Scheduled Castes; (ii) while the creamy layer excludes the socially 
advanced, sub-classification aims to identify within the Scheduled 
Castes, those who face the maximum social discrimination; (iii) sub-
classification mainstreams certain castes and creates a preference 
based on qualitative inclusion, contradistinguished from exclusion of the 
creamy layer; and (iv) preferential treatment identifies certain castes 
within the Scheduled Castes’ list, while the creamy layer exclusion 
applies to individuals; 
h. Scheduled Castes do not lose their identity once enumerated because 
caste is a sociological reality while the enumeration in the list is through 
the operation of a legal fiction. The limited preference to some groups 
by sub-classification because of their relative disadvantage will not 
exclude the other Scheduled Castes in the List notified under Article 341; 
i. The State Legislatures have the legislative competence to make 
preferences for the purposes of laws in relation to Entry 41 of List II and 
Entry 25 of List III of the Seventh Schedule; and 

PART B 

j. Article16(4) is not subject to Article 335. ‘Efficiency’ under Article 335 
must be defined in an inclusive sense. 
21. 
Mr Kapil Sibal, senior counsel made the following submissions: 
a. The Constitution permits sub-classification. Article 366(34) which 
defines the Scheduled Castes envisages that even a part of a caste or 
a group may be included; 
b. While Justice Mathew in NM Thomas (supra) noted that “they are no 
castes in the Hindu fold but an amalgam of castes …”, in Chinnaiah 
(supra), Justice Hegde replaced “they” with “there” in the above 
paragraph and noted instead, “there are no castes…”. This replacement 
completely alters the meaning of the quotation in NM Thomas (supra) 
which was that the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are a 
conglomeration of groups placed outside of the caste hierarchy, and not 
that Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes are homogenous42; 
c. When Dr. B R Ambedkar stated in the Constituent Assembly that Article 
341 is meant to “eliminate any kind of political factors” in “disturbing” the 
List, he was referring to inclusion and exclusion from the List. Sub-
classification has no bearing on the power of inclusion and exclusion. 
Potential political tinkering cannot obviate the present constitutional 
need for acknowledging and remedying inter-se inequality among the 
Scheduled Castes; 
 
42 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Hegde, 22] relying on NM Thomas (supra) [Justice Iyer, 135] 

PART B 

d. Article 342A of the Constitution inserted by the Constitution (One 
Hundred and Second Amendment) Act 2018 empowers the President to 
notify socially and educationally backward classes. This Article is pari 
materia to Article 341 and Article 342. Sub-classification is permissible 
for Schedule Castes because Indra Sawhney (supra) permits sub-
classification for the Socially and Educationally Backward Classes and 
after the inclusion of Article 342A, they are at par with the Scheduled 
Castes; and 
e. Chinnaiah (supra) is not in line with empirical data collected by the 
State. According to the view of Justice Reddy in Indra Sawhney 
(supra)43, several castes or tribes within the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes are not similarly situated. 
22. 
Mr Shekhar Naphade, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the State of 
Tamil Nadu submitted that: 
a. Chinnaiah (supra) does not provide connecting links between Article 
341 and subclassification. The plain meaning of Article 341 does not limit 
the power of the State legislature to classify the listed Scheduled Castes; 
and 

43 Relied on Indra Sawhney (supra) [Justice Reddy, 795]. 

PART B 

b. Classification based on inter-se backwardness is in pursuance of Article 
14. This inter-se backwardness is not among individuals but among 
groups in the Scheduled Castes. Indra Sawhney (supra) is applicable 
to sub-classification of the Scheduled Castes. 
23. Mr Gopal Sankaranarayanan, senior counsel submitted on behalf of 
Intervenor Madiga Jana Seva Samiti that Scheduled Castes or Tribes are not 
castes because Article 366(24) uses “deemed”. Article 16(2) uses “only”; thus, 
a Scheduled Caste, identified due to historic untouchability, is not “caste” 
under Articles 15(1) and16(2). 
24. 
Mr KK Venugopal, learned senior counsel for the Petitioner Madiga 
Reservation Porata Samithi submitted that Article 14 does not only mandate 
equal treatment to all but also bars discrimination by equal treatment of 
unequals. He submitted that Article 38(2) entitles those who are unequal in 
status to special treatment to bring them on the same plane. Article 341 has 
to be read along with Article 38(2). 
25. 
Mr R Venkataramani, Attorney General of India submitted that Articles 14 to 
16 and Articles 341 and 342 operate in different fields. Mere designation 
under Article 341 does not entail homogeneity. 
26. 
Mr Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General of India submitted that equality is not a 
static concept. It has evolved from the judgment of this Court in Champakam 
Dorairajan (supra), to Indra Sawhney (supra). Sub-classification is an issue 
of rationalising the affirmative action regime. 

PART B 

27. 
Mr Nidhesh Gupta, Senior Counsel submitted that adequate representation is 
a matter within the subjective satisfaction of the state, subject to 
backwardness and inadequacy of representation. Courts cannot scrutinize 
underlying data to reach that satisfaction of the state. Since Article 16(4) 
refers to “backward classes of citizens” collectively, Scheduled Castes are at 
par with the Backward Classes. Article 16(4) is a broader provision that 
Articles 15 (4) and 15(5). While Articles 15(4), 15(5) refer to “any special 
provisions for the Scheduled Castes..”, Article 16(4) uses “..any backward 
class of citizens”. The use of “any” in Article 16(4), as opposed to the use of 
the word “the” to qualify the beneficiary classes in Articles 15(4) and 15(5), 
indicates that there is a greater discretionary power under Article 16(4). 
28. 
Mr Vijay Hansaria, Senior Counsel submitted that the List under Article 341 is 
not a constitutional provision in itself, but an executive order passed by the 
President that can be modified by Parliament. 
29. 
Dr S Muralidhar, Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the State of Andhra 
Pradesh submitted that the State has not enacted a new law consequent to 
the decision in Chinnaiah (supra). 
30. 
Mr Arun Bhardwaj, Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the State of 
Haryana submitted that there are disadvantaged groups within the Scheduled 
Castes and the State should be allowed to alleviate their concerns. 
31. 
Mr Kanu Agarwal, standing counsel for Chandigarh submitted that affirmative 
action can be summarized as a two- step process including identification 

PART B 

(Articles 341 and 342) and extension (i.e. how affirmative action can be 
undertaken). 
32. 
Ms Shraddha Deshmukh, counsel submitted that rights cannot be bundled up 
for the unequal members of the Scheduled Castes, without ensuring that the 
rights accrue to them in proportion to their lack of representation. Sub-
classification is therefore, essential for better representation of the weaker 
among the Scheduled Castes. 
33. 
Mr Dama Sheshadri Naidu, Mr Rajesh Kumar Khanna, Mr Sidharth Luthra, 
senior counsel, and Dr Vivek Sharma, Mr Shivam Singh and Mr Sanjay Jain, 
counsel appearing on behalf of other Petitioners and Intervenors have 
adopted the above submissions. ii. 
Submissions of Respondents 
34. 
Mr Manoj Swarup, senior counsel made the following submissions: 
a. The Scheduled Castes constituted by a notification issued by the 
President under Article 341(1) are a class in themselves. The latter part 
of Article 341(2) stipulates that no variation to the List is permitted except 
by a law enacted by Parliament. The class constituted by the 
Presidential notification can be interfered with only by Parliament under 
Article 341(2). As is evident from the Constituent Assembly debates on 
Article 341, Parliament is solely vested with the power to alter the 
Presidential list otherwise, the executive would tinker with the list to 
achieve political ends; 

PART B 

b. Upon the issuance of a notification by the President under Article 341, 
the castes notified are deemed to be Scheduled Castes for the purposes 
of the Constitution. The castes which are included in the Presidential list 
under Article 341 are heterogenous. However, once notified, the castes 
are put in an artificial mould of homogeneity by the deeming fiction; 
c. The necessary effect of the preferential treatment to Balmiki Sikhs and 
Mazhabis in the fifty percent seats reserved for Scheduled Castes in 
Punjab is that the persons belonging to other Scheduled Castes are 
excluded from those seats; 
d. None of the entries in the Seventh Schedule deal with Scheduled 
Castes. The only entry under which a law on reservation for the 
Scheduled Castes can be enacted is Entry 97 of List I. Thus, even if sub-
classification of the Scheduled Castes is permissible, only Parliament 
and not the Legislature of the State has the power to enact such a law; 
e. The National Commission for Scheduled Castes constituted under 
Article 338 can consider any new data sets or experiences of the 
Scheduled Castes and make recommendations. However, the power to 
alter the list solely vests with Parliament; 
f. Courts through a judicial exercise cannot include or exclude any caste 
from the list of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes notified by the 
President44; 
 
44 Bhaiyalal v. Harikishan Singh, (1965); State of Maharashtra v, Milind, (2001); Bir 
Singh v. Dekhi Jal Board, (2018) 

PART B 

g. Classification within the Scheduled Castes is based on caste which is 
impermissible by virtue of Article 16(2); and 
h. Contrary to the submissions of the petitioners, Chinnaiah (supra) 
discusses the interplay between Articles 16(4) and 341 of the 
Constitution. 
35. 
 Mr Salil Sagar, senior counsel made the following submissions: 
a. 
The direct impact and effects standard45 must be used to decide the 
issue of whether granting preference to certain castes amounts to 
tinkering the Presidential List. Sub-classification, in effect, restricts the 
scope and operation of the Presidential list in the following manner: 
i. 
It has an exclusionary effect, disturbing the scheme of reservation 
sought to be implemented; 
ii. 
It disproportionately increases the share of reservation available to 
certain communities and decreases the share available to the rest 
of the communities; and 
iii. 
The sub-grouping of castes violates the legal fiction in Article 341 
by which a homogenous group is created for the purposes of the 
Constitution. b. 
In Indra Sawhney (supra), this Court held that sub-classification of other 
backward classes is constitutionally valid. This Court cautioned against 
 
45 Relied on IR Coelho v. State of Tamil Nadu, (2007) 

PART B 

the application of the same principles to Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes; and 
c. 
Sub-classification of the Scheduled Castes cannot be held constitutional 
merely because Articles 341, 342 and 342-A are pari materia. The 
classes represented by the Scheduled Castes and the Other Backward 
Classes are distinct. Castes which are notified as Scheduled Castes 
have a feature of commonality; they all suffer from the historical injustice 
of untouchability. 
36. 
Dr KS Chauhan, senior counsel made the following submissions: 
a. In Indra Sawhney (supra), this Court held that a caste can be a class 
for the purposes of reservation under Article 16 if the caste is socially 
and educationally backward46; and 
b. In Indra Sawhney (supra), Justice Jeevan Reddy observed that Article 
16(4) of the Constitution mainly contemplates that reservation must be 
on the grounds of social backwardness. There cannot be any further 
classification of the Scheduled Castes since all the castes which are 
notified as Scheduled Castes by the President share the commonality of 
social backwardness in the form of untouchability. 

46 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [Justice Pandian, 57,60,67,82,95]; [Justice Jeevan Reddy, 782,784] 

PART B 

37. Mr Sanjay Hegde, senior counsel made the following submissions: 
a. This Court in the judgments delivered after Indra Sawhney (supra) has 
observed that it was limited in its application to Other Backward 
Classes47; 
b. In State of Kerala v. NM Thomas48, this Court held that the Scheduled 
Castes constitute a class in themselves. Similar observations were 
made in Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh (Railway) v. 
Union of India49; 
c. The notification issued by the President under Article 341 can be altered 
only by law made by Parliament50; 
d. States must confer the benefits to members of all the castes notified by 
the President under Article 341. If the State Government is of the opinion 
that benefits are not required to be conferred to the caste, then it can 
make a recommendation for its exclusion from the list of Scheduled 
Castes; and 
e. The purpose of conferring Parliament with the power to alter the list 
issued by the President under Article 321 is to prevent the tinkering of 
the list for political purposes. 
 
47 Ashoka Kumar Thakur v. Union of India, (2008) [293, 393, 633]; Jarnail Singh v. Lachhmi Narain 
Gupta, (2018) [16, 24, 34] 
48 (1976) 
49 (1981) 
50 Relied on B. Basavalingappa v. D. Munichinnapa, (1965); Bhaiya Lal v. Harikrishnan Singh, 
(1965); Srish Kumar Chodhury v. State of Tripura, 1990 Supp SCC 220; Palghat Jilla Than dan 
Samudhya Samrakshna Samiti v. State of Kerala, (1994); State of Maharashtra v. Milind, (2001) 
 [15]; Bir Singh v. Delhi Jal Board, (2018) 

PART B 

38. Mr Mallela Venkata Rao, counsel submitted that the opinion of Justice SB 
Sinha in Chinnaiah (supra) that other forms of affirmative action must be 
employed to remedy inter-se backwardness within the Scheduled Castes is 
the appropriate and constitutional approach. 
39. Mahendra Kumar Mitra, Petitioner-in-person appearing on behalf of Dr. 
Ambedkar Scheduled Castes Federation, Karnataka submitted that the 
recommendation of the Justice Usha Mehra Committee to include Clause (3) 
to Article 341 providing Parliament the power to sub-categorize castes upon 
a resolution received from the State was not accepted by the National 
Commission for Scheduled Castes51. 
40. Anusuchit Jaati-Janjati Adhikari Evam Karamchari Sangh, a social welfare 
association submitted that sub-classification of the Scheduled Castes defeats 
the purpose of providing special reservation to Scheduled Castes. 
41. Mr Saket Singh, appearing for the Haryana Pradesh Chamar Mahasabha, 
submitted that the deeming fiction in Article 341 creates a common identity of 
Scheduled Castes even though each caste within the list possesses a unique 
identity. Counsel further submitted that the Constitution would expressly 
provide a provision for the special treatment of certain castes where 
necessary. 

51 3rd meeting of the National Commission for Scheduled Castes held on 13.12.2010 under the Chairmanship 
of Dr PL Punia. 

PART C 

42. Mr Vembadi Subramanian and Mr VK Biju, counsel, made submissions on 
the same lines. 
 
C. 
Issues 
43. The Constitution Bench has to adjudicate upon whether the sub-classification 
of Scheduled Castes for the purpose of providing affirmative action, including 
reservation is valid. In this context, the following issues arise for 
consideration: 
a. Whether sub-classification of a reserved class is permissible under 
Articles 14, 15 and 16; 
b. Whether the Scheduled Castes constitute a homogenous or a 
heterogenous grouping; 
c. Whether Article 341 creates a homogenous class through the operation 
of the deeming fiction; and 
d. Whether there any limits on the scope of sub-classification. 

PART D 

D. 
Analysis 
i. 
The jurisprudence on reservation 
44. The jurisprudence surrounding reservations has undergone turbulations, both 
inside and outside the courts. Two crucial issues have dominated the 
jurisprudential debate – identifying the model of equality espoused by the 
Constitution and the interplay of equality with ‘efficiency’ or ‘merit’. It is 
important that we trace the core principles governing reservations in India 
before we proceed to answer the issue of whether sub-classification of the 
Scheduled Castes is violative of Articles 14,15 and 16. This would enable us 
to analyze whether sub-classification furthers the constitutional promise of 
equality. a. Reservation as an exposition of substantive equality 
45. The purpose of the equal opportunity principle in Article 16(1) and the 
reservation provision in Article 16(4) has emerged as a focal point of the 
jurisprudence on reservations in this Court. A discussion of the journey of the 
competing models of equality that the Court has espoused and their evolution 
over the course of the years is necessary to understand the constitutional 
vision on equality. 
I. 
The competing visions of equality 
46. Articles 14, 15 and 16 of the Constitution encompass an equality code in 
pursuance of the preambular values of equality of status and opportunity and 

PART D 

social justice. Article 14 lays down general principles governing equality by 
postulating that there must be “equality before the law” and “equal protection 
of law”. In its formative years, this Court interpreted Article 14 through the lens 
of the classification doctrine52 which is premised on the recognition that formal 
equality in law, by which every person irrespective of their circumstances is 
treated alike, does not translate to factual equality. The underlying foundation 
of this doctrine is that two persons who are not similarly situated cannot be 
treated alike.53 
47. Articles 15(1) and 16(1) were viewed as an elucidation of the equality principle 
housed in Article 14.54 However, the Courts were reticent in applying the 
doctrine of reasonable classification and its underlying assumption that ‘not 
all persons (and not all situations) are alike’ to the realm of reservation. The 
reason for the hesitation was that the means adopted (that is, reservation) 
were understood to not have relevance to securing equality of opportunity 
which was defined in terms of formal equality and efficiency55. In the State of 
Madras (now Tamil Nadu), seats in Medical and Engineering colleges were 
apportioned among different groups in the proportion set forth in a 
Government Order called the “Communal GO”. Seats were apportioned in 
specific proportions for Non-Brahmins (Hindus), Backward Hindus, Brahmins, 
Harijans, Anglo-Indians, Christians and Muslims.56 In State of Madras v. 
 
52 See State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar, 
53 Chiranjit Lal Chowdhury v. Union of India, [38,39] 
54 Chiranjit Lal Chowdhury v. Union of India, [38,39] 
55 General Manager, Southern Railway v. Rangachari, AIR 1962 SC 36; CA Rajendra v. Union of India, AIR 
1968 SC 507 
56 Non-Brahmin (Hindus): 6; Backward Hindus: 2; Brahmins: 2; Harijan: 2, Anglo-Indians and Indian 
Christians (1); Muslims: 1. 

PART D 

Champakam Dorairajan57, a Constitution Bench of this Court held the 
reservation of seats in educational institutions on that basis to be 
unconstitutional and violative Article 29(2) which stipulates that no citizen 
shall be denied admission in any educational institution maintained by the 
State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, 
caste, language, or any of them. The Court observed that Article 29 does not 
contain an exception clause such as Article 16(4) which would permit 
reservation of seats in educational institutions. 
48. The State of Madras also notified that vacancies to the post of District Munsif 
would be filed on the basis of the Communal GO. In B Venkataramana v. 
The State of Madras58, reservation of seats in services based on the 
Communal GO was challenged. The Constitution Bench observed that Article 
16(4) permits the State to make provisions for ‘backward classes’ in the 
services if they are not adequately represented in the opinion of the State and 
that only Harijans and the backward Hindus can be considered as ‘backward 
classes’. The denial of admission to seats other than those reserved for 
Harijans and Backward Hindus, it was observed, would be a discrimination 
based on “caste,” violating Articles 16(1) and 16(2). 
49. The above judgments adopted a formalistic and reservation-limiting approach 
in the reading of the constitutional provisions. In this approach, reservation 
was viewed as an exception to the principle of equal opportunity in Articles 
15(1) and 16(1). This Court had recognized the principle of reasonable 

 SC 229 

PART D 

classification in Article 14 before the decision in Champakam Dorairajan 
(supra). However, it did not transpose the principle to the realm of 
reservation.59 Even in Venkataramana (supra), this Court held that 
reservation in services is permissible only because the Constitution expressly 
provides for it. Reservation or any other form of affirmative action was 
regarded as antithetical to the equality principle and not a re-statement of it. 
50. The Constitution was amended by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act 
1951 to include Clause (4) in Article 15 to overcome the judgment in 
Champakam Dorairajan (supra). Despite the inclusion of Article 15(4), a 
formalistic reading of the equality code continued. In Balaji v. State of 
Mysore60, this Court observed that Articles 15(4) and 16(4) are special 
provisions (or in other words, an exception to the principle of equality) while 
prescribing a cap of fifty per cent on the total seats to be reserved. It was in 
NM Thomas v. State of Kerala,61 that this Court undertook an expansive and 
substantive reading of the equality code. In that case, proceedings were 
instituted for challenging the constitutional validity of Rule 13AA of the Kerala 
State and Subordinate Services Rules 1958 by which the qualifying criteria 
was relaxed for candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. The majority constituting the seven-Judge Bench 
interposed the principle of reasonable classification in Article 14 to Article 
16(1)62 and observed that Article 16(4) is not an exception to the principle of 
 
59 Article 15(4) was included in the Constitution by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act 1951 to overcome 
the judgment in Champakam Dorairajan. 
 SC 649 
61 (1976); the seeds of the expansive approach were sowed by Justice Subba Rao in T 
Devadasan. 
62 (1976) [Ray CJI, 21] 

PART D 

equality of opportunity. Article 16(4), in the opinion of the Court, clarifies and 
explains the principle in Article 16(1).63 Chief Justice Ray observed that Article 
16(1) will not be violated when the rule ensures “equality of representation in 
the services for unrepresented classes after satisfying the basic needs of 
efficiency of administration”.64 Chief Justice Ray’s opinion rests on two 
conceptual foundations. First, the goal of Article 16(1) is to ensure equality of 
representation while maintaining efficiency of service; and second, the 
beneficiaries must be the unrepresented class. Equality of opportunity was 
framed in the language of equal representation subject to these two caveats. 
Justice K K Mathew adopted a different approach. The learned Judge broke 
down the conceptual foundation of the equality provision in the following 
manner: 
a. A criterion which is relevant to the apportionment of the good (that is, 
services) must be adopted65; 
b. It must be determined if the relevant criterion leads to an a priori 
exclusion of a certain class. The State is required to identify if persons 
of all classes have an equal chance of satisfying the chosen criteria66; 
and 
 
63 (1976) [Ray CJI, 37] 
64 (1976) [Ray CJI, 45] 
65 (1976) [Justice Mathew, 55] 
66 (1976) [ Justice Mathew, 58-59] 

PART D 

c. There is a violation of the right to equal opportunity if the relevant 
criterion leads to a priori exclusion. In that case, a compensatory 
provision must be made to offset the disadvantage.67 
51. In his concurring opinion, Justice Krishna Iyer observed that when two 
interpretations of Article 16(1) are available, that which ensures equal 
participation and fair representation in administration must be chosen.68 
52. Thus, at the end of the first phase, it was clarified that the Constitution 
espouses a substantive vision of equality where reservation is not an 
exception but, as Justice Krishna Iyer observed in NM Thomas (supra), an 
“illustration of constitutionally sanctified” classification69. However, the Judges 
varied on the purpose of Article 16(1). While Chief Justice Ray defined 
equality in opportunity in terms of equality in representation and efficiency of 
service, Justice Mathew defined it in terms of equality in representation of the 
backward class. Additionally, Chief Justice Ray identified the beneficiary class 
as the ‘unrepresented’ class without laying down the basis of the under-
representation. Justice Mathew on the other hand, identified the beneficiary 
class not merely on the basis of under-representation but on the cause for 
under-representation. It was this difference in the opinions that brooded over 
the post-NM Thomas era. In the subsequent section, we will discuss the 
impact of Chief Justice Ray’s reading of the principle of efficiency into Article 
16 on the scope of reservation policies. 
 
67 (1976) [ Justice Mathew, 74] 
68 (1976) [Justice Krishna Iyer, 120] 
69 (1976) [Justice Krishna Iyer, 136] 

PART D 

II. 
The “efficiency” of reservation 
53. The expansive reading of the constitutional ideal of equality, noticed above, 
was not sufficient to realize the full potential of affirmative action. A barrier 
was raised through Article 335. Article 335 emphasizes that the State shall 
maintain efficiency of administration while deciding the claims of the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in appointments to services.70 
This Court, while deciding the following four important questions relating to 
reservations, placed considerable emphasis on the efficiency of service to 
limit the scope of reservation: 
a. Whether reservation is limited to initial appointment; 
b. If reservation is extendable to promotions, the method to be employed 
to ascertain seniority; 
c. Whether lowering the standard of evaluation for backward classes 
violates the equal opportunity principle in Article 16; and 
d. The permissible method for calculating vacancies to be filled through 
reservation. 
The central theme that governed these four issues was whether the expansion of 
the scope of reservations would dilute the overall efficiency of the service. 
 
70 335. The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into 
consideration consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of service, in the making of appointments to 
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State. Provided that nothing in this article 
shall prevent in making of any provision in favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes for relaxation in qualifying marks in any examination or lowering the standards of evaluation, for 
reservation in matters of promotion to any class or classes of services or posts in connection with the affairs 
of the Union or of a State. 

PART D 

54. In General Manager, Southern Railway v. Rangachari71, the issue was 
whether Article 16(4) permits reservations in promotions. Writing for the 
majority of the Constitution Bench, Justice Gajendragadkar observed that 
though reservations in promotions are detrimental to “efficiency”, a reading of 
Article 16(4) to include reservations in promotions would further substantive 
equality72: 
“27. It is true that in providing for the reservation of 
appointments or posts under Article 16(4) the State has 
to take into consideration the claims of the members of 
the 
backward 
classes 
consistently 
with 
the 
maintenance of the efficiency of administration. It must 
not be forgotten that the efficiency of administration is 
of such paramount importance that it would be unwise 
and impermissible to make any reservation at the cost 
of efficiency of administration. That undoubtedly is the 
effect of Article 335. Reservation of appointments or 
posts may theoretically and conceivably mean 
some impairment of efficiency; but the risk involved 
in sacrificing efficiency of administration must always 
be borne in mind when any State sets about making a 
provision for reservation of appointments or posts.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
55. Both the majority and the minority (consisting of Justice Wanchoo and Justice 
Ayyangar) agreed that reservations impair the efficiency of administration. 
The learned Judges belonging to the minority only disagreed on the balance 
which must be drawn between reservation and efficiency of service. Justice 
 
71 (1962) 
72 (1962) [27]; See Article 335 which provides that that the claims of the members of the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the 
maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the making of appointments to services and posts in 
connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State. The majority in Rangachari (supra), interpreted the 
phrase “matters relating to employment” as it occurs in Article 16(1) to also include promotion. The next issue 
which fell for the consideration of the Court was whether Article 16(4) covers promotion because the provision 
only uses the phrases “appointments or posts”. This Court held that the phrase “posts” would - as held by 
the High Court - not mean ex-cadre posts but posts in the services under the State because any other 
interpretation would be contradictory to the purpose of Article 16(4) which is to ensure adequate 
representation. 

PART D 

Gajendragadkar observed that though reservations in promotion will impair 
efficiency of administration, the social benefit of reservation will trump the cost 
of the impairment. Justice Wanchoo and Justice Ayyangar disagreed. 
According to the minority, an interpretation of Article 16(4) to include 
reservation in promotion would be contrary to the principles set out in Article 
335.73 Similarly, in CA Rajendran v. Union of India,74 this Court observed 
that restricting reservations only to Class III and Class IV posts was justified 
because Class I and Class II posts require candidates with higher efficiency 
which would not be achieved if promotional posts are reserved.75 
56. The judgment in Rangachari (supra) was overruled in Indra Sawhney 
(supra). In Indra Sawhney (supra), this Court adopted the approach of the 
minority in Rangachari (supra), holding that reservations in promotions would 
dilute efficiency in administration.76 By the Constitution (Seventy-seventh 
Amendment) Act 1995, Parliament amended the Constitution to include 
Clause (4-A) into Article 16 permitting reservation for the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes in promotion. 
57. The issue whether members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
should be considered senior to candidates of the general category (who were 
senior to the candidates of the reserved category in the feeder category)77 
when they are being considered for subsequent promotion arose before this 
 
73 (1962) [Justice Wanchoo, 35]; [Justice Ayyangar, 41] 
 SC 507 
 SC 507 [9] 
76 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217 [Justice Reddy, 827, 828]; [Justice Thommen,302]; [Justice Sawant,552] 
77 The service rule by which the general category retains their seniority is called the catch-up rule. The service 
rule by the seniority is measured based on the feeder pool is called consequential seniority. 

PART D 

Court. In Union of India v. Virpal Singh Chauhan78, this Court held that 
though the catch-up rule is not implicit in Article 16, it is a constitutionally valid 
practice to maintain “efficiency”.79 This was reiterated in Ajit Singh (I) v. State 
of Punjab80. Justice NP Singh, writing for the three-Judge Bench observed 
that the process of appointments must balance both Article 16(4) and Article 
335 and that the “principal object of a promotion system is to secure the best 
possible incumbents for the higher position”.81 Subsequently, Parliament 
amended Article 16(4-A) by the Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act 
2001 to overcome a series of judgments of this Court where the rule of 
consequential seniority in reservation was held to result in reverse-
discrimination. Article 16(4-A), as amended by the Constitution (Eighty-fifth 
Amendment) Act 2001, enables the State to provide reservation in promotion 
with consequential seniority. 
58. In Indra Sawhney (supra), Justice Jeevan Reddy writing for four Judges 
observed that relaxation of qualifying marks in promotion would result in 
inefficiency of administration. This position was reiterated by a two-Judge 
Bench in S Vinod Kumar v. Union of India82. A proviso was included in 
Article 335 by the Constitution (Eighty-second) Amendment Act 2000 to 
overcome this aspect of the ruling in Indra Sawhney (supra) and Vinod 
Kumar (supra). The proviso provides that Article 335 does not prevent the 
 
78 (1995) 
79 Also see Ajit Singh (II) v. State of Punjab, (1999) 
80 (1996); “it cannot be overlooked that at the first promotion from the basic grade, there was no 
occasion to examine their merit and suitability for the purpose of promotion.” 
81 (1996) [15] 
82 (1996) 

PART D 

State from relaxing the qualifying marks in any examination for reservation in 
promotion. 
59. The method for calculating the permissible total percentage of reservation 
was another issue in which the “efficiency of administration” was used to limit 
the scope of reservation. This Court had held in Balaji (supra) and Indra 
Sawhney (supra) that reservation must not exceed 50 per cent. The State 
was faced with a peculiar situation where a sufficient number of persons from 
the reserved category was not available to fill the seats reserved for them. 
The issue was whether the unfilled seats of the reserved category could be 
carried over to the next year, and whether the carried forward vacancies could 
be counted while calculating the total percentage of reserved seats in that 
year. 
60. In T Devadasan v. Union of India83, the majority held that a carry forward of 
the unfilled vacancies of the reserved category to the next year will abrogate 
the equal opportunity principle and impair efficiency. Justice Subba Rao while 
dissenting, advocated for a harmonious reading of Articles 16, 46 and 335. 
Laying the groundwork for the jurisprudential development in NM Thomas 
(supra), the learned Judge observed that the phrase “any provision” in Article 
16(4) is wide enough to include the carry forward rule. The observation of the 
majority that carrying forward the vacancies to the subsequent year is 
contrary to the equal opportunity principle was line with the judgment in Balaji 
(supra) because the judgment was delivered in the pre-NM Thomas (supra) 
 
83 (1964) 

PART D 

era. However, besides the narrow interpretation of the equal opportunity 
principle, the concept of “efficiency” also weighed with the Court. 
61. By the Constitution (Eighty-first) Amendment Act 2000, the Constitution was 
amended to include Article 16(5) by which the States are permitted to carry 
forward the unfilled seats of the reserved category to be filled up in the 
succeeding years. The challenge to the constitutional validity of Article 16(4-
A) and 16(4-B) was rejected by the Constitution Bench in M Nagaraj v. Union 
of India84 where it was held that the efficiency of administration is only relaxed 
and not “obliterated” by the inclusion of Articles 16(4-A) and 16(4-B).85 
62. As is evident from the discussion above, the jurisprudence in the second 
phase on questions involving the scope of reservation, evolved around the 
idea that reservation dilutes the efficiency in administration or to put it 
otherwise, reservation is anti-merit. The Constitution was amended to 
overcome this Court’s holding on each of the above issues, thereby 
overhauling the premise that reservation does not ensure efficiency in service. 
The Constitution, after the numerous turbulations within each of the issues 
traced, today advances a more substantive reading of the equality provision, 
expanding the sphere and the scope of reservation to ensure that the benefits 
trickle down to those who need it the most. However, traces of the friction 
between merit and reservation continue to persist even after the amendments 
to Articles 16 and 335.86 This Court has, with a few divergences87, continued 
 
84 (2006) 
85 (2006) [108] 
86 Nagaraj v. Union of India, (2006) 
87 Neil Aurelio Nunes v. Union of India, (2022); BK Pavitra (II) v. State of Karnataka, (2019) 

PART D 

to uphold the binary of merit and reservations. The understanding of the 
Courts at the end of this phase was that the scope of reservation must be 
expanded to ensure substantive equality in spite of its dilution of efficiency88, 
thereby continuing to read the requirement of efficiency into Article 16(4). 
III. 
The interplay of Article 16 and Article 335 
63. In this section, we will discuss whether the principle in Article 335 must be 
read as a limitation on the power of the State to provide reservations under 
Article 16. Article 335 provides that the claims of the members of the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into 
consideration, 
consistently 
with 
the 
maintenance 
of 
efficiency 
of 
administration, in the making of appointments to services. The proviso to the 
Article states that the provision shall not prevent the “relaxation of qualifying 
marks in any examination or lowering the standards of evaluation”, for 
reservation of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in matters of 
promotion. 
64. Reservations under Article 16(4) are not restricted to the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes. The provision provides the State with the enabling 
power to provide reservations for the “backward classes” which are not 
adequately represented in the services of the State. The “backward class” 
encompasses more than the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. It 
encompasses all classes whose backwardness is attributable to social 
 
88 See General Manager, Southern Railway v. Rangachari, AIR 1962 SC 36; T Devadasan v. Union of India, 
(1964) [Justice Subba Rao, 32] 

PART D 

reasons.89 This includes other socially and educationally backward classes 
such as the Other Backward Class category, women and the disabled. 
65. Applying the additional requirement of “efficiency of administration” only with 
respect to the exercise of power under Article 16(4) vis-à-vis the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes would be discriminatory. Reading this 
requirement into Article 16(4) assumes that a dilution of the principle of 
efficiency in administration is the necessary effect of reservation for the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes while the same standard is not 
applied to reservations for Other Backward Classes. Though this Court has 
not expressly stated so in as many words, efficiency of administration was 
added as a requirement for the exercise of power under Article 16(4) to 
prevent discrimination between the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and 
other Socially and Educationally Backward Classes. If the requirement of 
efficiency of administration in Article 335 was not read into Article 16, then the 
requirement would only apply to reservations for the Scheduled Castes and 
the Scheduled Tribes but not for the reservation of other socially backward 
beneficiary classes.90 
66. However, such an interpretative exercise (that is, applying the principle of 
efficiency of service to restrict the power of the State to provide affirmative 
action policies) is contrary to the express language of Article 335 which is 
confined to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. The preliminary 
 
89 See Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [116,117,492,788, 859(3)(e)] 
90 The opinion of Justice Sawant in Indra Sawhney (supra), highlights this aspect:” 434: […] It cannot, 
however, be doubted that the same considerations will have to prevail while making provisions for reservation 
in favour of all backward classes under Article 16(4). To hold otherwise would not only be irrational but 
discriminatory between two classes of backward classes.” 

PART D 

error is that the requirement of efficiency of administration was viewed as an 
additional requirement and a roadblock to reservation provisions. Efficiency 
was not understood as a facet of the principle of equal opportunity. 
67. The meaning of the phrase “efficiency” as it occurs in Article 335 must be 
determined to take this argument to its logical conclusion. Though the 
Constitution does not define the phrase, the proviso to the Article offers 
interpretative guidance. The proviso states that “relaxation in qualifying marks 
in any examination or lowering the standards of evaluation” does not amount 
to a reduction in the efficiency of administration. There can be two possible 
deductions about the scope of the provision, based on a reading of the 
proviso. One possible meaning that can be deduced is that marks in the 
qualifying examination are not a marker of efficiency of administration 
because if they were, then a reduction of the qualifying standards/marks 
would also lead to a reduction in efficiency. Another possible interpretation 
could be that the premise of the proviso is that while reduction or dilution of 
the evaluating standards or the qualifying marks is not inconsistent with 
maintenance of efficiency, a complete removal of the qualifying marks would 
be.91 Even if the latter interpretation is accepted, it only goes to establish that 
securing higher marks in an examination does not contribute to higher 
efficiency and that securing a minimum mark (and not the highest) in the 
examination is sufficient to maintain efficiency of administration. Thus, a 
 
91 See Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [835]; M Nagaraj v. Union of India, (2006) 
 [108] 

PART D 

policy which allows for lower qualifying marks or standards of evaluation is by 
the proviso to Article 335 not contrary to efficiency. 
68. The only constitutional provision which refers to an examination for 
appointments to posts in services is Article 320 which stipulates that the Union 
and State Public Service Commissions must conduct examinations for 
appointments to the services of the Union and the State. An examination is 
an assessment to determine the proficiency of candidates and their suitability 
for the post. The Constitution does not prescribe the exact method of 
assessment which must be adopted for the examination. The Constitution 
also does not prescribe that the examination must be framed in a manner 
which would only assess skill sets accessible to certain classes of people. 
The principle of equality in opportunity in Article 16(1) is therefore the guide 
for the State while it is determining the method of examination. The 
examination or any method of distribution of posts must ensure factual 
equality. An examination leads to a priori exclusion if it only assesses the skill 
set that is accessible to specific classes. It is to offset this disadvantage that 
affirmative action policies are introduced for the distribution of posts. 
69. The underlying premise of the decision in NM Thomas (supra) is that the 
distribution of public resources including seats in educational institutions and 
public services must be based on considerations of equality and justice. Thus, 
Article 335 is not a limitation on the exercise of power under Articles 16(1) 
and 16(4). Rather, it is a restatement of the necessity of considering the 
claims of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in public services. 

PART D 

Efficiency of administration must not be viewed in terms of the narrow lense 
of scores in an examination which a priori excludes certain classes but in 
terms of inclusivity and equality as required by Article 16(1). 
70. This Court has previously challenged the binary of reservation and merit. In 
Devadasan (supra), Justice Subba Rao observed that there is no conflict 
between the provisions of Articles 16(4) and 335 and that the latter has no 
bearing on the interpretation of the former. Justice Rao observed that the 
former provision, is directory while the latter is a mandatory provision by which 
the State is required to consider the “claims”92 of the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes.93 Subsequently, in Vasanth Kumar (supra) Justice 
Chinnappa Reddy echoed this view. The learned Judge observed that 
reservation cannot be viewed as a conflict between the principles of merit and 
distributive justice. It is rather, the conflict between the haves and the have-
nots.94 
71. This line of reasoning was furthered in BK Pavitra (II) v. State of 
Karnataka95, where this Court observed that the assumption of the critiques 
of reservation is that awarding opportunities in government services based on 
“merit” results in an increase in administrative efficiency.96 In BK Pavitra (II) 
(supra) and Neil Aurelio Nunes v. Union of India97, this Court highlighted 
the folly of measuring “merit” based on the performance of candidates in a 
 
92 Justice Krishna Iyer in NM Thomas (supra) observed that the usage of the phrase ‘claims’ in Article 335 
indicates that reservation is a right and not the provision of charity or benevolence. [paragraph 128] 
93 (1964) [25] 
94 1985 (Supp) SCC 714 [35, 36] 
95 (2019) 
96 (2019) [129] 
97 (2022) 

PART D 

seemingly “neutral” selection process which is factually not neutral since the 
process does not provide equal opportunity to candidates belonging to 
classes which face widespread inequalities in accessing facilities required 
to ace the examinations.98 In Neil Aurelio Nunes (supra), a two-Judge Bench 
of this Court discussed the privileges that accrue to the advanced classes in 
the form of cultural capital which ensures that a child is unconsciously trained 
by the familial environment and the economic capital: 
“24. […] the privileges that accrue to forward classes 
are not limited to having access to quality schooling 
and access to tutorials and coaching centres to prepare 
for a competitive examination but also includes their 
social networks and cultural capital) communication 
skills, accent, books or academic accomplishments) 
that they inherit from their family. […] Social networks 
based on community linkages) become useful when 
individuals seek guidance and advice on how to 
prepare for examination and advance in their career.” 
 
72. One of us (DY Chandrachud J) writing for the Bench, observed that while 
examinations are a convenient method to allocate educational resources, 
they are not effective markers of merit, and that merit should be understood 
in terms of the social good of equality and inclusivity.99 
73. Before concluding the discussion in this section, we deem it necessary to 
discuss the opinion of the nine-Judge Bench in Indra Sawhney (supra) on 
the binary of merit and reservation because this Bench sitting in a composition 
of seven is bound by the opinion of the larger Bench. The petitioners in that 
case argued that the necessary effect of reservation is the appointment of 
 
98 Neil Aurelio Nunes v. Union of India, (2022) 
99 Neil Aurelio Nunes v. Union of India (2022) [28]; BK Pavitra (II) v. State of Karnataka (2019) [131] 

PART D 

less meritorious persons while the respondents argued that marks obtained 
in an examination do not represent the inherent merit of the candidate. Justice 
B P Jeevan Reddy, authoring the plurality opinion, observed that it is not 
necessary to express their view on the competing visions of reservation and 
merit. However, the learned Judge observed that reservation is not anti-merit. 
The learned Judge made two conceptual observations: first, even if merit is 
not synonymous with efficiency in administration, its relevance and 
significance cannot be ignored. Reservations imply the selection of a less 
meritorious person100; and second, members of disadvantaged sections, 
given the opportunity, would overcome the barriers and prove their merit. 
74. Applying these two principles, Justice Jeevan Reddy held that: (a) the 
removal of minimum marks in qualifying examinations for the backward class 
is invalid; (b) there cannot be reservations in promotions101; and (c) there 
cannot be any reservation in certain positions of services “where either on 
account of the nature of duties attached to them or the level (in the hierarchy)”, 
merit alone counts. The learned Judge also proceeded to give a non-
exhaustive list of such positions. The list included technical posts in research 
and development organizations/departments/institutions; specialties and 
super-specialties in medicine, engineering and other such courses in physical 
sciences and mathematics; defense services; posts of professors; airline 
pilots; and scientists and technicians in nuclear and space application. 
 
100 Also see, Janki Prasad Parimoo v. State of J&K, (1973), Justice Khanna in NM Thomas v. 
State of Kerala, (1976); Justice Subba Rao in Devadasan v. Union of India, 1964 
101 The holding that there shall not be reservations in promotions was based on the link between Article 16(4) 
and Article 335. See, Justice Reddy [827] and Justice Sawant [552-224] 

PART D 

Justice Pandian also agreed with this view102, making it the view of the 
majority. 
75. Justice Jeevan Reddy recognized that reservation is not anti-merit. Two 
constitutional amendments overruled the above aspects of the holding in 
Indra Sawhney (supra). These amendments altered the intersection between 
the exercise of power under Article 16(4) and Article 335. The Constitution 
(Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act 1995 included Article 16(4-A) enabling 
the State to provide reservations for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes in promotions. The Constitution (Eighty-second) Amendment Act 2000 
added the proviso to Article 335 stipulating that lowering the standards of 
evaluation will not be inconsistent with the maintenance of efficiency. The 
amendments recognize the difficulties and struggles faced by members of the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes during promotions. In a formal 
sense, the criteria of selection for promotions a priori excludes the members 
of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes because the criteria which 
are considered to be appropriate are not accessible to them. In a more 
informal but substantive manner, the members of the Scheduled Castes and 
the Scheduled Tribes are often unable to climb up the ladder because of the 
stigma of incompetence held against candidates who are selected through 
reservation. The stereotype operates against them because they are 
externalized as “affirmative action beneficiaries” or “quota candidates”.103 The 
amendments recognize the discrimination through the operation of both 
 
102 Justice Pandian in Indra Sawhney, (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [243(11)] 
103 See Ashwini Deshpande, Double Jeopardy? Stigma of Identity and Affirmative Action, The Review of 
Black Political Economy 2019, Vol. 46(I) 38-64 

PART D 

human conduct and recruitment processes. They are an emphatic repudiation 
of the binary of reservation and merit. ii. 
Permissibility of sub-classification under Article 14 
 
76. In Chinnaiah (supra), one of the issues was “whether the impugned 
enactment creates sub-classification or micro-classification of Scheduled 
Castes”.104 Justice Santosh Hegde, writing for himself and two other Judges 
noted that according to the decision in NM Thomas (supra), all the castes in 
the list acquired a special status as a ‘class’ and that a classification for the 
purpose of reservation already existed. The learned Judge observed that the 
Scheduled Castes form a class by themselves and any further classification 
would violate the doctrine of reasonableness.105 Justice Hegde observed that 
a class cannot be sub-divided to give more preference to a “miniscule 
proportion of the Scheduled Castes in preference to the other members of the 
same class”.106 In his concurring opinion, Justice Sema observed that further 
classification of the Scheduled Castes, who constitute a homogenous group 
would amount to “discrimination in reverse” and would run contrary to Article 
14107. Justice Sinha observed that the Constitution permitted additional 
measures in respect of disadvantaged groups to bring them at par with the 
advantaged groups, but the class which requires the benefits of additional 
protection, cannot be discriminated inter se when both satisfy the test of 
 
104 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Hegde J,32] 
105 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Hegde,37,43]. 
106 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Hegde,36] 
107 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Sema, 46-50]. 

PART D 

abysmal backwardness and inadequate representation in public service.108 
Justice Sinha further noted that the state had not discharged the burden of 
proving reasonable classification and the nexus of the classification with the 
purpose of the enactment.109 
77. In Chinnaiah (supra), this Court held that the Scheduled Castes cannot be 
further classified for the purpose of reservation because they constitute an 
internally homogenous class by virtue of their inclusion in the Presidential list 
and thus, as a class, groups within the Scheduled Castes cannot be treated 
differently. In view of the already existing classification of the Scheduled 
Castes under the Constitution, further classification and consequent 
preferential treatment were held to violate Article 14, as it would amount to a 
constitutionally 
proscribed 
‘micro-classification’. 
To 
appreciate 
the 
correctness of this view of Article 14 and micro-classification, we must 
analyze the contours of the equality guarantee and permissibility of sub-
classification under Article 14. a. 
The contours of Article 14 
78. Article 14 employs two expressions – equality before the law and equal 
protection of the laws. Both different in content and sweep110. “Equality before 
the law”-, an expression derived from the English Common law, entails 
absence of special privileges for any individual within the territory. It does not 
mean that the same law should apply to everyone, but that the same law 
 
108 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Sinha, 81] 
109 ibid. 
110 Indra Sawhney (supra) [Justice Reddy,643]. 

PART D 

should apply to those who are similarly situated.111 The expression “equal 
protection of the laws” means that among equals, laws must be equally 
administered. It enjoins the State with the power to reasonably classify those 
who are differently placed. The mandate of “equal protection of laws” casts a 
positive obligation on the state to ensure that everyone may enjoy equal 
protection of the laws, and no one is unfairly denied this protection. In 
essence, the guarantee of equality entails that all persons in like 
circumstances must be treated alike. That there must be a parity of treatment 
under parity of conditions.112 Equality does not entail sameness. The State is 
allowed to classify in a manner that is not discriminatory. The doctrine of 
classification gives content to the guarantee of equal protection of the laws.113 
Under this approach, the focus is on the equality of results or opportunities 
over equality of treatment.114 
79. The Constitution permits valid classification if two conditions are fulfilled. First, 
there must be an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons grouped 
together from others left out of the group. The phrase “intelligible differentia” 
means difference capable of being understood.115 The difference is capable 
of being understood when there is a yardstick to differentiate the class 
included and others excluded from the group.116 In the absence of the 
yardstick, the differentiation would be without a basis and hence, 
 
111 Gauri Shankar v. Union of India, AIR 1995 SC 55. 
112 Indra Sawhney (supra), [Thommen J, 260]. 
113 HM Seervai, Constitutional Law of India, 4th Edition, Volume I, page 439. 
114 Sandra Fredman, Substantive Equality Revisited, International Journal of Constitutional Law, Volume 14, 
Issue 3, 2016, 712-738. 
115 State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar (1952). 
116 Anwar Ali Sarkar (supra) (1952), [Das J, 66]. 

PART D 

unreasonable. The basis of classification must be deducible from the 
provisions of the statute; surrounding circumstances or matters of common 
knowledge.117 In making the classification, the State is free to recognize 
degrees of harm.118 Though the classification need not be mathematical in 
precision, there must be some difference between the persons grouped and 
the persons left out, and the difference must be real and pertinent.119 The 
classification is unreasonable if there is “little or no difference”.120 Second, the 
differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved 
by the law, that is, the basis of classification must have a nexus with the object 
of the classification.121 
b. 
Sub-classification as a facet of equality 
80. The first issue that arises for the consideration of this Court is whether the 
principle of sub-classification per se violates Article 14. It is established 
precept that Article 14 guarantees factual and not formal equality. Thus, if 
persons are not similarly situated in reference to the purpose of the law, 
classification is permissible. The same logic of classification equally applies 
to sub-classification. The law can further classify a class that is already 
created by law for a limited purpose if it is heterogeneous for another purpose. 
 
117 Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Shri SR Tandolkar, [12]. 
118 Ibid; Special Courts Bill, 1978, In re, (1979). 
119 Moorthy Match Works v. CCE, (1974). 
120 Deepak Sibal v. Punjab University, (1989). 
121 Indra Sawhney (supra) [Reddy J, 643]; State of Kerala v. N.M. Thomas (1976); Ram Krishna 
Dalmia v. Justice S.R. Tendolkar,; Budhan Choudhry v. State of Bihar (1955) 

PART D 

This Court has in multiple judgments held that such classification within a 
class is valid under Article 14.122 
81. To lay down the contours of the scope of sub-classification, it needs to be 
determined if the class is an integrated homogenous class. In All India 
Station Masters & Assistant Station Master’s Association v. General 
Manager, Central Railways123, the issue before a Constitution Bench of this 
Court was whether ‘road-side Station Masters’ could be differentiated from 
Guards for the purpose of promotion to the higher post of Station Masters. 
Answering the issue in the affirmative, this Court held that the Station Masters 
and Guards did not form an integrated class since they were recruited and 
trained separately. Thus, a distinction between the two classes was held not 
to be violative of the equality code which only requires the State to treat equals 
equally. Similarly, in Mohd. Shujat Ali v. Union of India124, another 
Constitution bench of this Court held that the distinction between graduate 
and non-graduate Supervisors for the purpose of promotion to the post of 
Assistant Engineer was valid because there was no integration between the 
two categories. The pay scale and even the nomenclature for the two classes 
were different. 
82. In All India Station Masters (supra) and Mohd. Shujat Ali (supra), this Court 
did not specifically answer the question of whether there could be sub-
classification within an integrated class. That issue arose for adjudication 
 
122 State of Kerala v. NM Thomas [Justice Mathew J, 83]; DS Nakara v, Union of India 1983 
[Justice Desai, 48]. 
 SC 384. 
124 1975. 

PART D 

before this Court in State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Triloki Nath Khosa125. 
The rules provided that only Assistant Engineers who possessed a degree or 
certain other qualifications were entitled to promotion to the post of Divisional 
Engineer. However, the pool of Assistant Engineers consisted of both degree 
and diploma holding graduates. The diploma holders among them challenged 
the constitutionality of the rule on the ground that it classified within the class 
of “Assistant Engineers” based on their educational qualification, and such a 
classification within a class was violative of Article 14. It was argued that if 
persons recruited from different sources are integrated into one class, they 
cannot thereafter be classified to permit preferential treatment in favour of 
some of them. This Court upheld the validity of the rule holding that the 
classification based on educational qualifications, for the purpose of 
promotions is not unreasonable. Justice YV Chandrachud (as he then was), 
writing for the bench held that the classification had a reasonable nexus with 
the objective of promotions, which was to achieve administrative efficiency in 
engineering services. 
83. It was also submitted that if persons recruited from different sources are 
integrated into one class, no further classification can be made within that 
class. In this case, the direct recruits to the post of Assistant Engineer were 
required to hold a degree in civil engineering. However, the promotees were 
drawn from the service which was open to both degree and diploma holders 
(the latter did not require a civil engineering degree). Thus, it was argued that 
 
125 1974. 

PART D 

a classification based on educational qualifications is a classification which is 
based on the source of service. This Court held that though persons were 
appointed from various sources such as promotion and direct recruitment, 
they came to be integrated into a common class of Assistant Engineers126. 
However, despite this integration into a class, they could be validly classified 
based on educational qualifications because it was not a classification based 
on the source of service. 
84. In this context, this Court cautioned that the judgment ought not to be 
interpreted as a justification for minute and microcosmic classifications and 
that the theory of classification could not be evolved through “imperceptible 
extensions”, diluting the very substance of the equality guarantee.127 
Distinguishing the judgment in Roshan Lal Tandon v. Union of India128, this 
Court observed in Triloki Nath (supra) that the issue in the former was 
whether the yardstick for integration (that is, the source of recruitment) could 
be used as a yardstick for further integration, which was not the issue in 
Triloki Nath (supra). Thus, Triloki Nath (supra) is the leading judgment for 
the proposition that an integrated class can be further classified if there is 
 
126 ibid, [YV Chandrachud J, 50]. “50. We are therefore of the opinion that though persons appointed directly 
and by promotion were integrated into a common class of Assistant Engineers, they could, for purposes of 
promotion to the cadre of Executive Engineers, be classified on the basis of educational qualifications. The 
Rule providing that graduates shall be eligible for such promotion to the exclusion of diploma-holders does 
not violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and must be upheld.” 
127 ibid, [YV Chandrachud J, 51]. “51. But we hope that this judgment will not be construed as a charter for 
making minute and microcosmic classifications. Excellence is, or ought to be, the goal of all good 
governments and excellence and equality are not friendly bed-fellows. A pragmatic approach has therefore 
to be adopted in order to harmonize the requirements of public services with the aspirations of public 
servants. But let us not evolve, through imperceptible extensions, a theory of classification which may 
subvert, perhaps submerge, the precious guarantee of equality. The eminent spirit of an ideal society is 
equality and so we must not be left to ask in wonderment: What after all is the operational residue of equality 
and equal opportunity?” 
128 (1968) 

PART D 

intelligible differentia and if the yardstick used has a nexus to the object of the 
provision.129 
85. It is not a given that appointees of different sources form an integrated class 
merely upon their appointment to one post. Even upon integration, the groups 
retain their separate identity for other purposes. In Katyani Sayal v. Union 
of India130, this Court held that the Assistant Officers of the Railways recruited 
through 
a 
competitive 
examination 
and 
those 
recruited 
on 
the 
recommendation of the Union Public Service Commission do not form an 
integrated homogenous class because the objects of recruitment, the tenure 
and even the appointing authority are different. In Col AS Iyer v. V 
Balasubramanyam131, a Constitution Bench of this Court upheld Survey of 
India promotion rules that reserved 50% more posts for engineers drawn from 
the military than for civilian engineers. Justice Krishna Iyer, writing for the 
Bench, observed that the army engineers never merged into the Survey of 
India service, along with their civilian counterparts. 
86. The judgment of this Court in DS Nakara v. Union of India132 has dwelt on 
the issue of sub-classification. In Nakara133, a scheme which divided 
pensioners into two groups based on the date of retirement, to provide 
pension was challenged. A Constitution Bench held that pensioners formed a 
class. Notably, this Court, similar to Triloki Nath (supra), did not hold that 
sub-classification is impermissible merely because the pensioners constitute 
 
129 See NM Thomas [Justice Mathew, 83] 
130 (1980). 
131 1980. 
132 1983 
133 ibid [48] 

PART D 

a class in themselves. As opposed to the inherent impermissibility of sub-
classification, the particular basis of classification in that case namely, the 
date of retirement, was found to be arbitrary considering the objective of 
granting pensions. It was held that if this basis of classification was accepted 
as valid, it would create an artificial distinction between two persons who 
retired within forty-eight hours of each other. Writing for the Bench, Justice D 
A Desai held that this Court while deciding if sub-classification is permissible 
must determine if the class is homogenous for the purpose of the law.134 
87. Nakara (supra) goes a step further than Triloki Nath (supra) to state that the 
scope of sub-classification does not hinge on the yardstick which is used to 
integrate groups into a class but on the issue of whether the class is 
homogenous or integrated for the specific objective of the law. When a law 
integrates a class, such as diploma and degree holders, it integrates the class 
for the purpose of that specific law and not for all purposes. Thus, a class 
which is not similarly situated for the purpose of the law can be further 
classified. The test that the Court must follow to determine the validity of the 
sub-classification of a class is as follows: 
a. Whether the class is “homogenous” or “similarly situated” for the 
purpose of the specific law; 
b. If the answer to ‘a’ above is in the affirmative, the class cannot be sub-
classified; 
 
134 DS Nakara (supra) [Desai J,42]: “If it appears to be undisputable, as it does to us that the pensioners for 
the purpose of pension benefits form a class, would its upward revision permit a homogenous class to be 
divided by arbitrarily fixing an eligibility criteria unrelated to purpose of revision and would such classification 
be founded on some rational principle?” 

PART D 

c. If the answer to ‘a’ above is in the negative, the class can be sub-
classified upon the fulfilment of the following standard: 
i. There must be a yardstick (or intelligible differentia) further 
classifying the class; and 
ii. The yardstick must have a rational nexus with the object of the 
statute. c. 
Micro-classification: the limits of sub-classification 
 
88. The next issue which arises is whether there are any limits to sub-
classification. In numerous judgments, this Court has held that the State must 
not micro-classify since such classifications would denude (rather than 
promote) the guarantee of equality, replacing the doctrine of equality with the 
doctrine of classification.135 When does sub-classification take the properties 
of micro-classification? 
89. In Nakara (supra), this Court incidentally illustrated what could be termed as 
a microscopic classification. This Court observed that if each pensioner were 
to be classified based on their individual dates of retirement or the month of 
their retirement, it would be too microscopic a classification. Notably, it was 
not the State’s argument that every individual pensioner retiring on a 
particular date was a class unto themselves or that the date of retirement was 
the basis of classification. Rather, the argument was that those retiring before 
the designated date were a class, distinct from those retiring after that date: 
 
135 Mohammad Shujat Ali and Others v. Union of India 1975 [Justice Bhagwati, 24-26]. 

PART D 

“9. Is this class of pensioners further divisible for the 
purpose of “entitlement” and “payment” of pension into 
those who retired by certain date and those who retired 
after that date? If date of retirement can be accepted 
as a valid criterion for classification, on retirement each 
individual government servant would form a class by 
himself because the date of retirement of each is 
correlated to his birth date and on attaining a certain 
age he had to retire. It is only after the 
recommendations 
of 
the 
Third 
Central 
Pay 
Commission were accepted by the Government of 
India that the retirement dates have been specified to 
be 12 in number being last day of each month in which 
the birth date of the individual government servant 
happens to fall. In other words, all government servants 
who retire correlated to birth date on attaining the age 
of superannuation in a given month shall not retire on 
that date but shall retire on the last day of the month. 
Now, if date of retirement is a valid criterion for 
classification, those who retire at the end of every 
month shall form a class by themselves. This is too 
microscopic a classification to be upheld for any valid 
purpose. Is it permissible or is it violative of Article 14?” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
90. All persons are unequal in one or the other aspect. In a given situation, even 
a single individual may be treated as a class by themselves.136 In that case, 
it is particularly important that laws do not micro-classify. The question of 
whether the classification amounts to a micro-classification which is 
impermissible under Article 14 would depend on the facts of each case. 
However, the two crucial components of the standard of intelligible differentia 
prescribe the limits of sub-classification. The two components are (a) the 
purpose; and (b) the rational basis (or principle) for the differentiation. This 
Court has previously held that the purpose must be independent of the 
differentiation.137 The Court grants the State sufficient latitude in identifying 
 
136 Charanjit Chowdhury (supra) 833 [58]; Ram Krishna Dalmia (supra) [11]. 
137 Deepak Sibal v. Punjab University (1989) 

PART D 

the purpose, including the degrees of harm.138 The same degree of latitude is 
not accorded to the principle underlying the differentiation. It is not sufficient 
if the principle underlying the classification is relevant or shares a nexus to 
the purpose. The principle underlying the classification must be reasonable 
and rational.139 In Nakara (supra), this Court questioned the rationale of 
classifying the beneficiary class based on the date of retirement. In a 
concurring opinion in Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India140, Justice Indu 
Malhotra held that a principle of differentiation based on “core and immutable” 
characteristics is not rational. For example, if the law stipulates that the loan 
of farmers from one specific village in a State will be fully waived, it must prove 
through the submission of cogent material that there is a rational principle 
distinguishing one village from other villages in the State. In this context, the 
State will for example have to prove that location of the land is a rational 
principle of categorization and then subsequently prove that the village is not 
similarly situated for the purpose of the law. With this background, we proceed 
to analyze the specific issue of whether the sub-classification within the 
Scheduled Castes is constitutionally permissible. iii. 
Sub-classification in reservations: tracing the journey through Balaji, 
Vasanth Kumar and Indra Sawhney 
 
91. The issue of whether the State can further sub-classify within a class for the 
purpose of reservation first arose in MR Balaji (supra). The State of Mysore 
 
138 See Anwar Ali Sarkar (Supra) [7]; Ram Krishna Dalmia (supra) [11]; State of Gujarat v. Shri Ambica Mills 
(1974) [61]. 
139 See DS Nakara (supra) [43] 
140 (2019). 

PART D 

appointed the Mysore Backward Class Committee to advise it on the adoption 
of criteria for the determination of the socially and educationally backward 
class. Based on the report of the Committee, the State recommended the 
sub-classification of the Backward Class into the Backward Class and More 
Backward Class based on educational backwardness141. In MR Balaji (supra) 
the Constitution Bench held the sub-classification of the backward class to be 
unconstitutional because it: (a) was solely based on caste142; and (b) devised 
measures for the benefit of “all” classes of citizens who are less advanced 
when compared to the most advanced class in the State which is not the 
scope of Article 15(4)143: 
“ 29. In this connection, it is necessary to add that the 
sub-classification made by the order between 
Backward Classes and More Backward Classes does 
not appear to the justified under Article 15(4). Article 
15(4) authorises special provision being made for the 
really backward classes. In introducing two categories 
of Backward Classes what the impugned order, in 
substance purports to do is to devise measures for the 
benefit of all the classes of citizens who are less 
advanced, compared to the most advanced classes in 
the State, and that, in our opinion, is not the scope of 
Article 15(4). The result of the method adopted by the 
impugned order is that nearly 90% of the population of 
the State is treated as backward, and that illustrates 
how the order in fact divides the population of the State 
into most advanced and the rest, and puts the latter into 
two categories of Backward and More Backward. The 
classification of the two categories, therefore, is not 
warranted by Article 15(4).” 
 
141 The criterion for the sub-classification was whether the standard of education in the community is less 
than 50% of the State Average. If it is, the community must be regarded as a more backward community. If 
it is not, then the community must be regarded as the backward community. 
 SC 649 [25] 
 SC 649 [29] This observation must be read along with the observation in Paragraph 21 where 
this Court held that the test of relativity must not be used to determine the backward class: “21. In considering 
the scope and extent of the expression “Backward Classes” under Article 15(4), it is necessary to remember 
that the concept of backwardness is not intended to be relative in the sense that any classes who are 
backward in relation to the most advanced classes of the society should be included in it. If such relative 
tests were to be applied by reason of the most advanced classes, there would be several layers or strata of 
backward classes and each one of them may claim to be included under Article 15(4).” 

PART D 

92. This view was critiqued by Justice O Chinnappa Reddy in Vasanth Kumar 
(supra). In Vasanth Kumar (supra), this Court was invited to deliver its 
opinion on reservations which may serve as a guideline to the Commission 
that the Government of Karnataka proposed to appoint for examining the 
question of reservation in education and employment sectors. In his 
concurring opinion, Justice Chinnappa Reddy observed that as a matter of 
principle, sub-classification within a reserved class is valid provided that both 
the classes are far behind the advanced class and that one of the classes is 
ahead of the most backward class.144 The learned Judge observed that the 
validity of the classification of the Backward Class into Backward and More 
Backward Classes may be open to adjudication on the facts of each case. 
93. In Indra Sawhney (supra), an Office Memorandum which introduced a 
criterion giving preference for the poorer of the Socially and Educationally 
Backward Class was under challenge. The learned Judges diverged on the 
interpretation of the phrase “poorer”. Justice Pandian construed the phrase 
“poorer” in the Memorandum to mean economically weaker sections. Justice 
B P Jeevan Reddy, authoring the plurality opinion, construed the phrase 
“poorer” not in the economic sense but in the socio-economic sense. The 
learned Judges adopted a different approach while dealing with the issue of 
sub-classification owing to this divergence. Justice Pandian observed that 
preference for a section of the socially and educationally backward section 
would eliminate or exclude the other section of the class.145 This observation 
 
144 Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [55] 
145 Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [207(5)] 

PART D 

of the learned Judge must be read along with a previous observation that the 
socially and educationally backward class shares a common characteristic of 
social backwardness which cannot then be further divided solely based on 
economic criteria. Thus, the learned Judge did not find the sub-classification 
of the socially and educationally backward classes unconstitutional per se but 
the sub-classification of the class based on economic criteria which is alien to 
the determination of the beneficiary class. Another reason for the decision of 
the learned Judge was the model of sub-classification which was prescribed 
by the Office Memorandum. The Office Memorandum provided that the 
poorer section would have preference over all the seats reserved for a class, 
leaving the possibility of excluding the rest open. 
94. Justice Jeevan Reddy observed that there is no constitutional or legal bar in 
classifying the backward class into backward and most backward class.146 
The learned Judge held that sub-classification is valid for two reasons. First, 
there may be inter-se backwardness within same class and in such a 
situation, sub-classification ensures that the more backward of the class can 
secure the benefit.147 Second, the constitutional scheme expressly provides 
for sub-classification. Article 16(4) only identifies the beneficiary class as the 
“backward class” unlike Article 15(4) which expressly identifies the socially 
 
146 Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [802] 
147 “802. We are of the opinion that there is no constitutional or legal bar to a State categorising the backward 
classes as backward and more backward. We are not saying that it ought to be done. We are concerned with 
the question if a State makes such a categorisation, whether it would be invalid? We think not. Let us take 
the criteria evolved by Mandal Commission. Any caste, group or class which scored eleven or more points 
was treated as a backward class. Now, it is not as if all the several thousands of castes/groups/classes 
scored identical points. There may be some castes/groups/classes which have scored points between 20 to 
22 and there may be some who have scored points between eleven and thirteen. It cannot reasonably be 
denied that there is no difference between these two sets of castes/groups/classes.” 

PART D 

and educationally backward class, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes. The relevant observation is extracted below: 
“803. There is another way of looking at this issue. 
Article 16(4) recognises only one class viz., “backward 
class of citizens”. It does not speak separately of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, as does 
Article 15(4). Even so, it is beyond controversy that 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are also 
included in the expression “backward class of citizens” 
and that separate reservations can be provided in their 
favour. It is a well-accepted phenomenon throughout 
the country. What is the logic behind it? It is that if 
Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled Castes and Other 
Backward Classes are lumped together, OBCs will take 
away all the vacancies leaving Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes high and dry. The same logic also 
warrants categorisation as between more backward 
and backward. We do not mean to say — we may 
reiterate — that this should be done. We are only 
saying that if a State chooses to do it, it is not 
impermissible in law.” 
 
95. The learned Judge also construed the phrase “preference” in the Office 
Memorandum to mean “equitable apportionment” such that preference does 
not exclude the benefit to the less backward of the socially and educationally 
backward class. 
96. With respect to the sub-classification of the backward classes, Justice Sawant 
observed that both the sub-categories must be substantially (and not 
comparatively) backward when compared to the forward class and there must 
be a substantial difference in backwardness between the sub-categories 
themselves. The learned Judge notes that if these two criteria are fulfilled, 
then it is not only advisable but imperative to sub-classify. Echoing the opinion 
of Justice Jeevan Reddy, Justice Sawant observed that sub-classification 

PART D 

would lead to the exclusion of classes if the preference model is followed 
instead of the model whereby a percentage of seats are allotted to the most 
backward.148 
97. The observations in Indra Sawhney (supra), elucidate the following three 
principles with respect to sub-classification: 
a. Sub-categorization within a class is a constitutional requirement to 
secure substantive equality in the event that there is a distinction 
between two sections of a class; 
b. Sub-classification must not lead to the exclusion of one of the 
categories in the class. A model that provides sufficient opportunities 
to all categories of the class must be adopted; and 
c. Sub-classification among a class must be on a reasonable basis. 
Justice Sawant held that the distinction between the categories must 
be substantial. Justice Jeevan Reddy held that the sub-
categorization must be reasonable. 
 
148 “524.[…] To give an instance, the Mandal Commission has, on the basis of social, educational and 
economic indicators evolved 22 points by giving different values to each of the three factors, viz., social, 
educational and economic. Those social groups which secured 22 points or above have been listed there as 
“socially and educationally backward” and the rest as “advanced”. Now, between 11 and 22 points some may 
secure, say, 11 to 15 points while others may secure all 22 points. The difference in their backwardness is, 
therefore, substantial. Yet another illustration which may be given is from Karnataka State Government order 
dated October 13, 1986 on reservations issued after the decision in Vasanth Kumar [1985 Supp SCC 714: 
1985 Supp ] where the backward classes are grouped into five categories, viz., A, B, C, D and E. 
In category A, fall such castes or communities as that of Bairagi, Banjari and Lambadi which are nomadic 
tribes, and Bedaru, Ramoshi which were formerly stigmatised as criminal tribes whereas in category D fall 
such castes as Kshatriya and Rajput. To lump both together would be to deny totally the benefit of special 
provisions to the former, the latter taking away the entire benefits. On the other hand, to deny the status of 
backwardness to the latter and ask them to compete with the advanced classes, would leave the latter without 
any seat or post. In such circumstances, the sub-classification of the backward classes into backward and 
more or most backward is not only desirable but essential.” 

PART D 

a. Indra Sawhney did not exclude sub-classification within the Scheduled 
Castes 
98. In Chinnaiah (supra), this Court observed that the principles in Indra 
Sawhney (supra) on sub-classification of the Other Backward Class will not 
apply to the Scheduled Castes because the judgment specifically observed 
that it is only ruling on the sub-classification of the Other Backward Class and 
not the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.149 At two places in 
Indra Sawhney (supra), Justice Jeevan Reddy limited the observations to the 
Other Backward Classes and did not extend them to the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes. While dealing with the identification of the backward 
class of citizens under Article 16(4), the learned judge made the following 
observations:150 
“781. At the outset, we may state that for the purpose 
of this discussion, we keep aside the Scheduled Tribes 
and Scheduled Castes (since they are admittedly 
included within the backward classes), except to 
remark that backward classes contemplated by Article 
16(4) do comprise some castes – for it cannot be 
denied that Scheduled Castes include quite a few 
castes.” 
99. These observations were made in the specific context of the recognition of 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes as a separate class of 
beneficiaries under Article 15(5) and their absence in Article 16(4). Justice 
Jeevan Reddy noted that it is admitted that the Backward Class in Article 
 
149 Chinnaiah v. State of AP, (2005) [Justice Santhosh Hegde, 38]; [Justice Sinha, 76] 
150 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [781] 

PART D 

16(4) includes the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes even though the 
provision does not expressly state so. 
100. While discussing the issue of the exclusion of the creamy layer in the 
identification of the beneficiary class under Article 16(4), Justice Jeevan 
Reddy noted that the discussion is confined to the Other Backward Class and 
does not have any relevance to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes.151 This observation must also be understood in the context in which it 
was made. While discussing the necessity of the exclusion of the creamy 
layer of the Other Backward Class for the purposes of reservation, Justice 
Reddy observed that social backwardness is the connecting link in a class 
identified under Article 16(4). The learned Judge remarked that the class does 
not remain a homogenous class if some of the members of the class are 
socially forward. This Court noted that economic advancement can be a 
relevant criterion to exclude the creamy layer provided that the economic 
advancement is so high as to cause social advancement. The observation 
that this does not apply to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes was 
made because they suffer from a more egregious form of social 
backwardness when compared to the Other Backward Class. The Court did 
not deem it necessary to decide the issue of whether the financial 
advancement of the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
would cause social advancement since the issue in Indra Sawhney (supra) 
was only with respect to reservation for the Other Backward Class. 
 
151 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [792] 

PART D 

101. The question then is whether there is any reason to not extend the principle 
of sub-classification to the Scheduled Castes when a nine-Judge Bench of 
this Court has already extended the principle to the beneficiary classes under 
Articles 15 and 16. It is true that the social backwardness of the Other 
Backward Class is not comparable to that of the Scheduled Castes since they 
are more socially advanced than the Scheduled Castes. That is precisely why 
the Constitution groups them into two separate classes in Article 15(4). It is 
also true that the castes included within the class of Other Backward Class 
do not suffer from a single form of social backwardness. The castes which 
are included within the Other Backward Class suffer from a certain degree of 
comparable backwardness but the form of social backwardness amongst 
them may vary. As opposed to this position, the Scheduled Castes suffer from 
a common form of social backwardness through untouchability. 
102. It is one thing to argue that the Scheduled Castes cannot be sub-categorized 
on account of their limited heterogeneity and common identity as opposed to 
the Other Backward Class. But it is another issue to completely disregard the 
application of the principle of sub-classification to the Scheduled Castes on 
the ground that Indra Sawhney (supra) limited its application to the Other 
Backward Class. We do not find that the purport of the observations in Indra 
Sawhney (supra) on sub-classification was to limit it to the Other Backward 
Classes, to the exclusion of the Scheduled Castes. The principle of sub-
classification was given judicial assent in Indra Sawhney (supra) to ensure 
that the principle of substantive equality is fulfilled. The principle of sub-
classification will be applicable to the Scheduled Castes if the social positions 

PART D 

of the constituents among the castes/groups is not comparable. In the 
subsequent section, we will analyze if Article 341 through the operation of the 
deeming fiction creates an integrated homogenous class that cannot be 
further classified. iv. 
The import of the deeming fiction in Article 341 
103. Article 366(24) defines the Scheduled Castes as the castes, groups, races 
or tribes which are deemed to be Scheduled Castes under Article 341(1). The 
provision does not offer any assistance on the criteria which must be satisfied 
by the castes, groups, races or tribes for them to be notified as a Scheduled 
Caste under Article 341. The definition clause only refers to the deeming 
fiction created by Article 341. Article 341(1) also does not lay down the criteria 
for inclusion of a caste as a Scheduled Caste. Sub-clause (1) of Article 341 
refers to the power of the President to specify the castes, races, tribes or 
parts of or groups within these three groups. Specified as such, they shall be 
deemed to be Scheduled Castes for the purpose of the Constitution in relation 
to the state. The respondents submitted that the “deeming fiction” creates a 
homogenous integrated class that cannot be further classified. The tenability 
of the submission needs to be analyzed. a. Chinnaiah on the deeming fiction in Article 341 
104. In his opinion in Chinnaiah (supra), Justice Santosh Hegde relied on NM 
Thomas (supra) to hold that the Scheduled Castes, though drawn from 
various castes, races and tribes, attain a new status by the Presidential 
notification. Justice Sema noted that once notified through a Presidential 

PART D 

Notification under Article 341 (1), Scheduled Castes attain a homogenous 
status. The learned Judge then held that the objective of the notification was 
to afford special protection to the Scheduled Castes as a homogenous group, 
which cannot be regrouped in the manner in which it was done by the Andhra 
Pradesh Act. Justice Sinha noted that Scheduled Castes constitute a class of 
persons entitled to special protection and could not be discriminated inter se, 
as all of them satisfied the test of abysmal backwardness and inadequate 
representation. He specifically observed that the Scheduled Castes are a 
“single integrated class of most backward citizens”. 
105. One of the issues in Jarnail Singh (supra) was whether the judgment in 
Nagaraj (supra) was correct to apply the principle of the exclusion of the 
creamy layer to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. It was argued 
before the Court in Jarnail Singh (supra) that the application of the creamy 
layer principle to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes would have the 
effect of amending the List, which is not permissible under Articles 341(2) and 
342(2). The Constitution Bench held that the exclusion of the creamy layer 
from the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes is justified under the 
equality code because the members of the creamy layer no longer require 
reservation since they have moved “forward so that they may march hand in 
hand with other citizens of India on an equal basis.”152 Writing for the Bench, 
Justice Nariman observed that the application of the principle of creamy layer 
to reservations for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes per se 
will not have the effect of tinkering with the Lists notified under Articles 341 
 
152 (2018) [26, 34]. 

PART D 

and 342 because a caste as a whole is not excluded from the List but only 
persons who have overcome backwardness are excluded.153 
106. Thus, it needs to be determined if the interpretation of the scope of Article 
341 in Chinnaiah (supra) is correct. We must decide, first, whether Article 
341 creates a deeming fiction. Second, if it does, the purpose and effect of 
the legal fiction created under Article 341 must be analyzed. That is, we must 
decide whether the legal fiction creates a homogenous class which cannot be 
further classified. Third, the scope of the prohibition under Article 341 (2) must 
be determined in relation to the effect of the legal fiction created by Article 
341(1). b. Scope of deeming fiction 
107. The use of the phrase “deemed to be” is not conclusive of a legal fiction.154 
The word deemed is used for many purposes, such as for the artificial 
construction of a word and to clarify uncertain constructions, or plainly just to 
mean “regarded as being”.155 A legal fiction is essentially a presumption that 
certain facts which do not exist in fact, will be treated as real and existing for 
the purpose of law. Courts have evolved two principles on the operation of 
legal fictions. The first principle is that a legal fiction must be confined to its 
‘legitimate field’, for the specific purpose for which it was created.156 In Bengal 
 
153 ibid [26]. 
154 See Consolidated Coffee Ltd v. Coffee Board, Bangalore, 1980 [11,12]; Bhuwalka Steel 
Industries Limited v. Union of India, (2017) [36,37,43,44] 
155 St. Aubyn v. Attorney General, 1952 AC 15, 53 [Lord Radcliffe] 
156 Industrial Supplies Private Limited v. Union of India, (1980) [25]; K. Prabhakaran v. P. 
Jayarajan, (2005) [39]; See Bengal Immunity Company Ltd v. State of Bihar, (1955) SCC OnLine 
SC 2. 

PART D 

Immunity Company Ltd v. State of Bihar157, a seven-Judge Bench of this 
Court held that legal fictions are created only for a certain purpose and they 
must be confined only to that “legitimate field”. In its decision in that case, this 
Court held that the deeming fiction in the Explanation to Article 286(1)(a), 
before the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act 1956, (by which a sale was 
deemed to have taken place in the State where the goods were delivered 
because of the direct sale) only applied to Article 286(1)(a) and not to Article 
286(2). This Court held that the scope of Article 286(1)(a) which barred a 
State from imposing tax on sales outside the State, was different from the 
scope of Article 286 (2) which stated that unless otherwise provided by law, 
State laws could not tax a sale or purchase which took place in the course of 
inter-state trade or commerce.158 
108. The second principle is that the scope of the legal fiction must be extended to 
the consequences which “logically” flow from its creation. The opinion of Lord 
Asquith in East End Dwelling Co. Ltd. v. Finsbury Borough Council159 is 
the leading case for this proposition. The Law Lord observed that the effect 
of a legal fiction must not be limited to treating facts that do not exist as real 
 
157 Bengal Immunity Company Ltd v. State of Bihar, (1955) SCC OnLine SC 2 [Justice Das, 32]. 
158 52. A legal fiction pre-supposes the correctness of the state of facts on which it is based and all the 
consequences which flow from that state of facts have got to be worked out to their logical extent. But due 
regard must be had in this behalf to the purpose for which the legal fiction has been created. If the 
purpose of this legal fiction contained in the Explanation to Article 286(1)(a) is solely for the purpose of sub-
clause (a) as expressly stated it would not be legitimate to travel beyond the scope of that purpose and read 
into the provision any other purpose howsoever attractive it may be. The legal fiction which was created 
here was only for the purpose of determining whether a particular sale was an outside sale or one 
which could be deemed to have taken place inside the State and that was the only scope of the 
provision. It would be an illegitimate extension of the purpose of the legal fiction to say that it was 
also created for the purpose of converting the inter-State character of the transaction into an intra-
State one. This type of conversion could not have been in the contemplation of the Constitution-makers and 
is contrary to the express purpose for which the legal fiction was created as set out in the Explanation to 
Article 286(1)(a). [emphasis supplied] 
159 LR 1952 AC 109. 

PART D 

but must be expanded to understand the effects and consequences that flow 
from the legal fiction.160 However, a law creating a deeming fiction cannot 
create presumptions in favor of a legal consequence but only presumptions 
about facts from which certain legal consequences may follow. In Delhi Cloth 
& General Mills Co. Ltd v. State of Rajasthan161, the constitutional validity 
of the Kota Municipal Limits (Continued Existence) Validating Act of 1975 was 
challenged. The Municipalities Act prescribed a mandatory procedure for 
delimitation of municipalities including a public notice inviting objections. This 
mandatory procedure was flouted in the inclusion and exclusion of certain 
villages to and from the Kota municipality in the State. The Validating Act 
provided that notwithstanding the mandatory provisions of the Municipalities 
Act, those villages would be deemed to have always continued to exist as 
they do within the limits of Kota municipality. The Court held that the 
Validating Act required the deeming of a legal position rather than the 
deeming of a fact from which such legal consequence would follow. The 
Bench found that this was not a permissible creation of a fiction. Article 341 
must be interpreted based on the above principles. c. Article 341 does not create a deeming fiction 
109. In Punit Rai v. Dinesh Chaudhary162, the issue before a three-Judge Bench 
of this Court was whether the Respondent, who contested an election for a 
 
160 ibid at page 132. “If you are bidden to treat an imaginary state of affairs as real, you must surely, unless 
prohibited from doing so, also imagine as real the consequence and incidents which, if the putative state of 
affairs had in fact existed, must inevitably have flowed from or accompanied it... The statute says that you 
must imagine a certain state of affairs; it does not say that having done so, you must cause or permit your 
imagination to boggle when it comes to the inevitable corollaries of that state of affairs.” 
161 1976. 
162 2003. 

PART D 

seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes in the Legislative Assembly, 
belonged to the Scheduled Caste community. Justice Sinha, writing the 
concurring opinion made a passing observation that Article 341(1) creates a 
deeming fiction.163 However, this observation does not form the ratio 
decidendi of the judgment. Thus, it needs to be analyzed if Article 341(1) 
creates a deeming fiction. 
110. Article 341(1) consists of three parts. The first part lays down the procedure 
for notifying a caste as a Scheduled Caste. The President, in consultation with 
the Governor (if the notification is with respect to a State) is empowered to 
specify castes which shall be Scheduled Castes. In the second part, a 
provision similar to Article 366(26), provides some clarity on who could be 
notified as a Scheduled Caste: a caste, race, or tribe or parts of or groups 
within the caste, race or tribe. The third part, with the use of the words “for the 
purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes” includes a 
substantive provision. In the absence of the word “deemed”, the provision 
would have solely been a procedural clause, empowering the President to 
notify the Scheduled Castes. The use of the word “deemed” ensures that the 
castes or groups of castes shall be regarded as Scheduled Castes by the 
very act of notifying them. Thus, the inclusion of the word ‘deemed’ in Articles 
341(2) and 342(2) does not create a legal fiction since it does not provide any 
artificial construction. To that extent, the observations of the three-Judge 
Bench of this Court in Punit Rai (supra) that Article 341(2) creates a deeming 
fiction are erroneous. 
 
163 ibid [Justice Sinha, 25]. 

PART D 

111. In Milind (supra), a Constitution Bench of this Court observed that the 
purpose of Article 341(1) is to recognize and identify the Scheduled Castes 
for the purpose of the Constitution and to prevent disputes as to who would 
constitute a Scheduled Caste for the purpose of the benefits under the 
Constitution.164 The Indian social order consists of castes or groups which 
suffer from varying degrees of social backwardness, ranging from 
untouchability to occupational segregation. These castes are grouped into 
different classes by the Constitution, such as the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes, based on the degree of marginalization for the purpose of 
conferring benefits through affirmative action. A caste only becomes a 
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or a socially and educationally 
backward caste when the President issues a notification to that effect in the 
exercise of the power under Articles 341, 342 and 342A respectively. Thus, it 
could be argued that the word “deemed” in the provision creates a legal fiction 
for creating a constitutional identity for the castes which are included in the 
lists. 
112. Even if it is accepted that the deeming fiction is used for the creation of a 
constitutional identity, the fiction can neither be extended to other purposes 
nor can it create legal consequences that do not logically flow from the fiction. 
Accepting the respondents’ argument that once included in the List, 
communities specified in the List of Scheduled Castes assume homogeneity 
would be akin to extending the legal fiction to a purpose that was not 
envisaged. The purpose of the deeming fiction is ‘identification’ of castes 
 
164 ibid, [35] 

PART D 

which are the Scheduled Castes. The logical corollary of the identification of 
castes or groups as Scheduled Castes is not that this creates a homogenous 
unit. The inclusion of certain castes within the Scheduled Caste category is 
only to demarcate them from other castes which are not included in the 
category. The inclusion does not automatically lead to the formation of a 
uniform and internally homogenous class which cannot be further classified. 
Article 341 creates a legal fiction for the limited purpose of identification of 
Scheduled Castes by distinguishing them from other groups. It offers no 
guidance on how the Scheduled Castes fare among themselves or on 
heterogeneity among the Scheduled Castes for the purpose of the 
Constitution. The legal fiction which assigns an identity to the Scheduled 
Castes, separate from other categories cannot be stretched to draw 
inferences about the existence or non-existence of internal differences among 
the Scheduled Castes. The only logical consequence is that each of the 
groups that is included in the list will receive the benefits that the Constitution 
provides to the Scheduled Castes as a class. 
113. In Chinnaiah (supra), Justice Santosh Hegde observed that the Castes 
notified by the President in the exercise of power under Article 341 form a 
class in themselves. For this purpose, the learned Judge relied on the 
following observations of the Constitution Bench in NM Thomas (supra): 
a. Justice Mathew observed that the members of the Scheduled Castes 
attain a new status by the Presidential Notification;165 
 
165 NM Thomas (supra) [Justice Mathew, 82]. 

PART D 

b. Justice Krishna Iyer observed that the Scheduled Castes are not 
castes within the Hindu fold but an amalgam of castes, races, groups, 
tribes, communities or parts thereof found on investigation to be the 
lowliest and in need of massive State aid and notified as such by the 
President;166 and 
c. Justice Fazal Ali observed that the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes have been given a special status in the Constitution 
and they constitute a class by themselves.167 
114. It is necessary to understand the context of the case to understand the import 
of the above observations. In NM Thomas (supra), rules providing 
concessions to the members of the Scheduled Castes for qualifying at the 
entrance examination were challenged. One of the issues before the Court 
was whether the concession to the members of the Scheduled Castes 
violated Article 16(2) since it discriminates solely on the ground of “caste”. To 
overcome the embargo placed by Article 16(2), the learned Judges observed 
that provision for affirmative action is made in favour of the Scheduled Castes, 
which once notified by the President in exercise of the power under Article 
341 are not a “caste” but a class. The class that is constituted by the 
Presidential notification as the Scheduled Castes consists of numerous 
castes, thereby forming a class. The observations in NM Thomas (supra) do 
not go further to state that it is a homogenous class that cannot be classified 
 
166 NM Thomas (supra) [Justice Iyer, 135]. 
167 NM Thomas (supra) [Justice Fazal Ali, 169]: “If, therefore, the members of the scheduled castes and the 
scheduled tribes are not castes, then it is open to the State to make reasonable classification in order to 
advance or lift these classes so that they may be properly represented in the services under the State.” 

PART D 

further. In fact, Justice Mathew observed in the very next paragraph that there 
can be further classification within a class if there is an intelligible differentia 
separating a group within a class from another group.168 Additionally, the 
approach adopted in NM Thomas (supra) by this Court that the Scheduled 
Castes are a class because they comprise of a collection of castes must be 
read in the context of the nine-Judge Bench decision in Indra Sawhney 
(supra), where this Court held that caste is itself a class. Therefore, we are of 
the view that the inference drawn by Justice Hegde in Chinnaiah (supra) that 
the Scheduled Castes are a homogenous class based on the above 
observations in NM Thomas (supra) is erroneous. d. Article 341(1) read with Article 341(2) only proscribes exclusion from and 
inclusion in the Scheduled Castes List. 
115. In Chinnaiah (supra), this Court held that sub-classification amounted to 
tinkering with the Presidential list by the State legislature, and was therefore, 
violative of Article 341(2) which exclusively vests power in Parliament. Article 
341(2) prescribes the only manner in which the Presidential Notification under 
Article 341(1) may be altered. The provision stipulates that castes, races or 
tribes, or parts of or groups within them once notified by the President under 
Article 341(1) may be included in or excluded from the List only by Parliament. 
The latter half of the clause states by way of abundant caution that ‘save as 
aforesaid’, the notification shall not be varied. The provision reads as follows: 
“(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from 
the list of Scheduled Castes specified in a notification 
issued under clause (1) any caste, race or tribe or part 
 
168 NM Thomas (supra) [Justice Mathew, 83]. 

PART D 

of or group within any caste, race or tribe, but save as 
aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause 
shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.” 

(emphasis supplied) 

116. Dr B R Ambedkar, while proposing the inclusion of Articles 300A and 300B of 
the Draft Constitution (which correspond to Articles 341 and 342 of the 
Constitution), indicated that once notified, any elimination from the list or an 
addition to the list was to be made by Parliament and not by the President. 
This limitation, he noted was to eliminate “political factors” from disturbing the 
list: 
“..The only limitation that has been imposed is this: that 
once a notification has been issued by the President, 
which, undoubtedly, he will be issuing in consultation 
with and on the advice of the government of each State, 
thereafter, if any elimination was to be made from the 
list so notified or any addition was to be made, that 
must be made by Parliament and not by the President. 
The object is to eliminate any kind of political factors 
having a play in the matter of the disturbance in the 
Schedule so published by the President.”169 
 
117. Unless amended in the manner prescribed under Article 341(2), the 
Presidential List notified under Article 341(1) is conclusive of which 
community is a Scheduled Caste and must be taken as it is. Article 341(2) 
prescribes the scope of permissible changes to the List published under 
Article 341(1) and exclusively vests the power to vary these lists in 
Parliament. 
 
169 Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 9, page 1636 (17 September 1949) 

PART D 

118. The prohibitions in Articles 341 (1) and 342 (2) are two-fold: first, 
specification as a Scheduled Caste is circumscribed by the territorial limits of 
the State or the region, specific to which a particular group has been 
notified170. For instance, Entry 23 of Part I of the Scheduled Castes Order for 
the State of Andhra Pradesh enumerates: “Godagalli, Godagula (in the 
districts of Srikakulam, Vizianagaram and Vishakhapatanam)”. Hence, the 
enlisted communities (Godagalli and Godagula) are treated as a Scheduled 
Caste for the districts named in the entry and not for the entire State. In Marri 
Chandra Shekar Rao v. Dean, Seth GS Medical College171, a Constitution 
Bench of this Court considered whether a member of the Gouda community, 
recognized as a Scheduled Tribe in Andhra Pradesh, could seek admission 
to a seat reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in Maharashtra. Answering it in 
the negative, this Court observed that since the social conditions of caste 
groups vary across the country, a caste or tribe could not be generalized as 
a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe for the whole country. It held that the 
expression “in relation to that State” in Articles 341 (1) and 342(1) could not 
be rendered redundant by treating a caste specified as a Scheduled Caste in 
one State to be entitled to the benefits for Scheduled Castes in another State, 
where it was not so specified.172 In Bir Singh v. Delhi Jal Board173, one of 
the issues before this Court was whether the power of the State to make 
provisions for affirmative action for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes under Article 16(4) is impacted by the power of the President under 
 
170 See Constitutional (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 [2,4]. 
171 (1990) 
172 Marri (supra) [9] 
173 2018. 

PART D 

Articles 341(1) and 342(1) of the Constitution. The Constitution Bench held 
that a State in exercise of its power under Article 16(4), cannot extend the 
benefits accorded to the Scheduled Castes to a caste which is not 
enumerated in the Presidential list notified under Article 341(1). The Court 
held that the enabling provision under Article 16(4) must be harmoniously 
read with Articles 341 and 342. Therefore, if a statute extends the policy of 
affirmative action to groups not enumerated specifically with respect to that 
State/Union Territory, it would circumvent the mandate of Article 341(2) and 
would be an impermissible expansion of the List, contrary to the mandate of 
Article 341(1).174 Thus, this Court held that the benefit of reservation cannot 
be extended to a caste which is not enumerated as a Scheduled Caste in that 
State, though it finds a place in the Presidential List with respect to another 
State. 
119. Second, Article 341(2) provides that only Parliament can include in or 
exclude from the List any caste, tribe, race or their parts or groups. The 
Presidential notification cannot be varied by any subsequent notification, 
other than by an inclusion or exclusion by Parliament. By completely vesting 
in Parliament the power to include or exclude from the Presidential List, Article 
341(2) correspondingly limits the power of the President (acting on the aid 
and advice of the Council of Ministers at the Centre) and the Governor (acting 
on the aid and advice of the State Government when consulted) to include or 
exclude castes or sub-castes from the List. 
 
174 ibid, [Justice Gogoi, 34]; [Justice Banumathi, 79, 81] 

PART D 

120. In Chinnaiah (supra), this Court interpreted Article 341(2) as a limit on the 
power of the President to “tinker” with the list.175 Article 341(2) consists of two 
parts. First, it grants only Parliament the power to “include or exclude” any 
caste or group, or a part of the caste or group, and second, “save as 
aforesaid”, a notification issued by the President under Article 341(1) shall not 
be varied by any other subsequent notification. It is important to understand 
the purport of the second part of the provision to understand the scope of 
Article 342(2). 
121. The second part of Article 341(2) must be read in the context of Article 367. 
Article 367 provides that unless the context otherwise requires, the General 
Clauses Act 1897 shall apply for the interpretation of the Constitution as it 
applies to the interpretation of an Act of the Legislature of the Dominion of 
India. Section 21 of the General Clauses Act 1897 states that the power to 
issue notifications includes the power to add to, amend, vary or rescind the 
notification.176 By Article 341(1) read with Article 367 and Section 21 of the 
General Clauses Act 1897, the President would have the power to add to, 
amend, vary or rescind the notification. The first part of Article 341(2) removes 
the power of the President to include in and exclude from the List and places 
it in the domain of Parliament. This power is traceable to the words “add to” 
or “amend” in Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. The second part of 
Article 341(2) ensures that the President does not have any residual power 
 
175Chinnaiah (supra), [Justice Hegde, 43] 
176 21. Power to issue, to include power to add to, amend, vary or rescind notifications orders, rules, or bye-
laws- Where, by any [Central Act] or Regulations a power to issue notifications, orders, rules, or bye-laws is 
conferred, then that power includes a power, exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like sanction 
and conditions (if any), to add to, amend, vary or rescind any notifications, orders, rules, or bye-laws so 
issued. 

PART D 

to “vary” the List. The phrase “vary” in common parlance has a wider meaning 
than exclusion or inclusion. It includes altering the list, even by partial 
change.177 However, the phrase “vary” in Article 341(2) takes the meaning of 
inclusion in and exclusion from the List, and not the other way around. This is 
clear with the use of the phrase “save as aforesaid” in the second part of the 
provision. Thus, by Article 341(2), the President does not have the power to 
vary the List notified under Article 341(1) by inclusion in and exclusion from 
it. 
122. The power of Parliament to vary the list includes not merely the power to 
exclude or include “any caste, race or tribe” but also the power to exclude or 
include “parts of or groups within any caste, race or tribe”. In Milind (supra), 
the issue before this Court was whether an entry titled ‘Halba/Halbi’ in the 
Scheduled Tribe Order relating to the State of Maharashtra could be read to 
include the ‘Halba-Koshti’ tribe. This Court held that the Presidential list is to 
be read as it is and no evidence could be allowed to establish that an entry in 
the Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe list included a particular group that 
was not included specifically in the List. The Court held that any other 
interpretation would infringe upon the power accorded solely to Parliament by 
Article 341(2). Justice Shivraj V Patil, writing for the Bench, held that unless 
a tribe is specified expressly in the List under Article 342, which is pari materia 
to Article 341, no inquiry could be held or evidence led to establish that such 
 
177 “Vary” - to make changes to something to make it slightly different. Oxford Learner’s Dictionary, 
<https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/definition/american_english/vary>; “vary” Merriam-Webster 
Dictionary <https://www.merriam-webster.com/thesaurus/vary#thesaurus-entry-1-2> 

PART D 

tribe, or any part thereof, is included within the meaning of an entry included 
in the Presidential Order.178 This Court underscored that the power of the 
States is limited to making recommendations at the initial stage of 
consultation, prior to the notification of the Presidential List under Article 
341(1). This Court observed that the Constitution vests the power to make 
any further changes to the List in Parliament to prevent alterations to the List 
due to political pressure. 179 
123. The prohibition under Article 341(2) entails that once a particular caste, race, 
tribe or a part or group of it is specified in the Presidential List under Article 
341(1), the list shall be read as it is with no additions or deletions. The benefit 
of the special provisions shall not be given to any caste or sub-caste not 
included in the List with respect to that State. Article 341(2) uses the words 
“include in” or “exclude from” and “shall not be varied”. These terms contained 
in the provision are unambiguous. An inclusion would occur if the State were 
to enact a law that extends the benefits meant for Scheduled Castes in that 
State to a community that is not enumerated as a Scheduled Caste for that 
State. The only mechanism open to the State, in case it regards a community 
fit for inclusion in the List notified for that State, is to make a proposal to that 
effect to the central authorities. After due inquiry, the community may be 
added to the List by Parliament, subject to its satisfaction that such a 
modification is required. Until then, the State has to apply the Scheduled 
Castes List as it is.180 Thus, to summarize, Article 341(2) bars the State 
 
178 Milind (supra) [12]. 
179 Milind (supra) [15]. 
180 Palghat Jilla Thandan Samudhaya Samrakshna Samithi v. State of Kerala, 1994 [17, 18]. 

PART D 

Legislature from removing or adding castes from and to the List respectively. 
Sub-classification within the Scheduled Castes for the purposes of affirmative 
action, including reservation does not include or exclude any caste or group 
from the List. Section D(iii) of this judgment deals with the different models of 
sub-classification to determine if the operation of reservation upon sub- 
classification in-effect leads to exclusion. v. 
Historical and empirical evidence of inter-se backwardness within the 
Scheduled Castes 
124. Having held that Article 341 does not create an integrated homogenous class, 
we will next decide whether there is an intelligible differentia to group the 
castes within the Scheduled Castes. For this, it needs to be analyzed if the 
Scheduled Castes are a heterogenous class. The respondents submitted that 
there cannot be any sub-categorization of the Scheduled Castes because all 
the castes face the same form of social backwardness based on 
untouchability. The petitioners, on the other hand, submitted that there exists 
inter-se backwardness within the Scheduled Castes. 
125. The Constitution of India does not provide a definition of the Scheduled 
Castes. Article 366(24) states that castes/groups notified under Article 341 
shall be Scheduled Castes. However, neither Article 341 nor Article 366(24) 
prescribes the criteria for their identification. The President issued the 
Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order 1950 which nearly corresponds to the 
Government of India (Scheduled Castes) Order 1936 notified under the 

PART D 

Government of India Act 1935.181 It is important to identify the criteria for 
inclusion of groups or castes in the Scheduled Castes Order 1936. 
126. The Government of India Act 1935 did not define the criteria for the 
identification of Scheduled Castes. Clause 26(1) of the First Schedule to it 
defined the Scheduled Castes as castes that corresponded to the classes of 
persons known as the “depressed classes”: 
“the scheduled castes” means such castes, races or 
tribes, or parts of or groups within castes, races or 
tribes being castes, races, tribes, parts or groups which 
appear to his Majesty in Council to correspond to the 
classes of persons formerly known as the 
depressed classes, as His Majesty in Council may 
specify.” 

(emphasis supplied) 
127. It is necessary that we briefly refer to the historical material on how the 
depressed classes were identified to analyze if the Scheduled Castes are a 
heterogenous class and whether there is an intelligible differentia 
distinguishing the sub-categories within the Scheduled Castes. a. Identification of the depressed classes 
128. In 1916, the definition of the depressed classes was raised in the Indian 
Legislative Council. It was suggested during the discussion that the 
expression should include criminal and wandering tribes, aboriginal tribes and 
untouchables.182 In 1917, Sir Henry Sharp, the Education Commissioner, 
prepared a list of depressed classes which included the aboriginal or hill 
 
181 Marc Galanter, Competing Equalities: Law and the Backward Classes in India, [Oxford University Press 
(1984)] 130 
182 Report of the Indian Franchise Committee (1932) Vol I, 112 

PART D 

tribes, depressed classes and criminal tribes. While preparing the list, Sir 
Henry stated that depressed classes “[…] includes communities which though 
not absolutely outside the pale of caste, are backward and educationally poor 
and despised and also certain classes of Muslims. Some have interpreted it 
as simply educationally backward”.183 
129. In 1919, the Southborough Franchise Committee adopted the test of 
untouchability to define the depressed class. The Indian Franchise 
Committee 1932, inter alia, was appointed to ascertain if a separate electorate 
must be provided to the depressed classes. The Committee also had to arrive 
at a definition of “depressed classes”. The Committee interpreted the phrase 
“depressed classes” as the 'untouchability class’, that is, the class whose 
touch or approach is deemed to cause pollution as it exists in the United 
Provinces.184 The report stated that the depressed classes “should not include 
primitive or aboriginal tribes nor should it include those Hindus who are only 
economically poor and in other ways backward but are not regarded as 
untouchables.”185 The Committee accepted the tests of untouchability 
formulated by Hutton186. Hutton had submitted a Census Report in 1931 by 
which depressed castes were defined as castes, contact with whom requires 
purification. The instruction which was given to determine if the caste is an 
untouchable caste was as follows: 
“I have explained depressed castes as castes, contact 
with whom entails purification on the part of high caste 
Hindus. It is not intended that the term should have any 
 
183 Ibid, 113 
184 id 
185 id 
186 Ibid,Pg. 112 

PART D 

reference to occupation as such but to those castes 
which by reason of their traditional position in Hindu 
society are denied access to temples, for instance, or 
have to use separate wells or are not allowed to sit 
inside a school but have to remain outside or which 
suffer similar social disabilities. These disabilities vary 
in different parts of India being much more severe in 
the south of India than elsewhere.”187 
 
130. The following tests were directed to be considered to determine if the caste 
faces untouchability: 
a. Whether the caste or class in question can be served by clean 
Brahmans; 
b. Whether the caste or class in question can be served by the barbers, 
water-carriers, tailors, etc., who serve the caste Hindus; 
c. Whether the caste in question pollutes a high caste Hindu by contact 
or by proximity; 
d. Whether the caste or class in question is one from whose hands a 
caste Hindu can take water; 
e. Whether the caste or class in question is debarred from using public 
conveniences such as, roads, ferries, wells, or schools; 
f. Whether the caste or class in question is debarred from the use of 
Hindu temples; 
 
187 Hutton Censes Report (1931) 471 

PART D 

g. Whether in ordinary social intercourse, a well-educated member of a 
caste or class in question will be treated as an equal by high caste 
men of the same educational qualifications; 
h. Whether the caste or class in question is merely depressed on 
account of its own ignorance, illiteracy or poverty and but for that 
would be subject to no social disability; and 
i. Whether it is depressed on account of the occupation followed and 
whether but for that occupation it would be subject to no social 
disability. 
131. Though the test that was proposed to be used was that of untouchability, the 
criteria above and in particular, criteria (f), (g) and (h) indicate that other forms 
of social disability which cannot be strictly confined to untouchability were also 
considered. The report recognized that there may be a variance in the degree 
of restrictions based on the degree of untouchability. For example, a few 
castes may have been denied entry to a temple as compared to castes which 
were denied entry to the inner sanctuary of the temple.188 
132. The Note submitted by Assam casts light upon the heterogeneity amongst the 
castes which face untouchability. The Note states that untouchability as it 
existed in Madras, where an untouchable’s touch necessitated immediate 
purification, did not exist in Assam. Mr Maullan, the Census Superintendent 
in Assam defined the depressed class (which he termed as “exterior castes”) 
as castes whose water is not acceptable and in addition are so deficient in 
 
188 Ibid, 472 

PART D 

education, wealth, influence, or for some reason connected with their 
traditional occupations which prevents them from acquiring any further social 
privileges. The Superintendent further noted that there are influential and 
wealthy castes even among the jal-achals (that is, those whose water was not 
acceptable). The note also distinguished the untouchability which certain 
castes faced from other untouchable castes:189 
“The exterior castes themselves are, however, guilty of 
similar treatment to each other and an exterior caste 
which considers itself to be on a higher social level than 
another exterior caste adopts exactly the same attitude 
as the higher castes do towards the exterior castes. A 
case which recently happened in Sunamganj illustrates 
this point. The local ferryman there (a patni by caste) 
was prosecuted for refusing to row a Muchi and that it 
has always been the practice, if a Muchi wanted to 
cross the river, for the paddle to be given to him so that 
he could row himself across.” 
133. The Note of the Superintendent of Assam on Mahars further elucidated the 
point that there was no “uniformity” in the untouchability faced by members of 
various castes. The Note explained that Mahars were included in the list of 
depressed class though they were jal-chal in the limited sense in as much as 
a man of the forward caste “can smoke huka filled with water by a Mahar”. 
They were included because they were untouchables with respect to 
everything but for smoking requirements and they were a socially and 
educationally backward community:190 
“I have made close and careful enquiries and there is a 
general consensus of opinion that the Mahars are not 
jal-chal and are a depressed class. The story of Raja 
Subid Narayan made them jal-chal for smoking 
requirements only, seems to be true. If the Mahars are 
 
189 Ibid, 495 
190 Ibid, 498 

PART D 

at all jal-chal, they are jalchal only in the sense that a 
man of the higher caste can smoke a huka filled with 
water by a Mahara. There is not a single graduate 
among the Maharas in this subdivision and not even a 
single matriculate can be found. The deputy Inspector 
of Schools reports that the only educated Maharas he 
has met in the whole subdivision are three persons 
working as Vernacular teachers in Primary and Middle 
English Schools. So the Maharas are depressed both 
socially and educationally.” 
 
134. The list prepared by Madras noted that castes to whom the “technical stigma 
of untouchability” does not apply, had been excluded from the list. This 
approach when juxtaposed with the approach adopted by Assam, varies with 
respect to the stringency of the untouchability standard employed.191 It is 
evident that there is no one “form” of untouchability. Untouchability, like other 
forms of social disability differs in degree and severity. 
135. Based on the tests for identifying untouchability laid down by Hutton, the 
Provincial Committee prepared the provincial estimates of depressed 
classes. In Madras, Bombay and the Central Province, there was a general 
agreement between the Provincial Committees and the Local Governments 
on the estimate of the depressed classes because the distinction between the 
depressed and other classes of the Hindu Communities was clearly defined. 
On the other hand, the States of Bihar, Orissa and Assam while stipulating 
the castes which faced untouchability observed that untouchability in the 
States did not exist in the same form as it existed in South India. 
 
191 Ibid, 499 

PART D 

136. Mr SB Rambe, Mr CY Chintamani and Mr RR Bakhale submitted a note of 
dissent, inter alia, on the depressed classes in which they claim that the tests 
for untouchability were not applied with uniformity.192 They observed that 
untouchability only existed in Madras, Bombay and the Central Province. 
They claimed that in other states, untouchability was not an adjunct of a 
person but the occupation that they pursued and thus, those castes should 
not have been included in the list of the depressed classes.193 It is here that 
the Note submitted by Dr B R Ambedkar on depressed classes is of particular 
importance for it encapsulates the heterogeneity within the castes which 
suffer untouchability. 
137. Dr B R Ambedkar highlighted that applying a uniform criterion to identify the 
depressed class would be inappropriate. Dr Ambedkar observed that the 
differences in the tests of untouchability do not indicate differences in the 
conditions of the untouchables because the notion underlying both the 
standards would be the same, that it is below the dignity to interact or touch 
persons of certain castes. He observed that the difference in the rigidity with 
which untouchability is practiced does not eliminate the notion of such a 
practice. 194 This indicates that the depressed classes were identified based 
on the notion of untouchability and not in the literal sense of the term. The 
effect of adopting the notional and not the literal test is that the social condition 
of all the castes included within the depressed classes is not uniform. Though 
 
192 Minute of dissent by Mr SB Rambe, Mr CY Chintamani, Mr RR Bakhale, Report of the Franchise 
Committee, 231 
193 id 
194 Dr Ambedkar, Note on the Depressed Classes, Report of the Franchise Committee, 211 

PART D 

the Government of India (Scheduled Castes) Order 1936 did not exactly 
correspond to the List published by Hutton or the Provincial Franchise 
Committees, the inclusions and exclusions to the list broadly matched.195 
138. The heterogeneity within the class is also evident from the Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) Order 1950 where certain castes are notified as the 
Scheduled Castes in specific localities. For example, in the State of Madhya 
Pradesh, of the twenty-five castes, only nine are Scheduled Castes 
throughout the State. The criteria used to identify the Scheduled Castes itself 
indicates that the endeavor was not to include all castes that suffered from 
identical forms of untouchability. Thus, the Scheduled Castes are not a 
homogenous class. b. Empirical evidence of heterogeneity 
139. Field researchers have also accounted that the Scheduled Castes are not one 
homogenous class. Studies indicate that certain castes of the Scheduled 
Castes are not only sociologically backward vis-à-vis the forward castes but 
also amongst the Scheduled Castes themselves. AM Shah recounts that 
there was much less interaction between two Dalit castes in Gujarat than 
there was between a Dalit caste and a forward class. The author observes 
that the priests for the Dalits are placed high amongst the Dalit castes and the 
 
195 Galanter, supra, 130 

PART D 

scavengers are placed the lowest, with the leather-workers and the rope 
makers occupying the intermediary positions:196 
“Briefly, the Dalits have reproduced among themselves 
a hierarchy on the model of caste hierarchy in general. 
There is at the top a small caste of garodas (derived 
from the Sanskrit word ‘guru’), who are priests for other 
dalit castes, […] Similarly, just as there are castes of 
bards for the upper castes, there is a bardic caste of 
dalit mendicants called dhed bava or sadhu. The 
garudas, turi barots, and dhed sadhus are accorded 
certain sacredness. 
The bhangis (scavengers) are the bottom of the 
hierarchy and the most under-privileged. Between the 
garodas and bhangis there is a large caste, the higher 
stratum of which is traditionally vankar (weavers) and 
the lower stratum dhed (menial servants). […] The 
chamars (leatherworkers) and senwas (rope-makers) 
occupy positions intermediately between the vankar-
cum-dheds and bhangis. The bhangis are the most 
oppressed.” 
140. The Robert F Kennedy Centre for Justice and Human Rights in collaboration 
with Navsarjan (an organization that promotes the rights of Dalits) undertook 
an extensive study on caste discrimination in 1589 villages in Gujarat. The 
census conducted by them produced results of horizontal discrimination, the 
practice by which certain Dalit castes practiced untouchability against other 
Dalit castes. The study identified that the practice of food, water and religion 
related untouchability is emulated within the Dalits as well. For example, 
Dalits of the lower sub-caste were prevented from sitting with the rest of the 
Dalit community during meals. They were not given tea when they visited the 
house of a higher sub-caste. It was also found that only in twelve percent of 
 
196 AM Shah, The ‘Dalit” category and its Differentiation; Also see AM Shah, Untouchability, the Untouchables 
and Social Change in Gujarat in Dimensions of Social Life, Essays in Honor of David G Mandelbaum (edited 
by Paul Hockings) 

PART D 

the villages could a Dalit belonging to a lower sub-caste receive water in the 
house of a Dalit of a higher sub-caste. The study also found that in 92.4 
percent of the villages studied, all the Dalits did not have access to all-Dalit 
burial grounds and that the lower sub-castes were denied entry into to Dalit 
Temples in 79 percent of the villages.197 
141. Similarly, in Tamil Nadu, when an Arunthathiyar man and a Paraiyar woman 
(both the castes find a place in the Scheduled Castes list) eloped, the 
woman’s family allegedly raped the women of the man’s family in 
retaliation.198 The inequality within the Scheduled Castes in Andhra Pradesh 
has also been studied. Uma Ramaswamy draws on the inequality within the 
Scheduled Castes by comparing the social positions of members of the Mala 
and Madiga Castes.199 The Madigas traditionally pursue the occupation of 
leather work which is assigned a lower status when compared to the weaving 
occupation of Malas. The author states that neither do members of both the 
castes live in the same hamlet nor do they draw water from the same well. 
The study found that the hierarchy between the castes translated to their 
relative progress in education, employment and political activity. In 1961, 10 
percent of Malas were literate as against 5.1 percent of Madigas. In 1971, the 
proportion of literates among Malas had gone up to 12.9 per cent in 
comparison to 6.2 percent among the Madigas. The author stated that 
hierarchy exists even within the Mala caste. Mala Jangam and Mala Desari 
 
197 Robert F Kennedy, Center for Justice and Human Rights, Understanding Untouchability: A comprehensive 
Study of Practices and Conditions in 1589 Villages, 22-33 
198 Ravinchandran Bathran, The many omissions of a concept: Discrimination amongst Scheduled Castes, 
Economic & Political Weekly, (Vol L1 No. 47, November 19, 2016) 1342-1346 
199 Uma Ramaswamy, Protection and Inequality among Backward Groups, Economic & Political Weekly (Vol. 
21 No. 9, 9 March 1986) 

PART D 

are priestly castes and are spiritual advisors to Mala satellite castes. Within 
the Mala satellite castes, Mala Jangam is at the top, followed by Mala 
Pambala, Masti and Gurra Malas. The sub-castes also follow rules of 
untouchability amongst themselves:200 
“There are certain rules that restrict the taking of food, 
water and access to the temples among the Dalits. The 
Malas, higher caste Dalit do not take food or water from 
the Madigas, the lower caste Dalit in village India. Mala 
Jangam, Mala Dasari and Mithal Ayyalwar do not eat 
or drink from Malas, Madigas and Dakkal. Similarly 
other castes do not take cooked food or water from 
these castes. Malas and Madigas have separate wells 
and temples. Malas do not take food and water from 
Mastu, Gurram Malas and Madigas. But all these 
castes take food and water from priestly class of Malas. 
The singari, the gurus to Madigas, strictly refrain from 
eating food touched or cooked by Madigas or other 
satellite caste. Bindla though enjoys higher social 
status in Madigas satellite caste. The higher castes do 
not take either cooked food or water from Bindlas. 
Being worshippers of Shakti (the power) they do not 
take food or water from the hands of their satellite 
castes, since they consider themselves as sacred. 
Sindhu, the entertaining caste of Madigas” do not take 
food or water from Dakkals but their food or water is 
acceptable for Madigas. Dakkals who occupied a 
lowest social status in social hierarchy accept food and 
water from all castes, except Vishwa Brahamaa. The 
food or water of Dakkals is not acceptable to any other 
caste. Dakkals have to take food or water standing 
outside Madiga houses. Thus the higher caste Dalits 
do not drink or dine in common. These commenalities 
indicate the foundation of Panchama hierarchy and 
heterogeneous caste cleavages within Scheduled 
Castes in Andhra Pradesh.” 
 
142. Empirical evidence indicates that there is inequality even within the 
Scheduled Castes. The Scheduled Castes are not a homogenous integrated 
class. 
 
200 Justice Usha Mishra Report on National Commission to Examine Issue of Sub-Categorisation [327] 

PART D 

vi. 
The power of the State to sub-classify under Articles 15 and 16 
143. Article 16(4) provides the State with the enabling power to make provisions 
for reservations in appointments or posts in favour of “any backward class of 
citizens”. The provision, unlike Article 15(4), does not distinguish amongst the 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and other Socially and Educationally 
Backward Classes. In Indra Sawhney (supra), this Court defined the 
backward class in terms of social backwardness. Social backwardness is 
attributable to several identities such as caste, gender and disability. Though, 
the backwardness caused due to these multiple identities are all collectively 
within the ambit of the backward class for the purposes of Article 16(4), the 
State is free to recognize the heterogeneity amongst the class and provide 
separate reservation to women and the Scheduled Castes to deal with the 
purpose. 
144. Article 15(4) recognizes the power of the State to make “any” special 
provisions for the advancement of “any” socially and educationally backward 
classes of citizens or for “the” Scheduled Castes and “the” Scheduled Tribes. 
Article 15(5) is similarly worded. It was submitted before this Court that the 
use of the preposition “any” before the socially and educationally backward 
class as opposed to the phrase “the” before Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes indicates the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are 
a homogenous integrated class. We do not agree with the submission. The 
provision provides the State with the power to make “any” special provisions 
for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Thereby, it recognizes 

PART D 

the wide power of the State to employ a range of means to secure substantive 
equality. This would include sub-classification within the Scheduled Castes. 
145. The first prong of the test for sub-classification is whether the Scheduled 
Castes form a homogenous integrated class for all purposes. We have held 
above that even if Article 341 creates a deeming fiction, the provision does 
not create an integrated class that cannot be further sub-classified. The 
provision only puts certain castes or groups or parts of them into a group 
called the Scheduled Castes. The castes or groups within the Scheduled 
Castes form an integrated class for the limited purpose of constitutional 
identification. They do not form an integrated class for any other purpose. We 
have also established through historical and empirical evidence that the 
Scheduled Castes notified by the President under Article 341 are a 
heterogenous class where groups within the class suffer from varying degrees 
of social backwardness. Thus, the first test is satisfied. 
146. The State in exercise of its power under Articles 15 and 16 is free to identify 
the different degrees of social backwardness and provide special provisions 
(such as reservation) to achieve the specific degree of harm identified. If the 
Scheduled Castes are not similarly situated for the purposes of the law (or the 
specific harm identified), there is nothing in Articles 15, 16 and 341 which 
prevents the State from applying the principle of sub-classification to the 
class. Thus, the Scheduled Castes can be further classified if: (a) there is a 
rational principle for differentiation; and (b) if the rational principle has a nexus 
with the purpose of sub-classification. 

PART D 

147. One of the issues before this Court in Chinnaiah (supra) was whether the 
State has the legislative competence to sub-classify. Justice Santosh Hegde 
observed that having once fulfilled the mandate of providing reservations 
under Articles 15(4) and 16(4), the enactments were beyond the legislative 
competence of the State because - first, the primary object of the law was 
grouping of sub-castes and apportionment of reservations was merely 
consequential and second, the State could not under Entry 41 of List II and 
Entry 25 of List III (of the Seventh Schedule) dealing with State services and 
education respectively, divide the Scheduled Castes List.201 Justice Sinha 
noted that the legislative competence of the State legislatures under Article 
246 is subject to the other provisions of the Constitution, namely Article 341 
of the Constitution.202 
148. The opinions in Chinnaiah (supra), conflate the issue of legislative 
competence, which is referrable to Articles 245 and 246, with the power to 
ensure substantive equality under Articles 15 and 16. Article 245 read with 
the Seventh Schedule lays down the legislative competence of the State 
Legislatures and Parliament. Articles 15(4) and 16(5) recognize the power of 
the State to make special provisions for the advancement of the backward 
class, including the Scheduled Castes. These provisions permit the State to 
confer the benefit of affirmative action on classes where it is most necessary. 
Thus, the power of the State to sub-classify the Scheduled Castes for the 
purpose of affirmative action, including reservations, is traceable to Articles 
 
201 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Hegde, 31] 
202 Chinnaiah (supra) [Justice Sinha, 90] 

PART D 

15(4) and 16(5) in the case of educational institutions and appointments, 
respectively. vii. 
Criteria for sub-classification 
 
149. The object of the special provisions in Articles 15(4) and 16(4) is to provide 
substantive equality to the beneficiary class.203 Inter-se backwardness within 
the class is a roadblock to achieving substantive equality. Sub-classification 
is one of the means to achieve substantive equality. But the crucial question 
is, what should be the rational principle to distinguish categories within the 
Scheduled Caste? Should it be based on the form of untouchability or any 
form of inter-se social backwardness? We will discuss the rational principle 
which must be used for sub-categorization in this segment of the judgment. 
150. It is important to understand the provision from the perspective of the 
beneficiary class for whose advancement it has been adopted, to elucidate 
the rational principle for differentiation. Though both Articles 15(4) and 16(4) 
share a similarity to the extent that they enable the State to provide affirmative 
action policies, there exist some dissimilarities in the language of the 
provisions. Firstly, Articles 15(4) and 16(4) deal with different spheres. Article 
15(4) is a general provision which gives effect to the principle of substantive 
equality by recognizing that the non-discrimination provisions shall not 
prevent the State from making “any special provision” for the advancement 
of the beneficiary class. On the other hand, Article 16(4) deals specifically 
 
203 See NM Thomas (supra) 

PART D 

with matters of public employment. Secondly, Article 16(4) only deals with 
reservation while Article 15(4) recognizes other forms of affirmative action. 
Article 15(4) is broader and all-encompassing as compared to Article 16(4). 
Thirdly, the beneficiary class under Article 15(4) must be “socially and 
educationally backward” while the class under Article 16(4) is a backward 
class which is not adequately represented. The Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes are expressly carved out in Article 15(4), unlike Article 
16(4), where they are encompassed within the “backward class”. 
151. One of the issues that must be adjudicated while discussing the scope of the 
provisions is whether the beneficiary classes in Articles 15(4) and 16(4) are 
different. This issue must be decided with reference to: 
a. The use of the qualifiers “socially and educationally” backward in 
Article 15(4); and 
b. The use of the qualifier “adequate representation” in Article 16(4). a. The meaning of “Backward Class” 
152. Article 15(4), unlike Article 16(4), provides that the beneficiary class for the 
purposes of the provision must be socially and educationally backward. In 
Balaji (supra), this Court held that the beneficiary class under Article 15(4) 
must be both socially and educationally backward. Justice Gajendragadkar 
observed that caste, occupation and poverty are important factors for 
determining the socially backward class.204 This was reiterated in Janki 
 
204 MR Balaji v. State of Mysore, AIR 1963 SC 649 [24,25] 

PART D 

Prasad Parimoo v. State of Jammu and Kashmir205. Justice D G Palekar 
writing for this Court made a crucial observation on the relationship between 
social and educational backwardness. The learned Judge observed that 
though the phrases ‘socially’ and ‘educationally’ are used cumulatively for the 
purposes of identifying the backward class under Article 15(4), “if a class as 
a whole is educationally advanced it is generally also socially advanced 
because of the reformative effect of education on that class”.206 The 
relationship between social and educational backwardness where social 
backwardness contributes to educational backwardness was reiterated in 
Indra Sawhney (supra). Thus, though the criteria of socially and 
educationally backward class must be cumulatively read for the purposes of 
identifying the beneficiary class, they are not mutually exclusive concepts. 
They have a causal relationship, where the educational backwardness of a 
class is an impact of its social backwardness. 
153. The next issue is whether the beneficiary classes in Article 15(4) and Article 
16(4) are the same even though, unlike Article 15(4), Article 16(4) does not 
include the qualifiers of “social” and “educational”. In Janki Prasad Parimoo 
(supra), this Court read the requirement of social and educational 
backwardness into Article 16(4).207 This was reiterated in Vasant Kumar v. 
State of Karnataka208 by a Constitution Bench of this Court. However, in 
 
205 (1973) 
206 (1973) [24] 
207 (1968) 
208 1985 Supp SCC 714; Justice Chinnappa Reddy observed that “backward classes of citizens referred to 
in Article 16(4), despite the short description, are the same as the socially and educationally backward 
classes of citizens and the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, so fully described in Article 15(4).” 
Justice Sen and Justice Venkataramiah (as the learned Chief Justice then was) observed that Articles 15(4) 

PART D 

Indra Sawhney (supra), Justice B P Jeevan Reddy speaking for four Judges 
(Chief Justice Kania, Justice Venkatachaliah, Justice AM Ahmadi and 
himself) observed that there is no basis for this assumption. The learned 
Judge observed that Article 16(4) applies to a much larger class. The socially 
and educationally backward class is one of the categories, to which Article 
16(4) applies. The socially and educationally backward classes are included 
within the broader class to which Article 16(4) applies. Justice Jeevan Reddy 
also held that reading educational backwardness in Article 16(4), which deals 
with reservation in appointments at any level, would not appropriate: 
“787. […] “Backward class of citizens” in Article 16(4) 
takes in Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled Castes and all 
other backward classes of citizens including the 
socially and educationally backward classes. Thus, 
certain classes which may not qualify for Article 15(4) 
may qualify for Article 16(4). They may not qualify for 
Article 15(4) but they may qualify as backward class of 
citizens for the purposes of Article 16(4). […] Thus, 
SEBCs referred to in Article 340 is only [one] of the 
categories for whom Article 16(4) was enacted: Article 
16(4) applies to a much larger class than the one 
contemplated by Article 340. It would, thus, be not 
correct to say that ‘backward class of citizens’ in Article 
16(4) are the same as the socially and educationally 
backward classes in Article 15(4). Saying so would 
mean and imply reading a limitation into a beneficial 
provision like Article 16(4). Moreover, when speaking 
of reservation in appointments/posts in the State 
services- which may mean, at any level whatsoever-
insisting upon educational backwardness may not be 
quite appropriate.” 
 
154. The observation above must not be read in a vacuum. The purport of the 
observation by Justice Jeevan Reddy is clarified in the subsequent paragraph 
 
and 16(4) are intended for the benefit of those who belong to casts, communities which are traditionally 
disfavored and which have suffered societal discrimination in the past. 

PART D 

where the learned Judge observed that though educational backwardness is 
not to be excluded as a criterion, social backwardness must have caused 
educational backwardness: 
“788. […] It goes without saying that in the Indian 
context, social backwardness leads to educational 
backwardness and both of them together lead to 
poverty- which in turn breeds and perpetuates the 
social and educational backwardness. They feel upon 
each other constituting a vicious cycle. It is a well-
known fact that till independence the administrative 
apparatus was manned almost exclusively by 
members of the ‘upper’ castes. The Shudras, the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and other 
similar backward social groups among Muslims and 
Christians 
had 
practically 
no 
entry 
into 
the 
administrative apparatus. It was this imbalance which 
was sought to be redressed by providing for 
reservations in favour of such backward classes.[…] 
We are, accordingly, of the opinion that the 
backwardness contemplated by Article 16(4) is mainly 
social backwardness. It would not be correct to say that 
the backwardness under Article 16(4) should be both 
social and educational.” 
155. In Indra Sawhney (supra), Justice Pandian defined the backward class of 
citizens as “a group of persons having common traits or attributes coupled 
with retarded social, material (economic) and intellectual (educational) 
development in the sense that not having so much of intellect and ability will 
fall within the ambit of ‘any backward class of citizens’ under Article 16(4)”.209 
The learned Judge further elucidated that the “primary consideration” in 
identifying the backward class is social backwardness.210 Justice Sawant also 
observed that in identifying the beneficiary class under Article 16(4), social 
backwardness must be given importance. Justice Sawant held that the 
 
209 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [58] 
210 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [117] 

PART D 

criterion for the identification of the beneficiary class is whether it is socially 
backward and whether the class which is educationally and economically 
backward, is so because of its social backwardness.211 
156. Justice Kuldip Singh adopted a different approach. The learned Judge held 
that the beneficiary classes in Articles 15(4) and 16(4) are different. Justice 
Kuldeep Singh observed that unlike the determination of the beneficiary class 
in Article 15(4) which must be socially and educationally backward, the class 
identified for the purposes of Article 16(4) need not be backward because: 
a. The Constituent Assembly Debates indicate that reservation under 
Article 16(4) is to provide access to communities that have not had a 
‘look in’ at the administration of the State. The object of including the 
phrase “backward” in Article 16(4) - which did not find a place in the 
initial draft - was only for the purpose of reducing the number of 
claimants for the reserved posts;212 
b. Inadequate representation in the services of the State is the only test 
for the identification of the beneficiary class under Article 16(4). 
Inadequate representation can be identified based on occupation, 
economic criterion, family income, political sufferers, border areas, 
backward areas, communities kept out of State services or any other 
means.213 The ‘backward class’ must be culled out from the classes 
which are inadequately represented214; 
 
211 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217, [Justice Thommen, 273]; [Justice Sawant 441,552] 
212 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [363] 
213 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [368] 
214 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [364] 

PART D 

c. The backward class cannot be classified into adequately represented 
and inadequately represented. A class that is adequately represented 
cannot be considered backward. Reading the qualifier of inadequate 
representation with respect to the backward class would render the 
former expression redundant; and215 
d. The Constitution has expressly mentioned the Scheduled Castes and 
the Scheduled Tribes whenever the Constitution grants protection to 
the “weaker classes”.216 
 
157. Contrary to the opinion of Justice Kuldeep Singh, which held that the 
determining character of the class in Article 16(4) is not backwardness but 
inadequacy of representation217, the majority in Indra Sawhney (Justice 
Reddy writing for four Judges, Justice Pandian and Justice Sawant) held that 
the predominant factor which must be employed to identify the “backward 
class” must be social backwardness. The majority also held that the backward 
class in Article 16(4) subsumes the socially and educationally backward class 
identified under Article 15(4).218 Thus, the objective of both Articles 15(4) and 
16(4) is to ensure substantive equality by uplifting the socially backward class. 
 
215 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [366] 
216 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [367] 
217 See opinion of CJ Ray in MN Thomas (supra) 
218 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [Justice Reddy,787]; [Justice Sahai, 583] 

PART D 

b. Inadequacy of representation in services of the State 
158. The issue on the identification of beneficiaries which will impact the scope of 
reservation is whether the class is both backward and inadequately 
represented. That is, whether they are mutually exclusive qualifiers. In Indra 
Sawhney (supra), Justice Sawant writing the concurring opinion observed 
that only classes which are inadequately represented must be provided 
reservation under Article 16(4). In the opinion of the learned Judge, a class 
that is backward will cease to be a beneficiary when the class becomes 
adequately represented. This observation aligns with the argument that 
reservation must not be provided once the goal of the provision, which is 
securing adequate representation is achieved. 
159. To navigate this issue, it is necessary that we refer to the debates of the Sub-
Committee of Minorities and Sub-Committee of Fundamental Rights to 
ascertain the reason for the inclusion of the phrase “inadequate 
representation” in Article 16(4). The Objectives Resolution which was 
introduced by Mr Jawaharlal Nehru on 13 December 1946 resolved to provide 
adequate safeguards for minorities, backward and tribal areas, and the 
depressed and other backward classes. The equality provision in the first draft 
report submitted by the Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights did not 
provide for reservation of seats for the backward community or the minorities. 
Though the report included provisions emphasizing anti-discrimination and 
equal opportunity, it did not recommend an enabling provision for affirmative 

PART D 

action.219 The Sub-Committee on Minorities along with the Fundamental 
Rights Sub-Committee decided to examine the clauses recommended to 
determine if any of them required to be amended to protect minority rights. 
During the discussion, Mr KM Munshi stated that reservation may have to be 
made for the minorities in public employment.220 An Advisory Committee was 
formed to make recommendations on how best to reconcile the anti-
discrimination provision with the provision for reservation. The Sub-
Committee on Minorities recommended that a proviso may have to be added 
to meet the claims of representation of the marginalized communities.221 
160. After the discussion, Dr Ambedkar representing the Advisory Committee, 
suggested the inclusion of the following provision: 
“Nothing herein contained shall prevent the State from 
making provisions for reservation in public services in 
favour of classes as may be prescribed by the 
State.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
161. The Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights debated two issues related to 
the above clause. First, whether the word “minority” or “class” must be used 
 
219 There shall be no discrimination against any person on any of the grounds aforesaid in regard to the use 
of wells, ranks, roads, schools and places of public resort maintained wholly or party out of public funds or 
dedicated to the use of the general public 
(b) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens- 
(i) in matters of public employment 
(ii) in the sercise or carrying on of any occupation, trade, business or profession; 
and no citizen shall on any of the grounds aforesaid be ineligible for public office or be prohibited from 
acquiring, holding or disposing of property or exercising or carrying on any occuptation, trade, business or 
profession within the Union 
(2) Any enactment, regulation, judgment, order, custom or interpretation of law, in force immediately before 
the commencement of this Constitution by which any penalty, disadvantage, or disability is imposed upon or 
any discrimination is made against any citizen on any of the grounds aforesaid shall cease to have effect. 
220 B Shiva Rao, The Framing of India’s Constitution: Select Documents [Vol II, The Indian Institute of Public 
Administration] 221 
221 Ibid, 258-259; KM Panikkar: “I was responsible for the change from the word ‘minorities’. The reason 
which I gave was that minorities in India have come to have a specific meaning, that is to say, religious or 
political minorities, Muslims, Sikhs etc. 

PART D 

to signify the beneficiaries. The debates indicate that the phrase “class” was 
preferred over “minority” because the latter has a specific connotation, that is, 
religious or political minorities and this would exclude classes who constitute 
the majority but are yet not adequately represented. The reason is best 
explained by Dr Ambedkar in the Annexure to the Memorandum and Draft 
Articles on the Rights of States and Minorities, where he noted that “to make 
religious affiliation the determining factor for constitutional safeguards is to 
overlook the fact that religious affiliation may be accompanied by an intense 
degree of social separation and discrimination”.222 
162. The second issue was whether the provision must be qualified with the phrase 
“adequately represented”. A few members expressed the fear that the use of 
the phrase “adequate representation” would become litigious.223 In spite of 
this apprehension, the phrase was retained to restrict the discretion of the 
State since the phrase “class” and not “minority” was adopted. Without the 
phase “adequate representation”, the clause would have also included 
reservations for adequately represented majorities for whom the benefit was 
not intended. However, with the inclusion of the phrase “adequately 
represented” qualifying the phrase “classes”, the benefit of the provision 
extends to classes which may be considered ‘majorities’ but are yet 
inadequately represented.224 
 
222 Shiva Rao, supra, 109 
223 BR Ambedkar: “I am omitting the words “not adequately represented”. If we have the words “not 
adequately represented”, any reservation made by the State may be open to be challenged in a court. The 
court may say that reservation is made for a class although it is adequately represented.” 
224 KM Panikkar: “I was responsible for the change from the word ‘minorities’. The reason which I gave was 
that minorities in India have come to have a specific meaning, that is to say, religious or political minorities, 
Muslims, Sikhs etc. Sikh, Muslim, Depressed Classes, either a political or religious minority. The meaning 

PART D 

163. The debates in the Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights and Sub-
Committee on Minorities indicate that the beneficiaries of reservation are 
classes that are not “adequately represented” and this could include classes 
which are numerical majorities. Provisions for reservation are now available 
not only to the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes but 
also of the socially and educationally backward classes which are numerical 
religious majorities. The phrase “backward” preceding “class” was absent in 
the draft circulated by the Sub-Committee. The phrase was included in Article 
10 of the Draft Constitution. The inclusion of the phrase backward along with 
the qualifier of adequate representation clarifies the scope of the beneficiary 
class. 
164. Dr B R Ambedkar stated in the Constituent Assembly that reservations under 
Article 10 of the Draft Constitution [Article 16 of the Constitution of India] are 
given to those who have not had a “proper look-in” to the administration 
because it has historically been controlled by a few communities.225 Referring 
to the above observations of Dr Ambedkar, Justice Jeevan Reddy held in 
Indra Sawhney (supra) that the objective of Article 16(4) is to ensure that the 
backward classes get the opportunity to share state power.226 
 
has come to that. There may be among the majority, among the Hindus for example, many classes who have 
not adequate representation in the services.” 
225 CAD Vol 7. P. 701 
226 Reddy J [694] “[…] In short, the objective behind Article 16(4) is empowerment of the deprived backward 
communities- to give them a share in the administrative apparatus and in the governance of the community.” 
Also see Paragraph 161 where Justice Pandian states that “inadequate representation is not confined to any 
specific section of the people, but all those who fall under the group of backwardness whether they are 
Shudras of Hindu community or similarly situated other backward classes of people in other communities, 
namely, Muslims, Sikhs, Christians etc. 

PART D 

165. It is clear from the debates extracted above that the purpose of the reservation 
clause is to remedy the inadequate representation in public services of certain 
“classes”. The cause for inadequate represented could be two-fold. First, it 
may be a result of laws that expressly excluded certain classes from 
accessing the good, that is posts in public service. Second, it may be the 
result of a class being excluded not expressly by law but through social 
exclusion. A class may be socially excluded from accessing skills which are 
relevant for acquiring the good. These restrictions could either be in the form 
of social and informal or legal and formal restrictions. 
166. In Indra Sawhney (supra), Justice Jeevan Reddy observed that a class for 
the purpose of securing reservations under Article 16(4) should not only be a 
backward class but must also be inadequately represented in the services of 
the State.227 Thus, the beneficiary class is not to be determined solely on the 
basis of whether the class is a numerical minority or a majority in the services 
of the State. The focus instead is on identifying classes that have been 
excluded from public services not as a matter of chance or choice but 
because of the operation of the system of hierarchy. Thus, both the phrases, 
“backward” and “not adequately represented,” in Article 16(4) cannot be 
interpreted in a mutually exclusive manner in determining the beneficiary 
class under Article 16(4). The intent of Article 16(4) is to cover those classes 
which have been inadequately represented because of their backwardness. 
 
227 Also see Nagaraj (supra) where this Court observed that the discretion of the State under Article 16(4) is 
subject to the existence of “backwardness” which must be based on objective factors and “inadequacy of 
representation” which must factually exist. 

PART D 

Thus, the requirement of inadequate representation cannot be detached from 
the requirement of backwardness. c. The requirement of “effective” representation 
167. Conventionally, the State has assessed if the class is adequately represented 
by comparing the representation of the class in the services to the total 
population of the State.228 However, adequacy of representation when 
determined purely from a numerical perspective without accounting for factors 
such as representation vis-à-vis posts would dilute the purpose of the 
provision. The objective of Article 16(4) is to ensure effective representation 
of the class in the services of the State across posts and grades. Classes 
which are socially backward occupy the lowest of the social strata primarily 
because of the traditional occupation accorded to the class by social rules. 
For example, certain Dalit castes are regarded as scavenger castes. Even 
with the provision of reservation, it is very difficult for the backward classes to 
shed the traditional occupation that is ascribed to them by society and 
optimize the opportunities even at the lowest levels. The struggles that the 
class faces do not disappear with their representation in the lower grades. 
The endeavor is to ensure true and effective representation of the socially 
backward classes across posts. 
168. Opportunities for real and effective representation must be created in all posts 
and grades. The objective of the provision is not to emulate the existing social 
 
228 See RK Sabharwal v. State of Punjab, (1995) [4]; BK Pavitra (II) v. State of Kerala, (2019) [107]; Indra Sawhney, (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [807 and 808] 

PART D 

hierarchy where the low-grade posts are occupied by the socially backward 
while supervisory and managerial posts continue to be occupied by the 
advanced classes. If the objective of Article 16(4) is to be achieved in the 
truest sense, the inadequacy of representation must not be determined only 
on the basis of the total number of members of the backward class in the 
services of the State but by assessing the representation of the class across 
various posts. 
169. The meaning of the phrase “adequate representation” fell for the 
consideration of this Court in Rangachari (supra). Writing for the majority, 
Justice Gajendragadkar observed that adequate representation means not 
only numerical representation but qualitative representation as well: 
“25. […] This condition precedent may refer either to 
the numerical inadequacy of representation in the 
services or even to the qualitative inadequacy of 
representation. The advancement of the socially 
and educationally backward classes requires not 
only 
that 
they 
should 
have 
adequate 
representation in the lowest rung of services but 
that they should aspire to secure adequate 
representation in selection posts in the services as 
well. In the context the expression “adequately 
represented” imports considerations of “size” as well as 
“values”, numbers as well as the nature of 
appointments held and so it involves not merely the 
numerical test but also the qualitative one. It is thus by 
the operation of the numerical and a qualitative test that 
the adequacy or otherwise of the representation of 
backward classes in any service can be judged.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
170. On the other hand, Justice Wanchoo and Justice Rajgopala Ayyangar 
observed that the phrase ‘adequate representation’ only conveys the 

PART D 

meaning of inadequacy of representation in the quantitative sense and does 
not convey any idea of equality.229 In Triloki Nath v. State of Jammu and 
Kashmir (I)230, a reservation policy providing 50 percent of the seats to 
Muslims from Jammu and Kashmir, 60 percent of the remaining fifty percent 
seats to Hindus from Jammu and the remaining 40 percent of the 50 percent 
to Kashmiri Pandits was challenged. The State contended that the sole test 
of backwardness for the beneficiary class under Article 16(4) is inadequacy 
of representation in the services of the State. The Constitution Bench rejected 
the argument, observing that if it is accepted, the benefit would be conferred 
only on the ‘rich and cultured’ who are socially and educationally advanced. 
171. Justice Jeevan Reddy also adopted a value-ridden interpretation of the 
phrase “adequately represented” in Indra Sawhney (supra). The learned 
Judge held that the principal test to determine the adequacy of representation 
is “effective representation or effective voice in the administration” and not 
mere numerical presence. Effective representation can only be achieved, in 
this view, when there is adequate representation at all levels or posts in the 
administration. Justice Sawant also adopted a similar approach.231 
 
229 Justice Wanchoo’s opinion “32. Therefore, when Article 16(4) says that reservation may be made in order 
that any backward class of citizens may be adequately represented in the services it means that reservation 
may be made in order to make the number of any backward class sufficient in the services under the State. 
These words do not in my opinion convey any idea of equality […]; Justice Ayyangar [Paragraph 43]: “[…] I 
have drawn attention to this because it pointedly demonstrates that the correct view is that when “inadequacy 
of representation” is referred to in Article 16(4) as justifying a reservation, the only rational and reasonable 
construction of the words are that it refers to a quantitative deficiency in the representation of the backward 
classes in the service taken as a whole and not to an inadequate representation at each grade of service or 
in respect of each post in the service.” 
230 (1967) 
231 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [517] 

PART D 

172. We are in complete agreement with the opinions of Justice Jeevan Reddy in 
Indra Sawhney (supra) and Justice Gajendragadkar in Rangachari (supra) 
on this aspect which is being discussed in the present segment. Adequate 
representation means meaningful and effective representation. The sphere of 
public services is a constitutionally recognized realm for reservation because 
being a part of the administrative mechanism of the State is itself an indicator 
of social power. It is for the same reason that the Constitution, when it was 
adopted, guaranteed reservation in the legislature. However, there exists a 
hierarchy in social power within the sphere of public service. Positions that 
are higher up in the pyramid are positions that command greater authority. 
For example, let us assume a situation where the Class III and Class IV posts 
in the State are filled by members of a certain class while the higher positions 
of authority and power are filled by members of a certain class. This 
demographic of representation, if the service is taken as a whole unit, does 
not paint a realistic picture of the inequality that persists within the sphere. If 
numerical representation is used as an indicator, provision for representation 
will have to be made in favour of classes which are unrepresented in Class III 
and Class IV which does not align with the purpose of the provision. In fact, 
that would be nothing but another indicator of the existence of unequal social 
structures where members of the backward classes are subject to the 
authority and power of the more advanced. Thus, a numeric-representation 
focused interpretation of the phrase ‘inadequate representation’ does not 
fulfill the purpose of the provision. 

PART D 

173. In view of the discussion above, the following principles are summarized with 
respect to the objective and yardstick for identifying the beneficiary class 
under Articles 15(4) and 16(4): 
a. The beneficiary class in Article 15(4) must be a socially and 
educationally backward class. “Socially and educationally backward” 
are not mutually exclusive concepts. The phrase constitutes a 
constitutional recognition of the sociological reality that educational 
backwardness is caused by the social backwardness of the class; 
b. The beneficiary class in Article 16(4), similar to the class under Article 
15(4), must predominantly be socially backward. The purpose of both 
the provisions is to ensure substantive equality of opportunity to the 
socially backward communities. The beneficiary class in Article 16(4) 
subsumes the socially and educationally backward classes under 
Article 15(4); 
c. The qualifier of inadequate representation in Article 16(4) is not 
mutually exclusive of the requirement of backwardness. The 
inadequate representation of the class in the services of the State 
must be because of social backwardness; and 
d. The adequacy of representation must be determined based on the 
standard of effective representation and not numerical representation. 

PART D 

d. Yardstick for sub-classification 
174. This takes us to the next question. What must be the rational basis for sub-
classification within the beneficiary classes? Since the purpose of Articles 
15(4) and 16(4) is to ensure equality of opportunity of the socially backward 
classes, the criterion for sub-classification within a class (be it the Other 
Backward Classes or the Scheduled Castes or Tribes) must be an indicator 
of social backwardness. The yardstick for classification must differentiate the 
class based on inter-se social backwardness. The inter-se backwardness 
could be identified based on the same or different identity. The State has 
identified the Other Backward Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes.232 Here, the State sub-classifies based on the same 
identity, that is, social backwardness because of caste identity. Horizontal 
reservation is provided to classes which face backwardness due to identities 
other than caste such as gender233 and disability234. Here, the State sub-
classified based on a different identity. 
175. Though Article 16(4) only refers to the “backward class” collectively, the 
Scheduled Castes are differentiated because they suffer from social 
backwardness in the form of untouchability which leads to educational and 
economic backwardness. The Scheduled tribes are classified as a separate 
class because they suffer from social backwardness because of their spatial 
and cultural isolation from the rest of the population.235 Since the State can 
 
232 See the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act 2006 
233 Seats have been reserved for women through executive notifications issued by various states. 
234 See The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 2016, Sections 32, 34 
235 Galanter,supra, 147 

PART D 

use any yardstick to determine inter-se backwardness, it is not necessary that 
the criteria for sub-classification and the criteria used to distinguish the class 
from the other classes must be the same. That is, if the criteria for recognizing 
the Scheduled Castes as a backward class is untouchability, it is not 
necessary that the group can be sub-classified only if there is inter-se 
backwardness due to the same identity (that is, untouchability). 
176. The Scheduled Castes are a collection of castes, races or tribes or parts of 
groups, races or tribes.236 Caste is both a unit in the sense that it consists of 
a homogenous group of people and is also an indicator of backwardness 
because it is an occupational grouping.237 The nexus between caste and 
occupation continues to persist, more predominantly in the rural areas. This 
position has been expounded by numerous cases right from Balaji (supra) to 
Indra Sawhney (supra). A caste whose traditional occupation is that of 
scavenging and another caste whose traditional occupation is that of weaving 
may both face the stigma of untouchability. However, the caste whose 
traditional occupation is that of scavenging will be more socially backward 
when compared to the weaver caste because of the caste-occupation-poverty 
nexus. 
177. How does the State identify inter-se social backwardness within the 
Scheduled Castes? As discussed above, the inter-se backwardness can, 
inter alia, be identified based on inadequacy of effective representation. 
However, it must be proved that inadequacy of effective representation of a 
 
236 Constitution of India 1950; Article 366(24) 
237 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [ Justice Jeevan Reddy, 779] 

PART D 

caste is because of its social backwardness. I have had the benefit of reading 
the erudite opinion of my learned Brother, Justice Gavai. My learned Brother 
and I agree that the State must prove that the group/caste carved out from 
the larger group of Scheduled Castes is more disadvantaged and 
inadequately represented. viii. 
The limits of sub-classification 
178. Having held that sub-classification of the Scheduled Castes for the purposes 
of reservation is valid and having laid down the yardstick which must be used 
for further categorization, the next issue that falls for our consideration is its 
scope. In this section, we will answer the following issues: 
a. Whether the State should earmark seats for the each of the sub-
categorized classes or follow a preference model; and 
b. Whether the State can allocate seats or preference for each of the 
castes in the Scheduled Castes List. 
This section is not intended to prescribe an inflexible criterion for the State. Our 
analysis will lay down broad constitutional parameters without trenching on matters 
of policy. a. Model of special provisions 
179. A crucial issue which arises for consideration is with respect to the model of 
reservations for the sub-classified classes. There are two models that the 

PART D 

State may employ while reserving seats for the sub-classified castes. It needs 
to be analyzed if both the methods are constitutional. 
180. In the first model, the class(es) that are more socially backward are given a 
preference to all the seats that are reserved for the Scheduled Castes. There 
are two variations of this model. In the first variation, certain castes are given 
a preference over all the seats reserved for the category of Scheduled Castes. 
In other words, the sub-categorized class will get the first bite at the apple. In 
the second variation, the sub-categorized class will have a preference over a 
certain percentage of seats. Any unfilled seats will be available to the other 
categories. 
181. In the second model, seats shall be exclusively available to certain castes. 
The exclusive model differs from the preference model to the limited extent 
that in the former, the seats that are not filled will be carried over to be filled 
by the same castes in the subsequent year while in the latter, the seats that 
are not filled will be available to the other castes within the same class. There 
are two variations to this model as well. In the first variation, a certain 
percentage of seats will be reserved for the sub-categorized class and the 
State shall carry forward the unfilled seats, if any, to be filled by the same 
class in the subsequent year. In the second variation, all the seats are 
exclusively available to a certain caste from the category and the State shall 
carry forward the unfilled seats. 
182. Whether the preference or the exclusive model is unconstitutional would 
depend on whether the variation in-effect excludes any caste notified as a 

PART D 

Scheduled Caste with respect to that State by the President under Article 
341(1). With respect to the preference model, the first variation by which 
preference is given to certain castes to all the seats would be an 
unconstitutional approach because there is a possibility that other categories 
within the class of the Scheduled Castes are excluded. For example, if the 
State grants preference to three of the thirty castes classified as the 
Scheduled Castes over all the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes, it is 
possible that the three castes exercise their preference and fill up all the 
seats. This would lead to a situation where the other twenty-seven castes 
classified as the Scheduled Castes would be excluded from the benefit of 
reservation. This model will be arbitrary and unreasonable also because the 
Other Backward Classes which are socially advanced compared to the castes 
classified as the Scheduled Castes would receive the benefit of reservation 
but the castes or groups within the Scheduled Castes would not. The castes 
classified as the Scheduled Castes must be given the opportunity to secure 
the benefit. If not, the provision would become otiose for their purposes. 
183. However, the second variation of the first model is differently placed vis-à-vis 
the scope of Article 341(2). In the second variation, preference to certain 
castes is given only over a certain percentage of the seats. Thus, castes for 
whom preference is not given but which are included in the List of Scheduled 
Castes will be able to compete for a certain percentage of seats. In addition 
to those seats, they may get the opportunity to compete for the percentage of 
seats reserved for the sub-classified caste, if they are left unfilled. Thus, this 

PART D 

model does not have the effect of excluding any of the castes in the 
Scheduled Castes List. 
184. The difference between the first and the second model is the method in which 
unfilled vacancies of the more-backward sub-category are to be filled. In the 
former, the more backward sub-category only has a preference to a certain 
percentage of seats while in the latter, a percentage of the seats is exclusively 
available to them and the unfilled seats, if any, will not be available to be filled 
by the more advanced category of the class. The State may carry forward the 
unfilled vacancies to the subsequent year which will be available to the same 
category for which the seats were reserved. 
185. Article 16(4-B) provides that the State can consider carrying forward the 
unfilled vacancies of the year, which were reserved to be filled by classes 
under Article 16(4) and 16(4-A), to the subsequent year or years. The 
provision further provides that the unfilled vacancies shall not be considered 
together with the vacancies of the subsequent year for determining the ceiling 
of fifty percent reservation on total vacancies for that year. 
186. Article 16(4-B) does not make any distinction between a class and sub-
classified classes. The provision stipulates that the State can carry forward 
vacancies of unfilled seats which were reserved to be filled under Articles 
16(4) and 16(4-A) of the Constitution. As held in the preceding section, the 
power of the State to sub-classify within the Scheduled Castes is traceable to 
Article 16(4). Further, the seats that remain unfilled will not in any manner 
reduce the seats which are available to the other sub-categories of the 

PART D 

Scheduled Castes. The Constitutional validity of Article 16(4-B) was upheld 
in Nagaraj (supra). Thus, there is no reason to prevent the State from 
exercising its power under Article 16(4-B) of carrying forward the vacancies 
which are reserved for a specific sub-category. Such an exercise will be legal 
and valid. 
187. Like the first model, the constitutionality of the exclusive model depends on 
the percentage of reservation for the sub-categorized castes. The model of 
sub-classification will be unconstitutional if it excludes some Scheduled 
Castes from the benefit. This, similar to the first variant of the preference 
model, would violate of Article 341(2), and would thus be unconstitutional. 
However, the second version of the exclusive model in which only a certain 
percentage of seats is exclusively allotted to the sub-classified castes would 
be constitutional. For example, if ten percent of the seats reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes are reserved for the more backward among Scheduled 
Castes, the other castes will have the chance to compete for the other ninety 
percent of the seats, thus, not excluding any of the castes. The sole test is 
whether the operation of the policy has the effect of eliminating the possibility 
of castes or groups competing for the seats reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes. 
188. Article 341(2), as we have noted above, unambiguously prevents inclusion in 
and exclusion from the Scheduled Castes List by anyone except Parliament. 
Inclusion could be by way of extending the benefits meant for Scheduled 
Castes in the State, to a community that is not specifically mentioned in the 

PART D 

State Scheduled Castes List (as was the case in Milind (supra)), by reading 
as a part of an enumerated entry or by reading it as a synonym of an 
enumerated entry. Such an exercise is not open to the States or for that matter 
to the Courts. Only Parliament is entrusted with the power to make inclusions 
to or exclusions from the Lists of Scheduled Castes and Tribes. The thrust of 
the prohibition, as Dr Ambedkar also indicated, is a proscription on the 
elimination of an entry or addition of an entry to the List. Such elimination or 
addition, it was apprehended could arise out of political calculations in the 
hope of short-term electoral gains. Therefore, only Parliament is invested with 
the exclusive power to make such variations to the List. Any legislative effort 
by the State that does not either include unspecified communities or exclude 
specified communities from the Scheduled Castes List applicable to that State 
does not fall foul of Article 341(2) of the Constitution. 
189. The state has the power to follow either of the two permissible models 
discussed above while reserving seats through sub-classification. The 
decision of the State to choose from either of the two models will depend on 
multiple considerations such as the degree of backwardness of certain castes 
vis-à-vis the other castes and the total number of qualifying candidates 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes (both the more backward castes of the 
Scheduled Castes and the others). 
190. The course of action adopted by the State is subject to judicial review, when 
faced with a constitutional challenge. Where the action is challenged, the 
State will have to justify the basis of its action. The basis of the sub-

PART D 

classification and the model which has been followed will have to be justified 
on the basis of empirical data gathered by the State. In other words, while the 
State may embark on an exercise of sub-classification, it must do so on the 
basis of quantifiable and demonstrable data bearing on levels of 
backwardness and representation in the services of the State. It cannot in 
other words merely act on its whims or as a matter of political expediency. 
The decision of the State is amenable to judicial review. When its action is 
challenged under Article 226 or before this Court under Article 32, the State 
must provide justification and the rationale for its determination. No State 
action can be manifestly arbitrary. It must be based on intelligible differentia 
which underlie the sub-classification. The basis of the sub-classification must 
bear a reasonable nexus to the object sought to be achieved. b. The caste-class conundrum 
191. One of the issues that arises is whether the State may provide special 
provisions for each caste within the class. In Indra Sawhney (supra), the 
State classified the Other backward Castes into two categories – the 
backward class and the more backward class. Thus, the class was only sub-
divided into two categories. Is it permissible to classify the Scheduled Castes 
by providing preference or reservation in a percentage of seats to every 
caste? 
192. Both Articles 15(4) and 16(4) do not enable reservation based on castes but 
only on classes. The absence of the use of “caste” in Articles 15(4) and 16(4) 
when coupled with its use in Articles 15(2) and 16(2) led the courts to hold 

PART D 

that caste cannot be the sole basis of reservation.238 However, as Marc 
Galanter notes, the court had erroneously fused the two distinct usages of 
caste, as a unit or class, and as a criterion of backwardness.239 
193. In Balaji (supra), the criterion for the determination of social and educational 
backwardness was in question. This Court held that caste is a relevant 
consideration for determining social backwardness. However, the Court 
observed that caste cannot be the sole basis for determining the beneficiary 
class because it would perpetuate the vice of castes. Disagreeing with the 
Nagan Gowda report, Justice Gajendragadkar writing for the Bench, held that 
economic backwardness and not caste is the ultimate cause of social 
backwardness. This interpretation of the permissibility of caste as a criterion 
to determine the backward class was approved in Chitralekha v. State of 
Mysore.240 In P Rajendran v. State of Madras,241 this Court deviated from 
the approach adopted in Chitralekha (supra) and MR Balaji (supra) 
observing that caste is a class because it is a homogenous “unit”.242 The 
approach in P Rajendran (supra) was later approved by a nine-Judge Bench 
in Indra Sawhney (supra), where this Court observed that to determine a 
socially backward class, a caste can be identified as a unit since it is 
homogenous and then the criteria for backwardness can be applied to it.243 
 
238 Venkataramana v. State of Madras, AIR 1951 SC 226; Balaji v. State of Mysore, AIR 1963 SC 649 
239 Galanter, supra, Pg. 189 
 SC 1823 
241 (1968) 
242 “It must not be forgotten that a caste is also a class of citizens and if the caste as a whole is socially and 
educationally backward, reservation can be made in favour of such a caste on the ground that it is a socially 
and educationally backward classes within the meaning of Article 15(4).” 
243 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [859] 

PART D 

194. The Constitution does not bar the allocation of a percentage of seats to a 
caste since every caste is a class. However, the State must have sufficient 
material to prove inter-se backwardness between each of the castes. The 
State must with the submission of cogent material prove that there is a 
rationale principle which distinguishes the groups included and those 
excluded from the class. However, the rational principle will have nexus with 
the object only when the principle can identify the inter-se social 
backwardness of the class. For example, if the State allocates a separate 
percentage of seats for the dhobi caste and the barber caste, it must prove 
that these two castes suffer from differing levels of social backwardness. It is 
not merely sufficient for the State to base the classification on the difference 
in the traditional occupation of the two castes. Rather, the State must on the 
basis of quantifiable data prove that the castes suffer from different levels of 
social backwardness. The State must also back this with the submission of 
data on effective representation of the caste in the services of the State. 
195. Though sub-categorization based on each caste is permissible, we are of the 
opinion that there can never be a situation where seats are allocated for every 
caste separately. Though each caste is a separate unit, the social 
backwardness suffered by each of them is not substantially distinguishable to 
warrant the State to reserve seats for each caste. If the social backwardness 
of two or more classes is comparable, they must be grouped together for the 
purposes of reservation. 

PART D 

ix. 
Scope for judicial review 
 
196. The scope of judicial review of reservation policies was laid down in Indra 
Sawhney (supra). Justice Jeevan Reddy observed that a class for meriting 
reservations must be both backward and inadequately represented in the 
“services under the State”. In Nagaraj (supra), this Court held that 
backwardness must be based on objective standards whereas inadequacy of 
representation must factually exist. The Court held that the State must submit 
quantifiable data to prove backwardness and inadequacy of representation. 
This standard applies for classifying groups for the purpose of reservations 
and would, equally apply for sub-classification within a group because it is 
premised on the same principle of difference and inequality. 
197. Two prominent considerations arise while discussing the scope of judicial 
review of sub-classification of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes. First, whether the State must prove inter-se backwardness given the 
position of law laid down in Indra Sawhney (supra) that the backwardness of 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes is not required to be proved. 
Second, whether the inadequacy of representation of the more backward of 
the Scheduled Castes must be proved. a. Inter-se backwardness 
198. In Indra Sawhney (supra), this Court held that the requirement of social and 
educational backwardness cannot be applied to the Scheduled Castes and 
the Scheduled Tribes because they admittedly fall within the backward class 

PART D 

of citizens.244 One of the issues before the Constitution Bench of this Court in 
Jarnail Singh v. Lachhmi Narain Gupta245, was whether Nagaraj (supra) in 
requiring the State to collect quantifiable data showing backwardness is 
contrary to the decision in Indra Sawhney (supra), where this Court held that 
backwardness of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes need not 
be proved. In Jarnail Singh (supra), this Court held that observations in 
Nagaraj (supra) that the State is required to collect quantifiable data to prove 
the backwardness of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes is bad 
in law because it is contrary to Indra Sawhney (supra). 
199. The decision in Indra Sawhney (supra) exempts the State from having to 
prove that the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes are backward for 
the purposes of securing benefits under Articles 15 and 16. The observations 
do not exempt the State from having to justify the decision of sub-classifying 
within the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of 
reservation. The basis of sub-classification is that few of the castes or groups 
within the class are more backward. Thus, though the State is not required to 
collect quantifiable data to prove backwardness of the entire class of the 
Scheduled Castes/Tribes, it is required to collect data to prove inter-se 
backwardness within the class, where it seeks to make a sub-classification 
within the class. 
 
244 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [Justice Reddy 781; 796-797] 
245 (2018) 

PART D 

b. Adequacy of representation 
200. Justice Jeevan Reddy noted in Indra Sawhney (supra) that the issue of 
whether a class is inadequately represented is a matter within the subjective 
satisfaction of the State which is evident from the use of the phrase “in the 
opinion of the State”, and that the subjective satisfaction of the executive 
action must be judicially reviewed based on the standard laid down in Barium 
Chemicals v. Company Law Board246. In Barium Chemicals (supra), a 
Constitution Bench of this Court while determining the validity of 
administrative actions held that though the formation of opinion by the State 
may be based on its subjective satisfaction, the State could not act based on 
circumstances it ‘thinks’ existed. There must be apparent circumstances that 
merit a certain inference by the State, and such circumstances, must be 
shown to exist at least prima facie.247 In the preceding section, we have held 
that inadequacy of effective representation is a criterion for determining inter-
se backwardness. Hence, quantifiable data for that purpose must be 
submitted. 
201. In Nagaraj (supra), this Court held that the State must submit quantifiable 
data to satisfy the court that reservations are necessary “on account of 
inadequacy of representation of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
in a particular class or classes of posts”.248 However, in the subsequent 
paragraphs, this Court held that the cadre strength must be taken as a unit to 
 
 SC 295; (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 [Justice Reddy, 798] 
 SC 295 [28] 
248 Nagaraj v. Union of India, (2006) [117] 

PART D 

ascertain whether a given class or group is adequately represented. These 
observations were made in the backdrop of RK Sabharwal (supra) where this 
Court held that the entire cadre strength should be taken into account to 
determine if the quota limit has been breached. The relevant observations are 
delineated as under: 
“82. Before dealing with the scope of the constitutional 
amendments we need to recap the judgments in Indra 
Sawhney [1992 Supp (3) SCC 217: 1992 SCC (L&S) 
Supp: 

ATC 
385] 
and R.K. 
Sabharwal [(1995): 1995 SCC (L&S) 548: 
(1995) 29 ATC 481]. In the former case the majority 
held that 50% rule should be applied to each year 
otherwise it may happen that the open competition 
channel may get choked if the entire cadre strength is 
taken as a unit. However, in R.K. Sabharwal [(1995): 1995 SCC (L&S) 548: (1995) 29 ATC 481] 
this Court stated that the entire cadre strength should 
be taken into account to determine whether the 
reservation up to the quota limit has been reached. It 
was clarified that the judgment in Indra Sawhney [1992 
Supp (3) SCC 217: 1992 SCC (L&S) Supp 1: (1992) 
22 ATC 385] was confined to initial appointments and 
not to promotions. The operation of the roster for filling 
the cadre strength, by itself, ensures that the 
reservation remains within the ceiling limit of 50%. 
83. In our view, the appropriate Government has to 
apply the cadre strength as a unit in the operation of 
the roster in order to ascertain whether a given 
class/group is adequately represented in the 
service. The cadre strength as a unit also ensures that 
upper ceiling limit of 50% is not violated. Further, roster 
has to be post-specific and not vacancy based.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
202. At this juncture, it is important that we clarify the observations in Nagaraj 
(supra) extracted above. In Nagaraj (supra), this Court referred to the 
judgment in RK Sabharwal while observing that the cadre must be taken as 

PART D 

a unit to determine the inadequacy of representation. However, the context in 
which RK Sabharwal (supra) held cadre must be considered as a unit was 
different. In that case, two issues were considered. First, whether 
appointments of the backward classes in the general category must be 
counted while working out the percentage of reservation for the backward 
classes. Second, whether the reservation is complete when the posts 
earmarked for the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes are filled. It is while 
answering the second of the issues that this Court held that reservations must 
operate in accordance with the roster maintained in the Department which will 
be a running account every year to ensure that there is no excessive 
reservation. This Court explained the working of the calculation of cadre-
based vacancy as follows: posts falling in specific serial numbers would be 
reserved seats allotted to each class and when a reserved seat falls vacant, 
it must be filled by the person of the same category: 
“5. […]concept of “running account” in the impugned 
instructions has to be so interpreted that it does not 
result in excessive reservation. “16% of the posts …” 
are reserved for members of the Scheduled Castes 
and Backward Classes. In a lot of 100 posts those 
falling at Serial Numbers 1, 7, 15, 22, 30, 37, 44, 51, 
58, 65, 72, 80, 87 and 91 have been reserved and 
earmarked in the roster for the Scheduled Castes. 
Roster points 26 and 76 are reserved for the members 
of Backward Classes. It is thus obvious that when 
recruitment to a cadre starts then 14 posts earmarked 
in the roster are to be filled from amongst the members 
of the Scheduled Castes. To illustrate, first post in a 
cadre must go to the Scheduled Caste and thereafter 
the said class is entitled to 7th, 15th, 22nd and onwards 
up to 91st post. When the total number of posts in a 
cadre are filled by the operation of the roster then the 
result envisaged by the impugned instructions is 
achieved. In other words, in a cadre of 100 posts when 
the posts earmarked in the roster for the Scheduled 

PART D 

Castes and the Backward Classes are filled the 
percentage of reservation provided for the reserved 
categories is achieved. We see no justification to 
operate the roster thereafter. The “running account” is 
to operate only till the quota provided under the 
impugned instructions is reached and not thereafter. 
[…] As and when there is a vacancy whether 
permanent or temporary in a particular post the same 
has to be filled from amongst the category to which the 
post belonged in the roster. For example the 
Scheduled Caste persons holding the posts at roster 
points 1, 7, 15 retire then these slots are to be filled 
from amongst the persons belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes. Similarly, if the persons holding the post at 
points 8 to 14 or 23 to 29 retire then these slots are to 
be filled from among the general category. By following 
this procedure there shall neither be shortfall nor 
excess in the percentage of reservation.” 
 
203. The inference in Nagaraj (supra) that cadre must be taken as a unit to 
determine inadequacy of reservation based on the above observations in RK 
Sabharwal (supra), in our respectful opinion, is misplaced. The cadre as a 
unit was considered only for the purpose of preparation of roster to draw a 
balance between the reserved and open seats. This Court did not hold that 
cadre must be used as a unit for the purpose of determining the adequacy of 
representation. In fact, RK Sabharwal (supra) says to the contrary. RK 
Sabharwal (supra) observed that the State Government may take the total 
population of a particular Backward Class and its representation in the State 
Services while determining adequacy of representation: 
“4. […] It is, therefore, incumbent on the State 
Government to reach a conclusion that the Backward 
Class/Classes for which the reservation is made is not 
adequately represented in the State Services. While 
doing so the State Government may take the total 
population of a particular Backward Class and its 
representation in the State Services.” 

PART D 

As observed above, the inadequacy of representation in the services of the 
State is an indicator to determine the backwardness of the class in the 
services of the State. When the cadre-strength is used, the inadequacy of 
representation of the class is not determined. Rather, it determines the 
inadequacy of representation in a cadre, thereby, merging the distinction 
between quantitative and qualitative representation. Further, the observations 
in Nagaraj (supra) that adequate reservation of the class or group must be 
measured against the cadre is contrary to the plain language of Articles 16(4) 
and 16(4-A). Both the provisions use the phrase “not adequately represented 
in the services under the State”. 
204. Thus, in view of the above discussion, the State for a valid exercise of power 
to sub-classify under Article 16(4) is required to collect quantifiable data with 
respect to the inadequacy of representation of the sub-categories in the 
services of the State. As held in the preceding section, the inadequacy of 
representation is an indicator of backwardness and thus, to use the cadre as 
a unit to determine representation alters the purpose of the indicator itself. 
The State while deciding if the class is adequately represented must calculate 
adequacy based on effective and not quantitative representation. 

PART E 

E. 
Conclusion 
205. In view of the discussion above, the following are our conclusions: 
a. Article 14 of the Constitution permits sub-classification of a class which is not 
similarly situated for the purpose of the law. The Court while testing the validity 
of sub-classification must determine if the class is a homogenous integrated 
class for fulfilling the objective of the sub-classification. If the class is not 
integrated for the purpose, the class can be further classified upon the 
fulfillment of the two-prong intelligible differentia standard; 
b. In Indra Sawhney (supra), this Court did not limit the application of sub-
classification only to the Other Backward Class. This Court upheld the 
application of the principle to beneficiary classes under Articles 15(4) and 
16(4); 
c. Article 341(1) does not create a deeming fiction. The phrase “deemed” is used 
in the provision to mean that the castes or groups notified by the President 
shall be “regarded as” the Scheduled Castes. Even if it is accepted that the 
deeming fiction is used for the creation of a constitutional identity, the only 
logical consequence that flows from it is that castes included in the list will 
receive the benefits that the Constitution provides to the Scheduled Castes. 
The operation of the provision does not create an integrated homogenous 
class; 
d. Sub-classification within the Scheduled Castes does not violate Article 341(2) 
because the castes are not per se included in or excluded from the List. Sub-

PART E 

classification would violate the provision only when either preference or 
exclusive benefit is provided to certain castes or groups of the Scheduled 
Castes over all the seats reserved for the class; 
e. Historical and empirical evidence demonstrates that the Scheduled Castes 
are a socially heterogenous class. Thus, the State in exercise of the power 
under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) can further classify the Scheduled Castes if (a) 
there is a rational principle for differentiation; and (b) the rational principle has 
a nexus with the purpose of sub-classification; and 
f. The holding in Chinnaiah (supra) that sub-classification of the Scheduled 
Castes is impermissible is overruled. The scope of sub-classification of the 
Scheduled Castes is summarized below: 
i. 
The objective of any form of affirmative action including sub-
classification is to provide substantive equality of opportunity for the 
backward classes. The State can sub-classify, inter alia, based on 
inadequate representation of certain castes. However, the State must 
establish that the inadequacy of representation of a caste/group is 
because of its backwardness; 
ii. 
The State must collect data on the inadequacy of representation in the 
“services of the State” because it is used as an indicator of 
backwardness; and 
iii. 
Article 335 of the Constitution is not a limitation on the exercise of power 
under Articles 16(1) and 16(4). Rather, it is a restatement of the 

PART E 

necessity of considering the claims of the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes in public services. Efficiency of administration must be 
viewed in a manner which promotes inclusion and equality as required 
by Article 16(1). 
206. The Registry is directed to obtain administrative instructions from Chief 
Justice for placing the matters before an appropriate Bench. 

…….……………………………………CJI 
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]..….…………………………………………J 
[Manoj Misra] 

New Delhi; 
August 01, 2024 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE/ORIGINAL/INHERENT JURISDICTION 

THE STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS....APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
DAVINDER SINGH & ORS....RESPONDENT(S) 
WITH 
C.A. NO.5593 OF 2010 
S.L.P.(C) NO.8701 OF 2011 
W.P.(C) NO.1477 OF 2019 
W.P.(C) NO.21 OF 2023 
W.P. (C) NO.562 OF 2022 
C.A. NO.5586 OF 2010 
C.A.NO.5597 OF 2010 
C.A. NO. 5598 OF 2010 
C.A.NO.5600 OF 2010 
C.A. NO.5589 OF 2010 
C.A. NO.5587 OF 2010 
C.A. NO.5595-5596 OF 2010 
C.A.NO.2324 OF 2011 
C.A.NO. 6936 OF 2015 
S.L.P.(C) NO.30766 OF 2010 
S.L.P.(C) NO. 5454-5459 OF 2011 
C.A. NO.2318 OF 2011 
S.L.P.(C) NO. 36500-36501 OF 2011 
C.A. NO.289 OF 2014 
T.C.(C) NO.37 OF 2011 
T.C.(C) NO.38 OF 2011 
T.P.(C) NO.464 OF 2015 

INDEX 
 
I. 
BACKGROUND 
 
Paras 1 to 7 
II. 
ARTICLE 341, ARTICLE 342 AND THE 
PRESIDENTIAL ORDER FOR SCHEDULED 
CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES 
 
Paras 8 to 49 
III. 
JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 
 
Paras 50 to 168 
 
A. M.R. Balaji vs. State of Mysore 
 
Paras 52 to 62 
 
B. State of Kerala vs. N.M. Thomas 
 
Paras 63 to 99 
 
C. Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh 
(Railway) vs. Union of India 
 
Paras 100 to 122 
 
D. K.C. Vasanth Kumar vs. State of Karnataka 
 
Paras 123 to 134 
 
E. 
Indra Sawhney vs. Union of India 
 
Paras 135 to 147 
 
F. 
E.V. Chinnaiah vs. State of A.P. 
 
Paras 148 to 162 
 
G. M. Nagaraj vs. Union of India 
 
Paras 163 to 164 
 
H. Jarnail Singh vs. Lachhmi Narain Gupta 
 
Paras 165 to 168 
IV. 
PRESENT REFERENCE 
 
Paras 169 to 171 
V. 
CONSIDERATION 
 
Paras 172 to 271 
VI. 
THE WAY FORWARD 
 
Paras 272 to 295 
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
 
Para 296 

JUDGMENT 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
I have gone through the erudite and scholarly judgment 
authored by Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India. I am in agreement 
with the views expressed by the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India. 
Taking into consideration the importance of the matter, I find it 
apposite to express my opinion through this separate judgment. 
Since the facts and submissions of the learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the parties have been elaborately considered 
in the judgment of the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India, in order to 
avoid repetition, I have not referred to them. 
I. 
BACKGROUND 
“The third thing we must do is not to be content 
with mere political democracy. We must make 
our political democracy a social democracy as 
well. Political democracy cannot last unless 
there lies at the base of it social democracy. 
What does social democracy mean? It means a 
way of life which recognizes liberty, equality and 
fraternity as the principles of life. These 
principles of liberty, equality and fraternity are 
not to be treated as separate items in a trinity. 
They form a union of trinity in the sense that to 

divorce one from the other is to defeat the very 
purpose of democracy. Liberty cannot be 
divorced from equality, equality cannot be 
divorced from liberty. Nor can liberty and 
equality be divorced from fraternity. Without 
equality, liberty would produce the supremacy 
of the few over the many. Equality without 
liberty would kill individual initiative. Without 
fraternity, liberty and equality could not become 
a natural course of things. It would require a 
constable to enforce them. We must begin by 
acknowledging the fact that there is complete 
absence of two things in Indian Society. One of 
these is equality. On the social plane, we have 
in India a society based on the principle of 
graded inequality which means elevation for 
some and degradation for others. On the 
economic plane, we have a society in which 
there are some who have immense wealth as 
against many who live in abject poverty. On the 
26th of January 1950, we are going to enter into 
a life of contradictions. In politics we will have 
equality and in social and economic life we will 
have 
inequality. 
In 
politics 
we 
will 
be 
recognizing the principle of one man one vote 
and one vote one value. In our social and 
economic life, we shall, by reason of our social 
and economic structure, continue to deny the 
principle of one man one value. How long shall 
we continue to live this life of contradictions? 
How long shall we continue to deny equality in 
our social and economic life? If we continue to 
deny it for long, we will do so only by putting 
our political democracy in peril. We must 

remove this contradiction at the earliest 
possible moment or else those who suffer from 
inequality will blow up the structure of political 
democracy which this Assembly has so 
laboriously built up.” 
 
1. 
These are the words of warning, which Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, 
the Chief Architect of the Indian Constitution, gave in his speech 
on 25th November 1949, while replying to the debate on the final 
draft of the Constitution. This was the day prior to 26th November 
1949, on which day, the Constituent Assembly adopted, enacted, 
and gave to our country the most cherished document for every 
Indian, “the Constitution of India”. 
2. 
He warned that we should not be content with mere political 
democracy but make our political democracy a social democracy 
as well. He emphasized that a social democracy would mean a 
way of life which recognizes liberty, equality, and fraternity as the 
principles of life. According to him, liberty, equality, and 
fraternity, not individually but a trinity of the three was 
necessary for converting our political democracy into social 

democracy. He pointed out the contradictions in the country 
about the social and economic structure. He warned that if we 
continue to deny equality in social and economic life for long, we 
will do so only by putting our political democracy in peril. He 
therefore appealed to the nation to remove this contradiction at 
the earliest possible moment. He warned that if we do not do so, 
those who suffer from inequality will blow up the structure of 
political democracy which the Constituent Assembly had so 
laboriously built up. 
3. 
Two months thereafter, the Constitution of India came into 
force on 26th January 1950. On 26th November 2023, we have 
completed 74 years from the date on which the Constitution of 
India was enacted, adopted, and given to ourselves. On 26th 
January 2024, we have completed 74 years from the date on 
which the Constitution of India came into effect. We are now in 
the 75th year of our Republic. 

4. 
For the last 75 years, there has been a march towards 
achieving social and economic equality. There have been efforts 
to give social and economic justice to the millions of citizens who 
on account of centuries and centuries of discrimination and 
inhuman treatment were denied the legitimate right to come into 
the mainstream of life. The trinity of Articles 14, 15, and 16 along 
with Articles 46, 335, 338, 341 and 342 have provided a tool to 
march towards social and economic equality; emphasis on 
affirmative action so as to give a special treatment to the 
underprivileged so that they can march forward; providing 
reservations in the matters of education and in the matter of 
public employment have been used so as to provide a special 
treatment to these backward classes. 
5. 
The present case raises a dispute amongst various classes 
in the group of Scheduled Castes who claim to be more 
underprivileged and therefore claim for a more differential 
treatment qua the more advantageous in that group., 

the rival classes inside them claim that once the classes are 
brought into the Presidential List of Scheduled Castes or 
Scheduled Tribes, they become a part of homogeneous group, 
and a further classification is not permissible under the 
Constitution. 
6. 
This quest of the underprivileged for more preferential 
treatment as compared to the more advantageous in the larger 
group falls for consideration in the present reference. 
7. 
The 5-Judge Bench of this Court in the case of E.V. 
Chinnaiah vs. State of A.P. and others1 has held that such a 
further classification on the ground of more backwardness 
among the backwards listed in the Presidential List is not 
permissible. However, another 5-Judge Bench of this Court in 
the case of The State of Punjab & Ors. vs. Davinder Singh & 
Ors.2 has doubted the view in E.V. Chinnaiah (supra) and 
 
1 (2005). 
2 (2020). referred the matter to a larger Bench. That is how these matters 
came up for consideration before us. 
ARTICLE 341, ARTICLE 342 AND THE PRESIDENTIAL 
ORDER FOR SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES 
 
8. 
For appreciating the rival submissions before us, it is to be 
noted that while on one hand the struggle for gaining freedom for 
India was going on; on the other hand, on account of social 
discrimination prevailing since centuries, a quest for social 
reforms was also going on. 
9. 
In the beginning, a nomenclature often used by Christian 
Missionaries was ‘depressed classes’ to describe the poor and 
downtrodden section of the society. A wide array of untouchable 
castes, aboriginal tribes, and other backward communities were 
all lumped together under that label. In 1909, leaders like Gopal 
Krishna Gokhale and Annie Besant also referred to low caste or 
marginalized communities in India as the ‘depressed classes’. 
Besant compared the ‘depressed classes’ in India to the 

‘submerged tenth’ in England, i.e., unskilled labourers, 
scavengers, sweepers, casual dock labourers, etc., constituting 
10% of the population of that country. However, by 1918, the 
term ‘depressed classes’ began to be used for only low-caste 
Hindus who suffered from the stigma of untouchability. The 
word ‘class’ in ‘depressed class’ was really a synonym for caste3. 
10. It would be apposite to start with the Census Report of 
1891. It refers to the manner of enumeration of castes including 
castes, tribes and sub-divisions. It also refers to the scheme of 
classification based on occupation divided into 60 categories. 
Then the said report regroups these 60 categories into 21 groups. 
The said report refers to Rajputs and Jats as tribes, larger than 
castes. Class VII deals with “Leather Workers and Lower Village 
Menials” and it includes the following groups: 
“40. Leather workers 
41. Watchmen and Village Menials 
42. Scavengers” 
 
3 Abhinav Chandrachud, These Seats are Reserved: Caste, Quotas and the Constitution of 
India (Viking by Penguin Random House India 2023). 

11. Thereafter comes the Indian Statutory Commission Report, 
1930. The heading of Chapter 4 of Part I is “Caste and the 
Depressed Classes”. The report specifically states that a Caste 
has been described as “the foundation of the Indian social fabric”. 
It further states that every Hindu necessarily belongs to the caste 
of his parents, and in that caste he inevitably remains. It states 
that no accumulation of wealth and no exercise of talents can 
alter his caste status; and marriage outside his caste is 
prohibited or severely discouraged. It further states that in some 
cases, the application of the rule of caste seems almost to 
prescribe the means of livelihood of its members; indeed, many 
castes partake of the nature of occupational guilds. It states that 
the caste system, which may have originated in the preservation 
of ceremonial purity in social relations and in rules designed to 
limit admixture of blood, has during ages developed into an 
institution which assigns to each individual his duty and his 
position in orthodox Hinduism. However, the boundary which 

brings members of the same caste together also serves to 
separate them from innumerable compartments embracing other 
castes. It further states that this has resulted in a rigid and 
detailed subdivision of Hindu society which strongly contrasts 
with the theory of equalitarian ideas among Moslems and 
Christians. 
12. Paragraph 53 of the Report deals with “the depressed 
classes”. It states that the depressed classes comprise about 
20% of the total population of the British India or about 30% of 
the Hindu population. They constitute the lowest castes 
recognized as being within the Hindu religious and social system. 
It further states that in origin these castes seem to be partly 
“functional,’’ comprising those who followed occupations held to 
be unclean or degrading, such as scavenging or leather working, 
and partly “tribal,” i.e., aboriginal tribes absorbed into the Hindu 
fold and transformed into an impure caste. It further states that 
their essential characteristic is that, according to the tenets of 

orthodox Hinduism, they are, though within the Hindu system, 
“untouchable,” – that is to say, that for all other Hindus they 
cause pollution by touch and defile food or water. They are 
denied access to the interior of an ordinary Hindu temple. It 
states that they are not only the lowest in the Hindu social and 
religious system, but with few individual exceptions are also at 
the bottom of the economic scale and are generally quite 
uneducated. The Report shows that in the villages they are 
normally segregated in a separate quarter and very frequently eat 
food which would not be even touched by any other section of the 
community. 
13. A large proportion of them are landless agricultural 
labourers employed by cultivators for small remuneration. It 
states that it was not uncommon for a particular shed in a factory 
to be reserved for depressed class workers. 
14. Paragraph 54 of the Report deals with “Disabilities of the 
Untouchables”. It states that the actual disabilities, other than 

religious, suffered by the untouchables owing to their 
untouchability vary very greatly in different parts of India, not 
only from province to province, but also in different parts of the 
same province and even sometimes in different parts of the same 
district. It states that the two most widespread difficulties are 
about water and schools. It states that in many places it was 
customary for the untouchables to be denied access to the wells 
or tanks used by the other castes and great difficulty has often 
been found, when a new source of water supply has been 
provided from public funds by local authorities, in arranging for 
the untouchables to have use of it. The Report highlights that if 
any village draws its water from a river, the untouchables will be 
required to take their supply from a different point, lower down. 
In many places the children of untouchables are either excluded 
altogether from ordinary schools, although provided in whole or 
in part from public funds, otherwise they would be required to sit 
apart. In some cases, the untouchable children are required to 

attend the classes standing outside the classroom. The Report 
highlights that the difficulty of the administrator or political 
reformer was much increased by the fact that the great body of 
the untouchables yet accept their destiny as natural and 
inevitable. The Report states that their state is indeed pitiable 
inside the Hindu fold and yet not of it living on the edge of 
starvation, and unaware of any hope of improving their lot. 
15. Paragraph 55 of the Report highlights that the depressed 
classes were most severely felt in Madras, and especially in 
Malabar. In Malabar, is still found the phenomenon of 
“unapproachability,’’ that is, the untouchable must not approach 
within a certain distance of a high caste Hindu and would have 
to leave the road to allow his passage, and even to shout to give 
warning of the risk of pollution. The Report states that the local 
authority in another part of Madras had preferred to leave the 
roads un-mended rather than employ untouchable labourers to 
repair them. 

16. The Report further points out that in Bombay and the 
Central Provinces, the position was more or less comparable with 
that in Madras. The Report also refers to the telegrams from 
Nasik and Poona, in the Bombay Presidency, wherein organized 
action on the part of some untouchables was taken to assert a 
claim to enter Hindu temples. 
17. It may not be out of place to mention that during the 
relevant period Dr. B.R. Ambedkar had also started a movement 
for opening waterbodies to the untouchables and even 
untouchables being permitted to enter the temples. One of such 
agitations was about a public tank called ‘Chavder tank’ in 
Mahad, held on 20th March 1927 and another was an attempt to 
enter Kalaram temple at Nashik on 2nd March 1930. 
18. The Report further states that in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa 
and the United Provinces, although there were large numbers 
belonging to untouchable castes, in general they do not seem to 
suffer so universally or so severely as in the South. The Report, 

however, states that the problem did exist in these areas also. 
The Report also gives approximate percentage of population of 
the number of untouchables. The Report excludes aboriginals 
who are outside the Hindu fold. 
19. The next document that requires a mention is ‘the Census 
of India 1931’. The said Report coins the phrase ‘primitive tribes’, 
who reside in hills, forests, and other nomadic groups. These 
primitive tribes provide a foundation for Scheduled Tribes. It also 
notes that the formerly depressed classes are now referred to as 
the Scheduled Castes. 
20. It could thus be seen that while the primitive tribes who 
reside in hills, forests and remote areas provide a foundation for 
Scheduled Tribes, the so-called depressed classes which are so 
recognized on account of untouchability provide a foundation for 
Scheduled Castes. The Report also states that the 1931 Census 
Report remains the source material for present day Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 

21. Then comes the Government of India Act, 1935 (hereinafter 
referred to as “the 1935 Act”). Part II of the 1935 Act deals with 
“The Federation of India”. Chapter I thereof deals with 
“Establishment of Federation and Accession of Indian States”. 
Section 5 of the 1935 Act deals with “Proclamation of Federation 
of India” and Section 6 of the 1935 Act deals with “Accession of 
Indian States”. Clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 5 of the 
1935 Act provided that the States, the Rulers whereof will, in 
accordance with the provisions contained in Part II of the First 
Schedule to this Act, be entitled to choose not less than fifty-two 
members of the Council of States. Clause (b) of sub-section (2) 
of Section 5 of the 1935 Act provided that the States, the 
aggregate population whereof, as ascertained in accordance with 
the said provisions, amounts to at least one-half of the total 
population of the States as so ascertained, have acceded to the 
Federation. 

22. Section 18 of the 1935 Act deals with “Constitution of the 
Federal Legislature”. Sub-section (3) of Section 18 provided that 
representatives to be provided to the Council of States and the 
Federal Assembly shall be chosen in accordance with the 
provisions in that behalf contained in the First Schedule of the 
1935 Act. 
23. Similarly, Section 60 of the 1935 Act deals with 
“Constitution of Provincial Legislatures”. Section 61 of the 1935 
Act provides for “Composition of Chambers of Provincial 
Legislatures”. Sub-section (1) of Section 61 provided that the 
composition of the Chamber or Chambers of the Legislature of a 
Province shall be such as is specified in relation to that Province 
in the Fifth Schedule to the 1935 Act. 
24. The First Schedule to the 1935 Act provided for 
“Composition of the Federal Legislature”. Clause 4 thereof inter 
alia provides for seats for representatives of the Scheduled 
Castes. 

25. It will be relevant to reproduce Clause 8 of the First 
Schedule to the 1935 Act, which reads thus: 
“8. 
In any Province to which a seat to be filled 
by a representative of the scheduled castes is 
allotted, a person to fill that seat shall be chosen 
by the members of those castes who hold seats 
in the Chamber or, as the case may be, either 
Chamber of the Legislature of that Province.” 
 
26. It could thus be seen that the 1935 Act provided that in any 
Province where seat(s) is/are to be filled by the representatives of 
the Scheduled Castes where they are so allotted, shall be chosen 
by the members of those castes who hold seats in the Chamber 
or either Chamber of the Legislature of that Province. 
27. Clause 18 of the First Schedule deals with “The Federal 
Assembly”. 
28. It could thus be seen that Clause 18 of First Schedule to the 
1935 Act inter alia deals with seats reserved for members of the 
Scheduled Castes. 

29. Clause 26 of the First Schedule to the 1935 Act is the 
interpretation clause. It defines “the Scheduled Castes” as under: 
““the scheduled castes” means such castes, 
races or tribes or parts of or groups within 
castes, races or tribes, being castes, races, 
tribes, parts or groups which appear to His 
Majesty in Council to correspond to the classes 
of persons formerly known as “the depressed 
classes”, as His Majesty in Council may 
specify;” 
 
30. It is thus clear that the 1935 Act defines ‘the Scheduled 
Castes” to mean such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups 
within castes, races or tribes, being castes, races, tribes, parts or 
groups which appear to His Majesty in Council to correspond to 
the classes of persons formerly known as “the depressed classes”, 
as His Majesty in Council may specify. 
31. It could thus be seen that the definition of “the Scheduled 
Castes” can be traced to “the depressed classes”, which were 
used in a generic sense earlier and again traced to the most 
backward people suffering untouchability. 

32. Then comes the Government of India (Scheduled Castes) 
Order, 1936 (hereinafter referred to as “the 1936 Order”), notified 
on 30th April 1936. It will be relevant to refer to the said order, 
which is as under: 
“THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA (SCHEDULED 
CASTES) 
ORDER, 1936 

AT THE COURT AT BUCKINGHAM PALACE 
The 30th day of April, 1936 
Present, 
THE KING’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY 
IN COUNCIL 
 
Whereas by certain provisions in the First, Fifth 
and Sixth Schedules to the Government of India Act, 
1935, His Majesty in Council is empowered to specify 
the castes, races or tribe or parts of or groups within 
castes, races or tribes which are to be treated as the 
scheduled castes for the purposes of those Schedules: 
AND WHEREAS a draft of this Order was laid 
before Parliament in accordance with the provisions of 
subsection (1) of section three hundred and nine of the 
said Act and an Address has been presented by both 

Houses of Parliament praying that an Order may be 
made in the terms of this Order: 
NOW, THEREFORE, His Majesty, in the exercise of 
the said powers and of all other powers enabling Him 
in that behalf, is pleased by and with the advice of His 
Privy Council to order, and it is hereby ordered, as 
follows:- 
1. This Order may be cited as “The Government of 
India (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1936.” 
2. Subject to the provisions of this Order, for the 
purposes of the First, Fifth and Sixth Schedules to 
the Government of India Act, 1935, the castes, 
races or tribes, or parts of or groups within castes, 
races or tribes specified in Parts I to IX of the 
Schedule to this Order shall, in the Provinces to 
which those Parts respectively relate, be deemed to 
be scheduled castes so far as regards members 
thereof resident in the localities specified in relation 
to them respectively in those Parts of that Schedule. 
 
3. Notwithstanding anything in the last preceding 
paragraph- 
(a) no Indian Christian shall be deemed to be a 
member of a scheduled caste; 
(b) in Bengal no person who professes Buddhism 
or a tribal religion shall be deemed to be a 
member of any scheduled caste; 

and if any question should arise as to whether any 
particular person does or does not profess 
Buddhism or a tribal religion, that question shall 
be determined according to the answers which he 
may make, in the prescribed manner, to such 
questions as may be prescribed. 
4. In this Order the expression “Indian Christian” 
has the same meaning as it has for the purposes of 
Part I of the First Schedule to the Government of 
India Act, 1935, and the expression “prescribed” 
means prescribed by rules made by the Governor of 
Bengal, exercising his individual judgment. 
5. Any reference in the Schedule to this Order to 
any division, district, subdivision, tahsil or 
municipality shall be construed as a reference to 
that division, district, subdivision, tahsil or 
municipality as existing on the first day of July, 
nineteen hundred and thirty-six. 
 
SCHEDULE 
PART I – MADRAS 
(1) Scheduled castes throughout the Province:- 
Adi-Andhra 
Gosangi 
Paidi 
Adi-Dravida 
Haddi 
Painda 
Adi-Karnataka 
Hasla 
Paky 
Ajila 
Holeya 
Pallan 
Arunthuthiyar 
Jaggali 
Pambada 

Baira 
Jambuvulu 
Pamidi 
Bakuda 
Kalladi 
Panchama 
Bandi 
Kanakkan 
Paniyan 
Bariki 
Kodalo 
Panniandi 
Battada 
Koosa 
Paraiyan 
Bavuri 
Koraga 
Paravan 
Bellara 
Kudumban 
Pulayan 
Byagari 
Kuravan 
Puthirai 
Vannan 
Chachati 
Madari 
Raneyar 
Chakkiliyan 
Madiga 
Relli 
Chalavadi 
Maila 
Samagara 
Chamar 
Mala 
Samban 
Chandala 
Mala Dasu 
Sapari 
Cheruman 
Matangi 
Semman 
Dandasi 
Moger 
Thoti 
Devandrakulathan 
Muchi 
Tiruvalluvar 
Ghasi 
Mundala 
Valluvan 
Godagali 
Nalakeyava 
Valmiki 
Godari 
Nayadi 
Vettuvan 
Godda 
Paga dai 

Scheduled castes throughout the Province 
except in any special constituency constituted under 
the Government of India Act, 1935, for the election of 
a representative of backward areas and backward 
tribes to the Legislative Assembly of the Province:- 
Aranadan 
Kattunayakan 
Kuruman 
Dombo 
Kudiya 
Malasar 
Kadan 
Kudubi 
Mavilan 
Karimpalan 
Kurichchan 
Pano 

PART II – BOMBAY 
Scheduled Castes: - 
(1) Throughout the Province: - 
Asodi 
Dhor 
Mang Garudi 
Bakad 
Garode 
Meghval, or 
Menghwar 
Bhambi 
Halleer 
Mini Madig 
Bhangi 
Halsar, or 
Haslar, or 
Hulsavar 
Mukri 
Chakrawadya – 
Dasar 
Holaya 
Nadia 
Chalvadi 
Khalpa 
Shenva, or 
Shindhava 
Chambhar, or 
Mochigar, or 
Samagar 
Kolcha, or 
Kolgha 
Shingdav, or 
Shingadya 
Chena – 
Dasaru 
Koli Dhor 
Sochi 
Chuhar, or 
Chuhra 
Lingader 
Timali 
Dakaleru 
Madig, or 
Mang 
Turi 
Dhed 
Mahar 
Vankar 
Dhegu-Mega 
 
Vitholia 
 
(2) Throughout the Province except in the 
Ahmedabad, Kaira, Broaoh and Panch Mahals and 
Surat districts – Mochi. 
(3) In the Kanara district – Kotegar. 

PART III – Bengal 
Scheduled castes throughout the Province: - 
Agariya 
Hari 
Mal 
Bagdi 
Ho 
Mallah 
Bahelia 
Jalia Kaibartta 
Malpahariya 
Baiti 
Jhalo Malo, or 
Malo 
Mech 
Bauri 
Kadar 
Mehtor 
Bediya 
Kan 
Muchi 
Beldar 
Kandh 
Munda 
Berua 
Kandra 
Musahar 
Bhatiya 
Kaora 
Nagesia 
Bhuimali 
Kapuria 
Namasudra 
Bhuiya 
Karenga 
Nat 
Bhumij 
Kastha 
Nuniya 
Bind 
Kaur 
Oraon 
Binjhia 
Khaira 
Paliya 
Chamar 
Khatik 
Pan 
Dhenuar 
Koch 
Pasi 
Dhoba 
Konai 
Patni 
Doai 
Konwar 
Pod 
Dom 
Kora 
Rabha 
Dosadh 
Kotal 
Rajbanshi 
Garo 
Lalbegi 
Rajwar 
Ghasi 
Lodha 
Santal 
Gonrhi 
Lohar 
Sunri 
Hadi 
Mahar 
Tiyar 
Hajang 
Mahli 
Turi 
Halalkhor 

PART IV – UNITED PROVINCES 
Scheduled castes:- 
(1) Throughout the Province:- 
Agariya 
Chamar 
Kharot 
Aheriya 
Chero 
Karwar (except 
Benbansi) 
Badi 
Dabgar 
Khatik 
Badhik 
Dhangar 
Kol 
Baheliya 
Dhanuk 

Korwa 
Bajaniya 
Dharkar 
Lalbegi 
Bajgi 
Dhobi 
Majhwar 
Balahar 
Dom 
Nat 
Balmiki 
Domar 
Pankha 
Banmanus 
Gharami 
Parahiya 
Bansphor 
Ghasiya 
Pasi 
Barwar 
Gual 
Patari 
Basor 
Habura 
Rawat 
Bawariya 
Hari 
Saharya 
Beldar 
Hela 
Sanaurhiya 
Bengali 
Kalabaz 
Sansiya 
Beriya 
Kanjar 
Shilpkar 
Bhantu 
Kapariya 
Tharu 
Bhuiya 
Karwal 
Turaiha 
Bhuyiar 
Khairaha 
 
Boriya 

(2) Throughout the Province except in the Agra, 
Meerut and Rohilkhand divisions – Kori 
PART V – PUNJAB 

Scheduled Castes throughout the Province: - 
Ad Dharmis 
Marija or 
Marecha 
Khatik 
Bawaria 
Bangali 
Kori 
Chamar 
Barar 
Nat 
Chuhra, or 
Balmiki 
Bazigar 
Pasi 
Dagi and Koli 
Bhanjra 
Perna 
Dumna 
Chanal 
Sapela 
Od 
Dhanak 
Sirkiband 
Sansi 
Gagra 
Meghs 
Sarera 
Gandhila 
Ramdasis 
 
PART VI – BIHAR 
Scheduled Castes: - 
(1) Throughout the Province:- 
Chamar 
Halalkhor 
Mochi 
Chaupal 
Hari 
Musahar 
Dhobi 
Kanjar 
Nat 
Dusadh 
Kurariar 
Pasi 
Dom 
Lalbegi 

(2) In the Patna and Tirhut divisions and the 
Bhagalpur, Mong Palamau and Purnea district:- 
Bauri 
Bhumij 
Rajwar 
Bhogta 
Ghasi 
Turi 
Bhuiya 
Pan 

(3) In the Dhanbad subdivision of the Manbhum 
district and the Central Manbhum general rural 
constituency, and the Purulia and Raghunathpur 
municipalities: - 
Bauri 
Ghasi 
Rajwar 
Bhogta 
Pan 
Turi 
Bhuiya 

PART VII – CENTRAL PROVINCES AND BERAR 
Scheduled Castes 
 
Localities 
Basor, or Burud 
 
Throughout the 
Province 
Chamar 
Dom 
Ganda 
Mang 
Mehtar or Bhangi 
Mochi 
Satnami 
Audhelia: In the Bilaspur district 
Bahna: In the Amraoti district 
Balahi, or Balai: In the Berar division 
and the Balaghat, 
Bhandara, Betul, 
Chanda, Chhindwara, 
Hoshangabad, 
Jubbulpore, Mandla, 
Nagpur, Nimar Saugor 
and Wardha districts 
Bedar: In the Akola, Amraoti 
and Buldana districts. 

Chadar: In the Bhandara and 
Saugor districts 
Chauhan: In the Drug district 
Dahayat: In the Damoh 
subdivision of Saugor 
district. 
Dewar: In the Bilaspur, Drug 
and Raipur districts. 
Dhanuk: In the Saugor district, 
except in the Damoh 
subdivision thereof. 
Dhimar: In the Bhandara 
district 
Dhobi: In the Bhandara, 
Bilaspur, Raipur and 
Saugor districts, and 
the Hoshangabad and 
Seoni-Malwa tahsils of 
the Hoshangabad 
district. 
Dohor: In the Berar division, 
and the Balaghat, 
Bhandara, Chanda, 
Nagpur and Wardha 
districts. 
Ghasia: In the Berar division 
and in the Balaghat, 
Bhandara, Bilaspur, 
Chanda, Drug, 
Nagpur, Raipur and 
Wardha districts. 
Holiya: In the Balaghat and 
Bhandara districts. 

Jangam: In the Bhandara 
district. 
Kaikari: In the Berar division, 
and in Bhandara, 
Chanda, Nagpur and 
Wardha districts. 
Katia: In the Berar division, 
in the Balaghat, Betul 
Bhandara, Bilaspur, 
Chanda, Drug, 
Nagpur, Nimar, Raipur 
and Wardha districts, 
in the Hoshangabad 
and Seoni-Malwa 
tahsils of the 
Hoshangabad district, 
in the Chhindwara 
district, except in the 
Seoni subdivision 
thereof, and in the 
Saugor district, except 
in the Damoh 
subdivision thereof. 
Khangar: In the Bhandara, 
Buldhana and Saugor 
districts and the 
Hoshangabad and 
Seoni-Malwa tahsils of 
the Hoshangabad 
district. 
Khatik: In the Berar division, 
in the Balaghat, 
Bhandara, Chanda, 
Nagpur and Wardha 

districts, in the 
Hoshangabad tahsil of 
the Hoshangabad 
district, in the 
Chhindwara district, 
except in the Seoni 
subdivision thereof, 
and in the Saugor 
district, except in the 
Damoh subdivision 
thereof. 
Koli: In the Bhandara and 
Chanda district 
Kori: In the Amraoti, 
Balaghat, Betul, 
Bhandara, Buldana, 
Chhindwara, 
Jubbulpore, Mandla, 
Nimar, Raipur and 
Saugor districts, and 
in the Hoshangabad 
district, except in the 
Harda and Sohagpur 
tahsils thereof. 
Kumhar: In the Bhandara and 
Saugor districts and 
the Hoshangabad and 
Seoni-Malwa tahsils of 
the Hoshangabad 
district. 
Madgi: In the Berar division, 
and in the Balaghat 
Bhandara, Chanda, 

Nagpur and Wardha 
districts. 
Mala: In the Balaghat, Betul, 
Chhindwara, 
Hoshangabad, 
Jubbulpore, Mandla, 
Nimar and Saugor 
districts. 
Mehra, or Mahar: Throughout the 
Province, except in the 
Harda and Sohagpur 
tahsils of the 
Hoshangabad district. 
Nagarchi: In the Balaghat, 
Bhandara, 
Chhindwara, Mandla, 
Nagpur and Raipur 
districts. 
Ojha: In the Balaghat, 
Bhandara and Mandla 
districts and the 
Hoshangabad tahsil of 
the Hoshangabad 
district. 
Panka: In the Berar division, 
in the Balaghat, 
Bhandara, Bilaspur, 
Chanda, Drug, 
Nagpur, Raipur, 
Saugor and Wardha 
districts and in the 
Chhindwara district 
except in the Seoni 
subdivision thereof. 

Pardhi: In the Narsinghpur 
subdivision of the 
Hoshangabad district. 
Pradhan: In the Berar division, 
in the Bhandara 
Chanda, Nagpur, 
Nimar, Raipur and 
Wardha districts and 
in the Chhindwara 
district, except in the 
Seoni subdivision 
thereof. 
Rujjhar: In the Sohagpur tahsil 
of the Hoshangabad 
district. 
 
PART VIII – ASSAM 
Scheduled Castes: - 
(1) In the Assam Valley: - 
Namasudra 
Hira 
Mehtar, or Bhangi 
Kaibartta 
Lalbegi 
Bansphor 
Bania, 
or 
Brittial-Bania 

(2) In the Surma Valley:- 
Mali, 
or 
Bhuimali 
Sutradhar 
Kaibartta, 
or 
Jaliya 
Dhupi, or Dhobi Muchi 
Lalbegi 
Dugla, or Dholi 
Patni 
Mehtar, or Bhangi 
Jhalo and Malo Namasudra 
Bansphor 

Mahara 

PART IX – ORISSA 
Scheduled castes: - 
(1) Throughout the Province:- 
Adi-Andhra 
Godra 
Mangan 
Audhelia 
Gokha 
Mehra, or 
Mahar 
Bariki 
Haddi, or Hari 
Mehtar, or 
Bhangi 
Basor,or Burud Irika 
Mochi, or 
Muchi 
Bavuri 
Jaggali 
Paidi 
Chachati 
Kandra 
Painda 
Chamar 
Kantia 
Pamidi 
Chandala 
Kela 
Panchama 
Dandasi 
Kodalo 
Panka 
Dewar 
Madari 
Relli 
Dhoba, 
or 
Dhobi 
Madiga 
Sapari 
Ganda 
Mahuria 
Satnami 
Ghusuria 
Mala 
Siyal 
Godagali 
Mang 
Valamiki 
Godari 

(2) Throughout 
the 
Province 
except 
in 
the 
Khondmals district, the district of Sambalpur, and 
the areas transferred to Orissa under the provisions 
of the Government of India (Constitution of Orissa) 

Order, 1936, from the Vizagapatam and Ganjam 
Agencies in the Presidency of Madras:- 
Pan, or Pano 
(3) Throughout 
the 
Province 
except 
in 
the 
Khondmals district and the areas so transferred to 
Orissa from the said Agencies: - 
Dom, or Dombo 
(4) Throughout the Province except in the district of 
Sambalpur: 
Bauri 
Bhumij 
Turi 
Bhuiya 
Ghasi, or Ghasia 

(5) In the Nawapara subdivision of the district of 
Sambalpur: - 
Kori 
Nagarchi 
Pradhau 

C. K. Rhodes, 
Joint Secy. to the Govt. of India” 
 
33. It could thus be seen that for the purposes of the First, Fifth 
and Sixth Schedules to the 1935 Act, the castes, races or tribes, 
or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes specified in 
Parts I to IX of the Schedule to the 1936 Order were deemed to 

be scheduled castes in the Provinces to which those Parts 
respectively relate. 
34. A perusal of the 1936 Order would reveal that for different 
provinces different castes were notified as Scheduled Castes. In 
some of the provinces, a particular caste was to be considered as 
Scheduled Caste, except in the districts mentioned therein where 
it was not to be considered as Scheduled Caste. Similarly, in 
some of the cases, in particular areas or districts, the said castes 
were deemed to be Scheduled Castes in the same province. 
35. It can thus be seen that a same caste in the same province 
could be a Scheduled Caste only in one or more districts and not 
in the other districts. 
36. It could be seen that insofar as the Bombay Province is 
concerned, the caste ‘Mochi’ would be a Scheduled Caste 
throughout the Province except in Ahmedabad, Kaira, Broaoh 
and Panch Mahals and Surat districts. Similarly, a caste 

‘Kotegar’ would be a Scheduled Caste only in the Kanara district 
and not in the rest of the Province. 
37. It could thus be seen that the 1936 Order formed the basis 
of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 (hereinafter 
referred to as “the 1950 Order”) issued under Article 341(1) after 
the commencement of the Constitution. 
38. Then comes the most important event i.e. the debate in the 
Constituent Assembly on 17th September 1949, when Dr. B.R. 
Ambedkar moved two new draft Articles being Articles 300A and 
300B, which read thus: 
“300A-Scheduled Castes 
 
(1) The President may, after 
consultation with the Governor or 
Ruler 
of 
a 
State, 
by 
public 
notification specify the castes, races 
or tribes or Scheduled Castes parts 
of or groups within castes, races or 
tribes, which shall for purposes of 
this Constitution be deemed to be 
Scheduled Castes in relation to that 
State. 

(2) Parliament may by law include 
in or exclude from the list of 
Scheduled Castes specified in a 
notification issued by the President 
under clause (1) of this article any 
caste, race or tribe or part of or group 
within any caste, race or tribe, but 
save as aforesaid a notification 
issued under the said clause shall 
not be varied by any subsequent 
notification. 
 
300B-Scheduled Tribes 

The 
President 
may 
after 
consultation with the Governor or 
Ruler 
of 
a 
State, 
by 
public 
notification specify the tribes or 
tribal communities or parts of or 
groups 
within 
tribes 
or 
tribal 
communities 
which 
shall 
for 
purposes of this Constitution be 
deemed to be scheduled tribes in 
relation to that State. 
 
(2) Parliament may by law include 
in or exclude from the list of 
scheduled tribes specified in a 
notification issued by the President 
under clause (1) of this article any 
Tribe or Tribal community or part of 
or group within any Tribe or Tribal 
community but save as aforesaid a 
notification issued under the said 

clause shall not be varied by any 
subsequent notification.” 
 
39. While moving the said new draft Articles, Dr. B.R. 
Ambedkar stated thus: 
“The object of these two articles, as I 
stated, was to eliminate the, necessity of 
burdening the Constitution with long lists 
of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes. It is now proposed that the 
President, 
in 
consultation 
with 
the 
Governor or Ruler of a State should have, 
the power to issue a general notification in 
the Gazette specifying all the Castes and 
tribes or groups thereof deemed to be 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
for the purposes of the privileges which 
have been defined for them in the 
Constitution. The only limitation that has 
been imposed is this: that once a 
notification has been issued by the 
President, which, undoubtedly, he will be 
issuing in consultation with and on the 
advice of the Government of each State, 
thereafter, if any elimination was to be 
made from the List so notified or any 
addition was to be made, that must be 
made by Parliament and not by the 
President. The object is to eliminate any 
kind of political factors having a play in 
the matter of the disturbance in the 
Schedule so published by the President.” 

40. It could thus be seen that the idea behind draft Articles 
300A and 300B, which are now Articles 341 and 342, was to 
eliminate the necessity of burdening the Constitution with long 
lists of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. It was proposed 
that the President, in consultation with the Governor or Ruler of 
a State shall have the power to issue a general notification in the 
Gazette specifying all the Castes and tribes or groups thereof 
deemed to be Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for the 
purposes of the privileges which have been defined for them in 
the Constitution. 
41. It is thus clear that the purpose of draft Article 300A (now 
Article 341) and draft Article 300B (now Article 342) was for 
identifying the castes, races, or tribes, or parts of or groups 
within castes, races or tribes, which were entitled to the privileges 
which had been defined for them in the Constitution. 

42. It is thus clear that the purpose of draft Articles 300A and 
300B (now Articles 341 and 342) was not providing the privileges 
but only identifying the castes, races, or tribes, or parts of or 
groups within castes, races or tribes, which would be entitled for 
the privileges which were elsewhere provided under the 
Constitution. 
43. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar further observed that the only limitation 
that has been imposed was that once a notification has been 
issued by the President, which he would be issuing in 
consultation with and on the advice of the Government of the 
State, thereafter, if any elimination or addition was to be made in 
the List so notified, the same can be done only by Parliament and 
not by the President. The purpose was to eliminate any kind of 
political factors having a play in the matter of the disturbance in 
the Schedule so published by the President. 
44. It is amply clear that the purpose behind the said provisions 
was that once an identification has been done in the List so 

notified, the Executive should not tinker with it and any addition 
or deletion had to be made only by Parliament. 
45. It will also be relevant to refer to the speech of Shri 
V.I.Muniswami Pillai, given on the same day i.e. 17th September 
1949 in support of the amendment, which reads as under: 
“Shri V. I. Muniswami Pillai: Mr. 
President, 
I 
come 
to 
support 
the 
amendments that have been moved by the 
Honourable 
Dr. 
Ambedkar. 
These 
amendments deal with the definition of 
Scheduled Castes. As far as I can see he 
has made it clear that, according to the 
second part of it, the President on the 26th 
January 1950 will publish a list of such 
communities 
that 
come 
under 
the 
category of Scheduled Castes. But I would 
like 
to 
inform 
this 
House 
of 
the 
background which brought out the special 
name of Scheduled Castes. It was the 
intouchability, the, social evil that has 
been practised by the Hindu Community 
for ages, that was responsible for the 
Government and the people to know the 
section of people coming under the 
category of Hindus and who were kept at 
the outskirts of the Hindu society. Going 
backwards to 1916 it was in that year 
when Government found that something 
had to be done for the untouchable 

classes, (when they said untouchable 
classes, they were always understood to be 
Hindus,) and they had to be recognised. In 
Madras there were six communities that 
came under this classification. During the 
Montago Chelmsford reforms they were 
made ten. In 1930 when the great epoch-
making fast of Mahatma Gandhi came 
about, then only the country saw who 
were the real untouchable classes. And in 
the 1935 Act, the Government thoroughly 
examined the whole thing and as far as the 
Province of Madras is concerned they 
brought 86 communities into this list or 
category, 
though 
there 
were 
some 
touchable classes also. Now, after further 
examination the Provincial Governments 
have drawn up a list and I think according 
to the amendment mover’s suggestions, all 
those communities that come-under the 
category of untouchables and those who 
profess Hinduism will be the Scheduled 
Castes, because I want to emphasise 
about the religion. I emphasise this 
because of late there have been some 
movements here and there; there are 
people who have left Scheduled Castes 
and Hinduism and joined other religions 
and they also are claiming to be scheduled 
Castes. Such convert cannot come under 
the scope of this definition. While I have no 
objection to Government granting any 
concessions to these converts, I feel 

strongly that they should not be clubbed 
along with Scheduled Castes. 
 
Sir, I am grateful to the Drafting 
Committee and also to the Chairman of 
that Committee for making the second 
portion of it very clear, that in future, after 
the declaration by the President as to who 
will be the Scheduled Castes, and when 
there is need for including any other class 
or to exclude, anybody or any community 
from the list of Scheduled Castes that 
must be by the word of Parliament. I feel 
grateful to him for bringing in this clause, 
because I know, as a matter of fact, when 
Harijans 
behave 
independently 
or 
asserting their right on some matters, the 
Ministers in some Provinces not only take 
note and action against those members, 
but they bring the community to which 
that particular individual belongs; and 
thereby not only the individual, but also 
the community that comes under that 
category 
of 
Scheduled 
Castes 
are 
harassed. By this provision, I think the 
danger is removed. 
 
I strongly oppose the amendment moved 
by Pandit Bhargava. The reason is that he 
wants to have the ten years period for 
observing these amendments. But he has 
entirely forgotten that under another 
article that we have already passed, or will 
pass the Constitution provides for the 

appointment of a Special officer at the 
Centre and also various officers in all the 
Provinces to go into the various disabilities 
of these communities and to submit a 
report to the President who will then be 
able to know whether the Scheduled 
Castes have reached a stage when the 
facilities now given to them could be 
withdrawn. I do not think that the reasons 
that he has advanced are fair and square 
for the uplift of the Harijans. 
 
With these few words, I support the 
amendment.” 
 
46. It can thus be seen that the Learned Member of the 
Constituent Assembly refers to the background which brought 
out the special name of Scheduled Castes. He refers to 
untouchability, the social evil that has been practiced by the 
Hindu Community for ages. He states that a section of people, 
though Hindus, were kept at the outskirts of the Hindu society 
and it was in the year 1916 when the Government found that 
something had to be done for the untouchable classes. He refers 
to the efforts made by Mahatma Gandhi. He identified as to who 

were the actual untouchable classes. He refers to the 1935 Act 
and the efforts of the Government in thoroughly examining the 
whole thing and states that as far as the Province of Madras is 
concerned they brought 86 communities into the list or category. 
He states that according to the amendment mover’s suggestions, 
all those communities that come-under the category of 
untouchables and those who profess Hinduism will be the 
Scheduled Castes. However, he opined that those people who 
have left Hinduism and joined other religions should not be 
entitled to claim the benefits of Scheduled Castes. He states that 
if the Government wants to grant any concessions to these 
converts, they should not be clubbed among the Scheduled 
Castes. 
47. He acknowledges the vision of the Drafting Committee and 
its Chairman as to who will be the Scheduled Castes, and when 
there is need for including any other class or to exclude anybody 
or any community from the list of Scheduled Castes that must 

be by the word of Parliament. He states that he is grateful to the 
Chairman for bringing in this clause and that when Harijans 
behave independently or assert their right on some matters, not 
only the members of that community but their entire community 
is harassed. 
48. Having referred to the history of as to how the concept of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes has emerged, I, now, for 
the sake of convenience, refer to the provisions in the 
Constitution of India dealing with the special treatment provided 
to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward 
Classes. Since we are not concerned with political reservations, 
I do not find it necessary to refer to the provisions dealing 
therewith. Since Articles 341 and 342 are draft Articles 300A 
and 300B, which were approved by the Constituent Assembly on 
17th September 1949, I do not repeat the same here. 

Article 15, 16, 46, 335, 338, Clauses 24 
and 25 of Article 366 
 
“15. Prohibition of discrimination on 
grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or 
place of birth.—(1) The State shall not 
discriminate 
against 
any 
citizen 
on 
grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, 
place of birth or any of them. 
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of 
religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or 
any of them, be subject to any disability, 
liability, restriction or condition with 
regard to— 

access 
to 
shops, 
public 
restaurants, hotels and places of 
public entertainment; or 
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing 
ghats, roads and places of public 
resort maintained wholly or partly 
out of State funds or dedicated to the 
use of the general public. 
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the 
State from making any special provision 
for women and children. 
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of 
Article 29 shall prevent the State from 
making any special provision for the 
advancement 
of 
any 
socially 
and 
educationally backward classes of citizens 

or for the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes. 
(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause 
(g) of clause (1) of Article 19 shall prevent 
the State from making any special 
provision, by law, for the advancement of 
any socially and educationally backward 
classes of citizens or for the Scheduled 
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes insofar as 
such special provisions relate to their 
admission to educational institutions 
including private educational institutions, 
whether aided or unaided by the State, 
other than the minority educational 
institutions referred to in clause (1) of 
Article 30. 
(6) Nothing in this article or sub-clause (g) 
of clause (1) of Article 19 or clause (2) of 
Article 29 shall prevent the State from 
making,— 
(a) any special provision for the 
advancement of any economically 
weaker sections of citizens other 
than 
the 
classes 
mentioned 
in 
clauses (4) and (5); and 
(b) any special provision for the 
advancement of any economically 
weaker sections of citizens other 
than 
the 
classes 
mentioned 
in 
clauses (4) and (5) insofar as such 
special provisions relate to their 
admission to educational institutions 

including 
private 
educational 
institutions, 
whether 
aided 
or 
unaided by the State, other than the 
minority 
educational 
institutions 
referred to in clause (1) of Article 30, 
which in the case of reservation 
would be in addition to the existing 
reservations 
and 
subject 
to 
a 
maximum of ten per cent of the total 
seats in each category. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this 
article and Article 16, “economically 
weaker sections” shall be such as may be 
notified by the State from time to time on 
the basis of family income and other 
indicators of economic disadvantage.” 
 
“16. Equality of opportunity in matters 
of public employment.—(1) There shall 
be equality of opportunity for all citizens in 
matters 
relating 
to 
employment 
or 
appointment to any office under the State. 
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of 
religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of 
birth, residence or any of them, be 
ineligible for, or discriminated against in 
respect of, any employment or office under 
the State. 
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent 
Parliament 
from 
making 
any 
law 
prescribing, in regard to a class or classes 

of employment or appointment to an 
office 14[under the Government of, or any 
local or other authority within, a State or 
Union territory, any requirement as to 
residence within that State or Union 
territory] prior to such employment or 
appointment. 
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the 
State from making any provision for the 
reservation of appointments or posts in 
favour of any backward class of citizens 
which, in the opinion of the State, is not 
adequately represented in the services 
under the State. 
(4-A) Nothing in this article shall prevent 
the State from making any provision for 
reservation in matters of promotion, with 
consequential seniority, to any class] or 
classes of posts in the services under the 
State in favour of the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the 
opinion of the State, are not adequately 
represented in the services under the 
State. 
(4-B) Nothing in this article shall prevent 
the State from considering any unfilled 
vacancies of a year which are reserved for 
being filled up in that year in accordance 
with any provision for reservation made 
under clause (4) or clause (4-A) as a 
separate class of vacancies to be filled up 
in any succeeding year or years and such 

class of vacancies shall not be considered 
together with the vacancies of the year in 
which they are being filled up for 
determining the ceiling of fifty per cent 
reservation on total number of vacancies 
of that year. 
(5) Nothing in this article shall affect the 
operation of any law which provides that 
the incumbent of an office in connection 
with the affairs of any religious or 
denominational institution or any member 
of the governing body thereof shall be a 
person professing a particular religion or 
belonging to a particular denomination. 
(6) Nothing in this article shall prevent the 
State from making any provision for the 
reservation of appointments or posts in 
favour 
of 
any 
economically 
weaker 
sections of citizens other than the classes 
mentioned in clause (4), in addition to the 
existing reservation and subject to a 
maximum of ten per cent of the posts in 
each category.” 
 
“46. Promotion of educational and 
economic 
interests 
of 
Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other 
weaker 
sections.—The 
State 
shall 
promote with special care the educational 
and economic interests of the weaker 
sections of the people, and, in particular, 
of 
the 
Scheduled 
Castes 
and 
the 

Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them 
from social injustice and all forms of 
exploitation.” 
“335. Claims of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes 
to 
services 
and 
posts.—The claims of the members of the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes shall be taken into consideration, 
consistently with the maintenance of 
efficiency of administration, in the making 
of appointments to services and posts in 
connection with the affairs of the Union or 
of a State: 
Provided that nothing in this article shall 
prevent in making of any provision in 
favour of the members of the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for 
relaxation in qualifying marks in any 
examination or lowering the standards of 
evaluation, for reservation in matters of 
promotion to any class or classes of 
services or posts in connection with the 
affairs of the Union or of a State.” 
 
“338. National 
Commission 
for 
Scheduled Castes.—(1) There shall be a 
Commission for the Scheduled Castes to 
be known as the National Commission for 
the Scheduled Castes. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law 
made in this behalf by Parliament, the 

Commission 
shall 
consist 
of 
a 
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three 
other Members and the conditions of 
service and tenure of office of the 
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other 
Members so appointed shall be such as 
the President may by rule determine.] 
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson 
and other Members of the Commission 
shall be appointed by the President by 
warrant under his hand and seal. 
(4) The Commission shall have the power 
to regulate its own procedure. 
(5) It shall be duty of the Commission— 
(a) to investigate and monitor all 
matters relating to the safeguards 
provided 
for 
the 
Scheduled 
Castes under this Constitution or 
under any other law for the time 
being in force or under any order of 
the Government and to evaluate the 
working of such safeguards; 
(b) to inquire into specific complaints 
with respect to the deprivation of 
rights 
and 
safeguards 
of 
the 
Scheduled Castes; 
(c) to participate and advise on the 
planning process of socio-economic 
development 
of 
the 
Scheduled 
Castes and to evaluate the progress 

of their development under the Union 
and any State; 
(d) to present to the President, 
annually and at such other times as 
the Commission may deem fit, 
reports upon the working of those 
safeguards; 

to 
make 
in 
such 
report 
recommendations as to the measures 
that should be taken by the Union or 
any 
State 
for 
the 
effective 
implementation of those safeguards 
and 
other 
measures 
for 
the 
protection, 
welfare 
and 
socio-
economic 
development 
of 
the 
Scheduled Castes; and 
(f) to discharge such other functions 
in relation to the protection, welfare 
and development and advancement 
of the Scheduled Castes as the 
President 
may, 
subject 
to 
the 
provisions of any law made by 
Parliament, by rule specify. 
(6) The President shall cause all such 
reports to be laid before each House of 
Parliament along with a memorandum 
explaining the action taken or proposed to 
be taken on the recommendations relating 
to the Union and the reasons for the non-
acceptance, if any, of any of such 
recommendations. 

(7) Where any such report, or any part 
thereof, relates to any matter with which 
any State Government is concerned, a 
copy of such report shall be forwarded to 
the Governor of the State who shall cause 
it to be laid before the Legislature of the 
State 
along 
with 
a 
memorandum 
explaining the action taken or proposed to 
be taken on the recommendations relating 
to the State and the reasons for the non-
acceptance, if any, of any of such 
recommendations. 

The 
Commission 
shall, 
while 
investigating any matter referred to in 
sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any 
complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of 
clause (5), have all the powers of a civil 
court trying a suit and in particular in 
respect of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the 
attendance of any person from any 
part of India and examining him on 
oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and 
production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record 
or copy thereof from any court or 
office; 

(e) issuing commissions for the 
examination 
of 
witnesses 
and 
documents; 
(f) any other matter which the 
President may, by rule, determine. 
(9) The Union and every State Government 
shall consult the Commission on all major 
policy matters affecting Scheduled Castes. 
(10) In this article references to the 
Scheduled Castes shall be construed as 
including references to the Anglo-Indian 
community.” 
“366. Definitions.—In this Constitution, 
unless the context otherwise requires, the 
following expressions have the meanings 
hereby respectively assigned to them, that 
is to say— 
******** 
(24) “Scheduled Castes” means such 
castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups 
within such castes, races or tribes as are 
deemed under Article 341 to be Scheduled 
Castes 
for 
the 
purposes 
of 
this 
Constitution; 
(25) “Scheduled Tribes” means such tribes 
or tribal communities or parts of or groups 
within such tribes or tribal communities 
as are deemed under Article 342 to be 
Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of this 
Constitution;” 

49. It will be relevant to note that in the draft definition of ‘the 
Scheduled Castes’, the word used earlier was “specify”. However, 
in the final clause (24) of Article 366, the word “specify” has been 
changed to “deemed”. 
III. JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 
50. In the last 74 years, the aforesaid constitutional provisions 
have been considered by this Court on a number of occasions. It 
will be relevant to refer to some of these judgments. 
51. It will also be relevant to note that by the First Amendment 
to the Constitution in the year 1951 by which clause (4) was 
added to Article 15 was necessitated on account of the judgment 
of this Court in the case of State of Madras vs. Smt. 
Champakam 
Dorairajan4 
wherein 
Government 
Order 
specifying reservation for Harijans was set aside. 

4 (1951) SCR 525. 

A. 
M.R. Balaji vs. State of Mysore 
52. In the case of M.R. Balaji and others vs. State of Mysore5, 
the subject matter of challenge before the Constitution Bench of 
this Court was an order issued by the State of Mysore under 
Article 15(4) of the Constitution of India. Vide the said order, the 
State reserved 68% of the seats in the engineering and medical 
colleges and other technical institutions for the educationally and 
socially backward classes and Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes and only 32% seats were available for the merit pool. 
53. The Constitution Bench of this Court held that the 
provisions contained in Articles 15(4) and 16(4) are similar 
provisions. It further held that Article 15(4) is an enabling 
provision and that it does not impose an obligation, but merely 
leaves it to the discretion of the appropriate government to take 
suitable action, if necessary. 
 
5 1963 Supp. (1) SCR 439:1962 SCC OnLine 147: AIR 1963 SC 649. 

54. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of 
this Court: 
“20. Article 15(4) authorises the State to 
make 
a 
special 
provision 
for 
the 
advancement 
of 
any 
socially 
and 
educationally 
backward 
classes 
of 
citizens, 
as 
distinguished 
from 
the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
No doubt, special provision can be made 
for both categories of citizens, but in 
specifying the categories, the first category 
is distinguished from the second. Sub-
clauses (24) and (25) of Article 366 define 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
respectively, but there is no clause 
defining 
socially 
and 
educationally 
backward classes of citizens, and so, in 
determining the question as to whether a 
particular provision has been validly made 
under Article 15(4) or not, the first 
question which falls to be determined is 
whether the State has validly determined 
who 
should 
be 
included 
in 
these 
Backward Classes. It seems fairly clear 
that the backward classes of citizens for 
whom special provision is authorised to be 
made are, by Article 15(4) itself, treated as 
being similar to the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. Scheduled Castes and 

Scheduled Tribes which have been defined 
were known to be backward and the 
Constitution-makers felt no doubt that 
special provision had to be made for their 
advancement. It was realised that in the 
Indian Society there were other classes of 
citizens who were equally, or may be 
somewhat 
less, 
backward 
than 
the 
Scheduled Castes and Tribes and it was 
thought that some special provision ought 
to be made even for them. Article 34(1) 
provides for the issue of public notification 
specifying the castes, races or tribes which 
shall, 
for 
the 
purposes 
of 
this 
Constitution, be deemed to be Scheduled 
Castes either in the State or the Union 
territory as the case may be. Similarly 
Article 342 makes a provision for the issue 
of 
public 
notification 
in 
respect 
of 
Scheduled Tribes. Under Article 338(3), it 
is 
provided 
that 
references 
to 
the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
shall be construed as including references 
to such other Backward Classes as the 
President may, on receipt of the report of a 
commission 
appointed 
under 
Article 
340(1) by order, specify and also to the 
Anglo-Indian community. It would thus be 
seen that this provision contemplates that 
some Backward Classes may by the 
Presidential 
order 
be 
included 
in 

Scheduled Castes and Tribes. That helps 
to bring out the point that the Backward 
Classes for whose improvement special 
provision is contemplated by Article 15(4) 
are in the matter of their backwardness 
comparable to Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes.” 
 
55. This Court observed that the backward classes of citizens 
for whom special provision is authorized to be made are, by 
Article 15(4) itself, treated as being similar to the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. It has been observed that the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes which have been defined 
were known to be backward and the Constitution-makers felt no 
doubt that special provision had to be made for their 
advancement. However, it was realized that in the Indian Society 
there were other classes of citizens who were equally, or may be 
somewhat less backward than the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes, and it was thought that some special provision 
ought to be made even for them. The Court observed that the 
Backward Classes for whose improvement special provision is 

contemplated by Article 15(4) are in the matter of their 
backwardness comparable to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes. 
56. It will also be apposite to refer to the following observations 
of this Court: 
“21. ……The backwardness under Article 
15(4) must be social and educational. It is 
not either social or educational, but it is 
both social and educational; and that 
takes us to the question as to how social 
and educational backwardness has to 
determined.” 
 
57. It is thus clear that the Constitution Bench of this Court 
observed that the backwardness under Article 15(4) must be 
social and educational. It is neither social nor educational, but it 
has to be both social and educational. 
58. The Court then considered the question as to whether caste 
can be made the sole basis for determining the social 
backwardness was permissible or not. The Court observed that 

the group of citizens to whom Article 15(4) applies are described 
as “classes of citizens”, not as castes of citizens. The Court 
observed that therefore in dealing with the question as to whether 
any class of citizens is socially backward or not, it may not be 
irrelevant to consider the caste of the said group of citizens. It 
has been observed that though the caste of the group of citizens 
may be relevant, its importance should not be exaggerated. The 
Court further observed that social backwardness is, on the 
ultimate analysis, the result of poverty to a very large extent. It 
observed that the classes of citizens who are deplorably poor 
automatically become socially backward. It observed that they do 
not enjoy a status in society and have, therefore, to be content to 
take a backward seat. The Court therefore held that both caste 
and poverty are relevant in determining the backwardness of 
citizens. 
59. The Court further observed that the occupations of citizens 
may also contribute to making classes of citizens socially 

backward. It has been observed that there are some occupations 
which are treated as inferior according to conventional beliefs 
and classes of citizens who follow these occupations are apt to 
become socially backward. It has been observed that the place of 
habitation also plays a role in determining the backwardness of 
a community of persons. It therefore held that the problem of 
determining who are socially backward classes is very complex. 
It has been held that sociological, social, and economic 
considerations come into play in solving the problem, and 
evolving proper criteria for determining which classes are socially 
backward. However, it observed, that is the function of the State 
which purports to act under Article 15(4) of the Constitution of 
India. 
60. In the facts of the said case, the Court found that the State 
had applied the sole criteria of caste without regard to the other 
factors. It was therefore held that the criteria of social 
backwardness of the communities to whom the order impugned 

therein was applied was not permissible under Article 15(4) of the 
Constitution of India. 
61. Insofar as the educational backwardness of the classes of 
citizens is concerned, the State had applied the formula that all 
castes whose average student population in the last three High 
School classes of all High Schools in the State was less than the 
State average of 6.9 per thousand should be regarded as 
backward communities. Insofar as more backward communities 
are concerned, the criteria applied was that if the average of any 
community was less than 50% of the State average, it should be 
regarded as constituting the more backward classes. 
62. The Court held that the State was not justified in including 
in the list of Backward Classes, castes, or communities whose 
average of student population per thousand was slightly above, 
or very near, or just below the State average. 

B. 
State of Kerala vs. N.M. Thomas 
63. Coming next to one of the most important judgments 
dealing with the affirmative action which is the 7-Judge Bench 
judgment of this Court in the case of State of Kerala and 
another vs. N.M. Thomas and others6. In the said case, out of 
the 7 Learned Judges, 5 Learned Judges upheld the provisions 
made by the Kerala Government for providing affirmative action 
to ameliorate the situation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes. 
64. It will be apposite to refer to the following observation made 
by A.N. Ray, C.J.: 
“21. Articles 14, 15 and 16 form part of a 
string of constitutional guaranteed rights. 
These rights supplement each other. 
Article 16 which ensures to all citizens 
equality of opportunity in matters relating 
to employment is an incident of guarantee 
of equality contained in Article 14. Article 
16(1) gives effect to Article 14. Both 
Articles 14 and 16(1) permit reasonable 
 
6 (1976). classification having a nexus to the objects 
to be achieved. Under Article 16 there can 
be a reasonable classification of the 
employees 
in 
matters 
relating 
to 
employment or appointment. 
 
22. This Court in State of Gujarat v. Shri 
Ambica Mills Ltd., Ahmedabad [(1974): 1974 SCC (L&S) 381] said: [SCC 
p. 675: SCC (L&S) p. 400, para 53] 
“The equal protection of the laws is a 
pledge of the protection of equal laws. 
But laws may classify. And the very idea 
of classification is that of inequality. In 
tackling this paradox the Court has 
neither abandoned the demand for 
equality nor denied the legislative right 
to classify. It has taken a middle course. 
It 
has 
resolved 
the 
contradictory 
demands of legislative specialization 
and constitutional generality by a 
doctrine of reasonable classification. 
(See Joseph Tussman and Jacobusten 
Brook, The Equal Protection of the Laws, 
37 California Rev. 341.)” 
 
23. In Ambica Mills case [(1974): 1974 SCC (L&S) 381] this Court 
explained reasonable classification to be 
one which includes all who are similarly 

situated and none who are not. The 
question as to who are similarly situated 
has been answered by stating that one 
must look beyond the classification to the 
purpose of law. 
“The purpose of a law may be either 
the elimination of a public mischief or 
the achievement of some positive public 
good.” [SCC p. 675: SCC (L&S) p. 400, 
para 54] 
 
24. Discrimination is the essence of 
classification. Equality is violated if it rests 
on unreasonable basis. The concept of 
equality has an inherent limitation arising 
from the very nature of the constitutional 
guarantee. 
Those 
who 
are 
similarly 
circumstanced are entitled to an equal 
treatment. Equality is amongst equals. 
Classification is, therefore, to be founded 
on 
substantial 
differences 
which 
distinguish persons grouped together from 
those left out of the groups and such 
differential attributes must bear a just and 
rational relation to the object sought to be 
achieved. xxx xxx xxx 

27. There is no denial of equality of 
opportunity 
unless 
the 
person 
who 
complains of discrimination is equally 
situated with the person or persons who 
are alleged to have been favoured. Article 
16(1) 
does 
not 
bar 
a 
reasonable 
classification of employees or reasonable 
tests 
for 
their 
selection 
(State 
of 
Mysore v. V.P. Narasing Rao [AIR 1968 SC 
349: (1968): (1968) 2 LLJ 
120]). 
 
28. This equality of opportunity need not 
be confused with absolute equality. Article 
16(1) does not prohibit the prescription of 
reasonable rules for selection to any 
employment or appointment to any office. 
In regard to employment, like other terms 
and 
conditions 
associated 
with 
and 
incidental to it, the promotion to a 
selection post is also included in the 
matters relating to employment and even 
in regard to such a promotion to a 
selection post all that Article 16(1) 
guarantees is equality of opportunity to all 
citizens. Articles 16(1) and (2) give effect to 
equality before law guaranteed by Article 
14 and to the prohibition of discrimination 
guaranteed by Article 15(1). Promotion to 
selection post is covered by Article 16(1) 
and (2). 

29. The power to make reservation, which 
is conferred on the State, under Article 
16(4) can be exercised by the State in a 
proper case not only by providing for 
reservation of appointments but also by 
providing for reservation of selection 
posts. In providing for reservation of 
appointments or posts under Article 16(4) 
the State has to take into consideration 
the claims of the Backward Classes 
consistently with the maintenance of the 
efficiency of administration. It must not be 
forgotten 
that 
the 
efficiency 
of 
administration is of such paramount 
importance that it would be unwise and 
impermissible to make any reservation at 
the cost of efficiency of administration. 
(General 
Manager, 
S. 
Rly. v. Rangachari [AIR 1962 SC 36: (1962) ].) The present case is not one of 
reservation of posts by promotion. 
 
30. Under 
Article 
16(1) 
equality 
of 
opportunity 
of 
employment 
means 
equality as between members of the same 
class of employees and not equality 
between 
members 
of 
separate, 
independent class. The Roadside Station 
Masters 
and 
Guards 
are 
recruited 

separately, trained separately and have 
separate avenues of promotion. The 
Station 
Masters 
claimed 
equality 
of 
opportunity for promotion vis-à-vis the 
guards on the ground that they were 
entitled to equality of opportunity. It was 
said the concept of equality can have no 
existence except with reference to matters 
which 
are 
common 
as 
between 
individuals, between whom equality is 
predicated. The Roadside Station Masters 
and Guards were recruited separately. 
Therefore, the two form distinct and 
separate classes and there is no scope for 
predicating equality or inequality of 
opportunity in matters of promotion. 
(See All 
India 
Station 
Masters 
and 
Assistant 
Station 
Masters' 
Association v. General Manager, Central 
Railway [AIR 1960 SC 384: (1960) ].) The present case is not to create 
separate avenues of promotion for these 
persons.” 
 
65. It could thus be seen that in the opinion of Ray, C.J., 
Articles 14, 15 and 16 form part of a string of constitutional 
rights guaranteed by it, which supplement each other. His 
Lordship observed that Article 16, which ensures to all citizens 

equality of opportunity in matters relating to employment is an 
incident of guarantee of equality contained in Article 14. In turn, 
Article 16(1) gives effect to Article 14. Both Articles 14 and 16(1) 
permit reasonable classification having a nexus with the objects 
to be achieved. 
66. Referring to the judgment of this Court in the case of State 
of Gujarat v. Shri Ambica Mills Ltd., Ahmedabad7, His 
Lordship explained the reasonable classification to be one which 
includes all who are similarly situated and none who are not. He 
further observed that discrimination is the essence of 
classification, and that equality is violated if it rests on an 
unreasonable basis. He observed that those who are similarly 
circumstanced are entitled to an equal treatment and that 
equality is amongst equals. He observed that the classification is, 
therefore, to be founded on substantial differences which 
distinguish persons grouped together from those left out of the 
 
7 (1974). groups. He further observed that such differential attributes 
must bear a just and rational relation to the object sought to be 
achieved. He further observed that there is no denial of equality 
of 
opportunity 
unless 
the 
person 
who 
complains 
of 
discrimination is equally situated with the person or persons who 
are alleged to have been favoured. He observed that Article 16(1) 
does not bar a reasonable classification of employees or 
reasonable tests for their selection. He observed that this 
equality of opportunity need not be confused with absolute 
equality. It is observed that power to make reservation, which is 
conferred on the State, under Article 16(4) can be exercised by 
the State in a proper case not only by providing for reservation of 
appointments but also by providing for reservation of selection 
posts. His Lordship observed that in providing for reservation of 
appointments or posts under Article 16(4) the State has to take 
into consideration the claims of the Backward Classes 

consistently with the maintenance of the efficiency of 
administration. 
67. His Lordship further observed thus: 
“38. The principle of equality is applicable 
to employment at all stages and in all 
respects, 
namely, 
initial 
recruitment, 
promotion, 
retirement, 
payment 
of 
pension and gratuity. With regard to 
promotion the normal principles are either 
merit-cum-seniority 
or 
seniority-cum-
merit. Seniority-cum-merit means that 
given the minimum necessary merit 
requisite for efficiency of administration, 
the senior though the less meritorious 
shall have priority. This will not violate 
Articles 14, 16(1) and 16(2). A rule which 
provides that given the necessary requisite 
merit, a member of the backward class 
shall get priority to ensure adequate 
representation will not similarly violate 
Article 14 or Article 16(1) and (2). The 
relevant touchstone of validity is to find 
out whether the rule of preference secures 
adequate 
representation 
for 
the 
unrepresented backward community or 
goes beyond it.” 
 
68. It is observed that the rule which provides that given the 
necessary requisite merit, a member of the backward class shall 

get priority so as to ensure adequate representation and the said 
rule will not violate Article 14 or Article 16(1) and (2). The relevant 
consideration would be to find out whether the rule of preference 
secures adequate representation for the unrepresented backward 
community or goes beyond it. 
69. His Lordship further observed thus: 
“43. Scheduled Castes and scheduled 
tribes are not a caste within the ordinary 
meaning 
of 
caste. 
In Bhaiyalal v. Harikishan 
Singh [AIR 
1965 SC 1557: (1965) ] this 
Court held that an enquiry whether the 
appellant there belonged to the Dohar 
caste which was not recognised as a 
scheduled caste and his declaration that 
he belonged to the Chamar caste which 
was a scheduled caste could not be 
premitted because of the provisions 
contained in Article 341. No court can 
come to a finding that any caste or any 
tribe is a scheduled caste or scheduled 
tribe. Scheduled caste is a caste as notified 
under Article 366(25). A notification is 
issued by the President under Article 341 
as a result of an elaborate enquiry. The 
object of Article 341 is to provide 

protection to the members of Scheduled 
Castes having regard to the economic and 
educational backwardness from which 
they suffer. 
 
44. Our Constitution aims at equality of 
status and opportunity for all citizens 
including 
those 
who 
are 
socially, 
economically and educationally backward. 
The claims of members of Backward 
Classes require adequate representation 
in legislative and executive bodies. If 
members of Scheduled Castes and tribes, 
who are said by this Court to be Backward 
Classes, 
can 
maintain 
minimum 
necessary requirement of administrative 
efficiency, not only representation but also 
preference may be given to them to enforce 
equality and to eliminate inequality. 
Article 15(4) and 16(4) bring out the 
position of Backward Classes to merit 
equality. Special provisions are made for 
the advancement of Backward Classes 
and reservations of appointments and 
posts for them to secure adequate 
representation. These provisions will bring 
out the content of equality guaranteed by 
Articles 14, 15(1) and 16(1). The basic 
concept equality is equality of opportunity 
for appointment. Preferential treatment for 
members of Backward Classes with due 

regard to administrative efficiency alone 
can mean equality of opportunity for all 
citizens. Equality under Article 16 could 
not have a different content from equality 
under Article 14. Equality of opportunity 
for unequals can only mean aggravation of 
inequality. Equality of opportunity admits 
discrimination with reason and prohibits 
discrimination 
without 
reason. 
Discrimination 
with 
reasons 
means 
rational 
classification 
for 
differential 
treatment 
having 
nexus 
to 
the 
constitutionally 
permissible 
object. 
Preferential 
representation 
for 
the 
Backward Classes in services with due 
regard to administrative efficiency is 
permissible object and Backward Classes 
are a rational classification recognised by 
our Constitution. Therefore, differential 
treatment in standards of selection are 
within the concept of equality.” 
 
70. His Lordship clearly observed that Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes are not a caste within the ordinary meaning of 
caste. He observed that no court can come to a finding that any 
caste or any tribe is a scheduled caste or scheduled tribe. It is 
observed that the object of Article 341 is to provide protection to 

the members of Scheduled Castes having regard to the economic 
and educational backwardness from which they suffer. 
71. His Lordship (Ray, C.J.) further observed that our 
Constitution aims at equality of status and opportunity for all 
citizens including those who are socially, economically and 
educationally backward. It has been held that if members of 
Scheduled Castes and tribes, who are said by this Court to be 
Backward 
Classes, 
can 
maintain 
minimum 
necessary 
requirement of administrative efficiency, not only representation 
but also preference may be given to them to enforce equality and 
to eliminate inequality. It has been observed that special 
provisions have been made for the advancement of Backward 
Classes and reservations of appointments and posts for them to 
secure adequate representation. It has been emphasized that 
only such special provisions will bring out the content of equality 
guaranteed by Articles 14, 15(1) and 16(1). His Lordship goes on 
to say that preferential treatment for members of Backward 

Classes with due regard to administrative efficiency alone can 
mean equality of opportunity for all citizens. It has been observed 
that equality of opportunity for unequals can only mean 
aggravation of inequality and that equality of opportunity admits 
discrimination with reason and prohibits discrimination without 
reason. His Lordship held that discrimination with reasons 
means rational classification for differential treatment having 
nexus to the constitutionally permissible object. It has been held 
that Preferential representation for the Backward Classes in 
services with due regard to administrative efficiency is 
permissible object and Backward Classes are a rational 
classification recognized by the Constitution. It has been held 
that the differential treatment in standards of selection is within 
the concept of equality. 
72. I now refer to the following observations of K.K. Mathew, J.: 
“53. Formal 
equality 
is 
achieved 
by 
treating all persons equally: “Each man to 
count for one and no one to count for more 

than one.” But men are not equal in all 
respects. The claim for equality is in fact a 
protest against unjust, undeserved and 
unjustified inequalities. It is a symbol of 
man's revolt against chance, fortuitous 
disparity, unjust power and crystallised 
privileges. Although the decision to grant 
equality is motivated prima facie by the 
alleged reason that all men are equal yet, 
as soon as we clear up the confusion 
between equality in the moral sense and 
equality in the physical sense, we realise 
that the opposite is the truth; for, we think 
that it is just to promote certain equalities 
precisely to compensate for the fact that 
men are actually born different. We, 
therefore, have to resort to some sort of 
proportionate equality in many spheres to 
achieve justice. 
 
54. The principle of proportional equality 
is attained only when equals are treated 
equally and unequals unequally. This 
would raise the baffling question: Equals 
and unequals in what? The principle of 
proportional equality therefore involves an 
appeal to some criterion in terms of which 
differential treatment is justified. If there 
is no significant respect in which persons 
concerned are distinguishable, differential 
treatment would be unjustified. But what 

is to be allowed as a significant difference 
such 
as 
would 
justify 
differential 
treatment? 
 
55. In distributing the office of a State, not 
any sort of personal equality is relevant; 
for, unless we employ criteria appropriate 
to the sphere in question, it would turn 
out that a man's height or complexion 
could determine his eligibility or suitability 
for a post. As Aristotle said, claims to 
political office cannot be based on prowess 
in athletic contests. Candidates for office 
should possess those qualities that go to 
make up an effective use of the office. But 
this principle also does not give any 
satisfactory answer to the question when 
differential treatment can be meted out. As 
I said, the principle that if two persons are 
being treated or are to be treated 
differently there should be some relevant 
difference between them is, no doubt, 
unexceptionable. 
Otherwise, 
in 
the 
absence of some differentiating feature 
what is sauce for the goose is sauce for the 
gander. The real difficulty arises in finding 
out what constitutes a relevant difference. 
 
56. If we are all to be treated in the same 
manner, this must carry with it the 

important requirement that none of us 
should be better or worse in upbriging, 
education, than anyone else which is an 
unattainable ideal for human beings of 
anything like the sort we now see. Some 
people maintain that the concept of 
equality 
of 
opportunity 
is 
an 
unsatisfactory concept. For, a complete 
formulation of it renders it incompatible 
with any form of human society. Take for 
instance, 
the 
case 
of 
equality 
of 
opportunity for education. This equality 
cannot start in schools and hence requires 
uniform treatment in families which is an 
evident impossibility. To remedy this, all 
children might be brought up in State 
nurseries, but, to achieve the purpose, the 
nurseries would have to be run on 
vigorously 
uniform 
lines. 
Could 
we 
guarantee equality of opportunity to the 
young even in those circumstances? The 
idea is well expressed by Laski: 
“Equality means, in the second place, 
that adequate opportunities are laid 
open to all. By adequate opportunities 
we cannot imply equal opportunities in 
a sense that implies identity of original 
chance. The native endowments of men 
are by no means equal. Children who 
are brought up in an atmosphere where 
things of the mind are accounted highly 

are bound to start the race of life with 
advantages no legislation can secure. 
Parental character will inevitably affect 
profoundly the equality of the children 
whom it touches. So long, therefore, as 
the family endures — and there seems 
little reason to anticipate or to desire its 
disappearance 
— 
the 
varying 
environments it will create make the 
notion of equal opportunities a fantastic 
one. [ “Liberty and Equality” in Special 
Problems and Public Policy: Inequality 
and Justice, Ed. Lee Rainwater, pp. 26 
to 31] 
 
57. Though complete identity of equality 
of opportunity is impossible in the world, 
measures compensatory in character and 
which 
are 
calculated 
to 
mitigate 
surmountable obstacles to ensure equality 
of opportunity can never incur the wrath 
of Article 16(1).” 
 
73. Mathew, J. observed that formal equality is achieved by 
treating all persons equally. Formally, it requires that all men 
have to be treated as the same. He observed that men are not 
equal in all respects. The claim for equality is in fact a protest 

against unjust, undeserved and unjustified inequalities. It is a 
symbol of man's revolt against chance, fortuitous disparity, 
unjust power and crystallized privileges. He observed that as 
soon as we clear up the confusion between equality in the moral 
sense and equality in the physical sense, it is just to promote 
certain equalities precisely to compensate for the fact that men 
are actually born different. He explains the theory of proportional 
equality and observed that the principle of proportional equality 
can be attained only when equals are treated equally and 
unequals unequally. He observed that if there is no significant 
respect in which persons concerned are distinguishable, 
differential treatment would be unjustified. But if there is 
significant 
respect 
in 
which 
persons 
concerned 
are 
distinguishable, the same would justify differential treatment. 
His Lordship observed that if two people are being treated or are 
to be treated differently there should be some relevant difference 
between them. Otherwise, in the absence of some differentiating 

feature what is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander. He 
observed that the real difficulty arises in finding out what 
constitutes a relevant difference. 
74. His Lordship observed that if we all were to be treated in the 
same manner, the same would carry with it the requirement that 
none of us should be better or worse in upbringing and education 
than anyone else. He observed that the equality of opportunity 
for education cannot start in schools and hence requires uniform 
treatment in families which is an evident impossibility. His 
Lordship referred to Laski, who opined that parental character 
will inevitably affect the equality of the children whom it touches. 
His Lordship then observed that though complete identity of 
equality of opportunity is impossible in the world, compensatory 
measures in character calculated to mitigate surmountable 
obstacles to ensure equality of opportunity would not violate 
Article 16(1). 

75. It will also be apposite to refer to the following observations 
of Mathew, J. in N.M. Thomas (supra): 
“64. It would follow that if we want to give 
equality of opportunity for employment to 
the members of the Scheduled Castes and 
scheduled tribes, we will have to take note 
of their social, educational and economic 
environment. Not only is the directive 
principle embodied in Article 46 binding 
on the law-maker as ordinarily understood 
but 
it 
should 
equally 
inform 
and 
illuminate the approach of the court when 
it makes a decision as the court also is 
‘state’ within the meaning of Article 12 and 
makes law even though “interstitially from 
the molar to the molecular”. I have 
explained at some length the reason why 
court is “State” under Article 12 in my 
judgment in His Holiness Kesavananda 
Bharati 
Sripadagalavaru v. State 
of 
Kerala [(1973): 1973 Supp 
SCR 1]. 
 
65. Equality of opportunity is not simply a 
matter of legal equality. Its existence 
depends, not merely on the absence of 
disabilities, but on the presence of 
abilities. It obtains insofar as, and only 
insofar as, each member of a community, 

whatever his birth or occupation or social 
position, possesses in fact, and not merely 
in form, equal chances of using to the full 
his natural endowments of physique, of 
character, and of intelligence. [ See R.H. 
Tawney, “Equality”, (1965) pp. 103-04] 
 
66. The guarantee of equality before the 
law or the equal opportunity in matters of 
employment is a guarantee of something 
more than what is required by formal 
equality. It implies differential treatment of 
persons who are unequal. Egalitarian 
principle has therefore enhanced the 
growing belief that Government has an 
affirmative duty to eliminate inequalities 
and to provide opportunities for the 
exercise of human rights and claims 
Fundamental rights as enacted in Part III 
of the Constitution are, by and large, 
essentially negative in character. They 
mark off a world in which the Government 
should have no jurisdiction. In this realm, 
it was assumed that a citizen has no claim 
upon Government except to be left alone. 
But the language of Article 16(1) is in 
marked contrast with that of Article 14. 
Whereas the accent in Article 14 is on the 
injunction that the State shall not deny to 
any person equality before the law or the 
equal protection of the laws that is, on the 

negative character of the duty of the State, 
the emphasis in Article 16(1) is on the 
mandatory aspect, namely, that there 
shall be equality of opportunity for all 
citizens in matters relating to employment 
or appointment to any office under the 
State implying thereby that affirmative 
action by the Government would be 
consistent with the article if it is calculated 
to achieve it. If we are to achieve equality, 
we can never afford to relax: 
“While inequality is easy since it 
demands no more than to float with the 
current, equality is difficult for it 
involves swimming against it. [ R.H. 
Tawney, “Equality”, (1952), p. 47] ” 
 
67. Today, the political theory which 
acknowledges 
the 
obligation 
of 
Government 
under 
Part 
IV 
of 
the 
Constitution to provide jobs, medical care, 
old age pension, etc., extends to human 
rights 
and 
imposes 
an 
affirmative 
obligation to promote equality and liberty. 
The force of the idea of a State with 
obligation to help the weaker sections of 
its members seems to have increasing 
influence in constitutional law. The idea 
finds expression in a number of cases in 
America involving social discrimination 

and also in the decisions requiring the 
State to offset the effects of poverty by 
providing counsel, transcript of appeal, 
expert witnesses, etc. Today, the sense 
that 
Government 
has 
affirmative 
responsibility 
for 
elimination 
of 
inequalities, 
social, 
economic 
or 
otherwise, is one of the dominant forces in 
constitutional 
law. 
While 
special 
concessions for the underprivileged have 
been easily permitted, they have not 
traditionally been required. Decisions in 
the areas of criminal procedure, voting 
rights and education in America suggest 
that the traditional approach may not be 
completely adequate. In these areas, the 
inquiry 
whether 
equality 
has 
been 
achieved no longer ends with numerical 
equality; rather the equality clause has 
been held to require resort to a standard 
of proportional equality which requires the 
State, in framing legislation, to take into 
account the private inequalities of wealth, 
of education and other circumstances. [ 
See “Developments — Equal Protection”, 
82 Harv LR 1165] 
 
68. The idea of compensatory State action 
to make people who are really unequal in 
their 
wealth, 
education 
or 
social 
environment, equal, in specified areas, 

was developed by the Supreme Court of 
the United States. Rousseau has said: 
“It is precisely because the force of 
circumstances tends to destroy equality 
that force of legislation must always 
tend to maintain it. [ Contract Social ii, 
11] ”” 
 
76. His Lordship observed that if we want to give equality of 
opportunity for employment to the members of the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, we will have to take note of their 
social, educational, and economic environment. His Lordship 
observed that the directive principle embodied in Article 46 is not 
only binding on the lawmaker, but it should equally inform and 
illuminate the approach of the court when it makes a decision. 
Referring to the exposition in the case of His Holiness 
Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalavaru vs. State of Kerala8, 
His Lordship states that the Court is also a ‘state’ when it makes 
a decision within the meaning of Article 12. 
 
8 (1973): 1973 Supp. SCR 1. 

77. His Lordship observed that ‘equality of opportunity’ is not 
simply a matter of legal equality and that its existence depends, 
not merely on the absence of disabilities, but on the presence of 
abilities. It has been observed that the guarantee of equality is 
something more than what is required by ‘formal equality’. It 
implies differential treatment of persons who are unequal. It has 
been observed that egalitarian principle requires that the 
Government has an affirmative duty to eliminate inequalities and 
to provide opportunities for the exercise of human rights and 
claim Fundamental rights as enacted in Part III of the 
Constitution are, by and large, essentially negative in character. 
His Lordship observed that the emphasis in Article 16(1) is on the 
mandatory aspect that there shall be equality of opportunity for 
all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to 
any office under the State. It therefore implies that affirmative 
action by the Government would be consistent with the article if 
it is calculated to achieve it. 

78. Referring to Article 14 of the Constitution, His Lordship 
observed that the State is under obligation to help the members 
of the weaker sections. His Lordship observed that under the 
constitutional law, the Government has affirmative responsibility 
for elimination of inequalities, social, economic or otherwise. 
Referring to the concept of proportional equality, His Lordship 
states that the State is required to frame legislation, to consider 
the private inequalities of wealth, of education and other 
circumstances. 
79. Referring to the judgments of the Supreme Court of the 
United States, His Lordship opined that the idea of compensatory 
State action was to bring about the equality for the people who 
are really unequal in their wealth, education or social 
environment. 
80. After referring to certain judgments of the United States 
Supreme Court, Mathew, J. observed thus: 

“73. There is no reason why this Court 
should not also require the State to adopt 
a standard of proportional equality which 
takes account of the differing conditions 
and circumstances of a class of citizens 
whenever 
those 
conditions 
and 
circumstances stand in the way of their 
equal access to the enjoyment of basic 
rights or claims. 
 
74. The concept of equality of opportunity 
in matters of employment is wide enough 
to 
include 
within 
it 
compensatory 
measures to put the members of the 
Scheduled Castes and scheduled tribes on 
par 
with 
the 
members 
of 
other 
communities which would enable them to 
get their share of representation in public 
service. How can any member of the so-
called forward communities complain of a 
compensatory measure made by the 
Government to ensure the members of 
Scheduled Castes and scheduled tribes 
their due share of representation in public 
services? 
 
75. It is said that Article 16(4) specifically 
provides for reservation of posts in favour 
of Backward Classes which according to 
the decision of this Court would include 

the power of the State to make reservation 
at the stage of promotion also and 
therefore Article 16(1) cannot include 
within its compass the power to give any 
adventitious 
aids 
by 
legislation 
or 
otherwise to the Backward Classes which 
would derogate from strict numerical 
equality. If reservation is necessary either 
at the initial stage or at the stage of 
promotion or at both to ensure for the 
members of the Scheduled Castes and 
scheduled tribes equality of opportunity in 
the matter of employment, I see no reason 
why that is not permissible under Article 
16(1) as that alone might put them on a 
parity with the forward communities in the 
matter of achieving the result which 
equality of opportunity would produce. 
Whether there is equality of opportunity 
can be gauged only by the equality 
attained in the result. Formal equality of 
opportunity simply enables people with 
more education and intelligence to capture 
all the posts and to win over the less 
fortunate in education and talent even 
when the competition is fair. Equality of 
result is the test of equality of opportunity. 
 
76. Daniel P. Moynihan, one of America's 
leading urban scholars, spelled out the 
problem in a widely publicized study that 

he prepared while he was Assistant 
Secretary 
of 
Labour. 
The 
Moynihan 
Report, as it came to be known, made the 
point in a passage that deserves full 
quotation: 
“It is increasingly demanded that the 
distribution of success and failure 
within 
one 
group 
be 
roughly 
comparable to that within other groups. 
It is not enough that all individuals 
start out on even terms, if the members 
of one group almost invariably end up 
well to the fore and those of another far 
to the rear. This is what ethnic politics 
are all about in America, and in the 
main the Negro American demands are 
being put forth in this new traditional 
and established framework. 
Here a point of semantics must be 
grasped. The demand for equality of 
opportunity 
has 
been 
generally 
perceived by White Americans as a 
demand for liberty, a demand not to be 
excluded from the competitions of life — 
at the polling place, in the scholarship 
examinations, at the personnel office, 
on the housing market. Liberty does, of 
course, demand that everyone be free to 
try his luck, or test his skill in such 
matters. But these opportunities do not 
necessarily produce equality: on the 

contrary, to the extent that winners 
imply losers, equality of opportunity 
almost insures inequality of results. 
The point of semantics is that 
equality of opportunity now has a 
different meaning for Negroes than it 
has for Whites. It is not (or at least no 
longer) a demand for liberty alone, but 
also for equality — in terms of group 
results. In Bayard Rustin's terms, ‘It is 
now 
concerned 
not 
merely 
with 
removing 
the 
barriers 
to 
full 
opportunity but with achieving the fact 
of equality’. By equality Rustin means a 
distribution of achievements among 
Negroes roughly comparable to that 
among Whites. [ The Moynihan Report 
and the Politics of Controversy, Eds. Lee 
Rainwater and William L. Yancey, p. 
49]” 
 
77. Beginning most notably with the 
Supreme Court's condemnation of school 
segregation in 1954, the United States has 
finally begun to correct the discrepancy 
between its ideals and its treatment of the 
black man. The first steps, as reflected in 
the decisions of the courts and the civil 
rights laws of Congress, merely removed 
the legal and quasi-legal forms of racial 

discrimination. These actions while not 
producing true equality, or even equality 
of opportunity, logically dictated the next 
step: positive use of government power to 
create the possibility of a real equality. In 
the words of Professor Lipset: 
“Perhaps the most important fact to 
recognise about the current situation of 
the American Negro is that (legal) 
equality is not enough to insure his 
movement into larger society.” [ “The 
American 
Democracy”, 
Mcgrath, 
Cornwell and Goodman, p. 18] 
 
78. I agree that Article 16(4) is capable of 
being interpreted as an exception to Article 
16(1) if the equality of opportunity 
visualized in Article 16(1) is a sterile one, 
geared to the concept of numerical 
equality which takes no account of the 
social, economic, educational background 
of the members of Scheduled Castes and 
scheduled tribes. If equality of opportunity 
guaranteed under Article 16(1) means 
effective material equality, then Article 
16(4) is not an exception to Article 16(1). It 
is only an emphatic way of putting the 
extent to which equality of opportunity 
could be carried viz., even up to the point 
of making reservation. 

79. The State can adopt any measure 
which 
would 
ensure 
the 
adequate 
representation in public service of the 
members of the Scheduled Castes and 
scheduled tribes and justify it as a 
compensatory measure to ensure equality 
of opportunity provided the measure does 
not dispense with the acquisition of the 
minimum basic qualification necessary for 
the efficiency of administration.” 
 
81. His Lordship observed that there is no reason why this 
Court should not require the State to adopt a standard of 
proportional equality which takes account of the differing 
conditions and circumstances of a class of citizens. His Lordship 
observed that whenever differing conditions and circumstances 
stand in the way of a class of citizens in their equal access to the 
enjoyment of basic rights or claims, the State would be required 
to adopt a standard of proportional equality. 
82. He observed that no member of the forward classes or 
communities should complain against a compensatory measure 

made by the Government to ensure that the members of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes get their due share of 
representation in public services. 
83. His Lordship observed that if reservation is necessary either 
at the initial stage or at the stage of promotion or at both, to 
ensure for the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes equality of opportunity, then this would be permissible 
under Article 16(1) as that alone would put them on a parity with 
the forward communities in the matter of achieving the result 
which equality of opportunity would produce. It is observed that 
the formal equality of opportunity simply enables people with 
more education and intelligence to capture all the posts and to 
win over the less fortunate in education and talent even when the 
competition is fair. He observed that the equality of result is the 
test of equality of opportunity. 
84. Mathew, J. rejects the contention that Article 16(4) is an 
exception to Article 16(1). He states that such an interpretation 

does not consider the social, economic, educational background 
of the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
He held that if equality of opportunity guaranteed under Article 
16(1) means effective material equality, then Article 16(4) is not 
an exception to Article 16(1) and that it is only an emphatic way 
of putting the extent to which equality of opportunity could be 
carried i.e., even up to the point of making reservation. 
85. His Lordship observed that the State can adopt any 
measure which would ensure the adequate representation in 
public service of the members of the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes and justify it as a compensatory measure to 
ensure equality of opportunity provided the measure does not 
dispense with the acquisition of the minimum basic qualification 
necessary for the efficiency of administration. 
86. Mathew, J. further observed thus: 
“83. A classification is reasonable if it 
includes all persons who are similarly 
situated with respect to the purpose of the 

law. In other words, the classification 
must be founded on some reasonable 
ground which distinguishes persons who 
are grouped together and the ground of 
distinction must have rational relation to 
the object sought to be achieved by the 
rule or even the rules in question. It is a 
mistake to assume a priori that there can 
be no classification within a class, say, the 
lower 
division 
clerks. 
If 
there 
are 
intelligible differentia which separates a 
group within that class from the rest and 
that differentia have nexus with the object 
of classification, I see no objection to a 
further classification within the class. It is 
no doubt a paradox that though in one 
sense 
classification 
brings 
about 
inequality, it is promotive of equality if its 
object is to bring those who share a 
common characteristic under a class for 
differential treatment for sufficient and 
justifiable reasons. In this view, I have no 
doubt that the principle laid down in All 
India 
Station 
Masters 
and 
Assistant 
Station 
Masters 
Association v. General 
Manager, Central Railway [(1960): 
AIR 

SC 
384.]; S.G. 
Jaisinghani v. Union of India and State of 
J&K. v. Triloki Nath Khosa [(1974): 1974 SCC (L&S) 49: (1974).] has no application here.” 

87. It has been observed that a classification is reasonable if it 
includes all persons who are similarly situated with respect to 
the purpose of the law. It has been observed that the 
classification must be founded on some reasonable ground which 
distinguishes persons who are grouped together and the ground 
of distinction must have rational relation to the object sought to 
be achieved by the rule. It specifically observed that it is a 
mistake to assume a priori that there can be no classification 
within a class. He held that if there are intelligible differentia 
which separates a group within that class from the rest and that 
differentia have nexus with the object of classification, such a 
further classification within the class would be permissible in 
law. He observed that though in one sense classification brings 
about inequality it is promotive of equality if its object is to bring 
those who share a common characteristic under a class, for 
differential treatment for sufficient and justifiable reasons. 

88. V.R. Krishna Iyer, J. in his concurring judgment observed 
thus: 
“124. A word of sociological caution. In the 
light of experience, here and elsewhere, 
the danger of “reservation”, it seems to me, 
is threefold. Its benefits, by and large, are 
snatched away by the top creamy layer of 
the “backward” caste or class, thus 
keeping the weakest among the weak 
always weak and leaving the fortunate 
layers to consume the whole cake. 
Secondly, 
this 
claim 
is 
overplayed 
extravagantly in democracy by large and 
vocal 
groups 
whose 
burden 
of 
backwardness has been substantially 
lightened by the march of time and 
measures of better education and more 
opportunities of employment, but wish to 
wear the “weaker section” label as a means 
to score over their near-equals formally 
categorised as the upper brackets. Lastly, 
a lasting solution to the problem comes 
only 
from 
improvement 
of 
social 
environment, added educational facilities 
and cross-fertilisation of castes by inter-
caste and inter-class marriages sponsored 
as a massive State programme, and this 
solution is calculatedly hidden from view 
by the higher “backward” groups with a 
vested 
interest 
in 
the 
plums 
of 
backwardism. But social science research, 
not judicial impressionism, will alone tell 

the whole truth and a constant process of 
objective 
re-evaluation 
of 
progress 
registered by the “underdog” categories is 
essential 
lest 
a 
once 
deserving 
“reservation” should be degraded into 
“reverse discrimination”. Innovations in 
administrative strategy to help the really 
untouched, most backward classes also 
emerge from such socio-legal studies and 
audit exercises, if dispassionately made. 
In fact, research conducted by the A.N. 
Sinha Institute of Social Studies, Patna, 
has revealed a dual society among 
harijans, a tiny elite gobbling up the 
benefits and the darker layers sleeping 
distances 
away 
from 
the 
special 
concessions. For them, Articles 46 and 
335 remain a “noble romance” [ As Huxley 
called it in “Administrative Nihilism” 
(Methods and Results, Vol. 4 of Collected 
Essays).], the bonanza going to the 
“higher” harijans. I mention this in the 
present case because lower division clerks 
are likely to be drawn from the lowest 
levels of harijan humanity and promotion 
prospects 
being 
accelerated 
by 
withdrawing, 
for 
a 
time, 
“test” 
qualifications 
for 
this 
category 
may 
perhaps delve deeper. An equalitarian 
breakthrough in a hierarchical structure 
has to use many weapons and Rule 13-AA 
perhaps is one. 

125. The core conclusion I seek to 
emphasise is that every step needed to 
achieve 
in 
action 
actual, 
equal, 
partnership 
for 
the 
harijans, 
alone 
amounts 
to 
social 
justice 
— 
not 
enshrinement of great rights in Part III and 
good goals in Part IV. Otherwise, the 
solemn undertakings in Articles 14 to 16 
read with Articles 46 and 335 may be 
reduced to a “teasing illusion or promise of 
unreality”. A clear vision of the true 
intendment of these provisions demands a 
deep 
understanding 
of 
the 
Indian 
spiritual-secular idea that divinity dwells 
in all and that ancient environmental 
pollution and social placement, which the 
State must extirpate, account for the 
current socio-economic backwardness of 
the blacked-out human areas described 
euphemistically as scheduled castes and 
scheduled 
tribes. 
The 
roots of 
our 
constitutional ideas — at least some of 
them — can be traced to our ancient 
culture. The noble Upanishadic behest of 
collective acquisition of cultural strength 
(सह वीर्य करवावहे) is involved in and must 
evolve out of “equality”, if we are true to 
the subtle substance of our finer heritage.” 
 
89. His Lordship categorizes three-fold danger of reservation. 
According to him, firstly the benefits, by and large, are snatched 

away by the top creamy layer of the “backward” caste or class, 
thus keeping the weakest among the weak always weak and 
leaving the fortunate layers to consume the whole cake. 
Secondly, this claim of backwardness is overplayed extravagantly 
in democracy by large and vocal groups whose burden of 
backwardness has been substantially lightened by the march of 
time and measures of better education and more opportunities of 
employment. However, they wish to wear the “weaker section” 
label to score over their near-equals formally categorized as the 
upper brackets. Thirdly, according to him, a lasting solution to 
the problem would come only from improvement of social 
environment, added educational facilities and cross-fertilization 
of castes by inter-caste and inter-class marriages sponsored as a 
massive State program. 
90. His Lordship observed that every step needed to achieve in 
action actual, equal, partnership for the harijans, alone amounts 
to social justice. He observed that if this is not done, the solemn 

undertakings in Articles 14 to 16 read with Articles 46 and 335 
may be reduced to a “teasing illusion or promise of unreality”. 
91. His Lordship further observed thus: 
“136. The next hurdle in the appellant's 
path relates to Article 16(4). To my mind, 
this sub-article serves not as an exception 
but as an emphatic statement, one mode 
of reconciling the claims of backward 
people and the opportunity for free 
competition the forward sections are 
ordinarily entitled to. In the language of 
Subba 
Rao, 
J. 
(as 
he 
then 
was), 
in Devadasan [AIR 1964 SC 179: (1964), 700: (1965) 2 LLJ 560]. 
“The expression ‘nothing in this 
article’ is a legislative device to express 
its intention in a most emphatic way 
that the power conferred thereunder is 
not limited in any way by the main 
provision but falls outside it. It has not 
really carved out an exception, but has 
preserved a power untrammelled by the 
other provisions of the article.” 
 
True, it may be loosely said that Article 
16(4) 
is 
an 
exception 
but, 
closely 
examined, 
it 
is 
an 
illustration 
of 
constitutionally sanctified classification. 
Public services have been a fascination for 
Indians even in British days, being a 

symbol of State power and so a special 
article has been devoted to it. Article 16(4) 
need not be a saving clause but put in due 
to the over-anxiety of the draftsman to 
make matters clear beyond possibility of 
doubt 
(see, 
for 
instance, CIT v. Shaw 
Wallace & Co. [59 IA 206: AIR 1932 PC 
138] ). 
 
137. “Reservation” based on classification 
of backward and forward classes, without 
detriment to administrative standards (as 
this Court has underscored) is but an 
application of the principle of equality 
within a class and grouping based on a 
rational differentia, the object being 
advancement 
of 
backward 
classes 
consistently with efficiency. Article 16(1) 
and (4) are concordant. This Court has 
viewed Article 16(4)as an exception to 
Article 16(1). Does classification based on 
desperate backwardness render Article 
16(4) 
redundant? 
No. 
Reservation 
confers pro 
tanto monopoly, 
but 
classification grants under Article 16(1) 
ordinarily a lesser order of advantage. The 
former is more rigid, the latter more 
flexible, 
although 
they 
may 
overlap 
sometimes. 
Article 
16(4) 
covers 
all 
backward classes; but to earn the benefit 
of grouping under Article 16(1) based on 
Articles 46 and 335 as I have explained, 
the 
twin 
considerations 
of 
terrible 

backwardness of the type harijans endure 
and 
maintenance 
of 
administrative 
efficiency must be satisfied.” 
 
92. Referring to the observation of Subba Rao, J. in the case of 
T. Devadasan vs. Union of India9, Krishna Iyer, J. observed 
that Article 16(4) serves not as an exception but as an emphatic 
statement, one mode of reconciling the claims of backward people 
and the opportunity for free competition the forward sections are 
ordinarily entitled to. 
93. He observed that on a closer examination, it can be seen 
that clause (4) of Article 16 is an illustration of constitutionally 
sanctified classification. He observed that Article 16(4) need not 
be a saving clause but put in due to the over-anxiety of the 
draftsman to make matters clear beyond possibility of doubt. 
94. It is observed that the “Reservation” based on classification 
of backward and forward classes, without detriment to 
administrative standards is an application of the principle of 
 
9 (1964): AIR 1964 SC 55. equality within a class and grouping based on a rational 
differentia, the object being advancement of backward classes 
consistently with efficiency. His Lordship further observed that 
Article 16(4) covers all backward classes. He however states that 
for earning the benefit of grouping under Article 16(1) based on 
Articles 46 and 335, the twin considerations of terrible 
backwardness of the type harijans endure and maintenance of 
administrative efficiency must be satisfied. 
95. His Lordship also held that Articles 14 to 16 are a common 
code of guaranteed equality, the first laying down the broad 
doctrine, whereas the other two applying it to sensitive areas 
which are historically important and politically polemical in a 
climate of communalism and jobbery. 
96. Fazal Ali, J. in his concurring judgment observed thus: 
“178. The concept of equality or equal 
opportunity as contained in Article 16 
does not mean that same laws must be 
applicable to all persons under every 
circumstance. Indeed if this artificial 

interpretation is put on the scope and 
ambit of Article 16 it will lead to 
channelisation 
of 
legislation 
or 
polarisation of rules. Differences and 
disparities exist among men and things 
and they cannot be treated alike by the 
application of the same laws but the law 
has to come to terms with life and must be 
able to recognise the genuine differences 
and disparities that exist in human 
nature. Legislature has also to enact 
legislation to meet specific ends by making 
a reasonable and rational classification. 
In Morey v. Doud [354 US 457, 473] it was 
so aptly observed: 
“To recognise marked differences 
that exist in fact is living law; to 
disregard practical differences and 
concentrate on some abstract identities 
is lifeless logic.” 
 
179. Coming now to Article 16 it may be 
analysed into three separate categories so 
far as the facts of the present case are 
concerned: 
Category I—clause (1) of Article 16 
Category II—clause (2) of Article 16. 
Category Ill—clause (4) of Article 16. 

180. Clause (1) of Article 16 clearly 
provides for equality of opportunity to all 
citizens in the services under the State. It 
is important to note that the Constitution 
uses the words “equality of opportunity 
for all citizens”. This inherently implies 
that the opportunity must be given not 
only to a particular section of the society 
or a particular class of citizens who may 
be advanced or otherwise more affluent 
but to all classes of citizens. This, 
therefore, can be achieved by making a 
reasonable classification so that every 
class of citizens is duly represented in 
services which will enable equality of 
opportunity 
to 
all 
citizens. 
The 
classification, 
however, 
must 
be 
a 
reasonable one and must fulfil the 
following conditions: 
(i) It must have a rational basis; 
(ii) it must have a close nexus with 
the object sought to be achieved; 
(iii) it should not select any person for 
hostile discrimination at the cost of 
others.” 
 
97. His Lordship observed that differences and disparities exist 
among men and things, and they cannot be treated alike by the 
application of the same laws. He observed that the law must 

come to terms with life and must be able to recognize the genuine 
differences and disparities that exist in human nature. He 
observed that the Legislature has also to enact legislation to meet 
specific ends by making a reasonable and rational classification. 
98. It has been observed that clause (1) of Article 16 clearly 
provides for equality of opportunity to all citizens in the services 
under the State. His Lordship emphasized that the words 
“equality of opportunity for all citizens” used in the Constitution 
imply that the opportunity must be given not only to a particular 
section of the society or a particular class of citizens who may be 
advanced or otherwise more affluent but to all classes of citizens. 
According to the Learned Judge, this can be achieved by making 
a reasonable classification so that every class of citizens is duly 
represented in services which will enable equality of opportunity 
to all citizens. He however culls out three conditions, viz., (i) it 
must have a rational basis; (ii) it must have a close nexus with 

the object sought to be achieved; and (iii) it should not select any 
person for hostile discrimination at the cost of others. 
99. Echoing the sentiments of the other Learned Judges, by 
holding that Article 16(4) is not a proviso to Article 16(1), the 
Learned Judge observed thus: 
“187. For these reasons, therefore, I 
respectfully agree with the observations of 
Subba Rao, J., as he then was, in T. 
Devadasan v. Union of India [AIR 1964 SC 
179: (1964): (1965) 2 LLJ 560] 
where he observed: 
“That is why the makers of the 
Constitution introduced clause (4) in 
Article 16. The expression ‘nothing in 
this article’ is a legislative device to 
express its intention in a most emphatic 
way 
that 
the 
power 
conferred 
thereunder is not limited in any way by 
the main provision but falls outside it. 
It has not really carved out an 
exception, but has preserved a power 
untrammelled by the other provisions of 
the article.” 
My view that Article 16(4) is not a proviso 
to Article 16(1) but that this clause covers 
the whole field of Article 16 is amply 
supported by the decision of this Court 
in General 
Manager, 
Southern 

Railway v. Ranga-chari where 
it 
was 
observed: (p. 599) 
“It is common ground that Article 
16(4) does not cover the entire field 
covered by Article 16(1) and (2). Some of 
the matters relating to employment in 
respect of which equality of opportunity 
has been guaranteed by Article 16(1) 
and (2) do not fall within the mischief of 
non-obstantive clause in Article 16(4).” 
 
C. 
Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh (Railway) 
vs. Union of India 
 
100. Next is the case of Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karamchari 
Sangh (Railway) represented by its Assistant General 
Secretary on behalf of the Association vs. Union of India and 
others10, where a bench of 3 Learned Judges of this Court was 
considering the policy directives issued by the Railway Board 
introducing reservation in cases of selection as well as non-
selection posts and other related issues regarding affirmative 
action. 
 
10 (1981). 

101. Krishna Iyer, J. in paragraph 12, observed thus: 
“12. Granville Austin [ Granville Austin: 
The Indian Constitution — Cornerstone of 
a Nation] quotes profusely from the 
Constituent 
Assembly proceedings 
to 
prove the goal of the Indian Constitution 
to be social revolution. Radhakrishnan, 
representing the broad consensus, said 
that: [ Ibid, p. 27] 
“India must have a ‘socio-economic 
revolution’ designed not only to bring 
about the real satisfaction of the 
fundamental needs of the common 
man, but to go much deeper and bring 
about ‘a fundamental change in the 
structure of Indian society’.” 
 
102. The 
Learned 
Judge 
refers 
to 
the 
speech 
of 
Dr. 
Radhakrishnan, representing the broad consensus, wherein he 
said that India must have a ‘socio-economic revolution’ designed 
not only to bring about the real satisfaction of the fundamental 
needs of the common man, but to go much deeper and bring 
about ‘a fundamental change in the structure of Indian society’. 
103. Explaining the inter-relation between Articles 16(1) and 
16(4), the Learned Judge observed thus: 

“21. The preamble which promises justice, 
liberty 
and 
equality 
of 
status 
and 
opportunity within the framework of 
secular, socialist republic projects a 
holistic perspective. Article 16 which 
guarantees equal opportunity for all 
citizens in matters of State service 
inherently implies equalisation as a 
process towards equality but also hastens 
to harmonize the realistic need to jack up 
“depressed” classes to overcome initial 
handicaps and join the national race 
towards progress on an equal footing and 
devotes Article 16(4) for this specific 
purpose. In a given situation of large social 
categories being submerged for long, the 
guarantee of equality with the rest is myth, 
not reality, unless it is combined with 
affirmative State action for equalisation 
geared to promotion of eventual equality. 
Article 16(4) is not a jarring note but 
auxiliary to fair fulfilment of Article 16(1). 
The prescription of Article 16(1) needs, in 
the living conditions of India, the concrete 
sanction of Article 16(4) so that those 
wallowing in the social quagmire are 
enabled to rise to levels of equality with the 
rest and march together with their 
brethren whom history had not so harshly 
hamstrung. To bury this truth is to 

sloganise Article 16(1) and sacrifice the 
facts of life. 
 
22. This is not mere harmonious statutory 
construction of Article 16(1) and (4) but 
insightful perception of our constitutional 
culture, reflecting the current of resurgent 
India bent on making, out of a sick and 
stratified society of inequality and poverty, 
a brave new Bharat. If freedom, justice 
and equal opportunity to unfold one's own 
personality 
belong 
alike 
to bhangi and brahmin, prince 
and 
pauper, if the panchama proletariat is 
to feel the social transformation Article 
16(4) promises, the State must apply 
equalising techniques which will enlarge 
their 
opportunities 
and 
thereby 
progressively diminish the need for props. 
The success of State action under Article 
16(4) consists in the speed with which 
result-oriented reservation withers away 
as 
no 
longer a need, not in the 
everwidening and everlasting operation of 
an exception [Article 16(4)] as if it were a 
super-fundamental 
right 
to 
continue 
backward all the time. To lend immortality 
to the reservation policy is to defeat its 
raison d'etre, to politicise this provision for 
communal support and Party ends is to 
subvert the solemn undertaking of Article 

16(1), 
to 
casteify 
“reservation” 
even 
beyond 
the 
dismal 
groups 
of 
backwardmost 
people, 
euphemistically 
described as SC & ST, is to run a grave 
constitutional risk. Caste, ipso facto, is 
not class in a secular State. 
 
23. The authentic voice of our culture, 
voiced by all the great builders of modern 
India, stood for abolition of the hardships 
of the pariah, the mlecha, the bonded 
labour, the hungry, hard-working half-
slave, whose liberation was integral to our 
independence. 
To 
interpret 
the 
Constitution rightly we must understand 
the people for whom it is made — the finer 
ethos, the frustrations, the aspirations, 
the parameters set by the Constitution for 
the 
principled 
solution 
of 
social 
disabilities. This synthesis of ends and 
means, of life's maladies and law's 
remedies is a part of the know-how of 
constitutional interpretation if alienation 
from the people were not to afflict the 
justicing process: [ J. Landis: Note on 
Statutory Interpretation, 43 Harv L Rev 
886, 891 (1930)] 
A statute rarely stands alone. Back of 
Minerva was the brain of Jove, and 

behind Venus was the spume of the 
ocean.” 
 
104. The Learned Judge observed that the guarantee of equal 
opportunity provided under Article 16 for all citizens in matters 
of State service inherently implies equalization as a process 
towards equality. However, he also emphasizes the need to 
harmonize the realistic need to jack up “depressed” classes to 
overcome initial handicaps and join the national race towards 
progress on an equal footing. He states that Article 16(4) has 
been devoted for this very specific purpose. He observed that the 
guarantee of equality to the large social categories being 
submerged for long, with the rest, would be myth and not reality, 
unless it is combined with affirmative State action for 
equalization geared to promotion of eventual equality. He 
observed that Article 16(4) is not a jarring note but auxiliary to 
fair fulfilment of Article 16(1). He observed that the prescription 
of Article 16(1) needs the concrete sanction of Article 16(4) so that 

those wallowing in the social quagmire are enabled to rise to 
levels of equality with the rest and march together with their 
brethren whom history had not so harshly hamstrung. 
105. The Learned Judge observed that this is not mere 
harmonious statutory construction of Article 16(1) and (4) but an 
insightful perception of our constitutional culture. He 
emphasized that the State must apply equalizing techniques 
which will enlarge their opportunities and thereby progressively 
diminish the need for props. He further emphasized that to 
casteify “reservation” even beyond the dismal groups of 
backwardmost people, euphemistically described as SC & ST, is 
to run a grave constitutional risk. He further emphasized that to 
interpret the Constitution rightly we must understand the people 
for whom it is made. He observed that the synthesis of ends and 
means, of life's maladies and law's remedies is a part of the know-
how of constitutional interpretation. 

106. Krishna Iyer, J. further observed thus: 
“34. Special 
provisions 
for 
depressed 
classes and even other castes have a pre-
Constitution 
history. 
After 
the 
Constitution was enacted the legality of 
old rules based on caste became moot and 
the Central Government revised its policy. 
The post-Constitution reincarnation of the 
communal G.O. concentrated not on caste 
orientation but on elimination of socio-
economic suppression and the diverse 
ways to achieve this objective. xxx xxx xxx 
36. Articles 14 to 16 form a code by 
themselves and embody the distilled 
essence of the Constitution's casteless and 
classless egalitarianism. Nevertheless, our 
founding fathers were realists, and so did 
not declare the proposition of equality in 
its bald universality but subjected it to 
certain 
special 
provisions, 
not 
contradicting the soul of equality, but 
adapting that never-changing principle to 
the ever-changing social milieu. That is 
how Articles 15(4) and 16(4) have to be 
read together with Articles 15(1) and 16(1). 
The first sub-article speaks of equality and 
the 
second 
sub-article 
amplifies 
its 
content by expressly interdicting caste as 
a ground of discrimination. Article 16(4) 

imparts to the seemingly static equality 
embedded in Article 16(1) a dynamic 
quality 
by 
importing 
equalisation 
strategies 
geared 
to 
the 
eventual 
achievement of equality as permissible 
State action, viewed as an amplification of 
Article 16(1) or as an exception to it. The 
same observation will hold good for the 
sub-articles of Article 15. Thus we have a 
constitutional fundamental guarantee in 
Articles 14 to 16; but it is a notorious fact 
of our cultural heritage that the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes have 
been in unfree India nearly dehumanised, 
and a facet of the struggle for Freedom has 
been the restoration of full personhood to 
them together with the right to share in 
the social and economic development of 
the country. Article 46 is a Directive 
Principle contained in Part IV. Every 
Directive Principle is fundamental in the 
governance of the country and it shall be 
the duty of the State to apply that principle 
in making laws. Article 46, in emphatic 
terms, obligates the State “to promote with 
special care the educational and economic 
interests of the weaker sections of the 
people, 
and, 
in 
particular, 
of 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes, and shall protect them from social 
injustice and all forms of exploitation”. 

Reading Article 46 together with Article 
16(4) 
the 
luscent 
intent 
of 
the 
Constitution-framers emerges that the 
exploited lot of the harijan-girijan groups 
in the past shall be extirpated with special 
care by the State. The inference is obvious 
that administrative participation by SC & 
ST shall be promoted with special care by 
the State. Of course, reservations under 
Article 16(4) and promotional strategies 
envisaged by Article 46 may be important 
but shall not run berserk and imperil 
administrative efficiency in the name of 
concessions to backward classes. Article 
335 enters a caveat in this behalf: 
“335. The claims of the members of 
the 
Scheduled 
Castes 
and 
the 
Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into 
consideration, consistently with the 
maintenance 
of 
efficiency 
of 
administration, 
in 
the 
making 
of 
appointments to services and posts in 
connection with the affairs of the Union 
or of a State.” 
The positive accent of this article is that 
the claims of SC & ST to equalisation of 
representation in services under the State, 
having regard to their sunken social 
status and impotence in the power system, 
shall be taken into consideration. The 
negative element, which is part of the 

article, is that measures taken by the 
State, pursuant to the mandate of Articles 
16(4), 46 and 335, shall be consistent with 
and not subversive of “the maintenance of 
efficiency of administration”. xxx xxx xxx 
39. Article 341 makes it clear that a 
“scheduled Caste” need not be a “caste” in 
the conventional sense and, therefore, 
may not be a caste within the meaning of 
Article 15(2) or 16(2). Scheduled Castes 
become such only if the President specifies 
any 
castes, 
races 
or 
tribes 
or parts or groups within castes, races or 
tribes for the purpose of the Constitution. 
So, a group or a section of a group, which 
need not be a caste and may even be a 
hotchpotch of many castes or tribes or 
even races, may still be a Scheduled Caste 
under Article 341. Likewise, races or tribal 
communities or parts thereof or part or 
parts of groups within them may still be 
Scheduled Tribes (Article 342) for the 
purpose of the Constitution. Under this 
definition, one group in a caste may be a 
Scheduled Caste and another from the 
same caste may not be. It is the socio-
economic 
backwardness 
of 
a 
social 
bracket, not mere birth in a caste, that is 
decisive. Conceptual errors creep in when 

traditional 
obsessions 
obfuscate 
the 
vision.” 
 
107. The Learned Judge refers to the pre-Constitution history 
wherein special provisions for depressed classes and even other 
castes were made. He stated that after the Constitution was 
enacted the legality of old rules based on caste became moot and 
the Central Government revised its policy. He stated that the 
post-Constitution 
reincarnation 
of 
the 
communal 
G.O. concentrated not on caste orientation but on elimination of socio-
economic suppression and the diverse ways to achieve this 
objective. 
108. He then stated that Articles 14 to 16 form a code by 
themselves and embody the distilled essence of the Constitution's 
casteless and classless egalitarianism. He then considered the 
interplay between Articles 15(4) and 16(4) on the one hand and 
Articles 15(1) and 16(1) on the other hand. He thereafter refers 
to the notorious fact of our cultural heritage that the Scheduled 

Castes and the Scheduled Tribes have been in unfree India nearly 
dehumanized, and a facet of the struggle for freedom has been 
the restoration of full personhood to them together with the right 
to share in the social and economic development of the country. 
He thereafter refers to Article 46 and the importance of the said 
Directive Principle in the governance of the country and observes 
that it shall be the duty of the State to apply that principle in 
making laws. He stated that reading Article 46 together with 
Article 16(4) expresses the intention of the Constitution-framers 
that the exploitation of the harijan-girijan groups in the past shall 
be extirpated with special care by the State. For completeness, 
he then refers to Article 335 to state that measures taken by the 
State, pursuant to the mandate of Articles 16(4), 46 and 335, 
shall be consistent with and not subversive of “the maintenance 
of efficiency of administration”. 
109. Krishna Iyer, J. then observed that Article 341 makes it 
clear that a “Scheduled Caste” need not be a “caste” in the 

conventional sense and, therefore, may not be a caste within the 
meaning of Article 15(2) or 16(2). He states that Scheduled 
Castes become such only if the President specifies any castes, 
races or tribes or parts or groups within castes, races or tribes for 
the purpose of the Constitution. He observed that under the 
definition, one group in a caste may be a Scheduled Caste and 
another from the same caste may not be and that it is the socio-
economic backwardness of a social bracket, not mere birth in a 
caste, that is decisive. 
110. In paragraph 73, he refers to Dr. Ambedkar’s address to the 
Constituent Assembly, which has already been extracted by us 
in the beginning of the judgment. Paragraph 73 is reproduced 
hereunder: 
“73. A 
luminous 
preface 
to 
the 
constitutional values nullified by social 
realities is found in Dr Ambedkar's 
address to the Constituent Assembly 
earlier extracted, which draws poignant 
attention to the life of contradictions 
between the explosive social and economic 

inequalities and the processes of political 
democracy. “How long shall we continue to 
live this life of contradictions? How long 
shall we continue to deny equality in our 
social and economic life?” was the 
interrogation before the framers of the 
Constitution and they wanted to enforce 
the principle of “one man, one value”. This 
perspective must inform the code of 
equality contained in Articles 14 to 16. 
Equality being a dynamic concept with 
flexible import this Court has read into 
Articles 14 to 16 the pragmatic doctrine of 
classification and equal treatment to all 
who fall within each class. But care must 
be taken to see that classification is not 
pushed to such an extreme point as to 
make the fundamental right to equality 
cave in and collapse (see observations 
in Triloki 
Nath 
Khosa v. State 
of 
J&K [(1974): 1974 SCC (L&S) 
49: (1974) ]. Ray, C.J., 
in Kerala v. Thomas [(1976), 
331, 332, 333, 334: 1976 SCC (L&S) 227, 
248 249, 250, 251: (1976), 
926-29] epitomised the position in a few 
passages: [SCC pp. 331, 332, 333 & 334: 
SCC (L&S) pp. 248, 249, 250 & 251, paras 
21, 24, 27, 28, 30 & 31 
“Articles 14, 15 and 16 from part of a 
string of constitutional guaranteed 
rights. These rights supplement each 
other. Article 16 which ensures to all 
citizens equality of opportunity in 

matters relating to employment is an 
incident 
of 
guarantee 
of 
equality 
contained in Article 14. Article 16(1) 
gives effect to Article 14. Both Articles 

and 
16(1) 
permit 
reasonable 
classification having a nexus to be the 
object to be achieved. 
* * * 
Discrimination is the essence of 
classification... 
Classification 
is, 
therefore, to be founded on substantial 
differences which distinguish persons 
grouped together from those left out of 
the 
groups 
and 
such 
differential 
attributes must bear a just and rational 
relation to the object sought to be 
achieved. 
* * * 
There is no denial of equality of 
opportunity unless the person who 
complains of discrimination is equally 
situated with the person or persons who 
are alleged to have been favoured. 
Article 16(1) does not bar a reasonable 
classification 
of 
employees 
or 
reasonable tests for their selection 
(State 
of 
Mysore v. V.P. 
Narasing 
Rao [AIR 1968 SC 349: (1968) ] ). 
This equality of opportunity need not 
be confused with absolute equality... 
Under 
Article 
16(1) 
equality 
of 
opportunity 
of 
employment 
means 

equality as between members of the 
same class of employees and not 
equality between members of separate, 
independent class... 
The rule of parity is the equal 
treatment 
of 
equals 
in 
equal 
circumstances. 
The 
rule 
of 
differentiation 
is 
enacting 
laws 
differentiating 
between 
different 
persons 
or 
things 
in 
different 
circumstances. 
The 
circumstances 
which govern one set of persons or 
objects may not necessarily be the same 
as governing another set of persons or 
objects so that the question of unequal 
treatment does not really arise between 
persons 
governed 
by 
different 
conditions 
and 
different 
sets 
of 
circumstances... A classification in 
order to be constitutional must rest 
upon distinctions that are substantial 
and not merely illusory. The test is 
whether it has a reasonable basis free 
from 
artificiality 
and 
arbitrariness 
embracing 
all 
and 
omitting 
none 
naturally falling into that category.” 
The learned Chief Justice relied upon 
earlier decisions to substantiate this 
proposition. In Triloki Nath Khosa v. State 
of J&K [(1976), 337: 1976 SCC 
(L&S) 227, 254: (1976), 932] 
this Court had held that the State may 
make rules guided by realities just as the 

legislature “is free to recognise degrees of 
harm and it may confine its restrictions to 
those classes of cases where the need is 
deemed to be the clearest”. Thus we arrive 
at the constitutional truism that the State 
may classify, based upon substantial 
differentia, groups or classes and this 
process does not necessarily spell violation 
of Articles 14 to 16.” 
 
111. After referring to Dr. Ambedkar’s speech, the Learned Judge 
observed that equality being a dynamic concept with flexible 
import, this Court has read into Articles 14 to 16 the pragmatic 
doctrine of classification and equal treatment to all who fall 
within each class. He, however, warns that classification should 
not be pushed to such an extreme point as to make the 
fundamental right to equality cave in and collapse. 
112. The Learned Judge further observed as under: 
“76. Proceeding 
on 
this 
footing, 
the 
fundamental 
right 
of 
equality 
of 
opportunity has to be read as justifying 
the categorisation of SCs & STs separately 
for 
the 
purpose 
of 
“adequate 
representation” in the services under the 
State. 
The 
object 
is 
constitutionally 

sanctioned in terms, as Articles 16 (4) and 
46 specificate. The classification is just 
and reasonable. We may, however, have to 
test whether the means used to reach the 
end are reasonable and do not outrun the 
purposes of the classification. Thus the 
scope of the case is narrowed down.” 
 
113. His Lordship observed that the fundamental right of 
equality of opportunity must be read as justifying the 
categorization of SCs & STs separately for the purpose of 
“adequate representation” in the services under the State. He 
observed that the object is constitutionally sanctioned in terms, 
as Articles 16 (4) and 46 specificate. 
114. While rejecting the argument that reservation in favour of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes could affect the 
efficiency in the administration, the Learned Judge observed 
thus: 
“94. It is fashionable to say — and there 
is, perhaps, some truth in it — that from 
generation to generation there is a 
deterioration in efficiency in all walks of 
life from politics to pedagogy to officialdom 

and other professions. Nevertheless, the 
world has been going forward and only 
parties whose personal interest is affected 
forecast a doom on account of progressive 
deficiency in efficiency. We are not 
impressed with the misfortune predicted 
about 
governmental 
personnel 
being 
manned by morons merely because a 
sprinkling of harijans/girijans happen to 
find their way into the services. Their 
apathy and backwardness are such that in 
spite of these favourable provisions, the 
unfortunates have neither the awareness 
nor qualified members to take their 
rightful place in the administration of the 
country. The malady of modern India lies 
elsewhere, and the merit-mongers are 
greater risks in many respects than the 
naive tribals and the slightly better off low 
castes. Nor does the specious plea that 
because a few harijans are better off, 
therefore, the bulk at the bottom 
deserves no jack-up provisions merit 
scrutiny. A swallow does not make a 
summer. Maybe, the State may, when 
social conditions warrant, justifiably 
restrict harijan benefits to the harijans 
among the harijans and forbid the 
higher harijans from robbing the 
lowlier brethren.” 
[emphasis supplied] 

115. The Learned Judge rejected the contention that merely 
because a sprinkling of harijans/girijans happen to find their 
way into the services, the efficiency of the administration of the 
country would be affected. On the contrary, he states that the 
merit-mongers are greater risks in many respects than the naive 
tribals and the slightly better off low castes. 
116. It is pertinent to note the observations made by the Learned 
Judge towards the end of paragraph 94 and in paragraph 98 are 
most important for the purposes of the present reference. 
Paragraph 98 reads thus: 
“98. The argument is that there are rich 
and influential harijans who rob all the 
privileges leaving the serf-level sufferers as 
suppressed as ever. The Administration 
may well innovate and classify to weed out 
the creamy layer of SCs/STs but the court 
cannot force the State in that behalf.” 
 
117. Chinnappa Reddy, J. in his separate concurring judgment 
observed thus: 

“123. Because fundamental rights are 
justiciable and directive principles are not, 
it was assumed, in the beginning, that 
fundamental 
rights 
held 
a 
superior 
position under the Constitution than the 
directive principles, and that the latter 
were only of secondary importance as 
compared with the Fundamental Rights. 
That way of thinking is of the past and has 
become obsolete. It is now universally 
recognised that the difference between the 
Fundamental 
rights 
and 
directive 
principles lies in this that Fundamental 
rights are primarily aimed at assuring 
political freedom to the citizens by 
protecting them against excessive State 
action while the directive principles are 
aimed at securing social and economic 
freedoms by appropriate State action. The 
Fundamental rights are intended to foster 
the ideal of a political democracy and to 
prevent the establishment of authoritarian 
rule but they are of no value unless they 
can be enforced by resort to courts. So 
they are made justiciable. But, it is also 
evident that notwithstanding their great 
importance, 
the 
directive 
principles 
cannot in the very nature of things be 
enforced in a court of law. It is 
unimaginable that any court can compel a 
legislature to make a law. If the court can 

compel Parliament to make laws then 
parliamentary democracy would soon be 
reduced to an oligarchy of Judges. It is in 
that sense that the Constitution says that 
the directive principles shall not be 
enforceable by courts. It does not mean 
that directive principles are less important 
than Fundamental rights or that they are 
not binding on the various organs of the 
State. Article 37 of the Constitution 
emphatically 
states 
that 
directive 
principles are nevertheless fundamental 
in the governance of the country and it 
shall be the duty of the State to apply 
these principles in making laws. It follows 
that it becomes the duty of the court to 
apply 
the 
directive 
principles 
in 
interpreting the Constitution and the laws. 
The directive principles should serve the 
courts as 
a code of interpretation. 
Fundamental rights should thus be 
interpreted in the light of the directive 
principles and the latter should, whenever 
and wherever possible, be read into the 
former. Every law attacked on the ground 
of infringement of a Fundamental Right 
should, among other considerations, be 
examined to find out if the law does not 
advance one or other of the directive 
principles or if it is not in discharge of 
some of the undoubted obligations of the 

State, constitutional or otherwise, towards 
its citizens or sections of its citizens, 
flowing out of the preamble, the directive 
principles and other provisions of the 
Constitution. 
 
124. So, we have it that the constitutional 
goal is the establishment of a socialist 
democracy in which Justice, economic, 
social and political is secure and all men 
are equal and have equal opportunity. 
Inequality, whether of status, facility or 
opportunity, is to end, privilege is to cease 
and 
exploitation 
is 
to 
go. 
The 
underprivileged, the deprived and the 
exploited 
are 
to 
be 
protected 
and 
nourished so as to take their place in an 
egalitarian society. State action is to be 
towards those ends. It is in this context 
that Article 16 has to be interpreted when 
State action is questioned as contravening 
Article 16.” 
 
118. The Learned Judge discussed the interplay between the 
Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles. He observed 
that the Fundamental Rights are primarily aimed at assuring 
political freedom to the citizens by protecting them against 

excessive State action while the Directive Principles are aimed at 
securing social and economic freedoms by appropriate State 
action. The Learned Judge observed that merely because the 
Directive Principles are not enforceable by Courts, it does not 
mean that Directive Principles are less important than 
Fundamental rights or that they are not binding on the various 
organs of the State. Referring to Article 37 of the Constitution, 
the Learned Judge states that the Directive Principles are 
nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country, and 
it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in 
making laws. He held that it becomes the duty of the court to 
apply the directive principles in interpreting the Constitution and 
the laws; that the directive principles should serve the courts as 
a code of interpretation. He held that the Fundamental rights 
should thus be interpreted in the light of the directive principles 
and the latter should, whenever and wherever possible, be read 
into the former. 

119. He 
observed 
that 
the 
constitutional 
goal 
is 
the 
establishment of a socialist democracy in which Justice, 
economic, social and political is to secure and all men are equal 
and have equal opportunity. He further observed that the 
inequality, whether of status, facility or opportunity, is to end, 
privilege is to cease, and exploitation is to go. He further observed 
that the underprivileged, the deprived and the exploited are to be 
protected and nourished to take their place in an egalitarian 
society. 
120. Thereafter, the Learned Judge then while referring to 
interplay between Article 16(1) and Article 16(4) observed thus: 
“125. Let us now take a look at Article 
16(1) and Article 16(4). Article 16(1) 
guarantees equality of opportunity for all 
citizens in matters relating to employment 
or appointment to any office under the 
State. To the class of citizens who are 
economically and socially backward this 
guarantee will be no more than mere 
wishful thinking, and mere “vanity... wind 
and confusion”, if it is not translated into 
reality by necessary State action to protect 

and nurture such class of citizens so as to 
enable them to shake off the heart-
crushing burden of a thousand years' 
deprivation from their shoulders and to 
claim a fair proportion of participation in 
the administration. Reservation of posts 
and all other measures designed to 
promote the participation of the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the 
Public Services at all levels are in our 
opinion necessary consequences flowing 
from the Fundamental Right guaranteed 
by Article 16(1). This very idea is 
emphasised further by Article 16(4). 
Article 16(4) is not in the nature of an 
exception to Article 16(1). It is a facet of 
Article 16(1) which fosters and furthers 
the idea of equality of opportunity with 
special reference to an underprivileged 
and deprived class of citizens to whom 
egalite de droit (formal or legal equality) is 
not egalite de fait (practical or factual 
equality). It is illustrative of what the State 
must do to wipe out the distinction 
between egalite de droit and egalite de fait. 
It recognises that the right to equality of 
opportunity includes the right of the 
underprivileged to conditions comparable 
to or compensatory of those enjoyed by the 
privileged. Equality of opportunity must be 
such as to yield “Equality of Results” and 
not that which simply enables people, 
socially and economically better placed, to 
win against the less fortunate, even when 

the 
competition 
is 
itself 
otherwise 
equitable. John Rawls in A Theory Of 
Justice demands the priority of equality in 
a distributive sense and the setting up of 
the social system “so that no one gains or 
loses from his arbitrary place in the 
distribution of natural assets or his own 
initial position in society without giving or 
receiving compensatory advantages in 
return”. His basic principle of social 
justice is: “All social primary goods — 
liberty and opportunity, income and 
wealth, and the bases of self-respect — are 
to be distributed equally unless an 
unequal distribution of any or all these 
goods is to the advantage of the least 
favoured.” One of the essential elements of 
his conception of social justice is what he 
calls the principle of redress: “This is the 
principle that undeserved inequalities call 
for redress; and since inequalities of birth 
and natural endowment are undeserved, 
these inequalities are somehow to be 
compensated for.” Society must, therefore, 
treat more favourably those with fewer 
native assets and those born into less 
favourable 
social 
positions. 
If 
the 
statement that “Equality of Opportunity 
must yield Equality of Results” and if the 
fulfilment of Article 16(1) in Article 16(4) 
ever needed a philosophical foundation it 
is furnished by Rawls' theory of justice and 
the redress Principle.” 

121. The Learned Judge observed that reading Article 16(1) and 
Article 16(4) together would reveal that they recognize that the 
right to equality of opportunity includes the right of the 
underprivileged to conditions comparable to or compensatory of 
those enjoyed by the privileged. It is observed that the equality 
of opportunity must be such as to yield “Equality of Results” and 
not that which simply enables people, socially and economically 
better placed, to win against the less fortunate, even when the 
competition is itself otherwise equitable. 
122. The Learned Judge thereafter refers to “A Theory of Justice” 
by John Rawls. He also refers to the ‘Principle of Redress’ 
according to which underserved inequalities call for redress; and 
since inequalities of birth and natural endowment are 
undeserved, these inequalities are somehow to be compensated 
for. 

D. 
K.C. Vasanth Kumar vs. State of Karnataka 
 
123. The next judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court 
that requires consideration is the case of K.C. Vasanth Kumar 
and another vs. State of Karnataka11. In the said case, the 
Court was invited not so much to deliver judgment but to express 
its opinion on the issue of reservations in the context of Articles 
15(4) and 16(4), which would serve as a guideline to the 
Commission which the Government of Karnataka had proposed 
to appoint, for examining the question of affording better 
employment and educational opportunities to Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes. Each of the 5 
Learned Judges comprising the Constitution Bench of this Court 
rendered their separate opinions. 
124. Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J. laid down certain propositions. It 
will be relevant to refer to paragraph 2, which reads thus: 
“2. I would state my opinion in the shape 
of the following propositions: 
 
11 1985 (Supp) SCC 714. 

The 
reservation 
in 
favour 
of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes must continue as at present, 
there is, without the application of a 
means test, for a further period not 
exceeding 
fifteen 
years. 
Another 
fifteen years will make it fifty years 
after the advent of the Constitution, 
a period reasonably long for the 
upper crust of the oppressed classes 
to overcome the baneful effects of 
social 
oppression, 
isolation 
and 
humiliation. 
 
(2) The means test, that is to say, the 
test 
of 
economic 
backwardness 
ought to be made applicable even to 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes after the period mentioned in 
(1) above. It is essential that the 
privileged 
section 
of 
the 
underprivileged society should not be 
permitted to monopolise preferential 
benefits for an indefinite period of 
time. 
 
(3) Insofar as the other backward 
classes are concerned, two tests 
should be conjunctively applied for 
identifying them for the purpose of 
reservations in employment and 
education: One, that they should be 

comparable to the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes in the matter 
of their backwardness; and two, that 
they should satisfy the means test 
such as a State Government may lay 
down in the context of prevailing 
economic conditions. 
 
(4) The policy of reservations in 
employment, 
education 
and 
legislative institutions should be 
reviewed every five years or so. That 
will at once afford an opportunity (i) 
to the State to rectify distortions 
 particular facets of the 
reservation policy and (ii) to the 
people, both backward and non-
backward, to ventilate their views in 
a public debate on the practical 
impact of the policy of reservations.” 
 
125. The Learned C.J. observed that for a further period of 15 
years, the reservation in favour of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes must continue. He further observed that the 
means test, i.e., the test of economic backwardness ought to be 
made applicable even to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes after the period of 15 years, as mentioned in clause (1). 

Insofar as the Other Backward Classes are concerned, the 
Learned C.J. observed that the twin tests should be applied; one, 
that they should be comparable to the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes in the matter of their backwardness; and two, 
that they should satisfy the means test such as a State 
Government may lay down in the context of prevailing economic 
conditions. It is also observed that the policy of reservations in 
employment, education and legislative institutions should be 
reviewed every 5 years or so. 
126. It will also be appropriate to refer to the observations of D.A. 
Desai, J. made in paragraphs 30 and 31, which read thus: 
“30. Let 
me 
conclude. 
If 
economic 
criterion for compensatory discrimination 
or affirmative action is accepted, it would 
strike at the root cause of social and 
educational 
backwardness, 
and 
simultaneously take a vital step in the 
direction of destruction of caste structure 
which in turn would advance the secular 
character of the Nation. This approach 
seeks to translate into reality the twin 

constitutional goals: one, to strike at the 
perpetuation of the caste stratification of 
the Indian Society so as to arrest 
regressive movement and to take a firm 
step towards establishing a casteless 
society; and two, to progressively eliminate 
poverty by giving an opportunity to the 
disadvantaged sections of the society to 
raise their position and be part of the 
mainstream 
of 
life 
which 
means 
eradication of poverty. 
 
31. Let me make abundantly clear that 
this 
approach 
does 
not 
deal 
with 
reservation in favour of Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes. Thousands of years 
of discrimination and exploitation cannot 
be wiped out in one generation. But even 
here economic criterion is worth applying 
byrefusing preferred treatment to those 
amongst them who have already benefited 
by it and improved their position. And 
finally reservation must have a time span 
otherwise concessions tend to become 
vested interests. This is not a judgment in 
a lis in an adversary system. When the 
arguments concluded, a statement was 
made that the Government of State of 
Karnataka would appoint a Commission to 
determine constitutionally sound and 
nationally 
acceptable 
criteria 
for 

identifying 
socially 
and 
educationally 
backward classes of citizens for whose 
benefit the State action would be taken. 
This does not purport to be an exhaustive 
essay on guide lines but may point to some 
extent, the direction in which the proposed 
Commission should move.” 
 
127. It could thus be seen that the Learned Judge supports 
applying the economic criterion for the purpose of compensatory 
discrimination or affirmative action. According to the Learned 
Judge, it would strike at the root cause of social and educational 
backwardness. He further states that simultaneously it would 
be a vital step in the direction of destruction of caste structure 
which in turn would advance the secular character of the Nation. 
128. Though he cautioned that such an approach does not deal 
with reservation in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes, however, even in their cases, economic criterion is worth 
applying by refusing preferred treatment to those amongst them 
who have already benefited by it and improved their position. 

129. Rejecting the contention that the reservation is anti-
imperialist, Chinnappa Reddy, J. observed thus: 
“35. One of the results of the superior, 
elitist approach is that the question of 
reservation is invariably viewed as the 
conflict between the meritarian principle 
and the compensatory principle. No, it is 
not so. The real conflict is between the 
class of people, who have never been in or 
who have already moved out of the desert 
of poverty, illiteracy and backwardness 
and are entrenched in the oasis of 
convenient living and those who are still in 
the desert and want to reach the oasis. 
There is not enough fruit in the garden 
and so those who are in, want to keep out 
those who are out. The disastrous 
consequences of the so-called meritarian 
principle to the vast majority of the under-
nourished, 
poverty-stricken, 
barely 
literate and vulnerable people of our 
country are too obvious to be stated. And, 
what is merit? There is no merit in a 
system 
which 
brings 
about 
such 
consequences. Is not a child of the 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or 
other backward classes who has been 
brought up in an atmosphere of penury, 
illiteracy and anti-culture, who is looked 
down upon by tradition and Society, who 
has no books and magazines to read at 
home, no radio to listen, no TV to watch, 

no one to help him with his home work, 
who goes to the nearest local board school 
and college, whose parents are either 
illiterate or so ignorant and ill-informed 
that he cannot even hope to seek their 
advice on any matter of importance, a 
child who must perforce trudge to the 
nearest public reading room to read a 
newspaper to know what is happening in 
the world, has not this child got merit if 
he, with all his disadvantages is able to 
secure the qualifying 40 per cent or 50 per 
cent of the marks at a competitive 
examination where the children of the 
upper 
classes 
who 
have 
all 
the 
advantages, who go to St. Paul's High 
School and St. Stephen's College, and who 
have perhaps been specially coached for 
the examination may secure 70, 80 or even 
90 per cent of the marks? Surely, a child 
who has been able to jump so many 
hurdles may be expected to do better and 
better as he progresses in life. If spring 
flower he cannot be, autumn flower he 
may be. Why then, should he be stopped 
at the threshold on an alleged meritarian 
principle? The requirements of efficiency 
may always be safeguarded by the 
prescription 
of 
minimum 
standards. 
Mediocrity has always triumphed in the 
past in the case of the upper classes. But 
why should the so-called meritarian 
principle be put against mediocrity when 

we come to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled 
Tribes and backward classes?” 
 
130. The 
Learned 
Judge 
observed 
that 
the 
disastrous 
consequences of the so-called meritarian principle to the vast 
majority of the under-nourished, poverty-stricken, barely literate 
and vulnerable people of our country are too obvious to be stated. 
The Learned Judge compared a child of the Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes or other backward classes who has been 
brought up in an atmosphere of penury, illiteracy and anti-
culture, who is looked down upon by tradition and Society, who 
has no books and magazines to read at home, no radio to listen, 
no TV to watch, no one to help him with his homework, who goes 
to the nearest local board school and college, whose parents are 
either illiterate or so ignorant and ill-informed that he cannot 
even hope to seek their advice on any matter of importance. The 
Learned Judge observed that with all these disadvantages, if he 
is able to secure the qualifying 40% or 50% of the marks at a 

competitive examination, he cannot be said to have no merit, 
especially if he be compared with the children of the upper 
classes who have all the advantages, who go to St. Paul's High 
School and St. Stephen's College, and who have perhaps been 
specially coached for the examination and may secure 70, 80 or 
even 90% of the marks. The Learned Judge further observed that 
the requirements of efficiency may always be safeguarded by the 
prescription of minimum standards. 
131. Emphasizing on the position of the Scheduled Castes, the 
Learned Judge observed thus: 
“51. …….Now, anyone acquainted with 
the rural scene in India would at once 
recognise the position that the Scheduled 
Castes occupy a peculiarly degraded 
position and are treated, not as persons of 
caste at all, but as outcastes. Even the 
other admittedly backward classes shun 
them and treat them as inferior beings. It 
was because of the special degradation to 
which they had been subjected that the 
Constitution itself had to come forward to 
make special provision for them. There is 
no point in attempting to determine the 

social backwardness of other classes by 
applying the test of nearness to the 
conditions of existence of the Scheduled 
Castes. Such a test would practically 
nullify the provision for reservation for 
socially 
and 
educationally 
backward 
classes other than Scheduled Castes and 
Tribes. Such a test would perpetuate the 
dominance of the existing upper classes. 
Such a test would take a substantial 
majority of the classes who are between 
the upper classes and the Scheduled 
Castes and Tribes out of the category of 
backward classes and put them at a 
permanent 
disadvantage. 
Only 
the 
“enlightened” classes will capture all the 
“open” posts and seats and the reserved 
posts and seats will go to the Scheduled 
Castes and Tribes and those very near the 
Scheduled Castes and Tribes. The bulk of 
those behind the “enlightened” classes 
and ahead of the near Scheduled Castes 
and Tribes would be left high and dry, with 
never a chance of imposing themselves.” 
 
132. The Learned Judge rejects the argument that insofar as 
Other 
Backward 
Classes 
are 
concerned, 
their 
social 
backwardness has to be ascertained by applying the test of 
nearness to the conditions of existence of the Scheduled Castes. 

The Learned Judge observed that such a test would practically 
nullify the provision for reservation for socially and educationally 
backward classes other than Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes. He observed that such a test would take a substantial 
majority of the classes, who are between the upper classes and 
the Scheduled Castes and Tribes, out of the category of backward 
classes and put them at a permanent disadvantage. He observed 
that only the “enlightened” classes will capture all the “open” 
posts and seats and the reserved posts and seats will go to the 
Scheduled Castes and Tribes and those very near the Scheduled 
Castes and Tribes. However, the bulk of those behind the 
“enlightened” classes and ahead of the near Scheduled Castes 
and Tribes would be left high and dry. 
133. It will also be relevant to refer to the following observations 
of Venkataramiah, J. (as His Lordship then was) in the case of 
K.C. Vasanth Kumar (supra): 

“143. This view is in conformity with the 
intention underlying clause (6) of the 
resolution regarding the aims and objects 
of the Constitution moved by Jawaharlal 
Nehru on December 13, 1946 which asked 
the Constituent Assembly to frame a 
Constitution 
providing 
adequate 
safeguards for minorities, backward and 
tribal areas and depressed and other 
backward classes and also with the 
provisions of Article 338 and Article 340 of 
the 
Constitution. 
Unless 
the 
above 
restriction is imposed on the Government, 
it 
would 
become 
possible 
for 
the 
Government to call any caste or group or 
community which constitutes a powerful 
political lobby in the State as backward 
even though in fact it may be an advanced 
caste or group or community but just 
below some other forward community. 
There is another important reason why 
such advanced castes or groups or 
communities should not be included in 
the list of backward classes and that is 
that if castes or groups and communities 
which are fairly well advanced and castes 
and groups and communities which are 
really backward being at the rock-bottom 
level are classified together as backward 
classes, the benefit of reservation would 
invariably be eaten up by the more 
advanced sections and the really deserving 
sections would practically go without any 
benefit as more number of children of the 

more advanced castes or groups or 
communities amongst them would have 
scored higher marks than the children of 
more backward castes or groups or 
communities. In that event the whole 
object 
of 
reservation 
would 
become 
frustrated. It is stated that it was with a 
view to avoiding this anomalous situation, 
the Government of Devaraj Urs had to 
appoint the Havanur Commission to make 
recommendations for the purpose of 
effectively implementing the objects of 
Article 15(4) and Article 16(4). Hence as far 
as possible while preparing the list of 
backward classes, the State Government 
has to bear in mind the above principle as 
a guiding factor. The adoption of the above 
principle will not unduly reduce the 
number of persons who will be eligible for 
the benefits under Article 15(4) and Article 
16(4) of the Constitution since over the 
years the level of the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes is also going up by 
reason of several remedial measures taken 
in regard to them by the State and Central 
Governments. At the same time, it will also 
release the really backward castes, groups 
and communities from the stranglehold of 
many advanced groups which have had 
the advantage of reservation along with 
the really backward classes for nearly 
three decades. It is time that more 
attention is given to those castes, groups 
and communities who have been at the 

lowest 
level 
suffering 
from 
all 
the 
disadvantages and disabilities (except 
perhaps untouchability) to which many of 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes have been exposed but without the 
same or similar advantages that flow from 
being included in the list of the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. 
 
144. Since economic condition is also a 
relevant criterion, it would be appropriate 
to incorporate a “means test” as one of the 
tests in determining the backwardness as 
was done by the Kerala Government 
in Jayasree case63. These two tests 
namely, that the conditions of caste or 
group or community should be more or 
less similar to the conditions in which the 
Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes are 
situated and that the income of the family 
to which the candidate belongs does not 
exceed the specified limit would serve as 
useful criteria in determining beneficiaries 
of any reservation to be made under 
Article 15(4). For the purpose of Article 
16(4) however, it should also be shown 
that the backward class in question is in 
the opinion of the Government not 
adequately represented in the Government 
services.” 

134. The Learned Judge observed that two tests namely, that the 
conditions of caste or group or community should be more or less 
similar to the conditions in which the Scheduled Castes or 
Scheduled Tribes are situated and that the income of the family 
to which the candidate belongs does not exceed the specified limit 
would serve as useful criteria in determining beneficiaries of any 
reservation to be made under Article 15(4). The Learned Judge 
observed that insofar as Article 16(4) is concerned, it should also 
be shown that the backward class in question is in the opinion 
of the Government not adequately represented in the 
Government services. 
E. 
Indra Sawhney vs. Union of India 
 
135. Then next comes the 9-Judge Bench judgment of this Court 
in the case of Indra Sawhney and others vs. Union of India 
and others12, which could be considered as an important 
milestone laying down the law about reservations for Other 
 
12 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217. 

Backward Classes. The extracts from the said judgment of 9-
Judge Bench have in-extenso been reproduced in the referral 
judgment (The State of Punjab & Ors. vs. Davinder Singh & 
Ors.13). 
136. I will refer to some of the observations made by B.P. Jeevan 
Reddy, J., who has authored the judgment for himself and M.H. 
Kania, C.J., M.N. Venkatachaliah, J. and A.M. Ahmadi, J. (as 
Their Lordships then were). 
“781. At the outset, we may state that for 
the purpose of this discussion, we keep 
aside the Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled 
Castes (since they are admittedly included 
within the backward classes), except to 
remark 
that 
backward 
classes 
contemplated by Article 16(4) do comprise 
some castes — for it cannot be denied that 
Scheduled Castes include quite a few 
castes.” 
 
137. His Lordship (Jeevan Reddy, J.) observed that with regard 
to identification of ‘backward class of citizens’, we keep aside the 
 
13 (2020). 

Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes. It will be relevant to 
note that in the said part of the judgment His Lordship (Jeevan 
Reddy, J.) was considering an issue with regard to identification 
of backward class of citizens. In this background, it was observed 
that the court was keeping aside Scheduled Tribes and 
Scheduled Castes since they are admittedly included within the 
backward classes. It was further observed that backward classes 
contemplated by Article 16(4) do comprise some castes since it 
cannot be denied that Scheduled Castes include quite a few 
castes. 
138. From paragraph 790 onwards, His Lordship considered the 
‘Means-test’ and ‘creamy layer’. It will be apposite to reproduce 
paragraph 792, which reads thus: 
“792. In our opinion, it is not a question 
of permissibility or desirability of such test 
but one of proper and more appropriate 
identification of a class — a backward 
class. The very concept of a class denotes 
a number of persons having certain 
common traits which distinguish them 

from the others. In a backward class 
under clause (4) of Article 16, if the 
connecting 
link 
is 
the 
social 
backwardness, it should broadly be the 
same in a given class. If some of the 
members are far too advanced socially 
(which in the context, necessarily means 
economically 
and, 
may 
also 
mean 
educationally) 
the 
connecting 
thread 
between them and the remaining class 
snaps. They would be misfits in the class. 
After excluding them alone, would the 
class be a compact class. In fact, such 
exclusion benefits the truly backward. 
Difficulty, however, really lies in drawing 
the line — how and where to draw the line? 
For, while drawing the line, it should be 
ensured that it does not result in taking 
away with one hand what is given by the 
other. The basis of exclusion should not 
merely be economic, unless, of course, the 
economic advancement is so high that it 
necessarily means social advancement. 
Let us illustrate the point. A member of 
backward 
class, 
say 
a 
member 
of 
carpenter caste, goes to Middle East and 
works there as a carpenter. If you take his 
annual income in rupees, it would be fairly 
high from the Indian standard. Is he to be 
excluded from the Backward Class? Are 
his children in India to be deprived of the 
benefit of Article 16(4)? Situation may, 
however, be different, if he rises so high 
economically as to become — say a factory 

owner himself. In such a situation, his 
social status also rises. He himself would 
be in a position to provide employment to 
others. In such a case, his income is 
merely a measure of his social status. 
Even otherwise there are several practical 
difficulties too in imposing an income 
ceiling. For example, annual income of Rs 
36,000 may not count for much in a city 
like Bombay, Delhi or Calcutta whereas it 
may be a handsome income in rural India 
anywhere. The line to be drawn must be a 
realistic one. Another question would be, 
should such a line be uniform for the 
entire country or a given State or should it 
differ from rural to urban areas and so on. 
Further, income from agriculture may be 
difficult to assess and, therefore, in the 
case of agriculturists, the line may have to 
be drawn with reference to the extent of 
holding. While the income of a person can 
be taken as a measure of his social 
advancement, the limit to be prescribed 
should not be such as to result in taking 
away with one hand what is given with the 
other. The income limit must be such as 
to mean and signify social advancement. 
At the same time, it must be recognised 
that there are certain positions, the 
occupants of which can be treated as 
socially advanced without any further 
enquiry. For example, if a member of a 
designated backward class becomes a 
member of IAS or IPS or any other All India 

Service, his status is society (social status) 
rises; 
he 
is 
no 
longer 
socially 
disadvantaged. 
His 
children 
get 
full 
opportunity to realise their potential. They 
are in no way handicapped in the race of 
life. His salary is also such that he is above 
want. It is but logical that in such a 
situation, his children are not given the 
benefit of reservation. For by giving them 
the 
benefit 
of 
reservation, 
other 
disadvantaged members of that backward 
class may be deprived of that benefit. It is 
then argued for the respondents that ‘one 
swallow doesn't make the summer’, and 
that merely because a few members of a 
caste or class become socially advanced, 
the class/caste as such does not cease to 
be backward. It is pointed out that clause 

of 
Article 

aims 
at 
group 
backwardness 
and 
not 
individual 
backwardness. While we agree that clause 
(4) aims at group backwardness, we feel 
that exclusion of such socially advanced 
members will make the ‘class’ a truly 
backward 
class 
and 
would 
more 
appropriately serve the purpose and object 
of clause (4). (This discussion is confined 
to Other Backward Classes only and has 
no relevance in the case of Scheduled 
Tribes and Scheduled Castes).” 

139. His Lordship observed that if some of the members in a 
class are far too advanced socially, the connecting thread 
between them and the remaining class snaps. The Court 
observed that ‘too advanced socially’ means economically and 
may also mean educationally. It has been observed that they 
would be misfits in the class. The Court considered the difficulty 
in drawing the line. It is observed that it should not amount to 
taking away with one hand what is given with the other. The 
Court observed that the basis of exclusion should not merely be 
economic, unless, of course, the economic advancement is so 
high that it necessarily means social advancement. The Court 
observed that the line to be drawn must be a realistic one. The 
Court posed a question as to whether such a line should be 
uniform for the entire country or a given State or should it differ 
from rural to urban areas and so on. It has been observed that 
since it is difficult to assess income from agriculture, in the case 
of agriculturists, the line may have to be drawn with reference to 

the extent of holding. It is observed that the income limit must 
be such as to mean and signify social advancement. The Court 
observed that at the same time, it must be recognized that there 
are certain positions, the occupants of which can be treated as 
socially advanced without any further enquiry. It has been 
observed that if a member of a designated backward class would 
become a member of IAS or IPS or any other All India Service, his 
status in the society rises and he is no longer socially 
disadvantaged. The Court observed that clause (4) of Article 16 
aims at group backwardness, the exclusion of such socially 
advanced members will make the ‘class’ a truly backward class 
and would more appropriately serve the purpose and object of 
clause (4). No doubt, it has been specified that the said 
discussion was confined to Other Backward Classes only and had 
no relevance in the case of Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled 
Castes. 

140. Then the question as to whether Backward Classes can be 
further divided into backward and more backward categories has 
been answered thus: 
“802. We are of the opinion that there is 
no constitutional or legal bar to a State 
categorising the backward classes as 
backward and more backward. We are not 
saying that it ought to be done. We are 
concerned with the question if a State 
makes such a categorisation, whether it 
would be invalid? We think not. Let us 
take the criteria evolved by Mandal 
Commission. Any caste, group or class 
which scored eleven or more points was 
treated as a backward class. Now, it is not 
as if all the several thousands of 
castes/groups/classes scored identical 
points. 
There 
may 
be 
some 
castes/groups/classes which have scored 
points between 20 to 22 and there may be 
some who have scored points between 
eleven and thirteen. It cannot reasonably 
be denied that there is no difference 
between 
these 
two 
sets 
of 
castes/groups/classes. 
To 
give 
an 
illustration, take two occupational groups 
viz., goldsmiths and vaddes (traditional 
stone-cutters in Andhra Pradesh) both 

included within Other Backward Classes. 
None can deny that goldsmiths are far less 
backward than vaddes. If both of them are 
grouped 
together 
and 
reservation 
provided, the inevitable result would be 
that goldsmiths would take away all the 
reserved posts leaving none for vaddes. In 
such a situation, a State may think it 
advisable to make a categorisation even 
among other backward classes so as to 
ensure that the more backward among the 
backward classes obtain the benefits 
intended for them. Where to draw the line 
and how to effect the sub-classification is, 
however, a matter for the Commission and 
the State — and so long as it is reasonably 
done, the Court may not intervene. In this 
connection, reference may be made to the 
categorisation 
obtaining 
in 
Andhra 
Pradesh. The Backward Classes have been 
divided into four categories. Group A 
comprises “Aboriginal tribes, Vimukta 
jatis, nomadic and semi-nomadic tribes 
etc.” Group B comprises professional 
group like tappers, weavers, carpenters, 
ironsmiths, goldsmiths, kamsalins etc. 
Group C pertains to “Scheduled Castes 
converts 
to 
Christianity 
and 
their 
progeny”, while Group D comprises all 
other 
classes/communities/groups, 
which are not included in Groups A, B and 

C. The 25% vacancies reserved for 
backward classes are sub-divided between 
them in proportion to their respective 
population. 
This 
categorisation 
was 
justified in Balram [(1972): 
(1972) ]. This is merely to show 
that even among backward classes, there 
can 
be 
a 
sub-classification 
on 
a 
reasonable basis. 
 
803. There is another way of looking at 
this issue. Article 16(4) recognises only 
one class viz., “backward class of citizens”. 
It does not speak separately of Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, as does 
Article 15(4). Even so, it is beyond 
controversy that Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes are also included in the 
expression “backward class of citizens” 
and that separate reservations can be 
provided in their favour. It is a well-
accepted phenomenon throughout the 
country. What is the logic behind it? It is 
that if Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled 
Castes and Other Backward Classes are 
lumped together, OBCs will take away all 
the vacancies leaving Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes high and dry. The 
same logic also warrants categorisation as 
between more backward and backward. 
We do not mean to say — we may reiterate 

— that this should be done. We are only 
saying that if a State chooses to do it, it is 
not impermissible in law.” 
 
141. The Court in unequivocal terms held that even among 
backward classes, there can be a sub-classification on a 
reasonable basis. The Court held that there can be backward and 
more backward classes and the State may think it advisable to 
provide a special benefit to the more backward among the 
backward classes. It has been observed that where to draw the 
line and how to effect the sub-classification is, however, a matter 
for the Commission and the State, and so long as it is reasonably 
done, the Court may not intervene. 
142. The Court observed that Article 16(4) recognizes only one 
class i.e., “backward class of citizens”. It is observed that it does 
not speak separately of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, 
as does Article 15(4). It has therefore been observed that it is 
beyond controversy that Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 

are also included in the expression “backward class of citizens” 
and that separate reservations can be provided in their favour. 
143. It has also been observed that if Scheduled Tribes, 
Scheduled Castes and Other Backward Classes are lumped 
together, the OBCs will take away all the vacancies leaving 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes high and dry. It has been 
observed that the same logic also warrants categorization as 
between more backward and backward. The Court, however, 
cautioned that it may not be construed as implying that the State 
should do it, but it was only saying that if the State chooses to 
do so, it is not impermissible in law. 
144. Similar view has also been expressed by P.B. Sawant, J. in 
paragraphs 523, 524 and 525, which read thus: 
“523. As regards the second part of the 
question, in Balaji [1963 Supp: 
AIR 1963 SC 649] it was observed that the 
backward classes cannot be further 
classified in backward and more backward 
classes. These observations, although 
made in the context of Article 15(4) which 

fell for consideration there, will no doubt 
be equally applicable to Article 16(4). The 
observations were made while dealing with 
the recommendations of the Nagan Gowda 
Committee appointed by the State of 
Karnataka which had recommended the 
classification 
of 
the 
backward 
communities into two divisions, the 
Backward and the More Backward. While 
making 
those 
recommendations 
the 
Committee had applied one test, viz., “Was 
the 
standard 
of 
education 
in 
the 
community in question less than 50% of 
the 
State 
average? 
If 
it 
was, 
the 
community 
was 
regarded 
as 
more 
backward; if it was not, the community 
was regarded as backward.” The Court 
opined that the sub-classification made by 
the Report and the order based thereupon 
was not justified under Article 15(4) which 
authorises special provision being made 
for ‘really backward classes’. The Court 
further observed that in introducing two 
categories of backward classes, what the 
impugned order in substance purported to 
do was to devise measures “for the benefit 
of all the classes of citizens who are less 
advanced compared to the most advanced 
classes in the State”. That, according to 
the Court, was not the scope of Article 
15(4). The result of the method adopted by 

the impugned order was that nearly 90% 
of the population of the State was treated 
as Backward and that, observed the 
Court, illustrated how the order in fact 
divided the population of the State into 
most advanced and the rest, putting the 
latter into two categories of the Backward 
and the More Backward. Thus, the view 
taken there against the sub-classification 
was on the facts of that case which showed 
that almost 90% of the population of the 
State was classified as backward, the 
backwardness of the Backward (as against 
that 
of 
the 
More 
Backward) 
being 
measured in comparison to the most 
advanced classes in the State. Those who 
were less advanced than the most 
advanced, were all classified as Backward. 
The Court held that it is the More 
Backward or who were really backward 
who alone would be entitled to the benefit 
of the provisions of Article 15(4). In other 
words, while the More Backward were 
classified there rightly as backward, the 
Backward were not classified rightly as 
backward. 
 
524. It 
may 
be 
pointed 
out 
that 
in Vasanth Kumar [1985 Supp SCC 714: 
1985 Supp ] Chinnappa Reddy, 
J after referring to the aforesaid view 

in Balaji [1963 Supp: AIR 
1963 SC 649] observed that the propriety 
of such test may be open to question on 
the facts of each case but there was no 
reason why on principle there cannot be a 
classification into Backwards and More 
Backwards if both classes are not merely 
a little behind, but far far behind the most 
advanced classes. He further observed 
that in fact, such a classification would be 
necessary to help the more backward 
classes; otherwise those of the backward 
classes who might be a little more 
advanced 
than 
the 
more 
backward 
classes, would walk away with all the seats 
just as if reservation was confined to the 
more backward classes and no reservation 
was made to the slightly more advanced of 
the backward classes, the backward 
classes would gain no seats since the 
advanced classes would walk away with all 
the 
seats 
available 
for 
the 
general 
category. With respect, this is the correct 
view of the matter. Whether the backward 
classes can be classified into Backward 
and More Backward, would depend upon 
the facts of each case. So long as both 
backward and more backward classes are 
not only comparatively but substantially 
backward than the advanced classes, and 
further, between themselves, there is a 

substantial difference in backwardness, 
not only it is advisable but also imperative 
to make the sub-classification if all the 
backward classes are to gain equitable 
benefit of the special provisions under the 
Constitution. To give an instance, the 
Mandal Commission has, on the basis of 
social, 
educational 
and 
economic 
indicators evolved 22 points by giving 
different values to each of the three 
factors, viz., social, educational and 
economic. Those social groups which 
secured 22 points or above have been 
listed there as “socially and educationally 
backward” and the rest as “advanced”. 
Now, between 11 and 22 points some may 
secure, say, 11 to 15 points while others 
may secure all 22 points. The difference in 
their 
backwardness 
is, 
therefore, 
substantial. Yet another illustration which 
may be given is from Karnataka State 
Government order dated October 13, 1986 
on reservations issued after the decision 
in Vasanth Kumar [1985 Supp SCC 714: 
1985 Supp ] where the 
backward classes are grouped into five 
categories, viz., A, B, C, D and E. In 
category 
A, 
fall 
such 
castes 
or 
communities as that of Bairagi, Banjari 
and Lambadi which are nomadic tribes, 
and Bedaru, Ramoshi which were formerly 

stigmatised as criminal tribes whereas in 
category D fall such castes as Kshatriya 
and Rajput. To lump both together would 
be to deny totally the benefit of special 
provisions to the former, the latter taking 
away the entire benefits. On the other 
hand, to deny the status of backwardness 
to the latter and ask them to compete with 
the advanced classes, would leave the 
latter without any seat or post. In such 
circumstances, the sub-classification of 
the backward classes into backward and 
more or most backward is not only 
desirable but essential. However, for each 
of them a special quota has to be 
prescribed as is done in the Karnataka 
Government order. If it is not done, as in 
the present case, and the reserved posts 
are first offered to the more backward and 
only the remaining to the backward or less 
backward, the more backward may take 
away all the posts leaving the backward 
with no posts. The backward will neither 
get his post in the reserved quota nor in 
the general category for want of capacity to 
compete with the forward. 
 
525. Hence, it will have to be held that 
depending upon the facts of each case, 
sub-classification of the backward classes 
into the backward and more or most 

backward would be justifiable provided 
separate quotas are prescribed for each of 
them.” 
 
145. His Lordship held that sub-classification of the backward 
classes into the backward and more or most backward would be 
justifiable provided separate quotas are prescribed for each of 
them. 
146. The question as to whether Backward Classes can be 
further divided into backward and more backward categories has 
been answered by P.B. Sawant, J. as under (Paragraph 552): 
“Question 5: 
Article 16(4) permits classification of 
backward classes into backward and more 
or most backward classes. However, this 
classification is permitted only on the 
basis 
of 
the 
degrees 
of 
social 
backwardness and not on the basis of the 
economic consideration alone. 
If backward classes are classified into 
backward and more or most backward 
classes, separate quotas of reservations 
will have to be kept for each of such 
classes. In the absence of such separate 
quotas, the reservations will be illegal. 

It 
is 
not 
permissible 
to 
classify 
backward classes or a backward class 
social group into an advanced section and 
a backward section either on economic or 
any other consideration. The test of 
advancement lies in the capacity to 
compete with the forward classes. If the 
advanced section in a backward class is so 
advanced as to be able to compete with the 
forward classes, the advanced section 
from the backward class no longer belongs 
to the backward class and should cease to 
be considered so and denied the benefit of 
reservations under Article 16(4).” 
 
147. It could thus be seen that Sawant, J. observed that if the 
advanced section in a backward class is so advanced as to be 
able to compete with the forward classes, the advanced section 
from the backward class no longer belongs to the backward class 
and should cease to be considered so and denied the benefit of 
reservations under Article 16(4). 
F. 
E.V. Chinnaiah vs. State of A.P. 
148. In the case of E.V. Chinnaiah, the validity of the Andhra 
Pradesh Scheduled Castes (Rationalisation of Reservations) Act, 

2000 (A.P. Act 20 of 2000) was challenged before the High Court 
of Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad. The same was dismissed by 
the 5-Judge Bench by a majority of 4:1. Under the said Act, the 
castes in the Presidential List of Scheduled Castes came to be 
classified in 4 groups. The seats were apportioned in different 
proportions amongst the said 4 groups. 
149. N. Santosh Hegde, J. for himself, S.N. Variava, and B.P. 
Singh, JJ. (as Their Lordships then were) observed thus: 
“13. We will first consider the effect of 
Article 341 of the Constitution and 
examine whether the State could, in the 
guise of providing reservation for the 
weaker of the weakest, tinker with the 
Presidential List by subdividing the castes 
mentioned in the Presidential List into 
different groups. Article 341 which is 
found in Part XVI of the Constitution 
refers to special provisions relating to 
certain 
classes 
which 
includes 
the 
Scheduled Castes. This article provides 
that the President may with respect to any 
State or Union Territory after consultation 
with the Governor thereof by public 
notification, specify the castes, races or 
tribes or parts of or groups within castes, 

races or tribes which shall for the 
purposes of this Constitution be deemed 
to be Scheduled Castes in relation to that 
State or Union Territory. This indicates 
that there can be only one list of 
Scheduled Castes in regard to a State and 
that list should include all specified 
castes, races or tribes or part or groups 
notified in that Presidential List. Any 
inclusion or exclusion from the said list 
can only be done by Parliament under 
Article 341(2) of the Constitution. In the 
entire Constitution wherever reference has 
been made to “Scheduled Castes” it refers 
only to the list prepared by the President 
under Article 341 and there is no reference 
to any subclassification or division in the 
said list except, maybe, for the limited 
purpose of Article 330, which refers to 
reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes 
in the House of the People, which is not 
applicable to the facts of this case. It is 
also clear from Article 341 that except for 
a limited power of making an exclusion or 
inclusion in the list by an Act of 
Parliament there is no provision either to 
subdivide, subclassify or subgroup these 
castes which are found in the Presidential 
List of Scheduled Castes. Therefore, it is 
clear that the Constitution intended all the 
castes including the subcastes, races and 
tribes mentioned in the list to be members 
of one group for the purpose of the 
Constitution and this group could not be 

subdivided for any purpose. A reference to 
the Constituent Assembly in this regard 
may be useful at this stage.” 
 
150. His Lordship observed that from the perusal of Article 341 
of the Constitution, there can be only one list of Scheduled Castes 
regarding a State and that list should include all specified castes, 
races or tribes or part or groups notified in that Presidential List. 
It has been observed that any inclusion or exclusion from the 
said list can only be done by Parliament under Article 341(2) of 
the Constitution. It is observed that it is also clear from Article 
341 that except for a limited power of making an exclusion or 
inclusion in the list by an Act of Parliament there is no provision 
either to subdivide, subclassify or subgroup these castes which 
are found in the Presidential List of Scheduled Castes. It has been 
observed that the Constitution intended all the castes including 
the subcastes, races and tribes mentioned in the list to be 
members of one group for the purpose of the Constitution and 
that the said group could not be subdivided for any purpose. 

151. In paragraph 26, it has been observed thus: 
“26. Thus 
from 
the 
scheme 
of 
the 
Constitution, Article 341 and above 
opinions of this Court in the case of N.M. 
Thomas [(1976): 1976 SCC 
(L&S) 227] it is clear that the castes once 
included in the Presidential List, form a 
class by themselves. If they are one class 
under the Constitution, any division of 
these classes of persons based on any 
consideration would amount to tinkering 
with the Presidential List.” 
 
152. The Court, relying on Article 341 and the opinions 
expressed in the case of N.M. Thomas, observed that it was clear 
that the castes once included in the Presidential List, form a class 
by themselves. It has been observed that if they are one class 
under the Constitution, any division of these classes of persons 
based on any consideration would amount to ‘tinkering’ with the 
Presidential List. 
153. In paragraph 31, the Court observed thus: 
“31. On a detailed perusal of the Act it is 
seen that Section 3 is the only substantive 
provision in the Act, rest of the provisions 

are only procedural. Section 3 of the Act 
provides for the creation of 4 groups out of 
the castes enumerated in the Presidential 
List of the State. After the regrouping it 
provides for the proportionate allotment of 
the reservation already made in favour of 
the Scheduled Castes amongst these 4 
groups. Beyond that the Act does not 
provide for anything else. Since the State 
had already allotted 15% of the total quota 
of the reservation available for the 
backward classes to the Scheduled Castes 
the question of allotting any reservation 
under this enactment to the backward 
classes does not arise. Therefore, it is clear 
that the purpose or the true intendment of 
this Act is only to first divide the castes in 
the Presidential List of the Scheduled 
Castes into 4 groups and then divide 15% 
of reservation allotted to the Scheduled 
Castes as a class, amongst these 4 groups. 
Thus it is clear that the Act does not for 
the first time provide for reservation to the 
Scheduled Castes but only intends to 
redistribute the reservation already made 
by subclassifying the Scheduled Castes 
which is otherwise held to be a class by 
itself. It is a well-settled principle in law 
that reservation to a backward class is not 
a constitutional mandate. It is the 
prerogative of the State concerned if it so 
desires, with an object of providing 
opportunity of advancement in the society 
to 
certain 
backward 
classes 
which 

includes the Scheduled Castes, to reserve 
certain seats in educational institutions 
under Article 15(4) and in public services 
of the State under Article 16(4). That part 
of its constitutional obligation, as stated 
above, has already been fulfilled by the 
State. Having done so, it is not open to the 
State to subclassify a class already 
recognised by the Constitution and allot a 
portion of the already reserved quota 
amongst the State-created subclass within 
the list of Scheduled Castes. From the 
discussion hereinabove, it is clear that the 
primary object of the impugned enactment 
is to create groups of subcastes in the list 
of Scheduled Castes applicable to the 
State and, in our opinion, apportionment 
of the reservation is only secondary and 
consequential. Whatever may be the object 
of 
this 
subclassification 
and 
apportionment of the reservation, we think 
the State cannot claim legislative power to 
make a law dividing the Scheduled Castes 
List of the State by tracing its legislative 
competence to Entry 41 of List II or Entry 
25 of List III. Therefore, we are of the 
opinion that in pith and substance the 
enactment is not a law governing the field 
of education or the field of State public 
services.” 

154. It can thus be seen that this Court held that whatever may 
be the object of the sub-classification and apportionment of the 
reservation, the State cannot claim legislative power to make a 
law dividing the Scheduled Castes List of the State by tracing its 
legislative competence to Entry 41 of List II or Entry 25 of List III. 
The Court held that, in pith and substance the enactment is not 
a law governing the field of education or the field of State public 
services. 
155. Then the Court posed a question as to whether the 
impugned enactment creates sub-classification or micro-
classification of the Scheduled Castes so as to violate Article 14 
of the Constitution. The same is answered as under: 
“41. The conglomeration of castes given in 
the Presidential Order, in our opinion, 
should be considered as representing a 
class as a whole. The contrary approach of 
the High Court, in our opinion, was not 
correct. The very fact that a legal fiction 
has been created is itself suggestive of the 
fact that the legislature of a State cannot 
take any action which would be contrary 

to or inconsistent therewith. The very idea 
of placing different castes or tribes or 
group or part thereof in a State as a 
conglomeration by way of a deeming 
definition clearly suggests that they are 
not to be subdivided or subclassified 
further. If a class within a class of 
members of the Scheduled Castes is 
created, the same would amount to 
tinkering 
with 
the 
list. 
Such 
subclassification would be violative of 
Article 14 of the Constitution. It may be 
true, as has been observed by the High 
Court, that the caste system has got stuck 
up in the society but with a view to do 
away with the evil effect thereof, a 
legislation which does not answer the 
constitutional scheme cannot be upheld. 
It is also difficult to agree with the High 
Court that for the purpose of identifying 
backwardness, a further inquiry can be 
made by appointing a commission as to 
who 
amongst 
the 
members 
of 
the 
Scheduled Castes is more backward. If 
benefits of reservation are not percolating 
to them equitably, measures should be 
taken to see that they are given such 
adequate or additional training so as to 
enable them to compete with the others 
but the same would not mean that in the 
process of rationalising the reservation to 

the Scheduled Castes the constitutional 
mandate of Articles 14, 15 and 16 could be 
violated. 
 
42. Reservation must be considered from 
the social objective angle, having regard to 
the constitutional scheme, and not as a 
political 
issue 
and, 
thus, 
adequate 
representation must be given to the 
members of the Scheduled Castes as a 
group and not to two or more groups of 
persons or members of castes. 
 
43. The very fact that the members of the 
Scheduled Castes are most backward 
amongst the backward classes and the 
impugned 
legislation 
having 
already 
proceeded on the basis that they are not 
adequately represented both in terms of 
clause (4) of Article 15 and clause (4) of 
Article 16 of the Constitution, a further 
classification 
by 
way 
of 
micro-
classification is not permissible. Such 
classification of the members of different 
classes of people based on their respective 
castes would also be violative of the 
doctrine of reasonableness. Article 341 
provides that exclusion even of a part or a 
group of castes from the Presidential List 
can be done only by Parliament. The 

logical corollary thereof would be that the 
State Legislatures are forbidden from 
doing that. A uniform yardstick must be 
adopted for giving benefits to the members 
of the Scheduled Castes for the purpose of 
the 
Constitution. 
The 
impugned 
legislation being contrary to the above 
constitutional scheme cannot, therefore, 
be sustained.” 
 
156. It has been held that the conglomeration of castes given in 
the Presidential Order should be considered as representing a 
class as a whole. It has been held that the very idea of placing 
different castes or tribes or group or part thereof in a State as a 
conglomeration by way of a deeming definition clearly suggests 
that they are not to be subdivided or subclassified further. It has 
been held that if a class within a class of members of the 
Scheduled Castes is created, the same would amount to tinkering 
with the list. Such subclassification would be violative of Article 
14 of the Constitution. 

157. The Court also held that classification of the members of 
different classes of people based on their respective castes would 
also be violative of the doctrine of reasonableness. 
158. S.B. Sinha, J. in his separate concurring opinion held thus: 
“93. Scheduled Caste, however, is not a 
caste in terms of its definition as contained 
in Article 366(24) of the Constitution. They 
are brought within the purview of the said 
category by reason of their abysmal 
backwardness. Scheduled Caste consists 
of not only the people who belong to some 
backward caste but also race or tribe or 
part of or groups within castes, races or 
tribes. They are not merely backward but 
the backwardmost. A person even does not 
cease 
to 
be 
a 
Scheduled 
Caste 
automatically even on his conversion to 
another religion. (See Punit Rai v. Dinesh 
Chaudhary [(2003) ] and State 
of Kerala v. Chandramohanan [(2004): 2004 SCC (Cri) 818: AIR 2004 
SC 1672].)” 
 
159. It could thus be seen that His Lordship has also recognized 
that the Scheduled Caste consists of not only the people who 
belong to some backward caste but also race or tribe or part of 

or groups within castes, races or tribes and that they are not 
merely backward but the backwardmost. 
160. After referring to the observations of this Court in Indra 
Sawhney (supra) regarding the applicability of ‘means test’ and 
‘creamy-layer test’, the Learned Judge observed thus: 
“96. But we must state that whenever 
such a situation arises in respect of 
Scheduled Caste, it will be Parliament 
alone to take the necessary legislative 
steps in terms of clause (2) of Article 341 
of the Constitution. The States concededly 
do not have the legislative competence 
therefor.” 
 
161. It is further observed in paragraph 113 thus: 
“113. The power of the State Legislature to 
decide as regards grant of benefit of 
reservation in jobs or in educational 
institutions to the backward classes is not 
in dispute. It is furthermore not in dispute 
that if such a decision is made the State 
can also lay down a legislative policy as 
regards extent of reservation to be made 
for different members of the backward 
classes including Scheduled Castes. But it 
cannot take away the said benefit on the 
premise that one or the other group 

amongst the members of the Scheduled 
Castes has advanced and, thus, is not 
entitled to the entire benefit of reservation. 
The impugned legislation, thus, must be 
held to be unconstitutional.” 
 
162. The Learned Judge observed that the State can lay down a 
legislative policy as regards extent of reservation to be made for 
different members of the backward classes including Scheduled 
Castes. However, it cannot take away the said benefit on the 
premise that one or the other group amongst the members of the 
Scheduled Castes has advanced and, thus, is not entitled to the 
entire benefit of reservation. 
G. 
M. Nagaraj vs. Union of India 
163. Next in line is the case of M. Nagaraj and others vs. Union 
of India and others14, where the Constitution Bench of this 
Court was considering, inter alia, the constitutional validity of the 
Constitution (Seventy-Seventh Amendment) Act, 1995, the 
Constitution 
(Eighty-first 
Amendment) 
Act, 
2000, 
the 
 
14 (2006). 

Constitution (Eighty-second Amendment) Act, 2000, and the 
Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2001. Answering the 
aforesaid, the Court observed thus: 
“121. The 
impugned 
constitutional 
amendments by which Articles 16(4-A) 
and 16(4-B) have been inserted flow from 
Article 16(4). They do not alter the 
structure of Article 16(4). They retain the 
controlling factors or the compelling 
reasons, 
namely, 
backwardness 
and 
inadequacy 
of 
representation 
which 
enables 
the 
States 
to 
provide 
for 
reservation keeping in mind the overall 
efficiency of the State administration 
under 
Article 
335. 
These 
impugned 
amendments are confined only to SCs and 
STs. They do not obliterate any of the 
constitutional 
requirements, 
namely, 
ceiling 
limit 
of 
50% 
(quantitative 
limitation), the concept of creamy layer 
(qualitative 
exclusion), 
the 
sub-
classification between OBCs on one hand 
and SCs and STs on the other hand as 
held in Indra Sawhney [1992 Supp (3) 
SCC 217: 1992 SCC (L&S) Supp 1: (1992) 
22 ATC 385], the concept of post-based 
roster with inbuilt concept of replacement 
as held in R.K. Sabharwal [(1995) 
 
745: 1995 SCC (L&S) 548: (1995) 29 ATC 
481]. 
 
122. We reiterate that the ceiling limit of 
50%, the concept of creamy layer and the 
compelling 
reasons, 
namely, 
backwardness, 
inadequacy 
of 
representation and overall administrative 
efficiency 
are 
all 
constitutional 
requirements without which the structure 
of equality of opportunity in Article 16 
would collapse. 
 
123. However, in this case, as stated 
above, the main issue concerns the “extent 
of reservation”. In this regard the State 
concerned will have to show in each case 
the existence of the compelling reasons, 
namely, backwardness, inadequacy of 
representation and overall administrative 
efficiency before making provision for 
reservation. 
As 
stated 
above, 
the 
impugned 
provision 
is 
an 
enabling 
provision. The State is not bound to make 
reservation for SCs/STs in matters of 
promotions. However, if they wish to 
exercise their discretion and make such 
provision, 
the 
State 
has 
to 
collect 
quantifiable data showing backwardness 
of 
the 
class 
and 
inadequacy 
of 

representation of that class in public 
employment in addition to compliance 
with Article 335. It is made clear that even 
if the State has compelling reasons, as 
stated above, the State will have to see 
that its reservation provision does not lead 
to excessiveness so as to breach the ceiling 
limit of 50% or obliterate the creamy layer 
or extend the reservation indefinitely. 
 
124. Subject to the above, we uphold the 
constitutional validity of the Constitution 
(Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995; 
the Constitution (Eighty-first Amendment) 
Act, 2000; the Constitution (Eighty-
second Amendment) Act, 2000 and the 
Constitution 
(Eighty-fifth 
Amendment) 
Act, 2001.” 
 
164. It could thus be seen that in M. Nagaraj (supra), the Court 
applied the test of creamy layer and the requirement for collection 
of quantifiable data showing backwardness of the class and 
inadequacy of representation of that class even insofar as the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are concerned. 

H. 
Jarnail Singh vs. Lachhmi Narain Gupta 
 
165. The correctness of the decision in M. Nagaraj was referred 
to the Constitution Bench in the case of Jarnail Singh and 
others vs. Lachhmi Narain Gupta and others15. The 
Constitution Bench in the said case considered two issues: 
firstly, with regard to the correctness of the view taken in M. 
Nagaraj about the requirement of collecting quantifiable data 
showing backwardness and inadequacy of representation of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in public employment; 
and secondly, with regard to applicability of the creamy layer 
principle even to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
166. The Court, insofar as the first issue is concerned, held that 
the 
requirement 
of 
collection 
of 
quantifiable 
data 
on 
backwardness and inadequacy of representation of Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in public employment is concerned, 
is contrary to the 9-Judge Bench judgment in the case of Indra 
 
15 (2018). 

Sawhney and liable to be struck down to that extent. However, 
insofar as the second issue regarding making the creamy layer 
principle applicable even to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes is concerned, the Court observed thus: 
“26. The whole object of reservation is to 
see that Backward Classes of citizens 
move forward so that they may march 
hand in hand with other citizens of India 
on an equal basis. This will not be possible 
if only the creamy layer within that class 
bag all the coveted jobs in the public sector 
and perpetuate themselves, leaving the 
rest of the class as backward as they 
always were. This being the case, it is clear 
that when a court applies the creamy layer 
principle 
to 
Scheduled 
Castes 
and 
Scheduled Tribes, it does not in any 
manner tinker with the Presidential List 
under 
Articles 

or 

of 
the 
Constitution of India. The caste or group 
or sub-group named in the said List 
continues exactly as before. It is only those 
persons within that group or sub-group, 
who have come out of untouchability or 
backwardness by virtue of belonging to the 
creamy layer, who are excluded from the 
benefit of reservation. Even these persons 

who are contained within the group or 
sub-group 
in 
the 
Presidential 
Lists 
continue to be within those Lists. It is only 
when it comes to the application of the 
reservation principle under Articles 14 
and 16 that the creamy layer within that 
sub-group is not given the benefit of such 
reservation. 
 
27. We do not think it necessary to go into 
whether Parliament may or may not 
exclude the creamy layer from the 
Presidential Lists contained under Articles 
341 and 342. Even on the assumption that 
Articles 341 and 342 empower Parliament 
to exclude the creamy layer from the 
groups or sub-groups contained within 
these Lists, it is clear that constitutional 
courts, applying Articles 14 and 16 of the 
Constitution to exclude the creamy layer 
cannot be said to be thwarted in this 
exercise by the fact that persons stated to 
be within a particular group or sub-group 
in the Presidential List may be kept out by 
Parliament on application of the creamy 
layer principle. One of the most important 
principles 
that 
has 
been 
frequently 
applied in constitutional law is the 
doctrine of harmonious interpretation. 
When Articles 14 and 16 are harmoniously 
interpreted along with other Articles 341 

and 342, it is clear that Parliament will 
have complete freedom to include or 
exclude persons from the Presidential 
Lists based on relevant factors. Similarly, 
constitutional courts, when applying the 
principle of reservation, will be well within 
their jurisdiction to exclude the creamy 
layer from such groups or sub-groups 
when applying the principles of equality 
under 
Articles 

and 

of 
the 
Constitution of India. We do not agree with 
Balakrishnan, C.J.'s statement in Ashoka 
Kumar 
Thakur [Ashoka 
Kumar 
Thakur v. Union of India, (2008): 
3 SCEC 35] that the creamy layer principle 
is merely a principle of identification and 
not a principle of equality. 
 
28. Therefore, 
when Nagaraj [M. 
Nagaraj v. Union of India, (2006): (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 1013] applied the 
creamy layer test to Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes in exercise of application 
of the basic structure test to uphold the 
constitutional amendments leading to 
Articles 16(4-A) and 16(4-B), it did not in 
any manner interfere with Parliament's 
power under Article 341 or Article 342. We 
are, therefore, clearly of the opinion that 
this part of the judgment does not need to 
be revisited, and consequently, there is no 

need to refer Nagaraj [M. Nagaraj v. Union 
of India, (2006): (2007) 1 SCC 
(L&S) 1013] to a seven-Judge Bench. We 
may 
also 
add 
at 
this 
juncture 
that Nagaraj [M. Nagaraj v. Union of India, 
(2006): (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 
1013] is a unanimous judgment of five 
learned Judges of this Court which has 
held sway since the year 2006. This 
judgment has been repeatedly followed 
and applied by a number of judgments of 
this Court, namely: 
 
28.1.Anil 
Chandra v. Radha 
Krishna 
Gaur [Anil 
Chandra v. Radha 
Krishna 
Gaur, (2009): (2009) 2 SCC 
(L&S) 683] (two-Judge Bench) (see paras 
17 and 18). 
 
28.2.Suraj 
Bhan 
Meena v. State 
of 
Rajasthan [Suraj Bhan Meena v. State of 
Rajasthan, (2011): (2011) 1 
SCC (L&S) 1] (two-Judge Bench) (see paras 
10, 50, and 67). 
 
28.3.U.P. Power Corpn. Ltd. v. Rajesh 
Kumar [U.P. Power Corpn. Ltd. v. Rajesh 
Kumar, (2012): (2012) 2 SCC 
(L&S) 289] (two-Judge Bench) [see paras 
61, 81(ix), and 86]. 

28.4.S. Panneer Selvam v. State of T.N. [S. 
Panneer Selvam v. State of T.N., (2015): (2016) 1 SCC (L&S) 76] (two-
Judge Bench) (see paras 18, 19, and 36). 
 
28.5.Central 
Bank 
of 
India v. SC/ST 
Employees Welfare Assn. [Central Bank of 
India v. SC/ST Employees Welfare Assn., 
(2015): (2016) 1 SCC (L&S) 
355] (two-Judge Bench) (see paras 9 and 
26). 
 
28.6.Suresh Chand Gautam v. State of 
U.P. [Suresh Chand Gautam v. State of 
U.P., (2016): (2016) 2 SCC 
(L&S) 291] (two-Judge Bench) (see paras 2 
and 45). 
 
28.7.B.K. Pavitra v. Union of India [B.K. 
Pavitra v. Union of India, (2017): (2017) 2 SCC (L&S) 128] (two-Judge 
Bench) (see paras 17 to 22).” 
 
167. The Court in unequivocal terms held that when a court 
applies the creamy layer principle to Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes, it does not in any manner tinker with the 

Presidential List under Articles 341 or 342 of the Constitution of 
India. It is observed that the caste or group or sub-group named 
in the said List continues exactly as before. It has been further 
observed that it is only those persons within that group or sub-
group, who, on account of belonging to the creamy layer, have 
come out of untouchability or backwardness would be excluded 
from the benefit of reservation. 
168. The Court observed that even if we assume that Articles 341 
and 342 empower Parliament to exclude the creamy layer from 
the groups or sub-groups contained within the lists notified 
under Articles 341 and 342, constitutional courts, applying 
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution would be entitled to 
exclude the creamy layer. It has been held that the 
Constitutional 
Courts, 
when 
applying 
the 
principle 
of 
reservation, will be well within their jurisdiction to exclude the 
creamy layer from such groups or sub-groups when applying the 

principles of equality under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution 
of India. 
IV. PRESENT REFERENCE 
169. A 3-Judge Bench of this Court in the case of State of 
Punjab and others vs. Davinder Singh and others16 vide order 
dated 20th August 2014, doubted the correctness of the 
Constitution Bench decision of this Court in the case of E.V. 
Chinnaiah and referred it to the larger Bench. The larger Bench 
of 5-Learned Judges proposed the following issues17. 
“1.1. (i) Whether the provisions contained 
under 
Section 
4(5) 
of 
the 
Punjab 
Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes 
(Reservation in Services) Act, 2006 are 
constitutionally valid? 
 
1.2. (ii) Whether the State had the 
legislative 
competence 
to 
enact 
the 
provisions contained under Section 4(5) of 
the Act? 

16 (2020). 
17 (2020). 

1.3. (iii) Whether the decision in E.V. 
Chinnaiah v. State 
of 
A.P. [E.V. 
Chinnaiah v. State of A.P., (2005): (2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 329] is required 
to be revisited?” 
 
170. Vide the judgment in The State of Punjab & Ors. vs. 
Davinder Singh & Ors.18, the Constitution Bench observed 
thus: 
“52. The State has the competence to 
grant reservation benefit to the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in terms of 
Articles 15(4) and 16(4) and also Articles 
341(1) and 342(1). It prescribes the 
extent/percentage 
of 
reservation 
to 
different classes. The State Government 
can decide the manner and quantum of 
reservation. As such, the State can also 
make sub-classification when providing 
reservation to all Scheduled Castes in the 
List based on the rationale that would 
conform with the very spirit of Articles 14, 
15 and 16 of the Constitution providing 
reservation. The State Government cannot 
tamper with the List; it can neither include 
nor exclude any caste in the List or make 
enquiry whether any synonym exists as 
 
18 (2020). held 
in Milind [State 
of 
Maharashtra v. Milind, (2001): 
2001 SCC (L&S) 117]. 
 
53. The State Government is conferred 
with the power to provide reservation and 
to distribute it equitably. The State 
Government is the best judge as to the 
disparities in different areas. In our 
opinion, it is for the State Government to 
judge the equitable manner in which 
reservation has to be distributed. It can 
work out its methodology and give the 
preferential treatment to a particular class 
more backward out of Scheduled Castes 
without depriving others of benefit. 
 
54. Apart from that, the other class out of 
Scheduled 
Castes/Scheduled 
Tribes/socially 
and 
educationally 
backward classes, who is not denied the 
benefit of reservation, cannot claim that 
whole or a particular percentage of 
reservation 
should 
have 
been 
made 
available to them. The State can provide 
such preference on rational criteria to the 
class within Lists requiring upliftment. 
There is no vested right to claim that 
reservation should be at a particular 
percentage. It has to accord with ground 

reality as no one can claim the right to 
enjoy the whole reservation, it can be 
proportionate one as per requirement. The 
State cannot be deprived of measures for 
upliftment of various classes, at the same 
time, which is the very purpose of 
providing such measure. The spirit of the 
reservation is the upliftment of all the 
classes essential for the nation's progress. 
 
55. In the federal structure, the State, as 
well as Parliament, have a constitutional 
directive for the upliftment of Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and socially and 
(sic educationally) backward classes. Only 
inclusion or exclusion in the Presidential 
notification is by Parliament. The State 
Government has the right to provide 
reservation in the fields of employment 
and education. There is no constitutional 
bar to take further affirmative action as 
taken by the State Government in the 
cases to achieve the goal. By allotting a 
specific percentage out of reserved seats 
and to provide preferential treatment to a 
particular class, cannot be said to be 
violative of the List under Articles 341, 342 
and 342-A as no enlisted caste is denied 
the benefit of reservation. 

56. The “inadequate representation” is the 
fulcrum of the provisions of Article 16(4). 
In our opinion, it would be open to the 
State to provide on a rational basis the 
preferential treatment by fixing reasonable 
quota out of reserved seats to ensure 
adequate 
representation 
in 
services. 
Reservation is a very effective tool for 
emancipation of the oppressed class. The 
benefit by and large is not percolating 
down to the neediest and poorest of the 
poor. 
 
57. The interpretation of Articles 14, 15, 
16, 338, 341, 342 and 342-A is a matter of 
immense public importance, and correct 
interpretation 
of 
binding 
precedents 
in Indra 
Sawhney [Indra 
Sawhney v. Union of India, 1992 Supp (3) 
SCC 217: 1992 SCC (L&S) Supp 1] and 
other decisions. Though we have full 
respect for the principle of stare decisis, at 
the same time, the Court cannot be a 
silent spectator and shut eyes to stark 
realities. The constitutional goal of social 
transformation 
cannot 
be 
achieved 
without taking into account changing 
social realities.” 

171. Recording the above observations, the Constitution Bench 
requested the Hon’ble Chief Justice to place the matter before the 
7 Judges or more as considered appropriate. The matter was 
thus placed before the present Bench. 
V. 
CONSIDERATION 
172. At one stage, the atrocious caste discrimination in India had 
even surpassed the racial discrimination and the slave trade, 
premised on the colour of skin, in other parts of the world. For 
centuries the people belonging to certain castes were inhumanly 
treated by the upper classes in society. They have been treated 
worse than animals. They were not permitted to be touched by 
the upper classes. In some areas, even the upper classes did not 
permit the shadow of such people to fall on them. As such, while 
walking, they were required to maintain a distance so that their 
shadow does not pollute the upper caste. In some areas, they 
were required to tie a broom to their back so that they clean the 
path after they travel from the same. 

173. These people were also denied water from the common 
places. In the villages where the water was drawn from the rivers, 
they were required to draw water from the downstream so that 
the water taken by the people from higher classes is not polluted. 
They were also denied the right to education. In schools, either 
they were required to sit separately or take their lessons standing 
outside their classroom. 
174. While India was struggling to gain freedom from the colonial 
rulers, the country also witnessed a parallel movement for 
eradication of these inequalities and upliftment of the classes 
which were being treated inhumanly. 
175. It would be apposite to refer to the statement by Dr. B.R. 
Ambedkar in ‘Evidence before the Southborough Committee’ 
(1919), where he gave several examples of the unjust treatment 
meted out to the untouchables by the oppressor castes as thus19: 
 
19 B.R. Ambedkar, ‘Evidence before the Southborough Committee on Franchise’ in Dr. 
Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches, ed. Vasant Moon, Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment 2019, Vol.I, p. 255. 

“From an untouchable trader no Hindu 
will buy. An untouchable cannot be 
engaged in lucrative service. Military 
service had been the monopoly of the 
untouchables since the days of the East 
India Company. They had joined the Army 
in such large numbers … But after the 
mutiny when the British were able to 
secure soldiers from the ranks of the 
Marathas, the position of the low-caste 
men who had been the prop of the Bombay 
Army became precarious, not because the 
Marathas were better soldiers but because 
their theological bias prevented them from 
serving under low-caste officers. The 
prejudice was so strong that even the non-
caste British had to stop recruitment from 
the untouchable classes. In like manner, 
the untouchables are refused service in 
the Police Force. In a great many of the 
Government offices it is impossible for an 
untouchable to get a place. Even in the 
mills a distinction is observed. The 
untouchables are not admitted in Weaving 
Departments of the Cotton Mills though 
many of them are professional weavers. 
An instance at hand may be cited from the 
school 
system 
of 
the 
Bombay 
Municipality. This most cosmopolitan city 
ruled by a Corporation with a greater 
freedom than any other Corporation in 
India has two different sets of schools … 
one for the children of touchables and the 
other for those of the untouchables. This 

in itself is a point worthy of note. But 
there is something yet more noteworthy. 
Following the division of schools it has 
divided 
its 
teaching 
staff 
into 
untouchables and touchables. As the 
untouchable teachers are short of the 
demand, some of the untouchable schools 
are 
manned 
by 
teachers 
from 
the 
touchable class. The heart-killing fun of it 
is that if there is a higher grade open in 
untouchable school service, as there is 
bound to be because of a few untouchable 
trained teachers, a touchable teacher can 
be thrust into the grade. But if a higher 
grade is open in the touchable school 
service, no untouchable teacher can be 
thrust into that grade. He must wait till a 
vacancy 
occurs 
in 
the 
untouchable 
service! Such is the ethics of the Hindu 
social life.” 
176. Dr. Ambedkar in order to fight against the inhuman 
treatment of untouchables, who were not even allowed to draw 
water from the common place, held an agitation at Mahad known 
as “Mahad Satyagraha” on 20th March 1927 so that the 
untouchables could be permitted to draw water from a public 
tank at Mahad. 

177. Dr. Ambedkar also led agitations for opening the doors of 
places of worship to the untouchables. One such agitation which 
he led was in Nashik and was popularly known as “Kalaram 
Temple Satyagraha”. 
178. Dr. Ambedkar was of the view that if untouchables come 
out of that stigma and participate in nation-building, they will 
only contribute to the progress of the nation. He was of the view 
that the movement for removal of untouchability is in true sense 
a movement for nation-building and fraternity. 
179. I can gainfully refer to the collection of views of Dr. 
Ambedkar as put together lucidly by Anurag Bhaskar in the book 
appropriately titled as “The Foresighted Ambedkar”20, which 
reads thus: 
“He asserted that the issue of temple entry 
or access to public resources is an issue of 
equality. He stated: 
“Another argument these Touchables 
give is that even if they do not allow 
 
20 Anurag Bhaskar, The Foresighted Ambedkar: Ideas that shaped Indian constitutional 
Discourse (Viking by Penguin Random House 2024). the Untouchables into their temples, 
all are free to build a temple for 
themselves. I would like to ask those 
so-called learned ones why they 
object 
to 
Railways 
for 
having 
separate coaches for Whites and 
Indians? …There is only one answer 
to this and that is: it is not a matter 
of travel only, it is a matter of 
equality! … The Untouchables have 
the same reason for demanding the 
right to worship God in the same 
temple. They want to prove that the 
temple is not defiled by their entry 
….. 
The 
Untouchables 
are 
not 
servants … On the basis of this alone 
they should accept the rights of the 
Untouchables. And when there are 
rights there is no question of custom 
of usage.”21 
He further added that public property 
cannot be used as the private property of 
the oppressor castes. He noted: 
“Legally, the right to public property 
is not required to be established by 
any 
deed; 
it 
is 
available 
automatically to everybody. Even if 
he has no usage or it was not 
continuous, it does not deprive him 
of that right. Suppose, somebody did 
 
21 Narendra Jadhav, Ambedkar: Awakening India’s Social Conscience. (Konark Publishers 
Pvt. Ltd. 2014). not walk on a particular road, does 
that mean he can never use that 
road? Therefore, it would be quite 
idiotic 
to 
say 
that 
since 
Untouchables never went to the 
temple or never drew water from the 
public wells, so now they cannot do 
that.”22 
Dr. 
Ambedkar 
also 
dismissed 
the 
contention of the oppressor castes that the 
Untouchables should wait for them to 
change and allow equal rights. He referred 
to the Thirteenth Amendment to the 
American Constitution, which abolished 
slavery, to demand accountability and 
action from the oppressor castes. He 
stated: 
“I am aware that some Touchables 
are suggesting that the matter of 
equal rights for the Untouchables 
should be allowed to be resolved by 
the Touchables amongst themselves. 
It 
cannot 
be 
resolved 
by 
the 
movement of the Untouchables. The 
Untouchables should wait till the 
Touchables willingly allow them such 
equal rights. How can it be trusted 
that they will willingly grant such 
rights to the Untouchables? It will be 
sheer stupidity to wait for such a 
miracle to happen … Another section 
 
22 Ibid. of the Touchables tells us that even if 
we launch our movement, we will not 
succeed. If we launch a struggle, 
whatever few Touchables who have 
sympathy with our cause will feel 
offended and we will lose their 
sympathy. 
 
The 
progressive 
Touchables 
will 
then 
join 
the 
orthodox Hindus against us. I want 
to tell them that if they have 
sympathy 
for 
us, 
if 
they 
feel 
anguished 
about 
the 
injustice 
caused to us, then they should 
support us wholeheartedly like the 
Whites supported the Blacks in 
America to end slavery. Otherwise, it 
does not matter whether you have 
sympathy or hatred towards us.””23 
180. Accordingly, when I consider the present issue, I will have 
to consider it in this background. 
181. It is a matter of great coincidence that Dr. Ambedkar, who 
fought for the cause of social equality and eradication of inhuman 
treatment for generations, got an opportunity to work as the 
Chief Architect of the Constitution of India. 
 
23 Ibid. 

182. I have already referred to his speech on draft Article 300A 
and draft Article 300B (now Articles 341 and 342). It will also be 
apposite to refer to the relevant part of Dr. Ambedkar’s speech on 
30th November 1948 on Article 16 (which was draft Article 10), 
which reads thus: 
“Article 

(Article 

in 
Draft 
Constitution) 
The Hon’ble Dr. B.R. Ambedkar: ……..As I 
said, the Drafting Committee had to 
produce a formula which would reconcile 
these three points of view, firstly, that 
there shall be equality of opportunity, 
secondly that there shall be reservations 
in favour of certain communities which 
have not so far had a ‘proper look-in’ so to 
say into the administration. If honourable 
Members will bear these facts in mind–the 
three principles, we had to reconcile,–they 
will see that no better formula could be 
produced than the one that is embodied in 
sub-clause (3) of article 10 of the 
Constitution; they will find that the view of 
those who believe and hold that there shall 
be equality of opportunity, has been 
embodied in sub-clause (1) of Article 10. It 
is a generic principle. At the same time, as 
I said, we had to reconcile this formula 
with 
the 
demand 
made 
by 
certain 

communities 
that 
the 
administration 
which has now–for historical reasons–
been controlled by one community or a few 
communities, 
that 
situation 
should 
disappear and that the others also must 
have an opportunity of getting into the 
public services. Supposing, for instance, 
we were to concede in full the demand of 
those communities who have not been so 
far employed in the public services to the 
fullest extent, what would really happen 
is, we shall be completely destroying the 
first proposition upon which we are all 
agreed, namely, that there shall be an 
equality of opportunity. Let me give an 
illustration. 
Supposing, 
for 
instance, 
reservations were made for a community 
or a collection of communities, the total of 
which came to something like 70 per cent 
of the total posts under the State and only 
30 per cent are retained as the unreserved. 
Could anybody say that the reservation of 
30 per cent as open to general competition 
would be satisfactory from the point of 
view of giving effect to the first principle, 
namely, that there shall be equality of 
opportunity? It cannot be in my judgment. 
Therefore the seats to be reserved, if the 
reservation is to be consistent with sub-
clause (1) of Article 10, must be confined 
to a minority of seats. It is then only that 
the first principle could find its place in the 
Constitution and effective in operation. If 
honourable Members understand this 

position that we have to safeguard two 
things namely, the principle of equality of 
opportunity and at the same time satisfy 
the demand of communities which have 
not had so far representation in the State, 
then, I am sure they will agree that unless 
you use some such qualifying phrase as 
“backward” the exception made in favour 
of reservation will ultimately eat up the 
rule altogether. Nothing of the rule will 
remain. That I think, if I may say so, is the 
justification why the Drafting Committee 
undertook on its own shoulders the 
responsibility of introducing the word 
`backward’ which, I admit, did not 
originally find a place in the fundamental 
right in the way in which it was passed by 
this Assembly………..” 
183. It could thus be seen that Dr. Ambedkar emphasized that a 
formula was required to be produced which would reconcile these 
three points of view, firstly, that there shall be equality of 
opportunity, secondly that there shall be reservations in favour 
of certain communities which have not so far had a ‘proper look-
in’ so to say into the administration. Dr. Ambedkar states that 
the equality of opportunity as specified in clause (1) has to be 
reconciled with the demand made by certain communities. He 

states that on account of historical reasons, the administration 
has been controlled by one community or a few communities, 
that such a situation should disappear and that the others also 
must have an opportunity of getting into the public services. 
However, he states that if the demand of such communities, in 
full, is accepted, it will destroy the first principle of equality 
guaranteed in clause (1). He gives an instance that if certain 
communities which are unrepresented or a group of communities 
have a population of 70% and if 70% reservation is provided for 
such communities, leaving only 30% for the open competition, it 
will destroy the very concept of equality of opportunity. He 
therefore advocates for confinement of reservation to a minority 
of seats. He therefore states that unless some qualifying phrase 
as “backward” is used for making reservation, the entire rule 
would be unworkable. He therefore justifies the efforts of the 
Drafting Committee in employing the word ‘backward’. 

184. It will further be apposite to refer to the following 
observation in the said speech. 
Article 

(Article 

in 
Draft 
Constitution) 
“The 
Hon’ble 
Dr. 
B.R. 
Ambedkar: 
……..Somebody asked me: “What is a 
backward community”? Well, I think 
anyone who reads the language of the 
draft itself will find that we have left it to 
be determined by each local Government. 
A backward community is a community 
which is backward in the opinion of the 
Government. My honourable Friend, Mr. 
T. T. Krishnamachari asked me whether 
this rule will be justiciable. It is rather 
difficult to give a dogmatic answer. 
Personally I think it would be a justiciable 
matter. If the local Government included 
in this category of reservations such a 
large number of seats, I think one could 
very well go to the Federal Court and the 
Supreme 
Court 
and 
say 
that 
the 
reservation is of such a magnitude that the 
rule regarding equality of opportunity has 
been destroyed and the court will then 
come to the conclusion whether the local 
Government or the State Government has 
acted in a reasonable and prudent 
manner. …………” 

185. Dr. Ambedkar observed that “what is a backward 
community” will have to be determined by each local 
Government. A backward community, in his view, is a 
community which is backward in the opinion of the Government. 
He also foresighted that if the local Government included in this 
category of reservations such a large number of seats, one could 
very well go to the Federal Court and the Supreme Court and 
contend that the reservation is of such a magnitude that the rule 
regarding equality of opportunity has been destroyed. He also 
foresighted that the court will then conclude whether the local 
Government or the State Government has acted in a reasonable 
and prudent manner. 
186. His foresight as to the debate regarding the identification of 
the backward classes and the extent of reservations can be 
judged from the spate of litigations that this country has 
witnessed for last 74 years. 

187. It could thus be seen that initially insofar as the issue 
regarding the identification of the backward classes except the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes was concerned, the 
same was left to the Executive. Insofar as the identification of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is concerned, the 
Constitution of India under Articles 341 and 342 provided the 
issuance of a general notification specifying all the castes and 
tribes or groups thereof to be Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes for the purposes of privileges which have been defined in 
the Constitution. 
188. I have already referred to Dr. Ambedkar’s speech about the 
introduction of the said provisions. He, however, stated that if 
any elimination was to be made from the list so notified or any 
addition was to be made then they must be made by Parliament 
and not by the President. He stated that the object behind the 
same was to eliminate any kind of political factors having play in 
the matter. 

189. As already discussed herein above, the question insofar as 
identification of Other Backward Classes is concerned, was left 
to the State. Insofar as the identification of Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes is concerned, the same was complete at 
the stage of enactment of the Constitution in view of Articles 341 
and 342 and any addition or alteration to the said notified list 
was permissible only by an Act of Parliament. It is further to be 
noted that the foundation of the Presidential List issued under 
Articles 341 and 342 finds place in the 1936 Order issued under 
the provisions of the 1935 Act. 
190. No doubt that by the Constitution (One hundred and 
Second Amendment) Act, 2018, Article 342A regarding socially 
and educationally backward classes has been inserted. Clause 
(26C) in Article 366 of the Constitution of India has also been 
inserted by the said Amendment insofar as socially and 
educationally backward classes are concerned. It was sought to 
be argued before us that in view of the Constitution (One hundred 

and Second Amendment) Act, 2018, read with the law laid down 
by this Court in the case of Indra Sawhney regarding Other 
Backward Classes, the judgment of this Court in E.V. Chinnaiah 
needs a relook. 
191. I do not find it necessary to go into that aspect of the matter, 
since I find that E.V. Chinnaiah does not correctly consider the 
provisions of Articles 46, 335, 14, 15 and 16 of the Constitution 
of India, as have been interpreted by the earlier precedents of this 
Court. I have discussed hereinbelow in depth as to how E.V. 
Chinnaiah incorrectly interpreted the earlier precedents. 
192. This Court in E.V. Chinnaiah in paragraph 13, while 
considering the effect of Article 341 of the Constitution, held that 
there can be only one list of Scheduled Castes in regard to a State 
and that list should include all specified castes, races or tribes or 
part or groups notified in that Presidential List. It is further 
observed that any inclusion or exclusion from the said list can 
only be done by Parliament under Article 341(2) of the 

Constitution. This Court held that there is no reference to any 
sub-classification or division in the said list in any of the 
provisions of the Constitution except, maybe, for the limited 
purpose of Article 330, which refers to reservation of seats for 
Scheduled Castes in the House of the People. This Court held 
that it was clear to it that the Constitution intended all the castes 
including the subcastes, races and tribes mentioned in the list to 
be members of one group for the purpose of the Constitution and 
this group could not be subdivided for any purpose. 
193. Thereafter, referring to the view expressed by Mathew, J., 
Krishna Iyer, J and Fazal Ali, J. in the case of N.M. Thomas, it 
is held in paragraph 26 that castes once included in the 
Presidential List, form a class by themselves. Then the Court 
held that if they are one class under the Constitution, any 
division of these classes of persons based on any consideration 
would amount to tinkering with the Presidential List. 

194. In paragraph 31, it is observed that once the State reserve 
certain seats in educational institutions under Article 15(4) and 
in public services of the State under Article 16(4) in fulfillment of 
its constitutional obligation, it is not open to the State to 
subclassify a class already recognized by the Constitution and 
allot a portion of the already reserved quota amongst the State-
created subclass within the list of Scheduled Castes. 
195. In paragraph 38, this Court after referring to the case of 
Indra Sawhney held that the principles laid down in Indra 
Sawhney for sub-classification of Other Backward Classes 
cannot be applied for subclassification or subgrouping of 
Scheduled Castes in the Presidential List because that very 
judgment itself specifically held that subdivision of Other 
Backward Classes is not applicable to Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. 
196. In paragraph 41, this Court held that the conglomeration of 
castes given in the Presidential Order, in their opinion, should be 

considered as representing a class as a whole. It is held that the 
very idea of placing different castes or tribes or group or part 
thereof in a State as a conglomeration by way of a deeming 
definition clearly suggested that they were not to be subdivided 
or subclassified further. It goes on to hold that if a class within a 
class of members of the Scheduled Castes is created, the same 
would amount to tinkering with the list and would amount to 
violation of Article 14 of the Constitution. The Court then 
disagreed with the High Court that for the purpose of identifying 
backwardness, a further inquiry can be made by appointing a 
commission as to who amongst the members of the Scheduled 
Castes is more backward. The Court, taking note of the fact that 
the benefits of reservation are not percolating to them equitably, 
suggested that measures should be taken to see that they are 
given such adequate or additional training to enable them to 
compete with the others. 

197. This Court in paragraph 43 observed that the very fact that 
the members of the Scheduled Castes are most backward 
amongst the backward classes and the impugned legislation 
having already proceeded on the basis that they are not 
adequately represented, a further classification by way of micro-
classification was not permissible. 
198. To ascertain if E.V. Chinnaiah is good law, I will have to 
first examine whether the finding in E.V. Chinnaiah that N.M. 
Thomas held the Scheduled Castes to be a homogeneous group 
is correct or not. 
199. E.V. Chinnaiah relies on the judgment of Mathew, J. in 
N.M. Thomas. In paragraph 82, what Mathew, J. observed is 
that it is by virtue of the notification of the President that the 
Scheduled Castes come into being. It has been observed that 
though the members of the Scheduled Castes are drawn from 
castes, races or tribes, they attain a new status by virtue of the 
Presidential Notification. 

200. It cannot be disputed that there is no caste by the name of 
“Scheduled Castes”. As has been discussed in earlier paragraphs, 
the term “Scheduled Castes” has come on account of the 1936 
Order and the 1950 Order. 
201. There can be no doubt that once the castes, races, tribes or 
part of or groups of such castes, races or tribes are included in 
the Presidential Notification they shall be deemed to be 
Scheduled Castes for the purposes of the Constitution. 
202. Then E.V. Chinnaiah refers to the judgment of Krishna 
Iyer, J. in N.M. Thomas. Krishna Iyer, J. in paragraph 135 
observed that a bare reading of Article 341 and 342 shows that 
there are no castes in the Hindu fold but an amalgam of castes, 
races, groups, tribes, communities or parts thereof found on 
investigation to be the lowliest and in need of massive State aid 
and notified as such by the President. The Learned Judge 
observed that to confuse this backwardmost social composition 
with castes is to commit a constitutional error. 

203. The observations made by the Learned Judge are in the 
context of the arguments that any special treatment on the 
ground of caste is prohibited under Article 16(2). The Learned 
Judge observed that Article 16(2) was not coming in the way to 
extend protective discrimination to this mixed bag of tribes, 
races, groups, communities and non-castes outside the four-fold 
Hindu division. The Learned Judge further observed that the 
Indian jurisprudence has generally regarded Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes not as caste but as a large backward group 
deserving of societal compassion. 
204. E.V. Chinnaiah thereafter relies on Fazal Ali, J.’s 
judgment. 
205. Again, the observations made by Fazal Ali, J. in paragraph 
169, are with regard to the arguments based on prohibition of 
Article 16(2). It is observed that the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes do not fall with the purview of Article 16(2) of 
the Constitution, which prohibits discrimination between the 

members of the same caste. It is observed that if, therefore, the 
members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes are 
not castes, then it is open to the State to make reasonable 
classification to advance or lift these classes so that they may be 
able to be properly represented in the services under the State. 
206. However, on reading of the majority judgments in N.M. 
Thomas it does not show that the Scheduled Castes are 
homogeneous group and sub-classification therein is not 
permissible. 
207. In paragraph 44 of the judgment in N.M. Thomas, Ray, C.J. observed that the equality of opportunity for unequals can only 
mean aggravation of inequality; equality of opportunity admits 
discrimination with reason and prohibits discrimination without 
reason; and discrimination with reasons means rational 
classification for differential treatment having nexus to the 
constitutionally 
permissible 
object. 
It 
is 
observed 
that 
preferential representation for the Backward Classes in services 

with due regard to administrative efficiency is permissible object 
and Backward Classes are a rational classification recognized by 
the Constitution. He therefore held that the differential treatment 
in standards of selection is within the concept of equality. 
208. Mathew, J. in paragraph 54, refers to the principle of 
proportional equality and held that it can be attained only when 
equals are treated equally and unequals unequally. He held that 
differential treatment would be allowed if there is significant 
difference among the persons who are treated differentially. 
209. In paragraph 73, the Learned Judge observed that the State 
should adopt a standard of proportional equality which takes 
account of the differing conditions and circumstances of a class 
of citizens whenever those conditions and circumstances stand 
in the way of their equal access to the enjoyment of basic rights 
or claims. 
210. In paragraph 75, the Learned Judge observed that such sort 
of preferential treatment would be permissible under Article 16(1) 

as such a preferential treatment alone would put the backward 
class people on a parity with the forward communities. The 
Learned Judge observed that whether there is equality of 
opportunity can be gauged only by the equality attained in the 
result. He states that formal equality of opportunity simply 
enables people with more education and intelligence to capture 
all the posts and to win over the less fortunate in education and 
talent even when the competition is fair. It is observed that the 
equality of result is the test of equality of opportunity. 
211. Krishna Iyer, J. in paragraph 119 refers to the concept of 
‘social engineering’. He quotes from a book that “One law for the 
Lion and Ox is oppression”. 
212. In paragraph 129, after considering the constitutional 
scheme, the Learned Judge observed that the Constitution itself 
demarcates harijans from others. That this is based on the stark 
backwardness of this bottom layer of the community. It is 
observed that the differentiation has been made to cover 

specifically the area of appointments to posts under the State. 
He further held that the twin objects, blended into one, are the 
claims of harijans to be considered in such posts and the 
maintenance of administrative efficiency. The Learned Judge 
observed that the State has been obligated to promote the 
economic interests of harijans and like backward classes. 
213. In paragraph 142, the Learned Judge observed that the 
genius of Articles 14 to 16 consists not in literal equality but in 
progressive elimination of pronounced inequality. He observed 
that to treat sharply dissimilar persons equally is subtle 
injustice. 
214. In paragraph 149, Krishna Iyer, J. while concluding 
observed that “the heady upper berth occupants from ‘backward’ 
classes do double injury. They beguile the broad community into 
believing that backwardness is being banished. They rob the 
need-based bulk of the backward of the ‘office’ advantages the 
nation, by classification, reserves or proffers”. 

215. Fazal Ali, J. in paragraph 165, referring to clauses (24) and 
(25) of Article 366 of the Constitution observed that the said 
provisions create a presumption in favour of Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes that they are backward classes of citizens. 
It is observed that it is not disputed that the members of the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are specified in the 
notifications issued under Articles 341 and 342 of the 
Constitution and, therefore, they must be deemed to be 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of the 
Constitution. 
216. In paragraph 178, the Learned Judge observed that the 
concept of equality or equal opportunity as contained in Article 
16 does not mean that same laws must be applicable to all 
persons under every circumstance. He observed that if this 
artificial interpretation is put on the scope and ambit of Article 
16 it will lead to channelization of legislation or polarization of 
rules. It is observed that differences and disparities exist among 

men and things, and they cannot be treated alike by the 
application of the same laws. He observed that the law has to 
come to terms with life and must be able to recognize the genuine 
differences and disparities that exist in human nature. 
217. The Learned Judge also held that the equality enshrined in 
clause (1) of Article 16 of the Constitution inherently implies that 
the opportunity must be given not only to a particular section of 
the society or a particular class of citizens who may be advanced 
or otherwise more affluent but to all classes of citizens. He 
observed that that this can be achieved by making a reasonable 
classification so that every class of citizens is duly represented in 
services which will enable equality of opportunity to all citizens. 
He lays down the conditions for the classification to be a 
reasonable one. 
218. It can thus be seen that in none of the judgments in N.M. 
Thomas it is held that the Scheduled Castes are a homogeneous 
class. It has been held that once the Scheduled Castes and 

Scheduled Tribes have been identified and they find a place in 
the Presidential List, they will continue to be the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. It has been held that by the very 
fact of they being included in the Presidential List, they are 
deemed to be backward and no further enquiry regarding their 
backwardness would be warranted. 
219. In Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh (supra), 
Krishna Iyer, J., in paragraph 94, rejects the plea that because a 
few harijans are better off, therefore, the bulk at the bottom 
deserves no jack-up provisions and that a swallow does not make 
a summer. He further observed that maybe, the State may, when 
social conditions warrant, justifiably restrict harijan benefits to 
the harijans among the harijans and forbid the higher harijans 
from robbing the lowlier brethren. 
220. Again, in paragraph 98, he considered the argument that 
there are rich and influential harijans who rob all the privileges 
leaving the serf-level sufferers as suppressed as ever. He advised 

the Administration to innovate and classify to weed out the 
creamy layer of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes. However, 
he observed that the Court cannot force the State in that behalf. 
221. In K.C. Vasanth Kumar, Chandrachud, C.J. in paragraph 
2, observed that the reservation in employment and education in 
favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes must continue 
without the application of a means test for a further period not 
exceeding 15 years. He observed that after the said period of 15 
years, the test of economic backwardness ought to be made 
applicable even to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
Insofar as Other Backward Classes are concerned, he stated that 
two tests should be conjunctively applied for identifying them for 
the purpose of reservations in employment and education: One, 
that they should be comparable to the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes in the matter of their backwardness; and two, 
that they should satisfy the means test such as a State 

Government may lay down in the context of prevailing economic 
conditions. 
222. Desai, J. in paragraph 31, observed that the approach 
suggested by him does not deal with reservation in favour of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes since thousands of years 
of discrimination and exploitation cannot be wiped out in one 
generation. However, he suggested that even in their cases 
economic criterion is worth applying by refusing preferred 
treatment to those amongst them who have already benefited by 
it and improved their position. 
223. Chinnappa Reddy, J. in paragraph 51 did not agree with the 
view that while determining the social backwardness of other 
classes, the test to be applied is nearness to the conditions of 
existence of the Scheduled Castes. He observed that such a test 
would practically nullify the provision for reservation for socially 
and educationally backward classes other than Scheduled 
Castes and Tribes. 

224. Chinnappa Reddy, J. in paragraph 79, notes that a few 
members of those castes or social groups may have progressed 
far enough and forged ahead to compare favourably with the 
leading forward class economically, socially and educationally. 
He suggests that in such cases, perhaps an upper income ceiling 
would secure the benefit of reservation to such of those members 
of the class who really deserve it. 
225. As already discussed hereinabove, the 9-Judge Bench of 
this Court in Indra Sawhney has in unequivocal terms held that 
further classification of backward classes into more backward 
classes is permissible in law. 
226. Jeevan Reddy, J. in paragraph 802, in the case of Indra 
Sawhney, gives an illustration with regard to two occupational 
groups viz., goldsmiths and vaddes (traditional stonecutters in 
Andhra Pradesh). He stated that both are included within Other 
Backward Classes. He observed that none can deny that 
goldsmiths are far less backward than vaddes and so if both are 

grouped together and reservation provided, the inevitable result 
would be that goldsmiths would take away all the reserved posts 
leaving none for vaddes. The Learned Judge further observed 
that in such a situation, a State may think it advisable to make 
a categorization even among other backward classes so as to 
ensure that the more backward among the backward classes 
obtain the benefits intended for them. He stated that where to 
draw the line and how to effect the sub-classification, however, 
is a matter for the Commission and the State and so long as it is 
reasonably done, the Court may not intervene. 
227. It will also be relevant to note that in paragraph 803, the 
Learned Judge observed that Article 16(4) recognizes only one 
class i.e., “backward class of citizens”. It does not speak 
separately of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, as does 
Article 15(4). The Learned Judge observed that it is beyond 
controversy that Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are also 
included in the expression “backward class of citizens” and that 

separate reservations can be provided in their favour. The 
Learned Judge observed that if Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled 
Castes and Other Backward Classes are lumped together, OBCs 
will take away all the vacancies leaving Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes high and dry. He states that the same logic also 
warrants categorization as between more backward and 
backward. 
228. As has already been noted before, in paragraph 781 of 
Indra Sawhney, Jeevan Reddy, J. states that for the purpose of 
the discussion in the judgment, the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes, which were admittedly included within the 
backward classes, were kept aside. 
229. It is pertinent to note that the said discussion in the 
judgment was pertaining to “identification” of backward classes 
of citizens. As discussed hereinabove, insofar as the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes are concerned, identification is 

already covered by the Presidential List issued under Artiles 341 
and 342. 
230. Sawant, J. in his judgment also held that Article 16(4) 
permits classification of backward classes into backward and 
more or most backward classes. However, this classification is 
permitted only because of the degrees of social backwardness 
and not based on economic consideration alone. He held that if 
backward classes are classified into backward and more or most 
backward classes, separate quotas of reservations would be kept 
for each of such classes. In the absence of such separate quotas, 
the reservations will be illegal. 
231. This Court in E.V. Chinnaiah has observed that the law 
laid down in the case of Indra Sawhney would not be applicable 
since Jeevan Reddy, J. in his judgment has himself stated that 
the same would not be applicable to Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes in paragraph 781, which paragraph deals with 
identification of backward classes of citizens. Jeevan Reddy, J. states that for the purpose of the said discussion, we keep aside 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. He observed that 
this was done since they are admittedly included within the 
backward classes. However, in paragraph 803, he specifically 
observed that under Article 16(4) there is no mention of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and that Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes are also part of backward class of 
citizens. 
232. Insofar as the observation in paragraph 792 wherein Jeevan 
Reddy, J. observed that the said discussion has no relevance in 
the case of Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes is concerned, 
the said discussion was regarding applicability of the ‘means test’ 
or ‘creamy layer test’. 
233. That being the case, if the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes are a part of backward class of citizens under Article 16(4), 
then the question would be, as to why sub-classification which 

is permitted in case of Other Backward Classes cannot be 
permitted in case of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes? 
234. Though the initial view of this Court was that Article 16(4) 
is by way of exception to Article 16(1), the same has undergone a 
thorough change, particularly after the judgment of this Court in 
the 
case 
of 
His 
Holiness 
Kesavananda 
Bharati 
Sripadagalavaru vs. State of Kerala24 in relation to interplay 
between the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles. 
Shortly after the judgment in Kesavananda Bharati, came the 
judgment of 7-Judge Bench of this Court in N.M. Thomas 
wherein the 5-Learned Judges took a view that Article 16(4) was 
not by way of exception to Article 16(1). It was held that the 
trinity of Articles 14 to 16 embodied the concept of equality. It 
was emphasized that equality does not mean equality to all. It 
was held that equality as enshrined under the Constitution did 
not mean formal equality but real equality. It was held that to 
 
24 (1973): 1973 Supp. SCR 1. bring real equality unequal treatment to unequals was what was 
contemplated under the Constitution. It was held that if 
unequals are to be treated equally it will lead to nothing else but 
perpetuating inequality. It was held that only giving an unequal 
treatment to unequals so that they can march ahead can bring 
out real equality. 
235. This Court in unequivocal terms held that preferential 
treatment for members of backward classes alone can mean 
equality of opportunity for all citizens. The Court held that clause 
(4) of Article 16 was an emphatic way of stating a principle 
implicit in Article 16 (1). 
236. Ray, C.J. observed that all legitimate methods were 
available for equality of opportunity in services under Article 
16(1). He stated that Article 16(4) indicates one of the methods of 
achieving equality embodied in Article 16(1) 
237. Mathew, J. observed that the claim for equality is in fact a 
protest against unjust, underserved and unjustified inequalities. 

It is a symbol of man’s revolt against chance, fortuitous disparity, 
unjust power and crystallized privileges. He stated that if 
equality of opportunity guaranteed under Article 16(1) means 
effective material equality, then Article 16(4) is not an exception 
to Article 16(1). It is only an emphatic way of putting the extent 
to which equality of opportunity could be carried i.e., even up to 
the point of making reservation. 
238. In paragraph 83, he emphatically states that it is a mistake 
to assume a priori that there can be no classification within a 
class. He states that if there are intelligible differentia which 
separates a group within that class from the rest and that 
differentia has nexus with the object of classification, then there 
should be no objection to a further classification within the class. 
239. Krishna Iyer, J. in paragraph 124 refers to the research 
conducted by the A.N. Sinha Institute of Social Studies, Patna 
which would reveal a dual society among harijans, a tiny elite 
gobbling up the benefits and the darker layers sleeping distances 

away from the special concessions. He observed that, for them, 
Articles 46 and 335 remain a ‘noble romance’, the bonanza going 
to the ‘higher’ harijans. He states in paragraph 136 that Article 
16(4) need not be a saving clause but put in due to the over-
anxiety of the draftsman to make matters clear beyond possibility 
of doubt. He observes in paragraph 142 that the genius of 
Articles 14 to 16 consists not in literal equality but in progressive 
elimination of pronounced inequality. According to him, to treat 
sharply dissimilar persons equally is subtle injustice. He held 
that if Article 16(4) admits of reasonable classification, so does 
Article 16(1). 
240. In K.C. Vasanth Kumar, Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J. observed 
that the test of economic backwardness ought to be made 
applicable even to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
after a period of 15 years from the date of the judgment. Desai, 
J. in the said judgment observed that even in the case of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes the economic criterion 

was worth applying by refusing preferred treatment to those 
amongst them who have already benefitted by it and improved 
their position. 
241. Fazal Ali, J., after referring to all the judgments of the 
Learned Judges in Kesavananda Bharati with regard to 
interplay between Part III and Part IV of the Constitution, held 
that Fundamental Rights guaranteed by the Constitution has to 
be read in harmony with the Directive Principles contained in 
Part IV. He also reiterates that Article 16(4) is not a proviso to 
Article 16(1). 
242. M.H. Beg, J. concurs with the views expressed by the 
aforesaid Learned Judges. 
243. Further, Krishya Iyer, J. in Akhil Bharatiya Soshit 
Karamchari Sangh reiterates that Articles 14 to 16 form a code 
by themselves and embody the distilled essence of the 
Constitution’s casteless and classless egalitarianism. He states 
that Article 46, in emphatic terms, obligates the State “to 

promote with 
special 
care the 
educational 
and 
economic 
interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, 
of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall 
protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation”. 
He states that reading Article 46 together with Article 16(4), the 
inference is obvious that administrative participation by the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall be promoted with 
special care by the State. 
244. While considering the criticism that there are rich and 
influential harijans who rob all the privileges leaving the serf-level 
sufferers as suppressed as ever, he suggested that the 
Administration may well innovate and classify to weed out the 
creamy layer of SCs/STs. However, records a caution that the 
Court cannot force the State in that behalf. 
245. Chinnappa Reddy, J. in the same judgment states that it 
becomes the duty of the Court to apply the Directive Principles 
in interpreting the Constitution and the laws. He states that the 

Directive Principles should serve the courts as a code of 
interpretation. He states that the Fundamental Rights should be 
interpreted in the light of the Directive Principles and the latter 
should, whenever and wherever possible, be read into the former. 
246. Chinnappa Reddy, J advocates that the State action should 
be towards protection and nourishment of the underprivileged, 
the deprived and the exploited so that they can take their place 
in an egalitarian society. 
247. In Indra Sawhney, 7 Learned Judges affirmed the position 
as laid down in N.M. Thomas that clause (4) of Article 16 is not 
by way of an exception to clause (1) of Article 16, but it is an 
emphatic way of stating a principle implicit in Article 16(1). 
248. As already discussed hereinabove, it has been held that 
further classification of backward classes into backward and 
more backward classes is permissible under the Constitution. 
The only caveat put by Sawant, J. is that if it is done there has 
to be a reservation for both backward as well as for more or most 

backward classes. It has been held in Indra Sawhney that 
under Article 16(4) the Scheduled Castes are also included in the 
term ‘backward class of citizens’. 
249. If that be so, I find no justification in E.V. Chinnaiah 
holding that the State is not empowered to do the exercise of sub-
classification among the Scheduled Castes. 
250. The basic error that appears to have been committed in E.V. 
Chinnaiah is that it proceeds on the understanding that Article 
341 has to do with the reservation of the seats. 
251. As already discussed hereinabove, Articles 341 and 342 are 
only with regard to identification of the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. Articles 341 and 342 read with clauses (24) 
and (25) of Article 366 of the Constitution provide that those 
castes included in the Presidential List shall be deemed to be 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of the 
Constitution. However, at the cost of repetition, I reiterate that 
Articles 341 and 342 do not deal with reservation. 

252. The provisions of affirmative action including reservations 
in the matter of public employment are contained in Article 16 of 
the Constitution of India. 
253. As already discussed herein above, this Court in Indra 
Sawhney has held that further classification of backward classes 
into backward and more backward classes is permissible in law. 
254. By that corollary, if a State finds that any of the castes, 
races, tribes or part of or groups within the castes, races or tribes 
are not adequately represented, could the State be denied its 
right to make a special provision for that? 
255. In a catena of decisions, this Court held that the State must 
resort to compensatory State action for the purpose of making 
people who are factually unequal in their wealth, education or 
social environment, equal in specified areas. It has been held that 
State should take affirmative action by way of giving preference 
and reservation to the socially and economically disadvantaged 
persons or inflicting handicaps on those more advantageously 

placed, to bring about real equality. Reference in this respect 
may be made to the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court 
in the case of Marri Chandra Shekhar Rao vs. Dean, Seth G.S. 
Medical College and others25, wherein this Court observed 
thus: 
“20. …. Reservations should and must be 
adopted to advance the prospects of 
weaker sections of society, but while doing 
so care should be taken not to exclude the 
legitimate 
expectations 
of 
the 
other 
segments of the community.” 
 
256. Some startling facts have been brought to our notice. 
Though the Presidential List for the State of Andhra Pradesh has 
a list of 60 Scheduled Castes, Justice Usha Mehra Commission 
Report26 shows that out of these 60 Scheduled Castes, only 4 or 
5 had availed the benefits of reservation, leaving the rest of the 
Scheduled Castes in the Presidential List high and dry. The 
 
25 (1990). 
26 Report of Justice Usha Mehra National Commission on Sub-Categorization of Scheduled 
Castes in Andhra Pradesh (submitted to Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
Government of India on 1st May 2008). 

Report shows that the same has resulted in an anomaly that 
none of the majority caste despite their inclusion in the 
Presidential List for the State of Andhra Pradesh, have been able 
to seek reservation benefits including entry into Government 
service under the State except for the job of Sweepers and/or 
Farash. 
257. Insofar as the State of Punjab is concerned, it is sought to 
be urged on behalf of the State of Punjab that though Balmikis 
and Mazhabi Sikhs constitute 41.9% of the total population of 
the Scheduled Castes, the percentage of these categories in 
public employment is totally disproportionate to their population 
among the Scheduled Castes. In any case, it is urged that what 
is provided under the Act27 was only differential treatment insofar 
as 50% of the vacancies reserved for Scheduled Castes is 
concerned. Only if the candidates from these categories are 
 
27 Section 4(5) of The Punjab Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes (Reservation in 
Services) Act, 2006 (Punjab Act No. 22 of 2006). available, the seats would go to these categories. On account of 
non-availability of the candidates from these categories, the seats 
would fall into the other categories of the Scheduled Castes. 
258. I find that, as has been observed by this Court in various 
judgments, it is the duty of the State to give preferential 
treatment to the backward class of citizens who are not 
adequately represented. If the State while discharging that duty 
finds that certain categories within the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes are not adequately represented and only the 
people belonging to few of the categories are enjoying the entire 
benefit reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, can 
the State be denied its right to give more preferential treatment 
for such categories? In my view, the answer would be in the 
negative, since the same would not amount to tinkering with the 
Presidential List. 
259. No doubt that if the State decides to provide 100% of the 
reservation for Scheduled Castes to one or more categories 

enlisted in the Presidential List in that State to the exclusion of 
some categories, it may amount to tinkering with that list 
because, in effect, it would amount to denial of benefit of 
reservation to those Scheduled Caste categories which have been 
excluded. In my view, that would, in effect, amount to deletion 
of the said categories from the Presidential List notified under 
Article 341 of the Constitution, which power is exclusively 
reserved with Parliament, in my opinion, such an exercise would 
not be permissible. 
260. In this respect, I may take support from the observations 
made by Sawant, J. in Indra Sawhney. He held that if the 
reservation is provided only for the more or most backward 
classes, then the people belonging to higher echelons would grab 
the open seats whereas the people from more or most backward 
classes would eat up the entire reservation, leaving the other 
backward classes high and dry. He therefore held that the sub-
classification of backward classes would be permissible provided 

the reserved seats are available for backward classes as well as 
more or most backward classes. I am therefore of the considered 
view that merely because more preferential treatment is provided 
to the more backward or more inadequately represented among 
the Scheduled Castes, it would not amount to tinkering with the 
Presidential List. In my view, the same would be permissible in 
view of the law laid down by the 9-Judge Bench in the case of 
Indra Sawhney. 
261. The ground realities cannot be denied. Even among the 
Scheduled Castes, there are some categories who have received 
more inhuman treatment for centuries and generations as 
compared to the other categories. The hardships and the 
backwardness which these categories have suffered historically 
would differ from category to category. In my view, therefore, 
merely because they are part of a single or a combined 
Presidential List, it cannot be said that they form part of a 

homogeneous group. I therefore have no hesitation in holding 
that E.V. Chinnaiah has been wrongly decided. 
262. The concept of sub-classification was sought to be attacked 
on the ground that this would lead to giving reservation for 
political reasons. It was argued that a political party in power to 
gain political advantage may provide special treatment to a 
particular class in the list of Scheduled Castes. I see no merit in 
the argument. 
263. Dr. Ambedkar had foreseen such a difficulty. In his speech 
in the Constituent Assembly, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar said that 
‘backward community” will have to be left to be determined by 
each local government. On a query by Shri T.T. Krishnamachari, 
as to whether this rule will be justiciable, he observed that it 
would be a justiciable matter. He stated that if the local 
Government included in this category of reservations such a large 
number of seats, one could very well go to the Federal Court and 
the Supreme Court and say that the reservation is of such a 

magnitude that the rule regarding equality of opportunity has 
been destroyed and the court will then come to the conclusion 
whether the local Government or the State Government has acted 
in a reasonable and prudent manner. 
264. Various judicial pronouncements referred to hereinabove 
have emphasized that a reasonable classification is implicit in the 
trinity of Articles 14 to 16. Therefore, if somebody approaches the 
Court, the Court can always examine as to whether such a 
classification is reasonable or not. 
265. For a classification to be reasonable, it will have to be 
established that any group or sub-group carved out in the larger 
group is significantly different than the larger group and that the 
classification has a nexus with the object to be achieved. 
266. In a case, like the present one, if a classification is made, it 
will have to be established that the group carved out from the 
larger group is more disadvantageous and not adequately 
represented. The result of classification would be to provide more 

preferential treatment to this more disadvantageous and less 
represented group. The ultimate object would be to achieve real 
equality among all the sub-groups in the larger group. 
267. In any case, as has been held by judicial pronouncements, 
when the State does such an exercise, it will have to be supported 
by an empirical data. Unless the State or the Commission comes 
to a finding that the group carved out needs special treatment is 
more disadvantageous and not adequately represented as 
compared to the other categories in the group, such a sub-
classification would not stand the scrutiny of the law. I, 
therefore, find that the fear that is posed is not substantiated. 
268. I find that the attitude of the categories in the Presidential 
List opposing such a sub-classification is that of a person in the 
general compartment of the train. Firstly, the persons outside 
the compartment struggled to get into the general compartment. 
However, once they get inside it, they make every attempt 

possible to prevent the persons outside such a compartment from 
entering it. 
269. In fact, what the people belonging to the categories who are 
availing of large chunk of reservations and denying a special 
treatment to the less privileged among them are doing, is what 
the people from the higher castes have done to these people for 
centuries as a result of which backward classes were kept away 
from the mainstream of society for ages, for no fault of theirs. 
Only on account of the principle of social and economic justice 
as enshrined under the Constitution, they have availed 
themselves of the benefits of special treatment. However, when 
the State endeavours to ensure that the said benefit percolates 
to the more underprivileged and less adequately represented, the 
sections from the Scheduled Castes who oppose them, stand in 
the shoes of those who oppressed them. 
270. The categories in the Presidential List who have already 
enjoyed a major chunk of reservations should not object to the 

State providing a special treatment to those who have been 
deprived of such a benefit and particularly when such a benefit 
is not being taken away from them. Only part of that benefit is 
being reserved for percolating the same to the more 
disadvantageous and less represented. 
271. I find that to achieve real equality as envisaged by this Court 
in various judicial pronouncements, sub-classification amongst 
the Scheduled Castes for giving more beneficial treatment is 
wholly permissible under the Constitution. 
VI. THE WAY FORWARD 
272. That leaves us with the question regarding the applicability 
of creamy layer principle to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes. 
273. No doubt that in Indra Sawhney, Jeevan Reddy, J. while 
considering the applicability of ‘means test’ and ‘creamy layer’ 
has observed that the discussion therein is confined only to Other 

Backward Classes, and it has no relevance in the case of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
274. In paragraph 792, Jeevan Reddy, J. observed thus: 
“792. In our opinion, it is not a question 
of permissibility or desirability of such test 
but one of proper and more appropriate 
identification of a class — a backward 
class. The very concept of a class denotes 
a number of persons having certain 
common traits which distinguish them 
from the others. In a backward class 
under clause (4) of Article 16, if the 
connecting 
link 
is 
the 
social 
backwardness, it should broadly be the 
same in a given class. If some of the 
members are far too advanced socially 
(which in the context, necessarily means 
economically 
and, 
may 
also 
mean 
educationally) 
the 
connecting 
thread 
between them and the remaining class 
snaps. They would be misfits in the class. 
After excluding them alone, would the 
class be a compact class. In fact, such 
exclusion benefits the truly backward. 
Difficulty, however, really lies in drawing 
the line — how and where to draw the line? 
For, while drawing the line, it should be 
ensured that it does not result in taking 
away with one hand what is given by the 
other. The basis of exclusion should not 

merely be economic, unless, of course, the 
economic advancement is so high that it 
necessarily means social advancement. 
Let us illustrate the point. A member of 
backward 
class, 
say 
a 
member 
of 
carpenter caste, goes to Middle East and 
works there as a carpenter. If you take his 
annual income in rupees, it would be fairly 
high from the Indian standard. Is he to be 
excluded from the Backward Class? Are 
his children in India to be deprived of the 
benefit of Article 16(4)? Situation may, 
however, be different, if he rises so high 
economically as to become — say a factory 
owner himself. In such a situation, his 
social status also rises. He himself would 
be in a position to provide employment to 
others. In such a case, his income is 
merely a measure of his social status. 
Even otherwise there are several practical 
difficulties too in imposing an income 
ceiling. For example, annual income of Rs 
36,000 may not count for much in a city 
like Bombay, Delhi or Calcutta whereas it 
may be a handsome income in rural India 
anywhere. The line to be drawn must be a 
realistic one. Another question would be, 
should such a line be uniform for the 
entire country or a given State or should it 
differ from rural to urban areas and so on. 
Further, income from agriculture may be 
difficult to assess and, therefore, in the 
case of agriculturists, the line may have to 
be drawn with reference to the extent of 

holding. While the income of a person can 
be taken as a measure of his social 
advancement, the limit to be prescribed 
should not be such as to result in taking 
away with one hand what is given with the 
other. The income limit must be such as 
to mean and signify social advancement. 
At the same time, it must be recognised 
that there are certain positions, the 
occupants of which can be treated as 
socially advanced without any further 
enquiry. For example, if a member of a 
designated backward class becomes a 
member of IAS or IPS or any other All India 
Service, his status is society (social status) 
rises; 
he 
is 
no 
longer 
socially 
disadvantaged. 
His 
children 
get 
full 
opportunity to realise their potential. They 
are in no way handicapped in the race of 
life. His salary is also such that he is above 
want. It is but logical that in such a 
situation, his children are not given the 
benefit of reservation. For by giving them 
the 
benefit 
of 
reservation, 
other 
disadvantaged members of that backward 
class may be deprived of that benefit. It is 
then argued for the respondents that ‘one 
swallow doesn't make the summer’, and 
that merely because a few members of a 
caste or class become socially advanced, 
the class/caste as such does not cease to 
be backward. It is pointed out that clause 

of 
Article 

aims 
at 
group 
backwardness 
and 
not 
individual 

backwardness. While we agree that clause 
(4) aims at group backwardness, we feel 
that exclusion of such socially advanced 
members will make the ‘class’ a truly 
backward 
class 
and 
would 
more 
appropriately serve the purpose and object 
of clause (4). (This discussion is confined 
to Other Backward Classes only and has 
no relevance in the case of Scheduled 
Tribes and Scheduled Castes).” 
 
275. It has been observed that the very concept of a class denotes 
a number of persons having certain common traits which 
distinguish them from the others. It is observed that if some of 
the members are far too advanced socially (which in the context, 
necessarily 
means 
economically 
and 
may 
also 
mean 
educationally) the connecting thread between them and the 
remaining class snaps. He observed that they would be misfits in 
the class. It is further observed that after excluding them alone, 
would the class be a compact class. It is observed that in fact, 
such exclusion would benefit the truly backward. 

276. His Lordship gave an example that, if a member of a 
designated backward class becomes a member of IAS or IPS or 
any other All India Service, his status in society rises; he is no 
longer socially disadvantaged. His children would get full 
opportunity to realize their potential. They are in no way 
handicapped in the race of life. It is observed that it is logical that 
in such a situation, his children are not given the benefit of 
reservation. It is further observed that by giving them the benefit 
of reservation, other disadvantaged members of that backward 
class may be deprived of that benefit. 
277. Rejecting the argument of ‘one swallow doesn't make the 
summer’, i.e. merely because few members of a caste/class 
become socially advanced the caste/class as such does not cease 
to be backward, the Learned Judge answered that though clause 
(4) of Article 16 aims at group backwardness, he was of the view 
that exclusion of such socially advanced members will make the 

‘class’ a truly backward class and would more appropriately serve 
the purpose and object of clause (4) of Article 16. 
278. As early as in 1981, in Akhil Bharatiya Soshit 
Karamchari Sangh, Krishna Iyer, J., in paragraph 94, while 
rejecting the argument that because a few harijans are better off, 
therefore, the bulk at the bottom deserves no jack-up provisions, 
had observed that the State may, when social conditions warrant, 
justifiably restrict harijan benefits to the harijans among the 
harijans and forbid the higher harijans from robbing the lowlier 
brethren. 
279. Again, 
in 
paragraph 
98, 
he 
observed 
that 
the 
Administration may well innovate and classify to weed out the 
creamy layer of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
However, he cautioned that the Court cannot force the State in 
that behalf. 
280. Chinnappa Reddy, J. also records that a few members of 
those castes or social groups may have progressed far enough 

and forged ahead so as to compare favourably with the leading 
forward class economically, socially and educationally. He 
observed that in such cases, perhaps an upper income ceiling 
would secure the benefit of reservation to such of those members 
of the class who really deserve it. 
281. In M. Nagaraj, the Court also applied the principle of 
quantifiable data and creamy layer even in the case of Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The correctness of the same was 
considered in Jarnail Singh. 
282. Though Jarnail Singh held that insofar as applicability of 
quantifiable data on backwardness insofar as Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes is concerned, M. Nagaraj was not correct, 
however, insofar as the applicability of creamy layer principle 
even to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is concerned, it 
upheld the view taken in M. Nagaraj. In doing so, Jarnail Singh 
is basically relying on the judgment of 7-Judge Bench of this 

Court in N.M. Thomas. The view taken in Jarnail Singh has 
also been approved in Davinder Singh. 
283. The correctness of the view taken in Jarnail Singh and 
Davinder Singh is not questioned. However, since in the present 
reference we are dealing with the question about equality among 
the group of unequals, I find it appropriate to consider the said 
issue also. 
284. I have already referred hereinabove to the observations 
made by Krishna Iyer, J. in N.M. Thomas and the observations 
made by Chinnappa Reddy, J. in K.C. Vasanth Kumar regarding 
applicability of creamy layer principle. It is worthwhile to note 
that the 7-Judge Bench in N.M. Thomas was considering the 
question about affirmative action in case of Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes. 
285. In N.M. Thomas, Krishna Iyer, J., in more than one place, 
had observed that the State is entitled to take steps for weeding 
out the socially, economically and educationally advanced 

sections of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes from the 
applicability of reservation. 
286. Krishna Iyer, J. has again reiterated this position in 
paragraphs 94 and 98 in Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karamchari 
Sangh. 
287. When the 9-Judge Bench in Indra Sawhney held that 
applicability of such a test insofar as Other Backward Classes 
are concerned would advance equality as enshrined in the 
Constitution, then why such a test should not also be made 
applicable to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
288. As observed hereinabove, there are stark ground realities, 
and we cannot be ignorant of them. Nearly 75 years have elapsed 
from the day on which the Constitution was brought into effect. 
Special provisions have been made for the advancement of the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and backward class of 
citizens. By judicial interpretation, the equality enshrined in the 
trinity of Articles 14 to 16 of the Constitution has been 

considered to be equal treatment among equals and unequal 
treatment among unequals. The question that will have to be 
posed is, whether equal treatment to unequals in the category of 
Scheduled Castes would advance the constitutional objective of 
equality or would thwart it? Can a child of IAS/IPS or Civil 
Service Officers be equated with a child of a disadvantaged 
member belonging to Scheduled Castes, studying in a Gram 
Panchayat/Zilla Parishad school in a village? 
289. The education facilities and the other facilities that would 
be available to a child of a parent of the first category would be 
much higher, maybe the facilities for additional coaching would 
also be available; the atmosphere in the house will be far superior 
and conducive for educational upliftment. 
290., the child of parent of the second category would 
be having only the bare minimum education; the facilities of 
coaching, etc., would be totally unavailable to him. He will be 

living in the company of his parents who do not have education 
and have not even been in a position to guide such a child. 
291. As observed by Chinnappa Reddy, J., in K.C. Vasanth 
Kumar, a child studying in the St. Paul's High School and St. 
Stephen's College cannot be equated with a child studying in a 
rural school. He observed that if a child of the first category 
secures 90% marks and the child of the second category secures 
50% of the marks, would treating both by the same standard 
achieve real justice. 
292. It is also commonly known that disparities and social 
discrimination, which is highly prevalent in the rural areas, start 
diminishing when one travels to the urban and metropolitan 
areas. I have no hesitation to hold that putting a child studying 
in St. Paul's High School and St. Stephen's College and a child 
studying in a small village in the backward and remote area of 
the country in the same bracket would obliviate the equality 
principle enshrined in the Constitution. 

293. I may note that some of the officers from the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes categories, who after receiving the 
benefit of reservation under the Constitution have reached high 
positions, are doing their bit to pay back to society. They are 
providing coaching and other facilities to the less advantaged so 
that they can compete and come up in their life. However, 
putting the children of the parents from the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes who on account of benefit of reservation 
have reached a high position and ceased to be socially, 
economically and educationally backward and the children of 
parents doing manual work in the villages in the same category 
would defeat the constitutional mandate. 
294. However, I may observe that taking into consideration that 
the Constitution itself recognizes the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes to be the most backward section of the society, 
the parameters for exclusion from affirmative action of the person 
belonging to this category may not be the same that is applicable 

to the other classes. If a person from such a category, by bagging 
the benefit of reservation achieved a position of a peon or maybe 
a sweeper, he would continue to belong to a socially, 
economically and educationally backward class. At the same 
time, the people from this category, who after having availed the 
benefits of reservation have reached the high echelons in life 
cannot be considered to be socially, economically and 
educationally backward so as to continue availing the benefit of 
affirmative action. They have already reached a stage where on 
their own accord they should walk out of the special provisions 
and give way to the deserving and needy. I may gainfully refer to 
the observations of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar as under: 
“History shows that where ethics and 
economics come in conflict, victory is 
always with economics. Vested interests 
have never been known to have willingly 
divested themselves unless there was 
sufficient force to compel them.”28 

28 What Gandhi and Congress have done to Untouchables, Chap. VII. 

295. I am therefore of the view that the State must evolve a policy 
for identifying the creamy layer even from the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes so as exclude them from the benefit of 
affirmative action. In my view, only this and this alone can 
achieve the real equality as enshrined under the Constitution. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
296. I, therefore, hold: 

that E.V. Chinnaiah, which held that sub-classification 
amongst the Scheduled Castes for the purpose of giving 
more beneficial treatment to a group in the larger group 
of the Scheduled Castes is not permissible, does not lay 
down a good law; 

that sub-classification amongst the Scheduled Castes for 
giving more beneficial treatment is permissible in law; 
(iii) that for doing so, the State will have to justify that the 
group for which more beneficial treatment is provided is 

inadequately represented as compared to the other 
castes in the said List; 

that while doing so, the State will have to justify the same 
on the basis of empirical data that a sub-class in whose 
favour such more beneficial treatment is provided is not 
adequately represented; 

that, however, while providing for sub-classification, the 
State would not be entitled to reserve 100% seats 
available for Scheduled Castes in favour of a sub-class to 
the exclusion of other castes in the List; 

that such a sub-classification would be permissible only 
if there is a reservation for a sub-class as well as the 
larger class; 
(vii) that the finding of M. Nagaraj, Jarnail Singh and 
Davinder Singh to the effect that creamy layer principle 
is also applicable to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes lays down the correct position of law; 

(viii) that the criteria for exclusion of the creamy layer from 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for the 
purpose of affirmative action could be different from the 
criteria as applicable to the Other Backward Classes. 
297. Before I part with the judgment, I place on record my deep 
appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered by learned 
counsel appearing for the parties. 

……………………….J. 
 [B.R. GAVAI] 
NEW DELHI; 
AUGUST 01, 2024 

ETC.ETC. 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE/ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
ETC.ETC. 
 
THE STATE OF 
PUNJAB & ORS. 

 …APPELLANT (S) 
 
VERSUS 
DAVINDER SINGH & ORS 

JUDGMENT 
 
VIKRAM NATH, J. 
 
1. 
I am generally in agreement with the reasons 
and conclusions arrived at in the opinions of Hon’ble 
the Chief Justice and Brother Justice Gavai in 
particular that the holding in E.V.Chinnaih, that 
sub-classification within Scheduled Castes was 
impermissible, does not lay down good law and 
stands over-ruled. Further, any exercise involving 
sub-classification by the State must be supported by 
empirical data. 
2. 
I am also in agreement with the opinion of 
Brother Justice Gavai that ‘creamy layer’ principle is 

ETC.ETC. also applicable to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes, and that the criteria for exclusion of creamy 
layer for the purpose of affirmative action could be 
different from the criteria as applicable to the Other 
Backward Classes. 

……….…………J. 
(VIKRAM NATH) 

NEW DELHI 
AUGUST 01, 2024 

 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

THE STATE OF PUNJAB AND OTHERS 

 VERSUS 
 
DAVINDER SINGH AND OTHERS 

WITH 
 
C.A. No. 5593/2010 
SLP (C) No. 8701/2011 
W.P. (C) No. 1477/2019 
W.P.(C) No. 21/2023 
W.P. (C) No. 562/2022 
C.A. No. 5586/2010 
C.A. No. 5597/2010 
C.A. No. 5589/2010 
C.A. No. 5600/2010 
C.A. No. 5598/2010 
C.A. No. 5587/2010 
C.A. No. 5595-5596/2010 
C.A. No. 2324/2011 
C.A. No. 6936/2015 
SLP (C) No. 30766/2010 
SLP (C) No. 5454-5459/2011 
C.A. No. 2318/2011 
SLP (C) No. 36500-36501/2011 
C.A. No. 289/2014 
T.C. (C) No. 37/2011 
T.C. (C) No. 38/2011 
T.P. (C) No. 464/2015 

 JUDGMENT 
 
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. 
 
1. Though unanimity and consensus in the opinions expressed by the 
larger Benches on the Constitutional matters are desirable for the sake 
of certainty and strength of the law laid down, I for one, believe that the 
“dissent” for well-chosen reasons would be equally important for an 
effective adjudication in a democratic functioning of judiciary, which 
would have a potential to develop the law in future. 
2. Justice William O. Douglas of the US Supreme Court1, a great dissenter 
who had written as many as 486 dissenting opinions, had stated: 
“The right to dissent is the only thing that makes life tolerable for 
a Judge of an Appellate Court…………. It is the right of dissent, 
not the right or duty to conform, which gives dignity, worth, and 
individuality to man”. 
 
3. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, another great dissenter, in his first 
dissent in the Supreme Court in Northern Securities Company Vs. 
The United States (1903)2 had stated: 
“I am unable to agree with the judgment of the majority of the 
Court, and although I think it useless and undesirable, as a rule, 
 
1 Bernard Schwartz, A Book of Legal Lists: The Best and Worst in American Law 
P.283 
2 193 U.S. 197 (1903) 

to express dissent, I feel bound to do so in this case and to give 
my reasons for it………” 
 
4. With somewhat similar feelings, and with due respect, I beg to differ 
from the erudite expression of opinions expressed by the Learned Chief 
Justice and my esteemed Brothers Justice B.R. Gavai and Justice 
Pankaj Mithal, and pen down my own opinion with reasons for my 
dissent. 
5. For the sake of brevity and avoid repetition, the facts and the 
submissions made by the learned advocates for the parties as narrated 
in the opinion expressed by the learned Chief Justice, are not reiterated. 
At the outset, it may be noted that neither the Referral Order made in 
the State of Punjab and Others vs. Davinder Singh and Others,3 
contains a formulation of precise questions nor the Order dated 
12.10.2023 made in the Reference case sets out specific questions for 
consideration by this Bench. Hence, having regard to the opinions 
expressed in Davinder Singh and in E.V. Chinnaiah vs. State of 
Andhra Pradesh and Others4, and having regard to the submissions - 
oral and written - made by the learned advocates for the parties, 
following substantial questions of law are formulated for consideration. 
 
3 (2020) 
4 (2005) 

Whether the law laid down by the Five-Judge Bench in E.V. 
Chinnaiah could have been doubted and referred to the larger 
Bench by the Bench of three judges, without recording any cogent 
reasons for their disagreement with the said decision in E.V. 
Chinnaiah, more particularly when the said decision held the field 
for a long period of fifteen years? 

Whether the States should be permitted to tinker with or vary the 
Presidential List specifying the “Scheduled Castes” as notified 
under Clause (1) of Article 341, by sub-classifying or sub-dividing 
or re-grouping the castes conglomerated in the said list, under the 
guise of providing reservation for the weaker of the weakest, and 
thereby commit the breach of the mandate contained in Clause (2) 
of Article 341? 

Whether the decision in E.V. Chinnaiah is required to be revisited 
in view of certain observations made by the Nine-Judge Bench in 
Indra Sawhney Vs. Union of India and Others5 concerning the 
Other Backward Class? 
 
5 (1992) Suppl. 

6. Before embarking on the issues involved, let us go through the 
trajectory of the Reference made by the Five-Judge Bench in the State 
of Punjab and Others vs. Davinder Singh and Others6 to this Bench. 
TRAJECTORY OF THE REFERENCE TO SEVEN JUDGES 
 
7. The State of Andhra Pradesh passed an enactment, namely the Andhra 
Pradesh Scheduled Castes (Rationalisation of Reservations) Act, 2000 
on 02.05.2000 dividing 57 castes enumerated in the Presidential List 
prepared under Article 341(1) of the Constitution, into 4 groups based 
on inter-state backwardness, and fixed separate quotas in reservation 
for each of these groups. The validity of the said Act of 2000 came to be 
challenged in the Writ Petitions filed in the High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh at Hyderabad. The said Writ Petitions came to be dismissed 
by a Five-Judge Bench by a majority of 4:1. The High Court having 
certified the case as being fit for appeal to the Supreme Court, the 
Appeals were filed before this Court. The same having been referred to 
the Constitution Bench of Five-Judges. The Constitution Bench after 
considering the various issues allowed the said Appeals being Civil 
Appeal No.6758/2000 and Others (E.V. Chinnaiah vs. State of Andhra 
 
6 (2020) 

Pradesh and Others)* declaring the impugned Act as ultra vires the 
Constitution. The Constitution Bench while considering the said 
Reference, had framed following three questions: - 
(i) Whether the impugned Act is violative of Article 341(2) of the 
Constitution of India? 
(ii) Whether the impugned enactment is constitutionally invalid for lack 
of legislative competence? 
(iii) Whether the impugned enactment creates sub-classification or 
micro-classification of Scheduled Castes so as to violate Article 14 
of the Constitution of India? 
8. Justice Santosh Hegde (for himself and Justice S.N. Variava and Justice 
B.P. Singh), and Justice S.B. Sinha and Justice H.K. Sema concurring 
but by separate judgments, allowed the said Appeals by answering the 
above questions as under: - 
(i) From the scheme of the Constitution, Article 341 and from the 
opinions in case of State of Kerala & Anr. vs. N.M. Thomas & 
Ors.7, it was clear that the castes once included in the Presidential 
List, form a class by themselves. If they are one class under the 
 
* (2005) 
7 (1976) 

Constitution, any division of these classes of persons based on any 
consideration would amount to tinkering with the Presidential List. 
(Paragraph 26) 
(ii) It is well settled principle in law that reservation to a backward class 
is not a constitutional mandate. It is the prerogative of the State 
concerned if it so desires, with an object of providing opportunity of 
advancement in the society to certain backward classes which 
include Scheduled Castes, to reserve certain seats in educational 
institutions under Article 15(4) and in public services of the State 
under Article 16(4). That part of its constitutional obligation having 
been fulfilled by the State, it was not open to the State to sub-
classify a class already recognized by the Constitution and allot a 
portion of the already reserved quota amongst the State created 
sub-class within the list of Scheduled Castes. (Paragraph 31) 
(iii) The primary object of the impugned enactment was to create 
groups of sub-castes in the list of Scheduled Castes applicable to 
the State and, apportionment of the reservation was only 
secondary and consequential. Whatever may be the object of such 
sub-classification and apportionment of the reservation, the State 
cannot claim legislative power to make a law dividing the 

Scheduled Castes List of the State by pressing its legislative 
competence to Entry 41 of List II or Entry 25 of List III. In pith and 
substance, the enactment was not a law governing the field of 
education or the field of State Public Services. (Paragraph 31) 
(iv) The conglomeration of castes given in the Presidential Order, 
should be considered as representing a class as a whole. The very 
fact that a legal fiction has been created is itself suggestive of the 
fact that the legislature of a State cannot take any action which 
would be contrary to or inconsistent therewith. The very idea of 
placing different castes or tribes or group or part thereof in a State 
as a conglomeration by way of a deeming definition clearly 
suggests that they are not to be sub-divided or sub-classified 
further. If a class within a class of members of the Scheduled Caste 
is created, the same would amount to tinkering with the list. Such 
sub-classification would be violative of Article 14 of the 
Constitution. If the benefits of reservation are not percolating to 
them equitably, measures should be taken to see that they are 
given such adequate or additional training so as to enable them to 
compete with the others, but the same could not mean that in the 
process of rationalising the reservation to the Scheduled Castes, 

the constitutional mandate of Articles 14, 15 and 16 could be 
violated. (Paragraph 41) 
(v) The Court therefore opined that the impugned legislation apart from 
being beyond the legislative competence of the State was also 
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and hence was liable to be 
declared as ultra-vires the Constitution. The impugned Act 
therefore was declared as ultra-vires the Constitution. (Paragraph 
44) 
9. Justice H.K. Sema in his concurring opinion had observed in Paragraph 
48 thereof* that in Indra Sawhney vs. Union of India and Others*, the 
discussion of creamy layer was confined to Other Backward Classes 
only, and had no relevance in the case of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. Justice S.B. Sinha also in his concurring opinion 
referred to certain observations made in Indra Sawhney and observed 
in Paragraph 38 that the principle laid down in Indra Sawhney for sub-
classification of Other Backward Classes cannot be applied as a 
precedent law for sub-classification or subgrouping Scheduled Castes 
in the Presidential List, because that very judgment itself has specifically 
 
* (1992) Supp. held that sub-division of Other Backward Classes is not applicable to 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The Constitution itself has 
kept the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes List out of 
interference by the State Governments. In Paragraph 93 thereof *, it has 
been held that “Scheduled Castes”, is not a caste in terms of its 
definition as contained in Article 366 (24) of the Constitution. They are 
brought within the purview of the said category by reason of their 
abysmal backwardness. Scheduled Caste consists of not only the 
people who belong to some backward caste but also race or tribe or 
part of groups within the castes, races, or tribes. They are not merely 
backward but the backward most. A person even does not cease to be 
a Scheduled Caste automatically even on his conversion to another 
religion. It was further observed that the two groups that is socially and 
educationally backward classes and Scheduled Castes were 
differentiated for the purpose of Clause (4) of Article 15 of the 
Constitution as therein Scheduled Castes had been recognized, in the 
nature of things, to be backward but it is also recognized that besides 
 
* (2005) 

them, there may be other groups of persons who are backward and 
deserve preferential treatment. 
10. Again, after referring to the observations made in Indra Sawhney 
regarding the “means-test and creamy layer test,” it was observed by 
Justice Sinha in Paragraph 96 thereof that whenever such a situation 
arises in respect of Scheduled Castes, it will be Parliament alone to take 
the necessary legislative steps in terms of Clause (2) of Article 341 of 
the Constitution, and the States do not have the legislative competence 
therefor. 
11. The aforesaid judgment in E.V. Chinnaiah* held the field for about 15 
years till the Three-Judge Bench of this Court in State of Punjab and 
Others vs. Davinder Singh and Others* referred the matter to a larger 
Bench for consideration, opining that the judgment of Five-Judge Bench 
in E.V. Chinnaiah was required to be revisited in the light of Article 338 
of the Constitution of India and exposition of law in Indra Sawhney. The 
Three-Judge Bench passed the following Order on 20th August, 2014.* 

* (2005) 
* (2020) 

“ORDER 
 
1. The learned counsel for the respondents heavily relies upon 
the Constitution Bench decision of this Court in E.V. 
Chinnaiah v. State of A.P. [E.V. Chinnaiah v. State of A.P., 
(2005): (2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 329] On the other hand, 
the learned Additional Solicitor General for the appellants, 
submits that E.V. Chinnaiah [E.V. Chinnaiah v. State of A.P., 
(2005): (2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 329] has no application 
on the controversy in hand. Moreover, he submits that E.V. 
Chinnaiah [E.V. Chinnaiah v. State of A.P., (2005): 
(2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 329] is not in accord with the 9-Judge Bench 
decision of this Court in Indra Sawhney v. Union of India [Indra 
Sawhney v. Union of India, 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217: 1992 SCC 
(L&S) Supp 1]. 
2. Having heard the learned Additional Solicitor General and the 
learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that E.V 
Chinnaiah [E.V. Chinnaiah v. State of A.P., (2005): 
(2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 329] needs to be revisited in the light of 
Article 338 of the Constitution of India and, inter alia, exposition 
of law in Indra Sawhey [Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, 1992 
Supp (3) SCC 217: 1992 SCC (L&S) Supp 1]. Moreover, the 
matter also involves interpretation and interplay between Article 
16(1), Article 16(4), Article 338 and Article 341 of the Constitution 
of India as well. 
 
3. In this view of the matter, we refer the matter for consideration 
of the above aspects by the larger Bench. Let the matter be 
placed before the Chief Justice on administrative side for 
appropriate order.” 

12. In the said case of Davinder Singh and Others, the Writ Petitions were 
filed in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh for 
declaring Section 4(5) of the Punjab Scheduled Castes and Backward 
Classes (Reservation in Services) Act 2006, which required 50% of the 

vacancies of the quota reserved for Scheduled Castes in direct 
recruitment, to be offered to Valmikis and Mazhbi Sikhs, if available as 
a first preference from amongst the Scheduled Castes, as 
unconstitutional. The Division Bench of the High Court placing reliance 
on the decision in E.V. Chinnaiah, vide the judgment dated 29.03.2010 
in CWP No. 18290 of 2009, declared the said provision contained in 
Section 4(5) of the Act 2006 as unconstitutional. The said Judgment 
came up for consideration before the Three-Judge Bench of this Court. 
On the Reference made by the Three-Judge Bench to the larger Bench, 
the Five-Judge Bench of this Court in the State of Punjab and Others 
vs. Davinder Singh and Others* framed the following issues. 
(i) Whether the provisions contained under Section 4(5) of the Punjab 
Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes (Reservation in Services 
Act, 2006) are constitutionally valid? 
(ii) Whether the State had the legislative competence to enact the 
provisions contained under Section 4(5) of the Act. 
(iii) Whether the decision in E.V. Chinnaiah vs. State of Andhra 
Pradesh and Others is required to be revisited. 
 
* (2020) 

13. The Five-Judge Bench however, after extensively referring various 
paragraphs of the decision in Indra Sawhney opined that E.V. 
Chinnaiah is required to be revisited by a larger bench. It was observed 
by the Five-Judge Bench therein* that: - 
“44. The question arises whether sub-classification for providing 
benefit to all castes can be said to be tinkering with the list under 
Articles 341, 342 and 342-A, in view of the decisions in Indra 
Sawhney [Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, 1992 Supp (3) SCC 
217: 1992 SCC (L&S) Supp 1], permitting sub-classifications of 
backward classes and in Jarnail Singh [Jarnail Singh v. Lachhmi 
Narain Gupta, (2018): (2019) 1 SCC (L&S) 86], in 
which, it was opined that “creamy layer concept” for exclusion of 
benefit can be applied to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes and it does not in any manner tinker with the Presidential 
List under Articles 341 or 342 of the Constitution. The caste or 
group or sub-group continued exactly as before in the List. It is 
only those persons within that group or sub-group, who have 
come out of untouchability or backwardness by virtue of 
belonging to the creamy layer, who are excluded from the benefit 
of reservation. The million dollar question is how to trickle down 
the benefit to the bottom rung; reports indicate that benefit is 
being usurped by those castes (class) who have come up and 
adequately represented. It is clear that caste, occupation, and 
poverty are interwoven. The State cannot be deprived of the 
power to take care of the qualitative and quantitative difference 
between different classes to take ameliorative measures. 
 
45. Reservation was not contemplated for all the time by the 
Framers of the Constitution. On the one hand, there is no 
exclusion of those who have come up, on the other hand, if sub-
classification is denied, it would defeat right to equality by treating 
unequal as equal. In Chebrolu Leela Prasad Rao v. State of A.P. 
[Chebrolu Leela Prasad Rao v. State of A.P., (2021): ], the necessity of revising lists was 
 
* (2020) 

pointed out relying on Indra Sawhney [Indra Sawhney v. Union of 
India, 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217: 1992 SCC (L&S) Supp 1] and 
Union of India v. Rakesh Kumar [Union of India v. Rakesh Kumar, 
(2010): (2010) 1 SCC (L&S) 961]. 
 
46. There is cry, and caste struggle within the reserved class as 
benefit of reservation in services and education is being enjoyed, 
who are doing better hereditary occupation. The scavenger class 
given the name of Balmikis remains more or less where it was, 
and so on, disparity within Scheduled Caste is writ large from 
various reports. The sub-classification was made under Section 
4(5) of the Punjab Act to ensure that the benefit of the reservation 
percolate down to the deprived section and do not remain on 
paper and to provide benefit to all and give them equal treatment, 
whether it is violative of Article 14? In our opinion, it would be 
permissible on rationale basis to make such sub-classification to 
provide benefit to all to bring equality, and it would not amount to 
exclusion from the list as no class (caste) is deprived of 
reservation in totality. In case benefit which is meant for the 
emancipation of all the castes, included in the List of Scheduled 
Castes, is permitted to be usurped by few castes those who are 
adequately represented, have advanced and belonged to the 
creamy layer, then it would tantamount to creating inequality 
whereas in case of hunger every person is required to be fed and 
provided bread. The entire basket of fruits cannot be given to 
mighty at the cost of others under the guise of forming a 
homogeneous class. 
 
47…………………………………… 
 
48…………………………………… 
 
49. Providing a percentage of the reservation within permissible 
limit is within the powers of the State Legislatures. It cannot be 
deprived of its concomitant power to make reasonable 
classification within the particular classes of Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes, and socially and educationally backward 
classes without depriving others in the list. To achieve the real 
purpose of reservation, within constitutional dynamics, needy 
can always be given benefit; otherwise, it would mean that 

inequality is being perpetuated within the class if preferential 
classification is not made ensuring benefit to all. 
 
50. The sub-classification is to achieve the very purpose, as 
envisaged in the original classification itself and based thereupon 
evolved the very concept of reservation. Whether the sub-
classification would be a further extension of the principle of the 
said dynamics is the question to be considered authoritatively by 
the Court. 
 
51. The Scheduled Castes as per Presidential List are not frozen 
for all the time, and neither they are a homogeneous group as 
evident from the vast anthropological and statistical data 
collected by various Commissions. The State law of preferential 
treatment to a limited extent, does not amend the List. It adopts 
the List as it is. The State law intends to provide reservation for 
all Scheduled Castes in a pragmatic manner based on statistical 
data. It distributes the benefits of reservations based on the 
needs of each Scheduled Caste. 
 
52. The State has the competence to grant reservation benefit to 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in terms of Articles 
15(4) and 16(4) and also Articles 341(1) and 342(1). It prescribes 
the extent/percentage of reservation to different classes. The 
State Government can decide the manner and quantum of 
reservation. As such, the State can also make sub-classification 
when providing reservation to all Scheduled Castes in the List 
based on the rationale that would conform with the very spirit of 
Articles 14, 15 and 16 of the Constitution providing reservation. 
The State Government cannot tamper with the List; it can neither 
include nor exclude any caste in the List or make enquiry whether 
any synonym exists as held in Milind [State of Maharashtra v. 
Milind, (2001): 2001 SCC (L&S) 117]. 
 
57. The interpretation of Articles 14, 15, 16, 338, 341, 342 and 
342-A is a matter of immense public importance, and correct 
interpretation of binding precedents in Indra Sawhney [Indra 
Sawhney v. Union of India, 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217: 1992 SCC 
(L&S) Supp 1] and other decisions. Though we have full respect 
for the principle of stare decisis, at the same time, the Court 

cannot be a silent spectator and shut eyes to stark realities. The 
constitutional goal of social transformation cannot be achieved 
without taking into account changing social realities. 
 
58. We endorse the opinion of a Bench of 3 Judges that E.V. 
Chinnaiah [E.V. Chinnaiah v. State of A.P., (2005): 
(2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 329] is required to be revisited by a larger 
Bench; more so, in view of further development and the 
amendment of the Constitution, which have taken place. We 
cannot revisit E.V. Chinnaiah [E.V. Chinnaiah v. State of A.P., 
(2005): (2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 329] being Bench of 
coordinate strength. We request the Hon'ble Chief Justice to 
place the matters before a Bench comprising of 7 Judges or more 
as considered appropriate.” 

14. In view of the above, the matters have been placed before us for 
consideration whether the E.V. Chinnaiah requires revisitation or not. 
In other words, for consideration as to whether the law laid down by E.V. 
Chinnaiah is the correct law in the light of certain observations made in 
Indra Sawhney. 
RELEVANT CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS 
15. In order to appreciate the rival contentions raised in the instant 
Reference, it would be beneficial to reproduce the relevant provisions 
of the Constitution for ready reference. 
“Article 14. Equality before law. —The State shall not deny to 
any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the 
laws within the territory of India. 

Article 15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of 
religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. — 
 
1 to 3…. 
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent 
the State from making any special provision for the advancement 
of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or 
for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.] 
(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of 
article 19 shall prevent the State from making any special 
provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and 
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled 
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in so far as such special 
provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions 
including private educational institutions, whether aided or 
unaided by the State, other than the minority educational 
institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.] 
 
Article 16. Equality of opportunity in matters of public 
employment. — 
1 to 3 …. 
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any 
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour 
of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the 
State, is not adequately represented in the services under the 
State. 
(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making 
any provision for reservation in matters of promotion, with 
consequential seniority, to any class or classes of posts in the 
services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and 
the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not 
adequately represented in the services under the State. 
 
Article 162. Extent of executive power of State. — Subject to 
the provisions of this Constitution, the executive power of a State 
shall extend to the matters with respect to which the Legislature 
of the State has power to make laws: 
Provided that in any matter with respect to which the Legislature 
of a State and Parliament have power to make laws, the 
executive power of the State shall be subject to, and limited by, 

the executive power expressly conferred by this Constitution or 
by any law made by Parliament upon the Union or authorities 
thereof. 
 
Article 166. Conduct of business of the Government of a 
State. - 
(1) All executive action of the Government of a State shall be 
expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor. 
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the 
name of the Governor shall be authenticated in such manner as 
may be specified in rules to be made by the Governor, and the 
validity of an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall 
not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or 
instrument made or executed by the Governor. Advocate-
General for the State. Conduct of business of the Government of 
a State. 
(3) The Governor shall make rules for the more convenient 
transaction of the business of the Government of the State, and 
for the allocation among Ministers of the said business in so far 
as it is not business with respect to which the Governor is by or 
under this Constitution required to act in his discretion. 
 
Article 246. Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and 
by the Legislatures of States. — 
(1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3), Parliament 
has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the 
matters enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule (in this 
Constitution referred to as the “Union List”). 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3), Parliament, and, 
subject to clause (1), the Legislature of any State 1*** also, have 
power to make laws with respect to any of the matters 
enumerated in List III in the Seventh Schedule (in this 
Constitution referred to as the “Concurrent List”). 
(3) Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of any State 
1*** has exclusive power to make laws for such State or any part 
thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List II in 
the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the 
“State List”). 
(4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter 
for any part of the territory of India not included 2 [in a State] 

notwithstanding that such matter is a matter enumerated in the 
State List. 
 
Article 335. Claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes to services and posts. —The claims of the members of 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be taken 
into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of 
efficiency of administration, in the making of appointments to 
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or 
of a State: 
Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent in making of any 
provision in favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes and 
the Scheduled Tribes for relaxation in qualifying marks in any 
examination or lowering the standards of evaluation, for 
reservation in matters or promotion to any class or classes of 
services or posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of 
a State. 
 
Article 341. Scheduled Castes. — 
(1) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, 
and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor 4 
thereof, by public notification, specify the castes, races or tribes 
or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for 
the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled 
Castes in relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may 
be. 
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of 
Scheduled Castes specified in a notification issued under clause 
(1) any caste, race or tribe or part of or group within any caste, 
race or tribe, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under 
the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent 
notification. 
 
Article 342. Scheduled Tribes. — 
(1) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, 
and where it is a State after consultation with the Governor 
thereof, by public notification, specify the tribes or tribal 
communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal 
communities which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be 

deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State or Union 
territory, as the case may be. 
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of 
Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under clause 
(1) any tribe or tribal community or part of or group within any 
tribe or tribal community, but save as aforesaid a notification 
issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any 
subsequent notification. 
 
Article 342A. Socially and educationally backward classes. 
(1) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, 
and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor 
thereof, by public notification, specify 6 [the socially and 
educationally backward classes in the Central List which shall for 
the purposes of the Central Government] be deemed to be 
socially and educationally backward classes in relation to that 
State or Union territory, as the case may be. 
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the Central 
List of socially and educationally backward classes specified in a 
notification issued under clause (1) any socially and 
educationally backward class, but save as aforesaid a notification 
issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any 
subsequent notification.] 
(3) Notwithstanding any contained in clauses (1) and (2), every 
State or Union territory may, by law, prepare and maintain, for its 
own purposes, a list of socially and educationally backward 
classes, entries in which may be different from the Central List. 
 
Article 366. Definitions. —In this Constitution, unless the 
context otherwise requires, the following expressions have the 
meanings hereby respectively assigned to them, that is to say— 
 
(24) “Scheduled Castes” means such castes, races or tribes or 
parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are 
deemed under article 341 to be Scheduled Castes for the 
purposes of this Constitution; 
 
(25) “Scheduled Tribes” means such tribes or tribal communities 
or parts of or groups within such tribes or tribal communities as 

are deemed under article 342 to be Scheduled Tribes for the 
purposes of this Constitution; 
 
(26).….. 
**** 
(26A) …….. 
(26B) …….. 
(26C) "socially and educationally backward classes" means such 
backward classes as are so deemed under article 342A for the 
purposes of the Central Government or the State or Union 
territory, as the case may be;” 
 
ANALYSIS 
 
(I) WHETHER THE LAW LAID DOWN BY THE FIVE-JUDGE BENCH IN 
E.V. CHINNAIAH VS. STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH AND OTHERS* 
COULD HAVE BEEN REFERRED TO THE LARGER BENCH BY THE 
BENCH OF THREE JUDGES, WITHOUT RECORDING ANY COGENT 
REASONS FOR DISAGREEMENT WITH THE SAID DECISION OF 
FIVE-JUDGE BENCH IN E.V. CHINNAIAH MORE PARTICULARLY 
WHEN THE SAID DECISION HELD THE FIELD FOR A LONG 
PERIOD OF FIFTEEN YEARS? 
16. It may be noted that the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes 
(Rationalization of Reservations) Act, 2000 has already been declared 
unconstitutional by the Five-Judge Bench in E.V. Chinnaiah as back as 
in 2005. Similarly, Section 4(5) of the Punjab Scheduled Caste and 
 
* (2005) 

Backward Classes (Reservation in Services Act, 2006) has also been 
declared unconstitutional by the Division Bench of the High Court of 
Punjab and Haryana vide the judgment dated 29.03.2010 in respect of 
which the present reference is made. Hence, both these Acts as on the 
date have been declared as unconstitutional. It is further required to be 
noted that E.V. Chinnaiah decided in 2005 was holding the field for 
about 15 years till the Five-Judge Bench in Davinder Singh, on the 
reference made by the Three-Judge Bench, further referred the matters 
to the Seven-Judge Bench in 2020. 
17. It is noteworthy that the Three-Judge Bench had referred the matters to 
the larger Bench without assigning any reason much less cogent reason 
as to why it could not agree with the decision in E.V. Chinnaiah 
delivered by the Constitution Bench. The law which was settled by the 
Constitution Bench and was prevalent since 15 years was sought to be 
doubted and unsettled by a Three-Judge Bench by passing a very 
cryptic and perfunctory order not supported by any reason, as quoted 
hereinabove. 
18. A Five-Judge Bench in Pradip Chandra Parija and Others Vs. 
Pramod Chandra Patnaik and Others8, while examining the propriety 
 
8 2002 (1) SCC 1 

of the Bench of two Judges doubting the correctness of a decision of a 
Bench of three Judges and directly referring the matter to the Bench of 
five Judges, had observed that judicial discipline and propriety demands 
that a Bench of two learned judges should follow a decision of a Bench 
of three learned judges, but if a Bench of two learned Judges concludes 
that an earlier judgment of three learned Judges is so very incorrect that 
in no circumstances, can it be followed, the proper course for it to adopt 
would be to refer the matter before it to a Bench of three learned Judges 
setting out, the reasons why it could not agree with the earlier judgment. 
19. The importance of the doctrine of binding Precedents in the 
administration of our judicial system hardly needs to be reiterated. The 
doctrines of Precedents and Stare decisis are the core values of our 
legal system. In series of cases, the Constitution Benches of this Court 
have time and again emphasized that when a decision is rendered by 
this Court, it acquires a reliance interest and the society organizes itself 
based on such legal order. When substantial judicial time and resources 
are spent on the References by the Constitution Benches, the same 
should not be further referred to the larger Bench by a smaller Bench, 
in a casual or cavalier manner, and without recording the reasons for 
disagreement. 

20. As back as in 1974 a Seven-Judge Bench in Maganlal ChhaganLal (P) 
Ltd. vs. Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay & Others9, H.R. 
Khanna, J. had remarked that certainty in the law, which was an 
essential ingredient of the Rule of Law, would be considerably eroded if 
the highest Court of the land lightly overruled the view expressed by it 
in earlier cases. One instance where such overruling could be 
permissible, according to him, was a situation where contextual values 
giving birth to the earlier view had subsequently altered substantially. 
21. In Lt. Col. Khajoor Singh Vs. Union of India & Another10 a Seven-
Judge Bench emphasized that the Court should not depart from an 
interpretation given in an earlier judgment of the Court unless there was 
a fair amount of unanimity that the earlier decision was manifestly 
wrong. 
22. A more compendious examination of the issue was considered by 
another Seven-Judge Bench in Keshav Mills Co. Ltd. vs. 
Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay North, Ahmedabad 11 
wherein it was observed that frequent exercise by this Court of its power 
to review its earlier decisions on the ground that the view placed before 
 
9 (1974) 
 SC 532 
 SC 1636 

it later appeared to the Court to be more reasonable, may incidentally 
tend to make law uncertain and introduce confusion which must be 
consistently avoided. It was further stated that before a previous 
decision is pronounced plainly erroneous, the Court must be satisfied 
with a fair amount of unanimity amongst its members that a revision of 
the said view is fully justified. 
23. In a more recent decision in case of Dr. Shah Faesal and Others vs. 
Union of India and Another12 a Five-Judge Bench reiterated the 
doctrines of Precedents and Stare decisis, and observed as under: - 
“17. This Court's jurisprudence has shown that usually the courts 
do not overrule the established precedents unless there is a 
social, constitutional or economic change mandating such a 
development. The numbers themselves speak of restraint and 
the value this Court attaches to the doctrine of precedent. This 
Court regards the use of precedent as indispensable bedrock 
upon which this Court renders justice. The use of such 
precedents, to some extent, creates certainty upon which 
individuals can rely and conduct their affairs. It also creates a 
basis for the development of the rule of law. As the Chief Justice 
of the Supreme Court of the United States, John Roberts 
observed during his Senate confirmation hearing, “It is a jolt to 
the legal system when you overrule a precedent. Precedent plays 
an important role in promoting stability and even-handedness”. 
[Congressional Record—Senate, Vol. 156, Pt. 7, 10018 (7-6-
2010).] 
 
“18. Doctrines of precedents and stare decisis are the core 
values of our legal system. They form the tools which further the 
goal of certainty, stability and continuity in our legal system. 
 
12 (2020) 

Arguably, Judges owe a duty to the concept of certainty of law, 
therefore they often justify their holdings by relying upon the 
established tenets of law.” 
 
“19. When a decision is rendered by this Court, it acquires a 
reliance interest and the society organises itself based on the 
present legal order. When substantial judicial time and resources 
are spent on references, the same should not be made in a 
casual or cavalier manner. It is only when a proposition is 
contradicted by a subsequent judgment of the same Bench, or it 
is shown that the proposition laid down has become unworkable 
or contrary to a well-established principle, that a reference will be 
made to a larger Bench. In this context, a five-Judge Bench of 
this Court in Chandra Prakash v. State of U.P. [(2002): 2002 SCC (Cri) 496: 2002 SCC (L&S) 496], after 
considering series of earlier rulings reiterated that: (SCC p. 245, 
para 22) 
 
“22. … The doctrine of binding precedent is of 
utmost importance in the administration of our 
judicial system. It promotes certainty and 
consistency 
in 
judicial 
decisions. 
Judicial 
consistency promotes confidence in the system, 
therefore, there is this need for consistency in 
the enunciation of legal principles in the 
decisions of this Court.” 
 
24. The above exposition of law makes it clear that the doctrines of binding 
Precedents and Stare decisis, as also the judicial discipline and 
propriety, developed over the years, warrant that the decision of larger 
Bench should be followed by the smaller Bench. If the smaller bench 
had any doubt or disagreement with a decision of the larger bench, it 
could refer the same for reconsideration to the larger bench, however, 
after setting out the reasons and justification as to why it could not agree 

or follow the decision of earlier larger Bench. Such disagreement also 
has to be based on some justifiable reasons, like where the earlier 
decision of larger Bench is found to be manifestly wrong or where the 
contextual values giving birth to the earlier view had altered 
substantially etc. A casual exercise of power to refer the matter to the 
larger Bench without recording any reason or on the ground that the 
view placed before it later seems to be more reasonable, may 
incidentally tend to make law uncertain and introduce confusion, which 
must be avoided. 
25. In the instant case, the reference was made by Three-Judge Bench to 
the larger Bench for revisitation of the earlier decision of Constitution 
Bench in E.V. Chinnaiah, without assigning any reason and in a very 
casual and cavalier manner, and that too after fifteen years of its 
attaining finality. Such reference could not and should not have been 
countenanced by the subsequent Five-Judge Bench for reference to the 
Seven-Judge Bench. When a law was settled by the previous 
Constitution Bench in E.V. Chinnaiah after considering all the previous 
judgments including Indra Sawhney, and after investing substantial 
judicial time and resources, and when the same had held the field for a 
substantially long period of fifteen years, in my opinion, the very 

reference by the Three-Judge Bench to the larger bench for 
reconsideration of the decision in E.V. Chinnaiah, that too without 
assigning any reason was inappropriate and not in consonance with the 
well settled doctrines of Precedents and Stare decisis. Having said that, 
let us proceed further with the other issues involved in the Reference. 
(II) WHETHER THE STATES SHOULD BE PERMITTED TO TINKER 
WITH OR VARY THE PRESIDENTIAL LIST SPECIFYING THE 
“SCHEDULED CASTES,” AS NOTIFIED UNDER CLAUSE (1) OF 
ARTICLE 341 BY SUB-CLASSIFYING OR SUB-DIVIDING OR RE-
GROUPING THE CASTES CONGLOMERATED IN THE SAID LIST 
UNDER THE GUISE OF PROVIDING RESERVATION FOR THE 
WEAKER OF THE WEAKEST, AND THEREBY TO COMMIT BREACH 
OF THE MANDATE CONTAINED IN CLAUSE (2) OF ARTICLE 341? 
26. The collateral issues which stem from the above question may be 
delineated as under: - 

Law on Constitution Interpretation. 
(b) Object, Purpose and limits of Article 341. 
(c) Etymology and Special Status of “Scheduled Castes” notified in the 
Presidential List. 

(d) State’s competence to sub-classify or sub-divide or re-group the 
Castes specified as “Scheduled Castes” in the Presidential List for 
providing reservation under Article 15 and 16. 

Constitutional Interpretation 
27. Before examining the correctness of the law laid down by Five Judge 
Bench in E.V. Chinnaiah in the context of exposition of law in Indra 
Sawhney and in the light of the constitutional provisions more 
particularly Article 14, 15, 16 and 341 of the Constitution of India, let us 
have glance over the cardinal principles of interpretation of the 
Constitution laid down by this Court over the years in catena of 
decisions. 
28. It cannot be gainsaid that the Constitution is construed to be a living and 
organic document, as it is intended to endure for ages to come, and 
consequently to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs. It is 
required to be construed broadly and liberally however, in the words of 
Benjamin Cardozo, “a Judge is not a Knight errant roaming at will in 
pursuit of his own ideal of beauty and goodness. Judge is not to 
innovate at pleasure.”13 
 
13 Benjamin Cardozo, The Nature of Judicial Process, (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 13th Edition 1946) 141 

29. As consistently held by this Court, it may be desirable to give a broad 
and generous construction to the Constitutional Provisions, but while 
doing so, the rule of “plain meaning” or “literal” interpretation, which 
remains “the primary rule”, has also to be kept in mind. 
30. In GVK Industries Limited and Another vs. Income Tax Officer and 
Another14, a Five-Judge Bench on the interpretation of Constitution 
observed as under: - 
“37. In interpreting any law, including the Constitution, the text of 
the provision under consideration would be the primary source 
for discerning the meanings that inhere in the enactment. 
However, in light of the serious issues it would always be 
prudent, as a matter of constitutional necessity, to widen the 
search for the true meaning, purport and ambit of the provision 
under consideration. No provision, and indeed no word or 
expression, of the Constitution exists in isolation—they are 
necessarily related to, transforming and in turn being transformed 
by, other provisions, words and phrases in the Constitution. 
 
38. Our Constitution is both long and also an intricate matrix of 
meanings, purposes and structures. It is only by locating a 
particular constitutional provision under consideration within that 
constitutional matrix could one hope to be able to discern its true 
meaning, purport and ambit. As Prof. Laurence Tribe points out: 
“To understand the Constitution as a legal text, it is 
essential to recognize the … sort of text it is: 
a constitutive text that purports, in the name of the 
people…, to bring into being a number of distinct but 
inter-related institutions and practices, at once legal 
and political, and to define the rules governing those 
institutions and practices.” (See Reflections on Free-
 
14 (2011) 

Form Method in Constitutional Interpretation. [108 
Harv L Rev 1221, 1235 (1995)])” 
 
39. It has been repeatedly appreciated by this Court that our 
Constitution is one of the most carefully drafted ones, where 
every situation conceivable, within the vast experience, expertise 
and knowledge of our framers, was considered, deliberated 
upon, and appropriate features and text chosen to enable the 
organs of the State in discharging their roles. While indeed 
dynamic interpretation is necessary, if the meaning necessary to 
fit the changed circumstances could be found in the text itself, we 
would always be better served by treading a path as close as 
possible to the text, by gathering the plain ordinary meaning, and 
by sweeping our vision and comprehension across the entire 
document to see whether that meaning is validated by the 
constitutional values and scheme.” 
 
31. Following GVK Industries Limited, another Five-Judge Bench in Dr. 
JaiShri LaxmanRao Patil vs. Chief Minister and Others15 observed 
as under: - 
“113. In examining provisions of the Constitution, courts should 
adopt the primary rule, and give effect to the plain meaning of the 
expressions; this rule can be departed, only when there are 
ambiguities. In Kuldip Nayar v. Union of India [(2006) ] 
after 
quoting 
from G. 
Narayanaswami v. G. 
Pannerselvam [(1972) ] this Court held that: (Kuldip 
Nayar case SCC p. 88, para 201) 
 
“201. … We endorse and reiterate the view taken in 
the above quoted paragraph of the judgment. It may 
be desirable to give a broad and generous 
construction to the Constitutional provisions, but while 
doing so the rule of “plain meaning” or “literal” 
interpretation, which remains “the primary rule”, has 
also to be kept in mind. In fact the rule of “literal 
 
15 (2021) 

construction” is the safe rule unless the language 
used is contradictory, ambiguous, or leads really to 
absurd results.”” 
 
32. Thus, it is quite well settled that in interpreting any law, including the 
Constitution, the text of the provision under consideration would be the 
primary source for discerning the meanings that inhere in the 
enactment. Sometimes as a matter of constitutional necessity, it may 
be prudent to widen the search for the true meaning, purport, and ambit 
of the provision under consideration, however, one has to bear in mind 
that no provision, no word or expression in the Constitution exists in 
isolation. They are necessarily related to, transforming and in turn being 
transformed by, other provisions, words and phrases in the Constitution. 
Even if a dynamic interpretation is necessary and the meaning 
necessary to fit the changed circumstances is found in the text itself, it 
would be always better to tread a path as close as possible to the text, 
by gathering the plain ordinary meaning, to see whether that meaning 
is validated by the constitutional values and the scheme. While giving a 
broad and generous construction to the constitutional provisions, the 
rule of “plain meaning,” or “literal” interpretation, which remains “the 
primary rule” has to be kept in mind. 

The Object, Purpose and Limits of Article 341: - 
33. Since the whole matter hinges on the interpretation of Article 341 of the 
Constitution of India, let us see the Object and Purpose of its insertion 
in the Constitution. 
34. Article 341 states that the President may with respect to any State or 
Union territory, and where it is a State after consultation with the 
Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the castes, races and 
tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for 
the purposes of the Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in 
relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may be. Clause (2) 
of the said Article 341 states that Parliament may by law include in or 
exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes specified in the notification 
issued under Clause (1) any caste, race or tribe or part of or group within 
any caste, race or tribe, but save as aforesaid a notification issued 
under the said clause which shall not be varied by any subsequent 
notification. Similar provision is made for Scheduled Tribes in Article 
342. Article 342 (A) pertaining to the socially and educationally 
backward classes is slightly differently worded, which was inserted by 
the Constitution (102nd Amendment) Act, 2018 w.e.f 14.08.2018. 

35. As transpiring from the extracts of the Constituent Assembly Debates 
placed on record, there was no Article similar to Article 341 as found in 
the present Constitution. Noticing the need for creating a list of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, some amendments in the 
draft Constitution were moved by Dr. Ambedkar, Chairman of the 
Drafting Committee of the Constitution. The relevant part of the 
proceedings of the Constituent Assembly debate on September 17, 
1949 is reproduced hereunder: - 
“The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Sir, I move: 
“That with reference to amendment No. 147 of List IV (Eighth 
Week), for sub-clause (w) of clause (1) of article 303, the 
following sub-clause be substituted: — 
(w) Schedule Castes’ means such castes, races or tribes or parts 
or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed 
under article 300A of this Constitution to be Scheduled Castes 
for the purposes of this Constitution. 
The only change is, the word ‘specified’ has been changed to 
‘deemed’. Sir, I move: “That with reference to amendment No. 
148 of List IV (Eighth Week), for sub-clause (x) of clause (1) of 
article 303, the following sub-clause be substituted: — 
(x) scheduled tribes’ means such tribes or tribal communities or 
parts of or groups within such tribes or tribal communities as are 
deemed under article 300B of this Constitution to be scheduled 
tribes for the purposes of this Constitution;' 
I am incorporating the other amendment which has also been 
tabled. Shall we take up, the two other articles also at the same 
time? 
Mr. President: Yes. 
New articles 300A and 300B. [COI Articles 341 and 342] 
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: Sir, I move: 
“That after article 300, the following articles be inserted: — 300A. 
Scheduled Castes. — (1) The President may, after consultation 

with the Governor or Ruler of a State, by public notification 
specify the castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within 
castes, races or tribes, which shall for purposes of this 
Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to 
that State. 
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of 
Scheduled Castes specified in a notification issued by the 
President under clause (1) of this article any caste, race or tribe 
or part of or group within any caste, race or tribe, but save as 
aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be 
varied by any subsequent notification. 
 
300B. Schedule Tribes. — (1) The President may after 
consultation with the Governor or Ruler of a State, by public 
notification specify the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or 
groups within tribes or tribal communities which shall for 
purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be scheduled tribes 
in relation to that State. 
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of 
scheduled tribes specified in a notification issued by the 
President under clause (1) of this article any Tribe or Tribal 
community or part of or group within any Tribe or Tribal 
community but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the 
said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.” 
The object of these two articles, as I stated, was to eliminate the 
necessity of burdening the Constitution with long lists of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. It is now proposed that 
the President, in consultation with the Governor or Ruler of a 
State should have the power to issue a general notification in the 
Gazette specifying all the Castes and tribes or groups thereof 
deemed to be Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for the 
purposes of the privileges which have been defined for them in 
the Constitution. The only limitation that has been imposed is this: that once a notification has been issued by the President, which, 
undoubtedly, he will be issuing in consultation with and on the 
advice of the Government of each State, thereafter, if any 
elimination was to be made from the List so notified or any 
addition was to be made, that must be made by Parliament and 
not by the President. The object is to eliminate any kind of 

political factors having a play in the matter of the disturbance in 
the Schedule so published by the President. 
 
Mr. President: 218A. 
Shri T. T. Krishnamachari: In reading it he has included that. 
Mr. President: 224. 
Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: Sir, I move: 
“That in amendment No. 201 of List V (Eighth Week) in clause 
(2) of the proposed new article 300A the following be added at 
the end: — ‘for a period of ten years from the commencement of 
this Constitution.’” 
I also move: 
“That in amendment No. 201 of List V (Eighth Week) in clause 
(2) of the proposed new article 300B the following be added at 
the end: — 
‘for a period of ten years from the commencement of this 
Constitution.’” I agree with the principle that for ten years to come 
no variation of the notification originally made by the President 
should be possible. Because now that special privileges of 
reservation, etc., have been given to the Scheduled Castes, I do 
not like the idea that the Executive, President or Governor or any 
other person may be able to tamper with that right, but after a 
period of ten years, when this privilege will no longer be available 
to the Scheduled Castes, there will be no difference between the 
Scheduled Castes and other backward classes which will be 
declared under article 301 of the Constitution. At that time there 
will be no meaning in taking away this power from the President 
in consultation with the Governor. Therefore, my humble 
submission is that the proposed amendment be accepted to 
make the point absolutely clear and free from ambiguity. Unless 
we add these words for a period of ten years from the 
commencement of this Constitution, you will be taking away the 
power of the President to include or exclude proper classes from 
the purview of the notification which will be issued under 300A 
and B. After the first ten years the privileges which will be open 
to these classes are probably under article 10 and under articles 
296 and 299. I do not know of any other privileges which have 
been specifically given to these Scheduled Castes. Whereas I 
am, very insistent and conscious that these provisions should not 
be tampered with, I do like that these castes may not become 

stereotyped and may not lose the capacity of travelling out of the 
schedule when the right occasion demands it. I, therefore, submit 
that if you put these words you will be making the whole thing 
elastic and the President will have the power of including or 
excluding after the lapse of ten years such tribes or castes within 
the notification. 
Mr. President: Mr. Chaliha—you have two amendments. Once is 
205 and the other is 225. I do not know if 205 arises now. 
Shri Kuladhar Chaliha (Assam: General): Mr. President, I move; 
“That in amendment No. 201 of List V (Eighth Week) in clause 
(2) of the proposed new article 300B after the words ‘Parliament 
may’ the words ‘and subject to its decision the State Legislature’ 
be inserted.” 
 
I have always been fighting that the Governor should have power 
to safeguard the rights of the Tribes. I am glad in some measure 
this has been conceded. Yet I find certain amount of suspicion in 
that the State Legislature is neglected. The Drafting Committee 
has not allowed the State Legislature to have a voice. In order to 
fill up that lacuna I have said that Parliament may and subject to 
its decision the State Legislature. 
Shri. T. T. Krishnamachari: Then what is left to the State 
Legislature? 
Shri Kuladhar Chaliha: Somehow or other I feel you have 
neglected it. In these you have covered a good deal which you 
had objected to in the past. The Governor has been given power 
I am glad to say. The only thing is provincial assemblies have no 
voice in this. Whatever Parliament says they are bound by it; but 
if there is anything which consistently with the orders of the 
Parliament they can do anything, they should be allowed to have 
the power. That is why I have moved this. However I am thankful 
this time that the Drafting Committee has assimilated good ideas 
and only provincial assemblies have been neglected. However, 
the Governor is there—that is an improvement—Parliament, is 
there and the President is there. Therefore, I thank the Drafting 
Committee for this. 
Mr. President: Mr. Sidhva. 
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: It is already covered. 
Shri Brajeshwar Prasad (Bihar: General). There are some 
amendments seeking to add some more clauses. 

Mr. President: ‘That is a separate matter. These were all the 
amendments. 
Shri V. I. Muniswami Pillai: Mr. President, I come to support the 
amendments that have been moved by the Honourable Dr. 
Ambedkar. These amendments deal with the definition of 
Scheduled Castes. As far as I can see he has made it clear that 
according to the second part of it, the President on the 26th 
January 1950 will publish a list of such communities that come 
under the category of Scheduled Castes. But I would like to 
inform this House of the background which brought out the 
special name of Scheduled Castes. It was the intouchability, the 
social evil that has been practised by the Hindu Community for 
ages, that was responsible for the Government and the people to 
know the section of people coming under the category of Hindus 
and who were kept at the outskirts of the Hindu society. Going 
backwards to 1916 it was in that year when Government found 
that something had to be done for the untouchable classes, 
(when they said untouchable classes, they were always 
understood to be Hindus,) and they had to be recognised. In 
Madras there were six communities that came under this 
classification. During the Montago Chelmsford reforms they were 
made ten. In 1930 when the great epoch-making fast of Mahatma 
Gandhi came about, then only the country saw who were the real 
untouchable classes. And in the 1935 Act, the Government 
thoroughly examined the whole thing and as far as the Province 
of Madras is concerned they brought 86 communities into this list 
or category, though there were some touchable classes also. 
Now, after further examination the Provincial Governments have 
drawn up a list and I think according to the amendment mover's 
suggestions, all those communities that come under the category 
of untouchables and those who profess Hinduism will be the 
Scheduled Castes, because I want to emphasise about the 
religion. I emphasise this because of late there have been some 
movements here and there; there are people who have left 
Scheduled Castes and Hinduism and joined other religions and 
they also are claiming to be scheduled Castes. Such convert 
cannot come under the scope of this definition. While I have no 
objection to Government granting any concessions to these 
converts, I feel strongly that they should not be clubbed along 
with Scheduled Castes. 

Sir, I am grateful to the Drafting Committee and also to the 
Chairman of that Committee for making the second portion of it 
very clear, that in future, after the declaration by the President as 
to who will be the Scheduled Castes, and when there is need for 
including any other class or to exclude anybody or any 
community from the list of Scheduled Castes that must be by the 
word of Parliament. I feel grateful to him for bringing in this 
clause, because I know, as a matter of fact, when Harijans 
behave independently or asserting their right on some matters, 
the Ministers in some Provinces not only take note and action 
against those members, but they bring the community to which 
that particular individual belongs; and thereby not only the 
individual, but also the community that comes under that 
category of Scheduled Castes are harassed. By this provision, I 
think the danger is removed. I strongly oppose the amendment 
moved by Pandit Bhargava. The reason is that he wants to have 
the ten years period for observing these amendments. But he has 
entirely forgotten that under another article that we have already 
passed, or will pass the Constitution provides for the appointment 
of a Special officer at the Centre and also various officers in all 
the Provinces to go into the various disabilities of these 
communities and to submit a report to the President who will then 
be able to know whether the Scheduled Castes have reached a 
stage when the facilities now given to them could be withdrawn. 
I do not think that the reasons that he has advanced are fair and 
square for the uplift of the Harijans. 
With these few words, I support the amendment. 
Mr. President: Does anyone else wish to speak? Do you wish to 
say anything Dr. Ambedkar? 
The Honourable Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: I do not accept the 
amendment of Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava. 
Mr. President: Then I put the amendments. The first is the one 
with reference to amendment 147. 
The question is: “That with reference to amendment No. 147 of 
List IV (Eighth Week), for sub-clause (w) of clause (1) of article 
303, the following sub-clause be substituted: — 
‘(w) ‘Scheduled Castes’ means such castes, races or tribes or 
parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are 
deemed under article 300A of this Constitution to be Scheduled 

Castes for the purposes of this Constitution; The amendment 
was adopted”. 

36. It is seen from the above Debate that ultimately the original draft Article-
300A was approved by the Constituent Assembly, and was re-
numbered as Article 341 in the present Constitution. From the bare 
reading of the Article 341 it is clearly discernible that power of the 
President is limited to specify the castes or the tribes which shall, for the 
purposes of the Constitution, be deemed to be Scheduled Castes or 
Scheduled Tribes in relation to a State or a Union Territory as the case 
may be. Once the notification is issued under Clause (1) of Article 341, 
it is only the Parliament which can by law, include in or exclude from the 
list of Scheduled Castes specified in the notification, any caste, race or 
tribe or part of or group within any caste, race or tribe, and the 
notification issued under Clause (1) could not be varied by any 
subsequent notification. As transpiring from the Constituent Assembly 
Debates quoted hereinabove, the object of inserting Article 341 was to 
eliminate the necessity of burdening the Constitution with long list of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. It was proposed that the 
President, in consultation with the Governor or Ruler of a State should 
have power to issue a general notification in the Gazette specifying all 

the Castes and tribes or groups thereof deemed to be Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of the privileges which 
have been defined for them in the Constitution. The only limitation put 
was that once a notification has been issued by the President, any 
elimination from or any addition in the list must be made by the 
Parliament and not by the President. In the words of Dr. Ambedkar, “the 
object is to eliminate any kind of political factors having a play in the 
matter of the disturbance in the Schedule so published by the 
President.” 
37. A Five-Judge Bench in B. Basavalingappa vs. D. Munichinnappa & 
others16 had held that the object of the provision contained in Article 
341 was to avoid all disputes as to whether a particular caste is a 
Scheduled Caste or not, and only those castes can be Scheduled 
Castes which are notified in the Order made by the President under 
Article 341 after consultation with the Governor where it relates to such 
caste in a State. It further held that Clause (2) provides that the 
Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of the 
Scheduled Castes specified in the notification issued under Clause (1), 
any caste, race or tribe or part of or group within any caste, race or tribe. 
 
16 AIR (1965) SC 1269 

The power was thus given to Parliament to modify the notification made 
by the President under Clause (1). A notification issued under Clause 
(1) could not be varied by any subsequent notification, thus making the 
notification by the President final for all times except for modification by 
law as provided by Clause (2). 
38. The said law has also been reiterated by the Five-Judge Bench in case 
of Bhaiya Lal Vs. Harikishan Singh17 A similar view has been also 
taken by another Five-Judge Bench in case of State of Maharashtra 
vs. Milind and Others18, by holding that: 
“11. By virtue of powers vested under Articles 341 and 342 of the 
Constitution of India, the President is empowered to issue public 
notification for the first time specifying the castes, races or tribes 
or part of or groups within castes, races, or tribes which shall, for 
the purposes of the Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled 
Castes or Scheduled Tribes in relation to a State or Union 
Territory, as the case may be. The language and terms of Articles 
341 and 342 are identical. What is said in relation to Article 341 
mutatis mutandis applies to Article 342. The laudable object of 
the said articles is to provide additional protection to the 
members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes having 
regard to social and educational backwardness from which they 
have been suffering since a considerable length of time. The 
words “castes” or “tribes” in the expression “Scheduled Castes” 
and “Scheduled Tribes” are not used in the ordinary sense of the 
terms but are used in the sense of the definitions contained in 
Articles 366(24) and 366(25). In this view, a caste is a Scheduled 
Caste or a tribe is a Scheduled Tribe only if they are included in 
the President's Orders issued under Articles 341 and 342 for the 
 
17 AIR (1965) SC 1557 
18 (2001) 

purpose of the Constitution. Exercising the powers vested in him, 
the President has issued the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) 
Order, 1950 and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 
1950. Subsequently, some orders were issued under the said 
articles in relation to Union Territories and other States and there 
have been certain amendments in relation to Orders issued, by 
amendment Acts passed by Parliament. 
 
12. Plain language and clear terms of these articles show (1) the 
President under clause (1) of the said articles may with respect 
to any State or Union Territory and where it is a State, after 
consultation with the Governor, by public notification specify the 
castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within the castes, 
races or tribes which shall for the purposes of the Constitution be 
deemed to be Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes in relation to 
that State or Union Territory as the case may be; (2) under clause 
(2) of the said articles, a notification issued under clause (1) 
cannot be varied by any subsequent notification except by law 
made by Parliament. In other words, Parliament alone is 
competent by law to include in or exclude a caste/tribe from the 
list of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes specified in 
notifications issued under clause (1) of the said articles. In 
including castes and tribes in Presidential Orders, the President 
is authorised to limit the notification to parts or groups within the 
caste or tribe depending on the educational and social 
backwardness. It is permissible that only parts or groups within 
them be specified and further to specify castes or tribes thereof 
in relation to parts of the State and not to the entire State on being 
satisfied that it was necessary to do so having regard to social 
and educational backwardness. The States had opportunity to 
present their views through Governors when consulted by the 
President in relation to castes or tribes, parts or groups within 
them either in relation to the entire State or parts of State. It 
appears that the object of clause (1) of Articles 341 and 342 was 
to keep away disputes touching whether a caste/tribe is a 
Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe or not for the purpose of the 
Constitution. Whether a particular caste or a tribe is Scheduled 
Caste or Scheduled Tribe as the case may be, within the 
meaning of the entries contained in the Presidential Orders 
issued under clause (1) of Articles 341 and 342, is to be 

determined looking to them as they are. Clause (2) of the said 
articles does not permit any one to seek modification of the said 
orders by leading evidence that the caste/Tribe (A) alone is 
mentioned in the Order but caste/Tribe (B) is also a part of 
caste/Tribe (A) and as such caste/Tribe (B) should be deemed to 
be a Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe as the case may be. It is 
only Parliament that is competent to amend the Orders issued 
under Articles 341 and 342. As can be seen from the entries in 
the schedules pertaining to each State whenever one caste/tribe 
has another name it is so mentioned in the brackets after it in the 
schedules. In this view it serves no purpose to look at gazetteers 
or glossaries for establishing that a particular caste/tribe is a 
Scheduled 
Caste/Scheduled 
Tribe 
for 
the 
purpose 
of 
Constitution, even though it is not specifically mentioned as such 
in the Presidential Orders. Orders once issued under clause (1) 
of the said articles, cannot be varied by subsequent order or 
notification even by the President except by law made by 
Parliament. Hence it is not possible to say that State 
Governments or any other authority or courts or Tribunals are 
vested with any power to modify or vary the said Orders. If that 
be so, no inquiry is permissible and no evidence can be let in for 
establishing that a particular caste or part or group within tribes 
or tribe is included in Presidential Order if they are not expressly 
included in the Orders. Since any exercise or attempt to amend 
the Presidential Order except as provided in clause (2) of Articles 
341 and 342 would be futile, holding any inquiry or letting in any 
evidence in that regard is neither permissible nor useful”. 
 
39. In Bir Singh Vs. Delhi Jal Board and Others19, a Five-Judge Bench 
after referring to the relevant clauses of the Constitution (Scheduled 
Castes) Order 1950, and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order 
1950, observed as under: 
 
19 (2018) 

“36. The upshot of the aforesaid discussion would lead us to the 
conclusion that the Presidential Orders issued under Article 341 
in regard to Scheduled Castes and under Article 342 in regard to 
Scheduled Tribes cannot be varied or altered by any authority 
including the Court. It is Parliament alone which has been vested 
with the power to so act, that too, by laws made. Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes thus specified in relation to a State 
or a Union Territory does not carry the same status in another 
State or Union Territory. Any expansion/deletion of the list of 
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes by any authority except 
Parliament would be against the constitutional mandate under 
Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution of India. 
 
37……………………………………………………. 
 
38. It is an unquestionable principle of interpretation that 
interrelated statutory as well as constitutional provisions have to 
be harmoniously construed and understood so as to avoid 
making any provision nugatory and redundant. If the list of 
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes in the Presidential Orders 
under Articles 341/342 is subject to alteration only by laws made 
by Parliament, operation of the lists of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes beyond the classes or categories enumerated 
under the Presidential Order for a particular State/Union Territory 
by exercise of the enabling power vested by Article 16(4)would 
have the obvious effect of circumventing the specific 
constitutional provisions in Articles 341/342. In this regard, it 
must also be noted that the power under Article 16(4) is not only 
capable of being exercised by a legislative provision/enactment 
but also by an Executive Order issued under Article 166 of the 
Constitution. It will, therefore, be in consonance with the 
constitutional scheme to understand the enabling provision 
under Article 16(4) to be available to provide reservation only to 
the classes or categories of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes 
enumerated in the Presidential Orders for a particular 
State/Union Territory within the geographical area of that State 
and not beyond. If in the opinion of a State it is necessary to 
extend the benefit of reservation to a class/category of 
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes beyond those specified in 
the Lists for that particular State, constitutional discipline would 

require the State to make its views in the matter prevail with the 
central authority so as to enable an appropriate parliamentary 
exercise to be made by an amendment of the Lists of Scheduled 
Castes/Scheduled Tribes for that particular State. Unilateral 
action by States on the touchstone of Article 16(4) of the 
Constitution could be a possible trigger point of constitutional 
anarchy and therefore must be held to be impermissible under 
the Constitution.” 

40. From the afore stated legal position, there is no room for doubt that the 
Presidential List as notified under Article 341 assumes finality on the 
publication of the notification, and that the castes, races or tribes or 
parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes specified in the 
notification are, for the purposes of the Constitution, deemed to be the 
“Scheduled Castes” in relation to that State or Union Territory as the 
case may be. It is only the Parliament by law which can include in or 
exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes specified in the notification 
notified under Clause (1), any caste, race or tribe or part of or group 
within any caste, race or tribe. Such notification notified under Clause 
(1) cannot be varied even by the President by issuing any subsequent 
notification. 
(c) Etymology and Special Status of “Scheduled Castes” 
41. Since the arguments have been advanced before us, on the issue 
whether the Scheduled Castes specified in the Presidential List under 

Clause (1) of Article 341 should be treated as a homogenous group or 
heterogenous group, let us peep into the etymology of the 
nomenclatures “Scheduled Castes” and “Scheduled Tribes”. Briefly 
stated, the practice of untouchability or caste-based discrimination was 
rampant particularly amongst Hindus in India during British era. Shri V.I. 
Muniswamy Pillai, in his speech (quoted hereinbefore) had informed the 
members of the Constituent Assembly about the background which 
brought out the special name of “Scheduled Castes”, and stated that it 
was untouchability, the social evil that was being practised by the Hindu 
Community for ages, that was responsible for the Government and the 
people to know the section of people coming under the category of 
Hindus and who were kept at the outskirts of the Hindu Society. Such 
class of people were being discriminated on the basis of their castes 
and occupations they were engaged in, like Sweepers, Scavengers, 
Chamars, Mochis, etc. They were known as “depressed classes.” The 
term “depressed classes” however was not synonymous with “backward 
classes.” From the study material placed before us, it appears that the 
Census Commissioner J.H. Hutton who conducted Census in 1931 had 
explained that the “depressed castes” were those castes, ‘the contact 
with whom entailed purification on the part of high caste Hindus’. These 

were the communities which suffered social disabilities such as being 
denied access to temples, use separate wells, and not being allowed to 
sit inside a school house etc. The term ‘depressed classes’ was being 
used only for low caste Hindus who suffered from the stigma of 
untouchability. The word “class” in “depressed class” was in fact 
referred to for “caste.” Eventually, the Government of India Act 1935 
referred to the “depressed classes” as “Scheduled Castes”. The 1935 
Act made it clear that “Scheduled castes” were none other than those 
who were previously known as “depressed classes”. Clause 26 of 
Schedule I appended to the said Act 1935 mentioned as under: 
“26(I) …………….the ‘scheduled castes’ means such castes, 
races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes, 
being castes, races, tribes or parts or groups which appear to be 
His Majesty in Council to correspondence to the classes of 
persons formerly known as ‘depressed classes’, as His Majesty 
in Council may specify”. 

42. The identification of the different castes for inclusion as Scheduled 
Castes in the said Schedule was based on an elaborate exercise 
conducted for each of the provinces as could be seen from the Schedule 
consisting of nine parts, to the 1935 Act. Thereafter, a gazette 
notification was published on 06.06.1936 promulgating the Government 
of India (Scheduled Castes) Order 1936 notifying the list of castes that 

were to be considered as “the Scheduled Castes” across the territory of 
India. The post constitutional exercise by the Constitution (Scheduled 
Castes) Order 1950 and Constitution (Scheduled Tribes), Order 1950, 
as originally enacted under Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution was 
basically an exercise in recasting the Schedule to the 1935 Act. The 
relevant clauses of the said two Presidential Orders were in the following 
terms: 
“Clause 2 of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 
2. Subject to the provisions of this Order, the castes, races or 
tribes or parts of, or groups within, castes or tribes specified in 
Parts I to XXV of the Schedule to this Order shall, in relation 
to the States to which those Parts respectively relate, be 
deemed to be Scheduled Castes so far as regards member 
thereof resident in the localities specified in relation to them in 
those Parts of that Schedule. 
 
Clause 2 of the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 
2. The Tribes or tribal communities, or parts of, or groups 
within, tribes or tribal communities, specified in Parts I to XXII 
of the Schedule to this Order shall, in relation to the States to 
which those Parts respectively relate, be deemed to be 
Scheduled Tribes so far as regards members thereof 
residents in the localities specified in relation to them 
respectively in those Parts of that Schedule”. 

43. The subsequent amendments to the aforesaid two Orders, from time to 
time were made to bring the position in tune with the amendments to the 
First Schedule to the Constitution made at different points of time by 

creation of new States and alterations in the area and boundaries of 
existing States. 
44. As discussed earlier, the Presidential Orders made under Article 341(1) 
or Article 342(1) enumerating the lists of castes/races, tribes recognized 
as “Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes” cannot be altered or varied by 
any State or any authority including the Court. It is Parliament alone 
which has been vested with the powers to so act, that too, by law made, 
as well settled by catena of decisions discussed hereinabove. 
45. The very language employed in Article 341 that “the castes, races or 
tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes, shall for the 
purposes of the Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in 
relation to that State or Union Territory, as the case may be”, mandates 
that each caste, each race, each tribe or each part of or group within the 
castes, races or tribes shall by the deeming fiction be the “Scheduled 
Castes” for the purposes of the Constitution, irrespective of the 
parameters by which such caste/ race or tribe is recognised as 
“Scheduled Caste” in relation to that State. Though the members of 
“Scheduled Castes” are drawn from different castes, races and tribes, 
they attain special status by virtue of Presidential Notification under 
Article 341. Thus, the etymological and evolutionary history and 

background of the nomenclature “Scheduled Castes,” coupled with the 
Presidential Orders published under Article 341 of the Constitution, 
make the “Scheduled Castes”, a homogenous class. The necessary 
corollary would be that all the members of all the castes, races and 
tribes enumerated in the Presidential List are deemed to be “Scheduled 
Castes” for the purposes of the Constitution and they all would be 
entitled to all the benefits granted or reserved for the “Scheduled 
Castes”. 
46. A very pertinent observations in this regard have been made by a 
Seven-Judge Bench in State of Kerala and Another vs. N.M. Thomas 
and Other20 which deserve to be reproduced. The issues involved in 
the said case inter alia were whether Article 16(1) permits preferences 
to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and weaker sections on the 
basis of reasonable classification, or whether Article 16(4) is an 
exception to Articles 16(1) and 16(2). The majority of five Judges in their 
separate but concurring opinions opined as under: - 
 Per A.N. Ray, J. 
 
“40. The Constitution makes a classification of Scheduled Castes 
and scheduled tribes in numerous provisions and gives a 
mandate to the State to accord special or favoured treatment to 
them. Article 46 contains a directive principle of State policy — 
fundamental in the governance of the country enjoining the State 
 
20 (1976) 

to promote with special care educational and economic interests 
of the Scheduled Castes and scheduled tribes and to protect 
them from any social injustice and exploitation. Article 335 
enjoins that the claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes 
and scheduled tribes to the services and posts in the Union and 
the States shall be taken into consideration. Article 338 provides 
for appointment by the President of a Special Officer for the 
Scheduled Castes and scheduled tribes to investigate all matters 
relating to the safeguards provided for them under the 
Constitution. Article 341 enables the President by public 
notification to specify castes, races or tribes which shall be 
deemed to be Scheduled Castes in the States and the Union 
Territories. Article 342 contains provision for similar notification 
in respect of scheduled tribes. Article 366(24) and (25) defines 
Scheduled Castes and scheduled tribes. The classification by the 
impugned rule and the orders is with a view to securing adequate 
representation to Scheduled Castes and scheduled tribes in the 
services of the State as otherwise they would stagnate in the 
lowest rung of the State services. 
41. to 42………………………………. 
43. Scheduled Castes and scheduled tribes are not a caste 
within the ordinary meaning of caste. In Bhaiyalal v. Harikishan 
Singh [AIR 1965 SC 1557: (1965) ] this Court held 
that an enquiry whether the appellant there belonged to the 
Dohar caste which was not recognised as a scheduled caste and 
his declaration that he belonged to the Chamar caste which was 
a scheduled caste could not be premitted because of the 
provisions contained in Article 341. No court can come to a 
finding that any caste or any tribe is a scheduled caste or 
scheduled tribe. Scheduled caste is a caste as notified under 
Article 366(25). A notification is issued by the President under 
Article 341 as a result of an elaborate enquiry. The object of 
Article 341 is to provide protection to the members of Scheduled 
Castes having regard to the economic and educational 
backwardness from which they suffer. 

Per Methew, J. 
82. The word “caste” in Article 16(2) does not include “scheduled 
caste”. The definition of “Scheduled Castes” in Article 366(24) 
means 

“such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such 
castes, races, or tribes as are deemed under Article 341 to be 
Scheduled Castes for the purposes of this Constitution.” 
This shows that it is by virtue of the notification of the President 
that the Scheduled Castes come into being. Though the 
members of the Scheduled Castes are drawn from castes, races 
or tribes, they attain a new status by virtue of the Presidential 
notification. Moreover, though the members of tribe might be 
included in Scheduled Castes, tribe as such is not mentioned in 
Article 16(2).” 
 
Per Krishna Iyer, J. 
 
“135. We may clear the clog of Article 16(2) as it stems from a 
confusion about caste in the terminology of scheduled castes 
and scheduled tribes. This latter expression has been defined in 
Articles 341 and 342. A bare reading brings out the quintessential 
concept that they (sic there) are no castes in the Hindu fold but 
an amalgam of castes, races, groups, tribes, communities or 
parts thereof found on investigation to be the lowliest and in need 
of massive State aid and notified as such by the President. To 
confuse this backwardmost social composition with castes is to 
commit a constitutional error, misled by a compendious 
appellation. So that, to protect harijans is not to prejudice 
any caste but to promote citizen solidarity. Article 16(2) is out of 
the way and to extend protective discrimination to this mixed bag 
of tribes, races, groups, communities and non-castes outside the 
four-fold Hindu division is not to compromise with the 
acceleration of castelessness enshrined in the sub-article. The 
discerning sense of the Indian Corpus Juris has generally 
regarded scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, not as caste 
but as a large backward group deserving of societal 
compassion.” 
 
47. The above observations made in N.M. Thomas leaves no room of doubt 
that “Scheduled Castes” are not a caste within the ordinary meaning of 
caste. It is by virtue of the notification of the President under Article 341 

that the “Scheduled Castes” come into being. Though, the members of 
the Scheduled Castes are drawn from different castes, races or tribes, 
they attain a new Special Status by virtue of the Presidential notification. 
A bare reading of Article 341 brings out the quintessential concept that 
“Scheduled Castes” is an amalgam of castes, races, groups, tribes, 
communities or parts thereof, and is a homogenous group, and that 
once notified by Presidential List, they acquire Special Status of 
“Scheduled Castes” which cannot be varied except by the Parliament 
by law. 
(d) State’s Competence to sub-classify or sub-divide or re-group the 
Castes specified as “Scheduled Castes” in the Presidential List for 
providing the reservation under Article 15 and 16: - 
48. It may be noted that the terminology “Backward Class” has not been 
defined or described anywhere in the Constitution, however the said 
terminology finds place in the various provisions in the Constitution. Part 
XVI of the Constitution deals with special provisions relating to certain 
classes, i.e. for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Anglo-Indian 
Community, Backward Class, Socially and Educationally Backward 
Class etc. Articles 330 and 332 provide for the reservation of seats for 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People 

and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States. Article 335 states that 
the claims of the member of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently, with the 
maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the making of 
appointments to services and posts in connection with the affairs of the 
Union and of a State. Article 338, 338(A) and 338(B) provides for the 
constitution of the National Commissions for the Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes and for Backward Classes respectively. As per the 
definition of “Scheduled Castes” contained in Article 366(24), 
“Scheduled Castes” means such castes, races or tribes or parts of or 
groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed under Article 
341 to be Scheduled Castes for the purposes of the Constitution. Similar 
definitions are contained in Article 366(25) for the “Scheduled Tribes” 
and in Article 366(26C) for the “socially and educationally backward 
classes”. 
49. Article 15(4) enables the State to make special provision for the 
advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of 
citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The newly 
added Clause (5) in Article 15 (w.e.f. 20.01.2006) enables the State, by 
law to make special provisions for the advancement of any socially and 

educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes 
or Scheduled Tribes, so far as such provisions relate to their admission 
to educational institutions. Article 16(4) enables the State to make 
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any 
backward class of citizens which in the opinion of the State, is not 
adequately represented in the services under the State. Subsequently 
inserted Clause (4A) in Article 16 (w.e.f. 17.6.1995) enables the State 
to make provision for reservation in the matters of promotions in the 
posts in the services under the State in favour of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes which in the opinion of the State are not adequately 
represented in the services under the State. Article 16(6) inserted by the 
Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019 enables 
the State to make provision for the reservation in favour of any 
economically weaker sections of citizens other than the classes 
mentioned in Clause 4 i.e. backward class of citizens. Article 46 states 
that the State shall promote with special care the educational and 
economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in 
particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall 
protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation. 

50. Thus, the terms “Scheduled Castes” and “Scheduled Tribes” are used 
in Article 15(4) along with the “socially and educationally backward 
classes of citizens”, used in Article 16(4A) exclusively and used in Article 
46 along with “weaker sections of people”. However, the term “backward 
class” is used in Article 16(4) only. Further, Article 340 empowers the 
President to appoint a Commission to investigate the conditions of 
Socially and Educationally Backward Classes within the territory of India 
and to make recommendations as to the steps that should be taken by 
the Union or any State to remove the difficulties of the members of such 
class. As discussed in detail earlier, Article 341 empowers the President 
to issue notification specifying the Scheduled Castes in relation to the 
States and Union Territory. Similar provision is found in Article 342 for 
the Scheduled Tribes. Article 342A inserted by the Constitution (One 
Hundred and Second Amendment Act, 2018) with effect from 14th 
August, 2018, empowers the President to specify the Socially and 
Educationally Backward Classes in the Central List which are deemed 
to be Socially and Educationally Backward Classes in relation to that 
State or Union Territory as the case may be. By virtue of the 
Constitution (One Hundred and Fifth) Amendment Act, 2021, an 
explanation to Clause (2) and new Clause (3) have been added to 

Article 342(A). The difference between the Article 341, 342 and 342A is 
that, whereas the notifications issued under Article 341 and 342 cannot 
be varied except by the Parliament by law, the newly added Clause (3) 
of Article 342A permits the State or Union Territory by law, to prepare 
and maintain for its own purposes a list of Socially and Educationally 
Backward Classes entries which may be different from the Central List. 
51. The mandate contained in Clause (2) of Article 341 specifically prohibits 
any variation in the notification issued under Clause (1) thereof, except 
by Parliament by law. There is no provision in the Constitution which 
would empower the States to make any variation in such notification 
issued under Clause (1) of Article 341, for the purpose of reservations 
under Article 15 or 16. It cannot be gainsaid that as per Article 162, the 
executive power of a State would extend to the matters with respect to 
which the Legislature of the State has power to make laws. The Proviso 
to the said Article states that in any matter with respect to which the 
Legislature of a State and Parliament have power to make laws, the 
executive power of the State shall be subject to, and limited by, the 
executive power expressly conferred by the Constitution or by any law 
made by Parliament upon the Union or authorities thereof. The source 
of legislative power of the State is found in Article 246, by virtue of which 

the Legislature of any State has power to make laws with respect to any 
matters enumerated in List III of the Seventh Schedule along with the 
Parliament, and has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any 
of the matters enumerated in List II of the said Schedule. 
52. As held in Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. vs. State of Bihar and Others21 
“19……………….. …. Article 162 prescribes the extent of 
executive power of the State, it lays down that the executive 
power of a State shall extend to the matters with respect to which 
the legislature of the State has power to make laws. Thus, the 
executive power of the State Government is co-extensive with 
the legislative power of the State legislature. If the State 
legislature has power to enact laws on a matter enumerated in 
the State List or in the Concurrent List the State has executive 
power to deal with those matters subject to other provisions of 
the Constitution……………………. Moreover, the proviso to 
Article 162 itself contains limitation on the exercise of the 
executive power of the State. It lays down that in any matter with 
respect to which the legislature of a State and Parliament have 
power to make laws, the executive power of State shall be 
subject to limitation of the executive power expressly conferred 
by the Constitution or by any law made by Parliament upon the 
Union or authority thereof. The limitation as contained in the 
proviso to Article 162 was necessary to avoid conflict in the 
exercise of executive power of State and the Union Government 
in respect of matters enumerated in List III of the Seventh 
Schedule...……………………….” 

53. Though the executive power of the State Government is co-extensive 
with the legislative power of the State Legislature, none of the entries, 
either in List II or List III of the Seventh Schedule confers any legislative 
 
21 (1990) 

power upon the State to rationalize the reservations, by sub-classifying 
or sub-dividing the castes enumerated in the Presidential List prepared 
under Article 341(1), as was sought to be done by the State of Andhra 
Pradesh by passing Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes (Rationalization 
of Reservations), Act 2000, nor does it confer any power to provide or 
reserve the quota for a particular caste or castes from amongst the 
“Scheduled Castes” enumerated in the Presidential List prepared under 
Article 341(1) of the Constitution, as was sought to be done by the State 
of Punjab and Haryana by passing the Punjab Scheduled Castes and 
Backward Classes (Reservation in Services) Act, 2006. In absence of 
any executive or legislative powers, the States are not competent to 
divide/ sub-divide/ sub-classify/ regroup the castes, races or tribes from 
amongst the “Scheduled Castes” nor could they give any preferential 
treatment by reserving a quota for a particular caste, race, tribe out of 
the quota reserved for the entire “Scheduled Castes”. 
54. Though sub-classification or sub division of castes from amongst the 
Scheduled Castes by the State for the purpose of reservation per se 
may not amount to inclusion or exclusion of any caste from the 
Presidential List of Scheduled Castes, it would certainly amount to 
tinkering with or varying the notification notified under Clause (1), which 

is clearly prohibited under Clause (2). When all castes, races or tribes 
enumerated in the Presidential List are deemed to be the “Scheduled 
Castes” for the purposes of the Constitution, any preference given to or 
any quota reserved for a particular caste or race or tribe out of the quota 
reserved for the entire class of the Scheduled Castes for the 
government jobs by the State, would certainly deprive the other 
members of the “Scheduled Castes” from having the benefit of 
reservation to the extent the quota is reserved for such particular caste 
or castes. Any such action on the part of the State would not only 
tantamount to discrimination in reverse and violation of Article 14 but 
would also tantamount to tinkering with Article 341 of the Constitution. 
55. As per the settled legal position, every word or expression used in the 
Constitution has a purpose, and all the provisions of the Constitution 
have to be read in harmony so that the meaning of such word or 
expression is validated by the Constitutional values and the scheme. A 
person belonging to any of the castes, races or tribes enumerated in the 
Presidential List acquiring special status as the member of the 
“Scheduled Caste” in relation to a particular State, would be entitled to 
all the rights including the fundamental rights enshrined under the 
Constitution, and therefore would also be entitled to be treated equally 

from amongst the other members of the “Scheduled Castes” 
enumerated in such Presidential List, in that particular State. If any 
State makes special provision of reservation by fixing quota for the 
entire “Scheduled Castes” for admission to educational institutions or 
for the appointments on the posts in the public services as permitted 
under Article 15 and 16, such quota of reservation should be made 
available to all the members of the “Scheduled Castes” specified in the 
Presidential List, as all the members of the castes, races and tribes 
specified in such List are deemed to be “Scheduled Castes” for the 
purposes of the Constitution, and the State has no power to further sub-
classify or sub-divide the “Scheduled Castes” for giving preferential 
treatment to a particular caste from the said list of “Scheduled Castes”. 
As stated earlier, the very object of Article 341 is to give new special 
status to the “Scheduled Castes” for the purposes of the Constitution 
and to keep the political interference of the States outside the purview 
of the said provisions. Therefore, under the guise of providing 
reservation for the weaker of the weakest castes, the State could not be 
permitted to make any variation in the notification nor could it be 
permitted to indirectly tinker with such notification published under 
Article 341(1). 

56. Article 15(4) is an enabling provision which enables the State to make 
special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes, and Clause (5) thereof enables the State to make 
special provisions for them in respect of the admission to educational 
institutions. Similarly, Article 16(4) enables the State to make any 
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any 
backward class of citizens which in the opinion of the State is not 
adequately represented in the services under the State. These 
provisions under Article 15 and 16 are merely enabling provisions, and 
could not be treated as the source of power to legislate the law for sub-
dividing or reclassifying/ sub-classifying or regrouping the castes, races 
or tribes enumerated as the “Scheduled Castes”, which have acquired 
special status by virtue of Article 341 of the Constitution. 
57. Under the guise of providing reservation or under the pretext of taking 
affirmative action for the weaker of the weakest sections of the society, 
the State cannot vary the Presidential List and tinker with Article 341. 
Such power if exercised by the State in absence of any executive or 
legislative power would be colourable exercise of powers. It hardly 
needs to be reiterated that the idea conveyed by the ‘doctrine of 

colourable legislation’ is that although apparently a legislature in 
passing a statute, purports to act within the limits of its powers, yet in 
substance and in reality, it transgresses its powers, the transgression 
being veiled by what appears, on proper examination, to be a mere 
pretence or disguise. As well-settled, the whole doctrine of “colourable 
exercise” is based on the maxim - “you cannot do indirectly what you 
cannot do directly.”* Any action of the State in the name of affirmative 
action, if not permitted by the Constitution, could not be validated or 
vindicated by the Courts by moulding or tinkering with the specific 
provisions of the Constitution. 
(III) WHETHER E.V. CHINNAIAH IS REQUIRED TO BE REVISITED IN 
VIEW OF CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS MADE IN INDRA SAWHNEY 
CONCERNING “OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES”? 
58. Much reliance has been placed by the Five-Judge Bench in Davinder 
Singh for making reference to this Bench, on the decision of Indra 
Sawhney for opining that the view taken in E.V. Chinnaiah was not in 
consonance with Indra Sawhney however, in my opinion, Indra 
Sawhney had not dealt with the issue of sub-classification of the 
 
* K.C. Gajapati Narayan Deo vs. State of Orissa, (1953) 

“Scheduled Castes” much less had dealt with the State’s power to sub-
classify or sub-divide or re-group the Castes specified as “Scheduled 
Castes” under Article 341 of the Constitution. 
59. So far as Indra Sawhney is concerned, the factual matrix was that the 
Government of India under Article 340 of the Constitution had 
constituted the “Second Backward Classes Commission” on January 1, 
1979 under the Chairmanship of Shri B. P. Mandal (known as the 
Mandal Commission). The terms of the reference of the said 
Commission were inter alia to determine the criteria for defining the 
socially and educationally backward classes, to recommend steps to be 
taken for the advancement of the socially and educationally backward 
classes of citizens so identified, and to examine the desirability or 
otherwise of making provision for reservation of appointments or posts 
in favour of such backward classes of citizens which were not 
adequately represented in the public services and posts in connection 
with the affairs of the Union or of any State. The Government of India 
itself on the recommendations of the Mandal Commission issued an 
office memorandum on August 13, 1990 purporting to extend 
reservations for socially and educationally backward classes in its 
services w.e.f. August 7, 1990. The said O.M reserved 27% of the seats 

for SEBC in addition to those already reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The issuance of the said O.M led to 
widespread protest and filing of writ petitions in the Supreme Court 
questioning the said Memorandum. The Five-Judge Bench of this Court 
by its order dated October 1, 1990 stayed the operation of the said O.M. dated 13th August, 1990, however, the process of identification of castes 
for locating the SEBCs was permitted to continue. Thereafter, as a 
consequence of the change in the Government at the Centre, another 
O.M on September 25th, 1991 modifying the earlier O.M. of August 13, 
1990 was issued, by introducing the economic criteria in the grant of 
reservation by giving preference to the poorer sections of the SEBC’s 
in the 27% quota and reserving another 10% of the vacancies in the civil 
services for other economically backward sections not covered by any 
of the existing schemes of reservation, which was explained to extend 
to the poorest amongst the higher caste and other religions also. The 
constitutionality of the said O.M dated September 25, 1991 was 
challenged before this Court and the Nine-Judge Bench was constituted 
to hear the matters. The matter was heard by the Nine-Judge Bench 
and by a 6:3 decision, the constitutionality, validity and enforceability of 
the impugned O.M dated 13.08.1990 subject to certain conditionalities 

and prerequisites was upheld, whereas paragraph 2(ii) of the second 
O.M. dated September 25, 1991 providing 10% additional reservation 
for the economically backward was held unconstitutional and struck 
down. Six separate judgments were delivered. The leading judgment 
was by B. P. Jeevan Reddy, J, (for M.H. Kania, C.J., and M.N. 
Venkatchaliah, A.M. Ahmadi and himself) with S. Ratnavel Pandian 
and P.B Sawant, J.J concurring by their separate judgments. 
60. Several questions were posed before the Nine-Judge Bench in Indra 
Sawhney which have been broadly indicated and discussed in the 
leading judgment of Jeevan Reddy, J along with the miscellaneous 
questions discussed therein. The questions particularly germane to the 
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes were the Question-3(a), Question-
3(e) and Question-10. The Question-3(a) was, “what does the 
expression “backward class of citizens” in Article 16(4) mean?” The 
Question-3(e) was, “whether the class, to be designated as a backward 
class, should be situated similarly to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled 
Tribes?” The Question-10 was, “whether the distinction made in the 
second memorandum between poorer sections of the backward classes 
and others was permissible under Article 16?” 

61. Justice Jeevan Reddy in his leading judgment while answering 
question 3(b) with regard to identification of “backward class of citizens” 
observed in Paragraph 781 as under: - 
“781. At the outset, we may state that for the purpose of this 
discussion, we keep aside the Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled 
Castes (since they are admittedly included within the backward 
classes), except to remark that backward classes contemplated by 
Article 16(4) do comprise some castes — for it cannot be denied 
that Scheduled Castes include quite a few castes.” 

62. Justice Jeevan Reddy further discussed the issue with regard to the 
“means test” and “creamy layer test” qua question no. 3 (d) and made 
a special note in paragraph 792 at page 725 that: - 
“This discussion is confined to Other Backward Classes only and 
has no relevance in the case of Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled 
Castes.” 
 
63. While summarising the issues involved in Question no. 3, Justice 
Jeevan Reddy held in Para 796 and 797 as under: - 
“796.-797. We may now summarise our discussion under 
Question No. 3. (a) A caste can be and quite often is a social 
class in India. If it is backward socially, it would be a backward 
class for the purposes of Article 16(4). Among non-Hindus, there 
are several occupational groups, sects and denominations, 
which for historical reasons are socially backward. They too 
represent backward social collectivities for the purposes of Article 
16(4). (b) Neither the constitution nor the law prescribe the 
procedure or method of identification of backward classes. Nor is 
it possible or advisable for the court to lay down any such 
procedure or method. It must be left to the authority appointed to 
identify. It can adopt such method/procedure as it thinks 

convenient and so long as its survey covers the entire populace, 
no objection can be taken to it. Identification of the backward 
classes can certainly be done with reference to castes among, 
and along with, other groups, classes and sections of people. 
One can start the process with the castes, wherever they are 
found, apply the criteria (evolved for determining backwardness) 
and find out whether it satisfies the criteria. If it does — what 
emerges is a “backward class of citizens” within the meaning of 
and for the purposes of Article 16(4). Similar process can be 
adopted in the case of other occupational groups, communities 
and classes, so as to cover the entire populace. The central idea 
and overall objective should be to consider all available groups, 
sections and classes in society. Since caste represents an 
existing, identifiable social group/class encompassing an 
overwhelming majority of the country's population, one can well 
begin with it and then go to other groups, sections and classes. 
(c) It is not necessary for a class to be designated as a backward 
class 
that 
it 
is 
situated 
similarly 
to 
the 
Scheduled 
Castes/Scheduled Tribes. (d) ‘Creamy layer’ can be, and must 
be, excluded. (e) It is not correct to say that the backward class 
contemplated by Article 16(4) is limited to the socially and 
educationally backward classes referred to in Article 15(4) and 
Article 340. It is much wider. The test or requirement of social 
and educational backwardness cannot be applied to Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, who indubitably fall within the 
expression “backward class of citizens”. The accent in Article 
16(4) appears to be on social backwardness. Of course, social, 
educational and economic backwardness are closely intertwined 
in the Indian context. The classes contemplated by Article 16(4) 
may be wider than those contemplated by Article 15(4).” 

64. Pandian, J. in his concurring opinion observed in Paragraph 39 that the 
words “backward class of citizens”, occurring in Article 16(4) are neither 
defined nor explained in the Constitution though the same words 
occurring in Article 15(4) are followed by a qualifying phrase, “socially 

and educationally”. In paragraph-126, he observed that it is not 
necessary for a class to be designated as backward class that it should 
be situated similarly to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
65. Justice P.B. Sawant in his concurring judgment observed as under in 
paragraph 417: - 
“417. Under Article 16(4), the reservation in the State 
employment is to be provided for a “class of people” which must 
be “backward” and “in the opinion of the State” is “not adequately 
represented” in the services of the State. Under Article 46, the 
State is required to “promote with special care” the “educational 
and economic interests” of the “weaker sections” of the people 
and “in particular”, of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes, and “to protect” them from “social injustice” and “all forms 
of exploitation”. Since in the present case, we are not concerned 
with the reservations in favour of the SCs/STs, it is not necessary 
to refer to Article 335 except to point out that, it is in terms 
provided there that the claims of SCs/STs in the services are to 
be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of 
efficiency of administration. It must, therefore, mean that the 
claims of other backward class of citizens and weaker sections 
must also be considered consistently with the maintenance of the 
efficiency. For, whomsoever, therefore, reservation is made, the 
efficiency of administration is not to be sacrificed, whatever the 
efficiency may mean. That is the mandate of the Constitution 
itself.” 
 
66. After taking into consideration, the principles laid down in Indra 
Sawhney, Justice Hegde in E.V. Chinnaiah rightly observed in 
paragraph 38 as under: - 
“38. On behalf of the respondents, it was pointed out that in Indra 
Sawhney case [1992 Supp (3) SCC 217: 1992 SCC (L&S) Supp 
1: (1992) 22 ATC 385] the Court had permitted subclassification 

of Other Backward Communities, as backward and more 
backward based on their comparative underdevelopment, 
therefore, 
the 
similar 
classification 
amongst 
the 
class 
enumerated in the Presidential List of Scheduled Castes is 
permissible in law. We do not think the principles laid down 
in Indra Sawhney case [1992 Supp (3) SCC 217: 1992 SCC 
(L&S) Supp 1: (1992) 22 ATC 385] for subclassification of Other 
Backward Classes can be applied as a precedent law for 
subclassification or subgrouping Scheduled Castes in the 
Presidential List because that very judgment itself has 
specifically held that subdivision of Other Backward Classes is 
not applicable to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. This 
we think is for the obvious reason i.e. the Constitution itself has 
kept the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes List out of 
interference by the State Governments.” 
 
67. Justice H.K. Sema, J. concurring with Justice Hegde in E.V. 
Chinnaiah observed in Paragraph 48 as under: - 
“48. In Indra Sawhney v. Union of India [1992 Supp (3) SCC 
217: 1992 SCC (L&S) Supp 1: (1992) 22 ATC 385] this Court 
observed at SCC p. 725 that the discussion of creamy layer is 
confined to Other Backward Classes only and has no relevance 
in the case of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.” 

68. Justice S.B. Sinha also in his concurring opinion observed in 
paragraph 76 and 92 as under: - 
“76. Having regard to the decision of this Court in Indra 
Sawhney v. Union of India [1992 Supp (3) SCC 217: 1992 SCC 
(L&S) Supp 1: (1992) 22 ATC 385] backward class citizens can 
be classified in four different categories — (i) more backward, (ii) 
backward, (iii) Scheduled Caste, and (iv) Scheduled Tribe. A 
contention has been raised that in Indra Sawhney [1992 Supp (3) 
SCC 217: 1992 SCC (L&S) Supp 1: (1992) 22 ATC 385] the 
Court permitted a classification amongst Other Backward 
Classes and as such there is no reason as to why the said 

principle shall not be applied to the members of the Scheduled 
Castes. In Indra Sawhney [1992 Supp (3) SCC 217: 1992 SCC 
(L&S) Supp 1: (1992) 22 ATC 385] itself this Court categorically 
stated that it was not concerned with the question as regards 
members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. (SCC 
para 792 at p. 725) It is relevant to note that Question 5 
formulated by Jeevan Reddy, J. was only in relation to the further 
division in the backward classes into backward and more 
backward categories. Advisedly, no question was framed as 
regards division of Scheduled Castes into more backward and 
backward Scheduled Castes. 
 
92. The impugned Act as also the judgment of the High Court are 
premised on the observations in Indra Sawhney [1992 Supp (3) 
SCC 217: 1992 SCC (L&S) Supp 1: (1992) 22 ATC 385] that 
there is no constitutional or legal bar for a State in categorising the 
backward classes as backward and more backward class. This 
Court, however, while referring to Article 16(4) of the Constitution 
stated that it recognised only one class viz. backward class of 
citizens in the following terms: (SCC p. 716, para 781) 
“781. At the outset, we may state that for the purpose of 
this discussion, we keep aside the Scheduled Tribes and 
Scheduled Castes (since they are admittedly included within the 
backward classes), except to remark that backward classes 
contemplated by Article 16(4) do comprise some castes — for it 
cannot be denied that Scheduled Castes include quite a few 
castes.” 
 
69. In Ashok Kumar Thakur vs. Union of India and Others22, another 
Five-Bench judgment, after considering earlier judgments on the issue 
whether the “creamy layer” principle is applicable to the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, held that the said Principle cannot be 
 
22 (2008) 

applied to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as they are 
separate classes by themselves. To be precise, it held as under: - 
“184. So far, this Court has not applied the “creamy layer” 
principle to the general principle of equality for the purpose of 
reservation. The “creamy layer” so far has been applied only to 
identify the backward class, as it required certain parameters to 
determine the backward classes. “Creamy layer” principle is one 
of the parameters to identify backward classes. Therefore, 
principally, the “creamy layer” principle cannot be applied to STs 
and SCs, as SCs and STs are separate classes by themselves. 
Ray, C.J., in an earlier decision, stated that “Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes are not a caste within the ordinary 
meaning of caste”. And they are so identified by virtue of the 
notification issued by the President of India under Articles 341 
and 342 of the Constitution. The President may, after 
consultation with the Governor, by public notification, specify the 
castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races 
or tribes which for the purpose of the Constitution shall be 
deemed to be Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes. Once the 
notification is issued, they are deemed to be the members of 
Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, whichever is applicable. 
In E.V. Chinnaiah [(2005) ] concurring with the 
majority judgment, S.B. Sinha, J. said: (SCC p. 403) 
“The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes occupy a 
special place in our Constitution. The President of India is the sole 
repository of the power to specify the castes, races or tribes or 
parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the 
purposes of the Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes. 
The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 made in terms 
of Article 341(1) is exhaustive. The object of Articles 341 and 342 
is to provide for grant of protection to the backward class of 
citizens who are specified in the Scheduled Castes Order and 
Scheduled Tribes Order having regard to the economic and 
education backwardness wherefrom they suffer. Any legislation 
which would bring them out of the purview thereof or tinker with 
the order issued by the President of India would be 
unconstitutional. (Paras 52, 111 and 84) 
(emphasis supplied) 

186. Moreover, right from the beginning, the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes were treated as a separate category and nobody 
ever disputed identification of such classes. So long as “creamy 
layer” is not applied as one of the principles of equality, it cannot be 
applied to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. So far, it is 
applied only to identify the socially and educationally backward 
classes. We make it clear that for the purpose of reservation, the 
principles of “creamy layer” are not applicable for Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes.” 
 
70. In view of the above, I am of the opinion that though Indra Sawhney 
had sought to define “backward class” in terms of social backwardness, 
while considering the ambit of “backward class” for the purpose of 
Article 16(4), it did not deal with the issue qua the Scheduled Castes/ 
Scheduled Tribes particularly in the light of Article 341/342, rather it 
categorically kept the Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled Tribes outside the 
purview of consideration. The Scheduled Castes being the most 
backward class amongst the backward classes, and having acquired a 
special status by virtue of Article 341, the question of defining “backward 
class” qua the “Scheduled Castes” did not arise, and rightly not dealt 
with in Indra Sawhney for the purposes of Article 16(4) of the 
Constitution. 
71. In so far as Article 15(4) and 15(5) are concerned, the use of the word 
“any” before the words “socially and educationally backward classes” 

and the use of the word “the” before “Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled 
Tribes” clearly indicate that the said provisions pertain to the “Other 
Backward Classes” which are socially and educationally backward, and 
that the said provisions also pertain to the “Scheduled Castes” and 
“Scheduled Tribes”, however the “Scheduled Castes” do not require any 
further identification once they are notified under Article 341. As rightly 
held in Ashok Kumar Thakur*, the “creamy layer” principle is one of 
the parameters to identify backward classes. The “Scheduled Castes” 
having already been specified in the Presidential List under Article 341, 
the said creamy layer principle cannot be applied to the “Scheduled 
Castes” for their identification as backward class. In my opinion, the 
Five-Judge Bench has thoroughly misread and misinterpreted Indra 
Sawhney, to opine that Indra Sawhney permitted sub-classification of 
backward classes including the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, 
rather they were categorically kept outside the purview of consideration 
by the Nine-Judge Bench in Indra Sawhney. 
72. The reliance placed on Jarnail Singh is also thoroughly erroneous. In 
Jarnail Singh, the Five-Judge Bench was called upon to examine the 
 
* (2008) 

correctness of the law laid down in Nagaraj. In para-17 of Jarnail 
Singh, the Bench observed that: - 
“The judgment in Chinnaiah has been referred by the three 
Judge Bench to a larger bench by an Order dated 20th August, 
2014. This is because, according to the three Judge Bench, 
Chinnaiah is contrary to Article 338 of the Constitution of India 
and Indra Sawhney. Since the correctness of Chinnaiah does 
not arise before us, we need not say more about this reference 
which will be decided on its own merits.” 
 
73. After noting above, the Five-Judge Bench in Jarnail Singh did not 
agree with the view taken by the Five-Judge Bench in Ashok Kumar* 
that the creamy layer principle is merely a principle of identification and 
not a principle of equality. The Bench in Jarnail Singh agreed with that 
part of decision in M. Nagaraj and Others vs. Union of India and 
Others* which held that the creamy layer test is applicable to the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in exercise of application of 
the basic structure test, however, it did not agree with Nagaraj, when 
Nagaraj required the States to collect quantifiable data on 
backwardness, in so far as Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
are concerned. The Bench in Jarnail Singh held that “it would clearly 
be contrary to Indra Sawhney, which had held that the requirement of 
 
* (2008) 
* (2006) 

social and educational backwardness cannot be applied to Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, who inevitably fall within the expression 
“Backward Class of Citizens” and therefore the decision the judgment 
in Nagaraj would have to be declared to be bad on this ground.” In my 
opinion, such observations in Jarnail Singh are self-contradictory. In 
any case, the Bench had no occasion to deal with nor had dealt with the 
issue whether sub-classification of “Scheduled Castes” notified in the 
Presidential List under Article 341 was permissible to be made by the 
States. 
74. It is very common that the Constitutional Benches in their judgments 
deal with many complex facts and legal issues. Not all that has been 
said in the body of judgment would become a precedent or binding for 
other Courts. The judgments of the Constitution Benches have to be 
read in the context of questions which arose for consideration before 
them. Certain observations made in the judgment may be necessary for 
deciding the issues involved, but every observation made on law in the 
course of delivering the judgment may not have a binding effect as a 
precedent. Any observation or remark made or opinion expressed 
incidentally or collaterally, and not directly upon the question posed 
before the Court would be an ‘obiter dicta’ and not a ‘precedent’. A 

decision is an authority for what it decides and not what can logically be 
deduced therefrom, as held in State of Haryana vs. Ranbir alias 
Rana23. It was also observed in ADM Jabalpur vs. Shivakant Shukla24 
that the statements which are not part of ratio decidendi constitute obiter 
dicta and are not authoritative. 
75. In none of the cases – Indra Sawhney or Jarnail Singh, the issue of 
sub-classification of “Scheduled Castes” in the context of Article 341 
was raised or argued, nor was decided by the concerned Benches, as 
was raised and decided in E.V. Chinnaiah. Hence, it would be a fallacy 
to hold that the law laid down in E.V. Chinnaiah was not in consonance 
with Indra Sawhney or Jarnail Singh. 
76. Since I have held that the State has neither executive nor legislative 
power to sub-classify or sub-divide or re-group the castes, races or 
tribes specified as the “Scheduled Castes” in the Presidential List 
notified under Article 341, the other questions pertaining to the criteria 
or yardstick for sub-classification, or requirement for collecting 
quantifiable data etc. by the State for sub-classification, are not required 
to be addressed. 
 
23 (2006) 
24 (1976) 

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND CONSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK 
77. The affirmative actions of the States have to be within the Constitutional 
framework, and if they are not, the Courts cannot ratify the same by 
bending or moulding the specific mandates contained in the 
Constitution. Article 142 even with the width of its amplitude cannot be 
used to build a new edifice where none existed earlier, by ignoring 
Constitutional provisions dealing with the subject and thereby achieve 
something indirectly which cannot be achieved directly.* As held by the 
Constitution Bench in the landmark judgment in case of Supreme Court 
Bar Association vs. Union of India and Another25. 
“47. The plenary powers of this Court under Article 142 of the 
Constitution 
are 
inherent 
in 
the 
Court 
and 
are complementary to those powers which are specifically 
conferred on the Court by various statutes though are not 
limited by those statutes. These powers also exist 
independent of the statutes with a view to do complete justice 
between the parties. These powers are of very wide amplitude 
and are in the nature of supplementary powers. This power 
exists as a separate and independent basis of jurisdiction 
apart from the statutes. It stands upon the foundation and the 
basis for its exercise may be put on a different and perhaps 
even wider footing, to prevent injustice in the process of 
litigation and to do complete justice between the parties. This 
plenary jurisdiction is, thus, the residual source of power which 
this Court may draw upon as necessary whenever it is just and 
equitable to do so and in particular to ensure the observance 
of the due process of law, to do complete justice between the 

25 (1998) 

parties, while administering justice according to law. There is 
no doubt that it is an indispensable adjunct to all other powers 
and is free from the restraint of jurisdiction and operates as a 
valuable weapon in the hands of the Court to prevent “clogging 
or obstruction of the stream of justice”. It, however, needs to 
be remembered that the powers conferred on the Court by 
Article 142 being curative in nature cannot be construed as 
powers which authorise the Court to ignore the substantive 
rights of a litigant while dealing with a cause pending before it. 
This power cannot be used to “supplant” substantive law 
applicable to the case or cause under consideration of the 
Court. Article 142, even with the width of its amplitude, cannot 
be used to build a new edifice where none existed earlier, by 
ignoring express statutory provisions dealing with a subject 
and thereby to achieve something indirectly which cannot be 
achieved directly. Punishing a contemner advocate, while 
dealing with a contempt of court case by suspending his 
licence 
to 
practice, 
a 
power 
otherwise 
statutorily 
available only to the Bar Council of India, on the ground that 
the contemner is also an advocate, is, therefore, not 
permissible in exercise of the jurisdiction under Article 142. 
The construction of Article 142 must be functionally informed 
by the salutary purposes of the article, viz., to do complete 
justice between the parties. It cannot be otherwise. As already 
noticed in a case of contempt of court, the contemner and the 
court cannot be said to be litigating parties.” 
 
78. The action of the State though well-intentioned and affirmative in nature, 
if violates the specific provision of the Constitution, cannot be validated 
by the Supreme Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 142. 
The removal of inequalities or remedy to remove inequalities cannot be 
permitted at the cost of violation of the specific provision of the 
Constitution. When the wordings of the provision of the statutes, in the 
instant case of Article 341 of the Constitution are clear, as also the 

intention of the draftsmen of the Constitution, the Court cannot add or 
subtract words from such provision to give it a meaning which the Court 
feels would achieve the goal of social transformation. Sometimes the 
affirmative action and the Constitution intersect with each other in 
complex ways, as the affirmative action policies are framed by the 
States to promote diversity and to address historical inequalities, while 
the legal frameworks have to ensure that these policies are 
implemented within the bounds of the Constitution. The implementation 
of the affirmative action policies must align with the Constitutional and 
legal principles, particularly those related to equality and non-
discrimination. In short, the affirmative action and the legal frameworks, 
though both do aim at more equitable society, they must navigate 
complex legal principles to ensure fairness and Constitutionality. 
79. The upshot of the above discussion may be summarised as under: - 
(i) When the law was settled by the Constitution Bench in E.V. 
Chinnaiah after considering all the previous judgments including 
Indra Sawhney and after investing substantial judicial time and 
resources, the same should not have been doubted and referred to 
the larger bench by the Three-Judge Bench in Davinder Singh, 
and that too without assigning any reason much less cogent reason 

for their disagreement disregarding the well settled doctrines of 
Precedents and Stare decisis. 
(ii) While giving a broad and generous construction to the 
Constitutional provisions, the rule of “plain meaning”, or “literal” 
interpretation, which is the “primary rule” has to be kept in mind. 
(iii) The Presidential List specifying “Scheduled Castes” under Article 
341 assumes finality on the publication of the notification, and the 
castes, races or tribes, or groups within castes, races or tribes 
specified in the notification are deemed to be the “Scheduled 
Castes” in relation to that State or Union Territory as the case may 
be, for the purposes of the Constitution and as such assume 
special status of “Scheduled Castes”. 
(iv) It is only the Parliament by law which can include in or exclude from 
the list of the “Scheduled Castes” specified in the notification 
notified under Clause (1), any caste, race or tribe or part of or group 
within any caste, race or tribe. Such notification notified under 
Clause (1) cannot be varied even by the President by issuing any 
subsequent notification. 

(v) It is by virtue of the notification of the President under Article 341 
that the “Scheduled Castes” come into being. Though the members 
of Scheduled Castes are drawn from different castes, races or 
tribes, they attain special status of “Scheduled Castes” by virtue of 
Presidential Notification. The etymological and evolutionary history 
and the background of the nomenclature “Scheduled Castes”, 
coupled with the Presidential orders published under Article 341 of 
the Constitution, make the “Scheduled Castes”, a homogenous 
class, which cannot be tinkered with by the States. 
(vi) The States have no legislative competence to enact the law for 
providing reservation or giving preferential treatment to a particular 
caste/castes by dividing/sub-dividing/sub-classifying or regrouping 
the castes, races or tribes enumerated as the “Scheduled Castes” 
in the notification under Article 341. 
(vii) Under the guise of providing reservation or under the pretext of 
taking affirmative action for the weaker of the weakest sections of 
the society, the State cannot vary the Presidential List, nor can 
tinker with Article 341 of the Constitution. 

(viii)The Nine-Judge Bench in Indra Sawhney and the Five-Judge 
Bench in Jarnail Singh had not dealt with the issue of sub-
classification of the “Scheduled Castes” in the context of Article 
341, much less had dealt with the State’s powers to sub-classify or 
sub-divide or regroup the castes specified as “Scheduled Castes” 
under Article 341 of the Constitution, and therefore, it could not be 
held that the law laid down in E.V. Chinnaiah was not in 
consonance with Indra Sawhney or Jarnail Singh. 
(ix) The power conferred upon the Supreme Court under Article 142 
cannot be used to supplant the substantive law applicable to the 
case under consideration. Even with the width of its amplitude, 
Article 142 cannot be used to build a new edifice where none 
existed earlier, by ignoring express statutory provisions dealing 
with the subject, and thereby to achieve something indirectly which 
cannot be achieved directly. The action of the State, though well 
intentioned and affirmative in nature, if violates the specific 
provision of the Constitution, cannot be validated by the Supreme 
Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 142. 

(x) The affirmative action and legal frameworks, though both do aim at 
more equitable society, they must navigate complex legal 
principles to ensure fairness and constitutionality. 
80. In that view of the matter, I am of the opinion that the law laid down by 
the Five-Judge Bench in E.V. Chinnaiah is the correct law and 
deserves to be confirmed....…..…..……..………J. 

 [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
AUGUST 01ST, 2024. 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE/ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

THE STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS. 
 …APPELLANTS 

VERSUS 
 
DAVINDER SINGH & ORS. 

 …RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 

With 

With 

With 

With 

With 

With 

With 
 
T.C. (C) NO.38 OF 2011 
With 
 
T.P. (C) NO.464 OF 2015 

With 

With 

With 

With 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOs.5595-5596 OF 2010 
With 

With 
 
T.C (C) NO.37 OF 2011 
With 

With 

With 

With 
 
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (Civil) NOs.5454-5459 OF 2011 
With 

With 

With 

JUDGMENT 

PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 

Index 
 
1. 
 
Introduction 
 
 4-10 
2. 
 
Amendments to Constitution with reference to 
Case Laws 
 
 10-23 
3. 
 
Central Government and State Government 
Commissions on SC/ST and OBC’s 
 
 23-33 
4. 
 
The Ramifications of Reservation 
 
 33-39 
5. 
 
Casteless Society - Caste System vis-à-vis the 
Varna System 
 
 39-45 
6. 
 
Reservation is only a medium of facility and its 
execution revives Casteism 

 45-48 
7. 
 
Conclusion 
 
 49-54 

INTRODUCTION 
 
1. 
The issue under reference to this Constitution Bench as 
succinctly described by the Chief Justice in his opinion is 
whether 
sub-classification 
of 
the 
scheduled 
castes 
is 
constitutionally permissible for the purposes of reservation. 
2. 
The issue arose as the Punjab legislature enacted the Punjab 
Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes (Reservation in 
Services) Act, 2006, inter alia providing for reservation of 25% 
in favour of scheduled castes and that 50% of the aforesaid 
percentage shall be offered to particular scheduled castes such 
as Balmikis and Mazhbi Sikhs in direct recruitment. 
3. 
The validity of providing 50% reservation in favour of the above 
two categories of scheduled castes, out of the various mentioned 
in the Presidential list of scheduled castes, was challenged 
before the High Court by invoking the writ jurisdiction under 
Article 226 of the Constitution of India. The High Court of 
Punjab and Haryana relying upon the Constitution Bench 
decision of this Court in E.V. Chinnaiah vs. State of Andhra 

Pradesh and Ors.1 declared Section 4(5) of the aforesaid Act 
which sub-classified the scheduled castes and provided for 50% 
reservation of the 25% admissible to the scheduled castes in 
favour of the above two categories of scheduled castes only to 
be invalid. 
4. 
The Chinnaiah case (supra) arose from the decision of the 
Andhra Pradesh High Court whereby it rejected the challenge to 
the 
provision 
of 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Scheduled 
Castes 
(Rationalization of Reservations) Act, 2000, which provided for 
apportionment of reservation among scheduled castes by 
classifying them into four groups: 1% for Group A, 7% for Group 
B, 6% for Group C and 1% again for Group D. 
5. 
The Constitution Bench in Chinnaiah’s case was of the 
unanimous opinion that the provision of the above Act of sub-
classifying the scheduled castes into four groups and 
apportioning 
the 
reservation 
criteria 
group 
wise 
was 
unconstitutional. It was held that the sub-classification 
permitted by Indra Sawhney and Ors. vs. Union of India and 
 
1 (2005) 

Ors.2 was limited only to backward and other backward classes 
and is not applicable to scheduled castes. 
6. 
It is in the above background that the Constitution Bench 
dealing with one of the cases at hand i.e. State of Punjab and 
Ors. vs. Davinder Singh and Ors. held that the matter requires 
to be revisited by a larger Bench. 
7. 
In somewhat similar fashion, a matter came to be referred from 
the State of Haryana and another from the State of Tamil Nadu 
wherein by notification in the State of Haryana scheduled castes 
were classified into two categories i.e. A and B for the purposes 
of applying reservation and in the State of Tamil Nadu by an Act 
of 2009, reservation of seats was provided to Arunthathiyar’s in 
educational institution and for appointment in services. 
8. 
All the three categories of matters i.e. from the State of Punjab, 
State of Haryana and the State of Tamil Nadu are before the 
Bench in the form of Civil Appeals, Writ Petitions, TP (C) & TC 
(C) and Special Leave Petition (Civil) and have been taken up as 
 
2 (1992) Supp (3) SCC 217 

clubbed matters as the issue is common as described in the 
beginning. 
9. 
The issue of sub-classification of scheduled castes has been 
appropriately answered by the Chief Justice and my esteemed 
brother Justice Gavai by their separate opinions with which I 
respectfully agree but at the same time since the matter in issue 
is basically concerning “reservation”, I consider it to be of 
utmost importance and, therefore, deem it appropriate to pen 
down my own views separately. 

10. Man/human as rightly understood is a social animal and has 
to live in a society. An ideal form of society is one which 
progresses on merit or where merit alone prevails. This is 
evident from Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution which 
provides for equality before law and that State shall not 
discriminate on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of 
birth. Articles 14 and 15 (as it originally stood) are quoted 
below: 
“Article14- Equality before law 
The State shall not deny to any person equality before the 
law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory 
of India. 

Article 15- Prohibition of discrimination on grounds 
of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth 
(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on 
grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or 
any of them. 
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, 
sex, place of birth or any of them, be subject to any 
disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to— 
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and 
places of public entertainment; or 
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads 
and places of public resort maintained wholly or 
partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use 
of the general public. 
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from 
making any special provision for women and children.” 
 
11. However, no society can exist in its ideal form as all citizens are 
not alike. The basic needs of everyone are different and have to 
be taken into account to carry the society forward. Therefore, 
there is pressing need to consider the social, economic and 
political need of all persons or classes of persons. In the context 
of India, the trinity of social, economic and political justice has 
to be balanced and to promote social justice, provisions have to 
be made for the upliftment of the so-called marginalized citizens 
or the depressed classes of persons who later came to be known 
as backward class of persons and scheduled castes as well as 
scheduled tribes etc. It is to achieve the above social objective 
of bringing every citizen or a class of citizen on equal level and 

at par in law that provision for reservation came to be made in 
the Constitution. 
12. The provision for reservation for any class of persons at first 
sight may appear to be anti-merit but if weighed on the scales 
of social justice, it is imperative. 
13. The poor and the downtrodden sections of the Indian society 
were earlier described by the ruling class as the “depressed 
classes” which included a wide range of persons such as 
untouchables, persons of various backward communities and 
those living in tribes in hills and forests or in remote areas of 
the country. Slowly, these depressed classes of persons came to 
be classified into various groups according to their vocation 
such as scavengers, leather workers, ironsmiths, carpenters, 
watchman and other menial workers and were referred to as 
scheduled castes; and those living in tribes in hills, forests or 
remote areas came to be recognized as scheduled tribes. The 
remaining depressed classes of persons or marginalized classes 
were later classified as other backward classes. 
14. The Government of India Act, 1935, for the first time, recognized 
the above referred depressed classes of persons as scheduled 

castes and the primitive tribes as backward tribes and inter alia 
provided reservation of seats for the scheduled castes and 
backward tribes in the federal legislature. The objective was of 
bringing about political equality only. 
15. The Constitution of India as enacted and adopted on 26th 
November, 1949 and enforced w.e.f. 26th January, 1950, 
originally provided for two categories of reservation, one for the 
political purposes and the other for social purposes vide Articles 
330 & 332 and Articles 15(3) & 16(4). 
16. Articles 330 and 332 of the Constitution aimed to achieve 
political justice by providing reservation of seats for scheduled 
castes and scheduled tribes in Lok Sabha and State 
Legislatures whereas Article 15(3) and 16(4) were aimed at 
social justice and provided for special provision for women & 
children and for reservation in the services in favour of 
backward classes of persons respectively. 
 
AMENDMENTS TO CONSTITUTION WITH REFERENCE TO CASE 
LAWS 
 
17. On the legislative front, in the wake of various verdicts of the 
apex court concerning reservation, a constitutional amendment 

regime 
commenced 
bringing 
about 
amendments 
after 
amendments in the Constitution to overcome the difficulties in 
the implementation of the reservation policy in the light of the 
decisions of the courts in context with reservation. 
18. The Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951 w.e.f. 18th June, 
1951, was brought about in order to solve the problems posed 
by the decision of 5 Judges Constitution Bench of this Court in 
State of Madras vs. Champakam Dorairajan3 which struck 
down caste-based reservation for admission in medical colleges 
being violative of Article 29(2) of the Constitution and by an 
other 

Judges 
Constitution 
Bench 
decision 
in 
B. 
Venkataramana vs. State of Madras and Ors.4 which held that 
the appointment of judicial officers as unconstitutional as 
Article 16(4) permitted reservation for backward classes of 
citizens only. Thus, Sub-Article (4) to Article 15 of the 
Constitution of India was introduced so as to empower the State 
for making special provision for the advancement of any socially 
 
3 AIR (1951) SC 226 
4 AIR (1951) SC 229 

and educationally backward classes of citizens or for scheduled 
castes and scheduled tribes. 
19. In this manner, Articles 16(4), 15(3) and 15(4) as introduced, 
envisaged to bring about social justice amongst the citizens of 
the country. 
20. After the Constitution Bench decision in Indra Sawhney 
(supra), there was a spate of amendments in the Constitution 
to overcome the difficulties caused by various observations of 
the court. 
21. The Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995 
added Article 16(4)(A) to the Constitution so as to provide 
reservation in promotion in favour of scheduled castes and 
scheduled tribes which are not adequately represented in the 
services of the State. 
22. It was followed by the Constitution (Eighty-first Amendment) 
Act, 2000 which inserted Article 16(4)(B) so as to make 
provisions for carry forward of unfilled vacancies of the reserved 
category. The new Article 16(4)(B) provided that the State is not 
denuded of power to consider any unfilled vacancies of a year 
reserved for being filled up in that year in accordance with the 

provisions for reservation made under Clause 4 or Clause 4(A) 
of Article 16 to be carried forward to be filled up in any 
succeeding year or years and that such carried forward 
vacancies shall not be counted for determining the sealing of 
50% reservation in total number of vacancies of that year. 
23. In immediate succession came the Constitution (Eighty-second 
Amendment) Act, 2000 which was necessitated to overcome one 
of the decisions of this Court in case of S. Vinod Kumar and 
Anr. vs. Union of India and Ors.5 which held that even if 
reservation in promotion is permissible, no lower qualifying 
marks or lesser level of evaluation for promotion is legally 
permissible for the reserved categories. The said amendment 
permitted provision for relaxation in qualifying marks in any 
examination or for lowering the standards of evaluation for 
reservation in the matters of promotion to any class or classes 
of services for posts in connection with the affairs of the Union 
or the State. 
 
5 (1996) 

24. In Union of India vs. Virpal Singh Chauhan6, this Court held 
that the accelerated promotion to the persons of the reserved 
categories would not give them consequential seniority and that 
their seniority in promoted category shall be governed by their 
seniority in the feeder cadre. 
25. The above view was reaffirmed in Ajit Singh Januja vs. State 
of Punjab7 and it was held that reserved category persons are 
entitled only for accelerated promotion and not consequential 
seniority. 
26. The above two decisions were followed by Ajit Singh (II) vs. 
State of Punjab8 wherein upholding the principles of 
accelerated promotion and consequential seniority as laid down 
in the above two cases it was clarified that the general 
candidates on promotion will get seniority over reserved 
candidates who were already promoted by way of accelerated 
promotion, if both were in the same cadre. 
27. The Constitution (Eighty-Fifth Amendment) Act, 2002, was 
enacted to undo the principles laid down by the above decisions 
 
6 (1995) 
7 (1996) 
8 (1999) 

especially in Ajit Singh (II) case (supra) and the expression 
“with consequential seniority” was inserted in Article 16 (4)(A) 
of the Constitution. This amendment was given retrospective 
effect w.e.f. 07.06.1995, the date on which Article 14(4)(A) was 
inserted into Article 16 of the Constitution by the Constitution 
(Seventy-Seventh Amendment) Act, 1995. 
28. In the meantime, following the directions of the Supreme Court 
in Indra Sawhney’s case (supra), an office memorandum was 
issued by the Government of India on 08.09.1993 designating 
certain categories of people as “creamy layer”. The State of Bihar 
and Uttar Pradesh vide The Bihar Reservation of Vacancies in 
Post and Services (For Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and 
Other Backward Classes) (Amendment) Ordinance, 1995, and 
Uttar Pradesh Public Services Reservation for Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes Act, 1994, 
provided that IAS and IPS Officers would be within “creamy 
layer” if they have a (i) salary of Rs.10,000/- per month; (ii) 
either of the spouse is a graduate; and (iii) one of them owns a 
house in an urban area. Similarly, professionals with income 
of Rs.10 lakhs per annum were also categorized under the 

“creamy layer” with additional criteria that either of the spouse 
should be a graduate and the family owns an immovable 
property of at least Rs.20 lakhs. 
29. In Ashoka Kumar Thakur vs. State of Bihar9, this Court 
struck down the additional conditions of education and 
property prescribed in the Bihar and by U.P. enactment to be 
unconstitutional for identifying the “creamy layer” as violative 
of Articles 16(4) and 14 of the Constitution. 
30. In Indra Sawhney (II) vs. Union of India10, the Kerala State 
Backward Classes Act, 1995, which provided that there are no 
socially advanced sections in any backward classes of the State 
and that the backward classes in the State are not adequately 
represented in the services under the State and as such 
backward classes would continue to avail the benefit of 
reservation, thus, declaring that there was no ‘creamy layer’ 
amongst the OBC in the State, was struck down holding that 
‘creamy layer’ in the backward classes is to be treated at par 
with the forward classes and are not entitled to benefit of 
 
9 (1995) 
10 (2000) 

reservation. It was also observed that “creamy layer” is to be 
excluded otherwise it will be discriminatory and violative of 
Articles 14 and 16 as “forwards” and “creamy layer of backward 
classes” cannot be treated unequally. 
31. In M. Nagaraj vs. Union of India11, the validity of the 
constitutional amendments namely Constitution (Seventy-
Seventh Amendment) Act, 1995, Constitution (Eighty-first 
Amendment) 
Act, 
2000, 
Constitution 
(Eighty-second 
Amendment) 
Act, 

and 
Constitution 
(Eighty-fifth 
Amendment) Act, 2002, were upheld. 
32. In TMA Pai Foundation vs. State of Karnataka12, the 11 
Judges Constitution Bench of this Court laid down various 
principles regarding right to establish educational institutions, 
the procedure for grant of admission, the right of minorities and 
the extent of State regulatory mechanism. The said judgment 
came to be interpreted and clarified by Islamic Academia 
Education vs. State of Karnataka13. In P.A. Inamdar vs. 
 
11 (2006) 
12 (2002) 
13 (2003) 

State of Maharashtra14, the 7 Judges Constitution Bench held 
that the 5 Judges Constitution Bench in Islamic Academia 
Education case did not interpret the TMA Pai Foundation case 
correctly. In such a situation, Constitution (Ninety-Third 
Amendment) Act, 2006, was brought about to overcome the 
confusion alleged to have been created in the interpretation of 
TMA Pai Foundation case and Sub-Article (5) was inserted in 
Article 15 of the Constitution which reads as under: 
“Article 15 (5)- Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) 
of clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent the State from 
making 
any 
special 
provision, 
by 
law, 
for 
the 
advancement of any socially and educationally backward 
classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes in so far as such special provisions 
relate to their admission to educational institutions 
including private educational institutions, whether aided 
or unaided by the State, other than the minority 
educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 
30.” 
 
33. The validity of the Constitution (Ninety-Third Amendment) Act, 
2006, was upheld by the 5 Judges Constitution Bench in Ashok 
Kumar Thakur case (supra) which provided reservation for 
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for 
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in educational 
 
14 (2005) 

institutions insofar as it relates to State maintained institutions 
and Government aided educational institutions. 
34. A similar view was expressed in Pramati Educational & 
Cultural Trust vs. Union of India15, wherein also the 
constitutional validity of the Constitution (Ninety-Third 
Amendment) Act, 2006, was upheld and reservation for socially 
and educationally backward classes of citizens or for scheduled 
castes and scheduled tribes in unaided private institutions as 
well was upheld. 
35. In Ram Singh vs. Union of India16, reservation for Jats in 
various States was struck down as no such reservation in their 
favour was recommended by the National Commission for 
Backward Classes and there was no quantifiable data for 
justifying reservation in their favour. Accordingly, Constitution 
(One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018, was brought 
about and Articles 338B & 342A were inserted constituting a 
separate commission for socially and educationally backward 
 
15 (2014) 
16 (2015) 

classes and empowering the President to specify socially and 
educationally backward classes. 
36. In Jaishri Laxmanrao Patil vs. State of Maharashtra17, 5 
Judges Constitution Bench struck down the reservation for 
Marathas in the State of Maharashtra on the ground that the 
State does not have power to declare any class of people as 
socially and educationally backward classes. 
37. In order to overcome the difficulty created by the above decision, 
Constitution (One Hundred and Fifth Amendment) Act, 2021 
was brought about amending Article 342A so as to provide that 
the list of socially and educationally backward classes of 
citizens prepared by the President is only for the Central 
Government but the State can also prepare its own list. 
38. In between, Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) 
Act, 2019, was enacted whereby Sub-Article (6) was inserted in 
Articles 15 and 16 in the following terms: 
“Article 15 (6)- Nothing in this article or sub-clause (g) of 
clause (1) of article 19 or clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent 
the State from making,— 
(a) any special provision for the advancement of any 
economically weaker sections of citizens other than 
the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5); and 
 
17 (2021) 

(b) any special provision for the advancement of any 
economically weaker sections of citizens other than 
the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5) in so far 
as such special provisions relate to their admission 
to 
educational 
institutions 
including 
private 
educational institutions, whether aided or unaided 
by the State, other than the minority educational 
institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30, 
which in the case of reservation would be in addition 
to the existing reservations and subject to a 
maximum of ten per cent. of the total seats in each 
category. 
Article 16 (6)- Nothing in this article shall prevent the 
State from making any provision for the reservation of 
appointments or posts in favour of any economically 
weaker sections of citizens other than the classes 
mentioned in clause (4), in addition to the existing 
reservation and subject to a maximum of ten per cent. of the posts in each category.” 
 
39. The validity of the aforesaid amendment was upheld in Janhit 
Abhiyan vs. Union of India (EWS Reservation)18. 
40. The various amendments carried out in the Constitution since 
its adoption in relation to making provision for reservation can 
be summarised as under:- 
1. 
Constitution 
(First 
Amendment) Act, 1951 
Inserting Sub-Article (4) to 
Article 15 providing reservation 
for socially and educationally 
backward classes. 
2. 
Constitution 
(Seventy-
seventh Amendment) Act, 

Inserting Sub-Article (4)(A) to 
Article 16 providing reservation 
in promotion. 
3. 
Constitution 
(Eighty-first 
Amendment) Act, 2000 
Inserting Sub-Article (4)(B) to 
Article 16 providing for carry 
forward of vacancies. 
 
18 (2023) 

4. 
Constitution (Eighty-second 
Amendment) Act, 2000 
Inserting proviso to Article 335 
providing 
relaxation 
of 
qualifying 
marks 
for 
the 
reserved category of persons. 
5. 
Constitution 
(Eighty-Fifth 
Amendment) Act, 2002 
Inserting 
the 
phrase 
“with 
consequential 
seniority” 
in 
Article 16(4)(A) providing not 
only accelerated promotion but 
consequential seniority as well 
to the reserved category. 
6. 
Constitution 
(Ninety-Third 
Amendment) Act, 2006 
Inserting Sub-Article (5) to 
Article 

providing 
for 
mechanism of admission in 
Education Institution to the 
reserved category. 
7. 
Constitution (One Hundred 
and 
Second 
Amendment) 
Act, 2018, 
and 
Constitution 
(One 
Hundred 
and 
Fifth 
Amendment) Act, 2021 
Providing for identification of 
backward classes by the Centre 
and the States by inserting 
Article 342A. 
8. 
Constitution (One Hundred 
and Third Amendment) Act, 

Providing for reservation of 
equally weaker section EWS by 
inserting Sub-Article (6) of 
Article 16. 
 
41. The above summary of the constitutional amendments carried 
out for the purposes of extending the benefit of reservation to 
the reserved categories would reveal that the Constitution has 
been amended as many as 9 times in order to implement the 
reservation policy in a fair and impartial manner so that the so-
called depressed classes may be elevated at par with the forward 
classes. Most of the times the amendments to the Constitution 
were carried out either to undo the decisions of this Court or to 

carry out the directions or the observations made by this Court 
in implementation of the reservation policy in a more fair and 
reasonable manner so that the benefit of reservation trickles 
down to the most backward of the other backward 
classes/scheduled castes/scheduled tribes. 
 
CENTRAL 
GOVERNMENT 
AND 
STATE 
GOVERNMENT 
COMMISSIONS ON SC/ST AND OBCs 
 
42. Apart from the above legislative exercise, the Union Government 
after independence, set up a Backward Class Commission in 
the year 1953 under the chairpersonship of Kaka Saheb 
Kalelkar. The Commission in its Report recommended inter alia 
that all women as a ‘class’ be treated as ‘backward’; all qualified 
students of backward classes be granted benefit of 70% seats 
reservation in all technical and professional Institutions; in all 
Government services and local bodies backward classes should 
be provided minimum reservation that is 25% in Class-I, 33-
½% in Class-II, 40% in Class-III and 40% in Class-IV. The said 
Commission in its Report observed: 
“if entire communities, with some exceptions, are 
treated to be backward, actual needy would lose in 

the mob and they seldom attract attention towards 
them and get sufficient help.” 
 
43. The Commission also observed that in certain States such as 
Rajasthan vagabond/restless movers/wanderers who groom 
and breed animals should be given special protection. The 
report was placed in the Parliament with an action plan but it 
went undebated. The Central Government at that time had 
spent a sum of Rs. 4.5 lakh which is equivalent to about Rs. 5 
crore as of today. 
44. In 1965, the Central Government appointed a Committee to 
advise on the revision of the existing list of scheduled castes 
and scheduled tribes. This Committee popularly known as B.N. 
Lokur Committee, reported and concluded that the question of 
de-scheduling (or excluding) of relatively advanced communities 
should 
receive 
serious 
and 
urgent 
consideration. 
It 
recommended for the intensive periodical survey of the socio-
economic progress made by each of the scheduled castes and 
scheduled tribes, probably to exclude certain communities that 
have progressed and to include those that have been left behind. 
It further recommended that in framing of development 

schemes for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, priority 
ought to be given to the welfare of the most backward amongst 
them. It also prepared a list of communities (castes/tribes) that 
were relatively forward and recommended to de-schedule or 
exclude 14 scheduled tribes and 28 scheduled castes from the 
list. 
45. The Constitution though aimed at a casteless society, it defined 
certain depressed/disadvantageous classes as Scheduled 
Castes and certain tribes living in forest, hilly areas and other 
remote areas as Scheduled Tribes. However, a significant 
segment of the population that was otherwise socially, 
economically and politically backward were not given any 
privileges or benefits of upliftment. They were marginalised and 
were left behind in education as well as employment. In order 
to address this anomaly, the most talked about second 
backward class Commission was constituted on 1st January, 
1979 by the Government of India which is popularly known as 
B. P. Mandal Commission. This Commission was entrusted with 
the job to investigate the conditions of socially and 
educationally backward classes, to recommend the criteria for 

defining such classes of citizens, steps to be taken for their 
advancement and upliftment and the manner in which they can 
be extending the benefit of the reservation. 
46. The Commission submitted its report on 31st December, 1980. 
The Commission on the basis of 1961 census compiled a 
national list of 3743 classes of persons under the heading 
‘Other Backward Classes’ out of which 2108 were classified as 
‘depressed backward classes’. The Commission recorded that 
52 per cent (including 44 per cent hindus and 8 per cent non-
hindus) of the citizens are Other Backward Classes whereas 
22.5 per cent are Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in 
India. 
47. The Government while implementing the recommendations of 
the Mandal Commission took a historic decision on 6th August, 
1990 to introduce 27 per cent reservation for Other Backward 
Classes which were socially and educationally backward 
classes. This was in addition to 22.5 per cent reservation for 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The 27 per cent 
reservation in favour of other backward classes was confined as 

this Court in M.R Balaji vs. State of Mysore19 has put a cap 
of 50 per cent mark for the purposes of reservation. 
48. The Mandal Commission thus recommended for 27 per cent 
reservation for OBCs in public sector and Government jobs and 
in promotion at all levels. It is also recommended that in the 
event the above quota remains unfilled in a particular year, the 
remaining vacancies be carried forward for a period of 3 years 
whereupon the unfilled vacancies if any would stand de-
reserved. It further recommended for age relaxation to the OBCs 
at par with the Scheduled Castes & Scheduled Tribes. The 
validity of the aforesaid 27 per cent reservation in favour of 
OBCs was upheld by this Court in the year 1992 in Indra 
Sawhney (supra). 
49. In addition to the above exercise of the Government on the 
executive/administrative side, on the direction of this Court in 
the case of E.V. Chinnaiah’s (supra), the Government of India 
appointed a single Member Justice Usha Mehra Commission of 
a National level to examine the issue of sub-categorization of 
 
 SC 649 

scheduled castes in Andhra Pradesh. This Commission 
appointed in the year 2006 was followed by another 
Commission set up by the Central Government in 2007 under 
the chairpersonship of Justice G. Rohini. It was also entrusted 
with the task of studying the entries in the Centre list of the 
OBCs and to examine the extent of equitable distribution of 
benefits of reservation amongst the OBCs. One important 
aspect which was also entrusted to this Commission was to 
work out a mechanism for sub-categorization of OBCs. 
50. This apart, different States on different occasions had set up 
various State Level Committees and Commissions to study and 
report about the improvements to be made in reservation policy 
and the smooth implementation of the provisions of 
reservations vis-a-vis the concerned State. In this context, it 
may be beneficial to refer to some of the such Committees and 
Commissions set up by different States: 
1. 

Dr 
R. 
Naganna 
Gowda Committee, 
Karnataka 
It suggested 50% reservation in 
technical 
and 
professional 
institutions 
and 
45% 
in 
Government services. 
2. 

V.K. 
Vishwanathan 
Commission, 
Kerala 
It recommended reserving 40% 
seats 
in 
technical 
and 
professional colleges for OBC 

students and 10% for SC/ST 
students. 
3. 

B.D. 
Deshmukh 
Committee, 
Maharashtra 
It recommended grouping of 
backward classes into four 
categories and reservation in 
Government 
services 
and 
educational institutions related 
in the ratio of their percentage 
in the State. 
4. 

A.N. 
Sattanathan 
Commission, 
Tamil Nadu 
It submitted its Report in 1970 
and 
recommended 
33% 
reservation 
in 
State 
Government 
jobs 
and 
in 
educational institutions. 
5. 

Manohar 
Pershad 
Commission, 
Andhra Pradesh 
It 
identified 
four 
different 
categories 
of 
OBCs 
and 
recommended reservations in 
their 
favour, 
in 
both 
professional colleges and in 
Government services. 
6. 

J.N. 
Wazir 
Committee, Jammu 
and Kashmir 
On 
the 
basis 
of 
the 
recommendations 
of 
this 
Committee “The Jammu and 
Kashmir Scheduled Castes and 
Backward Classes (Reservation) 
Rules, 1970” were framed by 
the State Government. 
7. 

Dhebar Commission 
Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs 
This Commission was set up to 
study the vulnerable tribal 
groups. It suggested creation of 
separate category for the less 
developed among the tribal 
groups. In 1975 Government of 
India carried out an exercise to 
identify the most vulnerable 
tribal groups as a separate 
category and declared 52 of 
them to be in such a group 
wherein 23 new groups were 
added in 1993 making it a total 
of 75 out of 705 scheduled 
tribes. 

8. 

L.G. 
Havanur 
Commission, 
Karnataka 
It 
recommended 
16% 
reservation 
for 
backward 
communities, 
10% 
for 
backward castes and 6% for 
backward tribes in Government 
vacancies 
and 
educational 
institutions. 
9. 

Mungeri 
Lal 
Commission, Bihar 
It identified 128 communities 
as backward and 94 of them as 
most 
backward. 
 
It 
recommended 20% reservation 
in Government services and 
24% 
in 
professional 
institutions. 
10. 1976 
A.R. 
Bakshi 
Commission, 
Gujarat 
It 
listed 

castes 
and 
communities as socially and 
educationally 
backward 
and 
recommended 10% reservation 
in Government services and in 
professional institutions. 
11. 1977 
Chhedi 
Lal 
Sathi 
Commission, 
Uttar Pradesh 
It is one of the most talked 
about Commission on most 
backward 
classes. 
 
It 
recommended classification of 
backward 
classes 
into 

categories 
and 
suggested 
reservation 
in 
Government 
services 
and 
educational 
institutions under a separate 
quota. 

Justice 
Gurnam 
Singh Commission, 
Haryana 
The Commission found that 
reservation benefits have been 
primarily 
availed 
by 
one 
particular scheduled caste and 
the overall benefits have not 
percolated down to rest of the 

scheduled 
castes. 
Consequently, the scheduled 
castes’ list for the purposes of 
reservation in Haryana was 
divided into Block ‘A’ and Block 
‘B’ putting the 36 scheduled 
castes in Block ‘A’ and the one 

that has availed most of the 
benefits in Block ‘B’. 
13. 1997 
Justice 
P. 
Ramchandra 
Raju 
Commission, 
Andhra Pradesh 
This Commission was set up on 
the demand of the extremely 
backward castes within the 
scheduled castes of the State of 
Andhra Pradesh. The Report 
opined that largely the benefits 
of reservation had gone to a 
particular caste among the 
scheduled castes and therefore 
recommended for categorizing 
of the scheduled castes into 
Group A, B, C and D. It is on the 
basis of the recommendation of 
this 
Commission 
that 
scheduled castes in Andhra 
Pradesh were categorized in 
Group A, B, C and D which 
enactment 
led 
to 
E.V. 
Chinnaiah where this Court 
declared such classification as 
unconstitutional opining that 
scheduled 
castes/scheduled 
tribes are one homogenous 
class and cannot be sub-
categorised for the purposes of 
reservation. 
14. 2001 
Hukam 
Singh 
Committee, 
Uttar Pradesh 
The Committee upon study 
found that the benefits of 
reservation was not percolating 
down to the most depressed 
classes of persons rather the 
Yadav’s alone had a maximum 
share 
of 
jobs. 
Thus, 
it 
recommended 
sub-
categorisation 
of 
list 
of 
scheduled castes/OBC. 
15. 2003 
Lahuji 
Salve 
Commission, 
Maharashtra 
This 
Commission 
was 
appointed to study the socio-
economic condition of Mangs 
caste which was within the list 
of scheduled castes. The 
Commission recommended the 

sub-classification 
of 
the 
scheduled castes as Mangs 
being 
the 
lowest 
in 
the 
hierarchy of caste system were 
not being adequately benefited. 
16. 2005 
Justice 
A.J. 
Sadashiva 
Commission, 
Karnataka 
This 
Commission 
was 
appointed to identify the castes, 
races and tribes of scheduled 
castes in the State to whom the 
benefit of reservation was not 
being adequately extended. 
The Commission recommended 
the division of 101 castes 
specified in the Presidential List 
into four categories with 15% of 
the 
total 
reservation 
of 
scheduled castes to each of the 
categories. 
17. 2007 
Mahadalit 
Commission, Bihar 
The Commission was to identify 
the castes within the scheduled 
castes that lagged behind. 
The Commission recommended 
inclusion 
of 

castes 
as 
extremely weaker castes from 
amongst the list of scheduled 
castes. 
18. 2007 
Justice 
Jasraj 
Chopra Committee, 
Rajasthan 
The Committee reported that 
Gurjar’s live in remote, isolated 
and uninhabited areas and are 
extremely 
backward 
and 
therefore recommended that 
they may be provided with 
better 
facilities 
than 
those 
available to the other backward 
classes. 
19. 2008 
Justice Thiru M.S. 
Janarthanam 
Committee, 
Tamil Nadu 
The Committee recommended 
that 
the 
Arunthathiyar’s 
deserve differential treatment in 
reservation. 
20. 2017 
K. 
Ratna 
Prabha 
Committee, 
Based 
upon 
the 
recommendation 
of 
this 
Committee, 
The 
Karnataka 

Karnataka 
Extension 
of 
Consequential 
Seniority to Govt. Servants 
Promoted on the Basis of 
Reservation (to the posts in the 
Civil Services of the State) Act, 
2018 was enacted and the 
matter came up to the Supreme 
Court wherein the validity of the 
Act was upheld and it was 
opined 
that 
the 
reserved 
category candidates are not 
only entitled to accelerated 
promotion but to consequential 
seniority. 
21. 2018 
Justice Raghvendra 
Kumar Committee, 
Uttar Pradesh 
According to the Report there 
are 79 castes under the OBC 
category in the State out of 
which 9 are backward, 37 are 
more backward and 33 are 
most 
backward 
classes. 
Therefore, 
it 
recommended 
splitting of 27% quota of OBC in 
the State: 7% for backward 
classes, 
11% 
for 
more 
backward classes and 9% for 
most backward classes. 
 
THE RAMIFICATIONS OF RESERVATION 
51. The above history of “Reservation” in the country would amply 
indicate that tremendous amount of effort has been put in by 
all the three organs of the State i.e. the Legislature, the 
Executive and the Judiciary to bring about social justice by 
promoting the reservation policy and its implementation in such 
a manner that not only the backwards but the most backwards 

of the backwards are brought into the forefront with the 
mainstream. So the question arises that how far has the 
reservation policy succeeded in someone’s wild guess? 
Notwithstanding, the success or failure of the reservation policy, 
one thing is for sure that it has burdened the Judiciary at all 
levels specially the High Courts and the Supreme Courts with 
enormous litigation which could have been avoided if a robust 
reservation policy with a vision would have been envisaged 
under the constitutional provisions in the very beginning 
instead of making piecemeal changes. 
52. It is a matter of experience that every kind of process of selection 
and appointment in the government services and admission at 
higher level has come to be challenged before the courts inter-
alia on the grounds of misapplication of the rule of reservation. 
Most of the times, the appointments and admissions get stuck 
up for years on account of litigation. This has caused enormous 
delay in the recruitment process and the vacancies remaining 
unfilled for long, giving rise to stop-gap/ad-hoc appointments 
resulting in further litigation. It is also noticeable that enough 
time and energy has been spent by all the three wings of the 

State in streamlining the process of reservation and to evolve a 
flawless mechanism for implementing the reservation policy but 
still the non-visionary approach to handle the upliftment of the 
backward castes has created more difficulties rather than 
ironing them out. 
53. It is a matter of record that in pro-reservation agitations and 
anti-reservation agitations, the peace and tranquillity of the 
entire country, at times, stood disturbed. Specially, during the 
anti-Mandal Commission agitation somewhere in 1990, most of 
the States witnessed large scale disturbances. The turmoil so 
created by such agitations and demonstrations particularly in 
the months of August-November of 1990 is the ample indication 
of the wide spread violence. 
 
54. It may not be out of context to point out that apart from the 
anti-Mandal Commission violence, the country witnessed 
similar violence in the year 2006 when the students of IITs and 
AIIMS came out on the streets opposing reservation. Also, there 
was violence in Maharashtra against the Maratha reservation, 
to talk about the few. 

55. After independence, a special provision was made in the 
Directive Principles of State Policy to provide compulsory 
primary education to all children within a period of 10 years but 
the target could not be achieved even after 77 years of 
independence. The Central Government, few years back, in 
order to provide free education to children enacted Right to 
Education Act, 2009. The aforesaid Act proved to be a very weak 
legislation and have not been able to provide primary education 
to one and all irrespective of the caste, creed, race, religion and 
sex as most of the children of the so-called depressed class 
either fail to attend schools or drop out after one and two years 
of education. There is no compulsion to give education to such 
children. The policy of reservation is applicable at the higher 
level only and for the purposes of employment. Thus, depriving 
such children or the drop outs, at the primary level of the benefit 
of reservation or upliftment in any other manner, as a result of 
which these children ultimately remain the most backward of 
the backwards. 
56. The statistics proves that the deprived and the marginalized 
persons have not been able to achieve the benefit of reservation 

which is permissible at higher level as about 50% of the 
students from the most backward classes drop out of school 
before Class-V and 75% drop out before Class-VIII. The figure 
goes to even 95 per cent when it comes to the level of high 
school. Thus, only the children of some of the castes, who are 
already affluent or urbanized, are able to obtain higher 
education and the benefits of reservation. 
57. By referring to the above agitations, disturbances, violence, 
litigation and shortcomings, I do not to intend to suggest that 
the task of upliftment of the downtrodden be brought to an end 
or that the government should give up the reservation policy. 
But the issue is how to carry out the process to bring about 
equality and development of all, the manner of identification of 
the so-called depressed classes or the downtrodden and the 
form/nature of steps to be taken for their upliftment. The 
Government has used caste as the basis for the upliftment 
rather than identifying the class of people on the basis of 
vocation or their social and economic conditions who actually 
requires help to be promoted to the level of the forward class. It 
is for this reason, today we are grappling with a situation of sub-

classification of the castes notified for the purpose of 
reservation. The experience shows that the better of the class 
amongst the backwards eats up most of the vacancies/seats 
reserved leaving the most backward with nothing in their 
hands. 
58. This may be illustrated and better explained by taking three 
students namely ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’. Both ‘A’ & ‘B’ are equals in every 
manner as they come from well-to-do family having same kind 
of status, family background, education and financial capacity. 
‘A’ being a general category candidate, qualifies for admission 
in higher education on merits whereas ‘B’ who belongs to a 
backward class competes and qualifies for admission in the 
reserved category. The student ‘C’ who is also of the backward 
class but has no advantage as that which is available to both ‘A’ 
and ‘B’, despite competing in the backward category remains 
unsuccessful. He continues to remain unsuccessful in the 
following years as well, as again and again backward category 
candidates having the status equivalent to that of a forward 
class or that which is available to ‘A’ and ‘B’ keeps on qualifying 
leaving the most backward of the backwards far behind. In this 

manner, the most backward of the backward category loses the 
battle even with the backward classes who are practically 
enjoying the status of the forward class people. 
CASTELESS SOCIETY-CASTE SYSTEM VIS-À-VIS THE VARNA 
SYSTEM 
59. The Constitution virtually visualises a casteless society and a 
unified society but in the name of ‘equality’ to accord facility 
and privileges to the depressed class/downtrodden, it is said 
that we have continued with the so-called Manuwadi System of 
caste. I am not an expert of religious scriptures nor do I claim 
that I have any knowledge of any one of them though I may have 
gone through Bhagwad Gita and Ramcharit Manas some times. 
According to my limited understanding of the scriptures 
specially the Gita, I am of the firm view that in primitive India 
there was no existence of any caste system rather there was 
categorisation of the people according to their profession, talent, 
qualities and nature. This can very well be reflected by verse 13 
of chapter 4 and verse 41 of chapter 18 of the Bhagwat Gita 
which I quote below. 

60. चातुर्वर्ण्व मया सृष्टं गुणकमववर्भागशः । (Chapter 4, Verse 13, Bhagwat Gita) 
ब्राह्मणक्षवियवर्शां शूद्राणां च परन्तप। 
कमाववण प्रवर्भक्तावि स्वभार्प्रभर्ैगुवणैः ॥ (Chapter 18, Verse 41, Bhagwat Gita) 
 
Lord Krishna says that I have categorised humans in 4 varnas 
according to their nature and characteristics. 
Gita thus only promotes varna system which is different from 
present day caste system. It lays emphasis on abilities, qualities 
and consciousness of a person to have a balanced structure of 
society and to bring out the best in every person. The four 
varnas (occupational categories) are: - 

61. The Bhagvad Gita in subsequent verses describes the intrinsic 
qualities of each of the varnas. The varna system depicting 
occupational categories can also be explained with the physical 
body of a person wherein the head of a person which does 
1. 
Bharama 
 
Teachers, Priests and Intellectuals (Priestly 
class) 
2. 
Kshatriyas 
Warriors, 
Police 
and 
Administrators 
(Administrative class) 
3. 
Vaishayas 
Farmers, 
Merchants, 
Traders 
and 
Businessman (Mercantile and Farmer class) 
 
4. 
Shudras 
 
Artisans, Workers and Labour class (Worker 
class) 

intellectual work is called ‘Bharaman’. The hands which protect 
him and his family does the job of a ‘Kshatriya’. The abdomen 
which requires food to convert it into energy refers to 
‘Vaishayas’, who are predominantly the farmers and the 
merchants invested to earn livelihood. The lower limbs (legs) do 
all kind of labour work and are referred to as ‘Shudras’. 
62. The Skanda Purana also contains a shloka: 
 जन्मना जायते शूद्रः संस्कारात् द्विज उच्यते20 | 
which means that everyone is born as Shudra i.e. to work and 
slowly each one of them elevates himself to a higher status of 
Vaishya, Kshatriya and Brahmin on the strength of his talent, 
quality, character and nature. 
63. It means the duties of Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and 
Shudras were distributed according to their qualities (guns) and 
nature (and not by birth). All people have different nature and 
characteristics. Their personality is shaped according to their 
qualities (gunas). Thus, different professionals duties are suited 
to persons of different nature and character. Since the center of 
 
20 Skanda Purana Vol.18 Book VI, Nagar Kanda, Chapter 239, Verse 31-34. society is God (Parmatma), everyone (atma) works according to 
their intrinsic qualities to sustain themselves and the society. 
64. According to the varna system no one is to be considered as 
lower or higher, rather it is preached that everyone is equal 
fragment and a part and parcel of Him, the Almighty. Gita 
nowhere preaches that the aforesaid varnas are on the basis of 
birth and are not interchangeable. However, with the passage 
of time, the varna system deteriorated and the people started 
labelling these varnas on the basis of birth, ignoring the nature 
and characteristics of a person which is exactly the opposite to 
what is preached in Gita. The varnas were given the 
nomenclature of castes in a very loose manner. 
65. Later, children of Brahmins started calling themselves as 
Brahmins, irrespective of whether they possessed the 
corresponding qualities or not. Similarly, the children of other 
varnas also adopted the varna of their father ignoring their own 
nature, talent and qualities. When this system grew rigid & 
birth based, it became dysfunctional. 
66. In short, what is intended to be conveyed is that according to 
Gita there is no caste system and the varna system 

(categorization) referred to therein is quite distinct, based upon 
persons nature & qualities. Thus, there was no caste system in 
ancient India i.e., Bharat. The misconstruction of the varna 
system as a caste system was a social defect that crept in with 
time and was not considered to be good as it divided the society 
and brought about discrimination & inequality. 
67. The social problems created by the so-called caste system or the 
problem of untouchability etc. were widely considered to be bad 
practices prevailing in the Indian society. Thus, social reformers 
always propagated giving up of such malpractices. 
68. Mahatma Gandhi, the Father of the Nation, during the entire 
freedom struggle strenuously worked for the upliftment of the 
so-called depressed classes including ‘untouchables’. He 
described the untouchables as ‘persons of God’ - ‘Harijans’. 
After independence with the adoption of the constitution, we 
decided to move towards the unified casteless society and vide 
Article 17 envisaged to abolish the practice of untouchability in 
any form and contemplated to make untouchability ‘a 
punishable offence’. Notwithstanding, the objective of casteless 
society and the principle of equality; the original Constitution 

made provision by Article 15 (3) enabling the State to make 
special provision for women and children despite prohibition of 
discrimination on grounds religion, race, caste, sex or place of 
birth. Similarly, Article 16 (4) enabled the State for making 
special provision for reservation of appointments or post in 
favour of any backward class of citizens. This was done with the 
object to bring about social equity and justice. 
69. The Constitution at the same time vide Article 341 conferred 
power upon the President to notify certain castes, races or tribes 
or part of such caste, races and tribes to be deemed to be 
Scheduled Castes. In fact, the constitution otherwise does not 
recognise any caste except for the above deeming provision. The 
country as such had moved into a casteless society except for 
the above legal fiction only for the purposes of the constitution 
and not otherwise. 
70. In other words, to put it summarily there was no caste system 
in primitive India. Slowly the varna system prevalent was 
misconstrued to be a caste system which practice was found to 
be socially non-acceptable and as such after independence with 
the adoption of the Constitution we again tried to move into a 

casteless society but in the name of social welfare to uplift the 
depressed and the backward classes, we again fell into the trap 
of caste system. We gave privilege of reservation to the 
depressed or the backward class or the Scheduled Caste to 
bring about equality. 
71. It is common understanding that what is conceded once to 
appease any class cannot be taken back. So are the benefits 
extended to the reserved category of persons under the 
constitution. Each concession once made, just goes on swelling 
like a raisin/balloon. This actually happened with the policy of 
reservation also. 
RESERVATION IS ONLY A MEDIUM OF FACILITY BUT ITS 
EXECUTION REVIVES CASTEISM 
 
72. ‘Reservation’ is one of the modes of helping or uplifting the 
status of the OBCs/SCs/STs. Anyone who suggests another or 
a better way of helping the so-called depressed classes or the 
downtrodden or the marginalised persons of the society is 
immediately pounced upon as ‘Anti Dalit’. At the cost of being 

called ‘Anti Dalit’, I quote Nani A Palkiwala from his book ‘We, 
The Nation, The Lost Decades)21 
“The basic structure of the Constitution envisages 
a cohesive, unified, casteless society. By breathing 
new life into casteism, the judgment fractures the 
nation and disregards the basic structure of the 
Constitution. 
The 
decision 
would 
revitalise 
casteism, cleave the nation into two – forward and 
backward - and open new vistas for internecine 
conflicts and fissiparous forces, and make 
backwardness a vested interest. It will undo 
whatever has been achieved since independence 
towards creating a unified, integrated nation. The 
majority judgments will revive casteism which the 
Constitution emphatically intended to end; and the 
pre-independence tragedy would be re-enacted 
with 
the 
roles 
reversed 
– 
the 
erstwhile 
underprivileged would not become the privileged.” 

73. In fact, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other 
backward classes simply deserve equality with the other 
forward classes of people. Justice O. Chinnappa Reddy in K C 
Vasantha Kumar & Anr. vs. State of Karnataka22 said “they 
need facility; they need launching; they need propulsion. Their 
needs are their demands. The demands are matters of rights and 
not of philanthrophy. They ask for parity and not charity.” 
 
21 NANI PALKIWALA, WE, THE NATION: THE LOST DECADES 179 (Mehta Publishing House 
1995) 
22 1985 SCC Suppl. 714 

74. In State of Kerala vs. N M Thomas23, Justice V R Krishna 
Ayer said “you can’t throw to the winds considerations of 
administrative capability and grind the wheels of Government 
to a hault in the name of ‘harijan welfare’.” 
75. This Court in A. Periakaruppan Chettiar vs. State of Tamil 
Nadu & Ors.24 observed that reservations should not be 
allowed to become a vested interest. In Akhil Bharatiya Soshit 
Karamchari Sangh vs. Union of India & Ors. 25 it was 
observed that efficacy of the reservation policy will depend upon 
how soon reservations can be done away with. The then Chief 
Justice of India Y.V. Chandrachud counselled in Vasanth 
Kumar (supra), “the policy of reservation in employment, 
education and legislative institutions should be reviewed every 
five years or so.” 
76. Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru in his letter dated 27th June 1961 
addressed to all the Chief Ministers of all the States laments 
upon the habit of giving reservations and privileges to any caste 
or group and expresses that such practice ought to be given up 
 
23 (1976) 
24 (1971) 
25 (1981) 

and emphasis to help the citizens on economic considerations 
and not on caste basis and that the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes do deserve help but not in the shape of any 
kind of reservation more particularly in services. He wrote: 
“I want my country to be a first-class country in 
everything. The moment we encourage the second-rate, we 
are lost. 
The only real way to help a backward group is to give 
opportunities of good education, this includes technical 
education which is becoming more and more important. 
Everything else is a provision of some kind of crutches 
which do not add to the strength or health of the body.” 
 
In the same letter he went on to speak about two very important 
decisions, “one is, universal free elementary education that is the 
base; and the second is scholarship on a very wide scale at every 
grade of education to the bright boys and girls”. He went on to 
express if reservation on communal and caste basis continues, 
India will remain second rate or third rate. He said “This way 
lies not only folly, but disaster. Let us help the backward groups 
by all means, but never at the cost of efficiency.” 

CONCLUSION 
77. Our predecessors, not only the Judges but also the former 
Prime Minister have appeared to be against providing 
reservation to any class or caste of persons on purely caste 
basis and wanted to take the country forward on merit basis. 
Despite the views so expressed, the Constitutional amendments 
envisaged to promote the depressed and the backward classes 
of persons to bring them to the level of the privileged class 
enjoying the status of an urban elite. Thus, the reservation 
policy was rightly applied and since its implementation faced 
difficulties as some in the backward classes have marched 
ahead, it has become imperative to uplift the backward of the 
backwards, for which purpose sub-classification has become 
the order of the day. 
78. I had the privilege of going through the erudite judgments of the 
Chief Justice and my esteemed brother Justice Gavai. 
79. The Chief Justice in his opinion has dwelled upon the legal 
aspects to answer the core issue whether sub-classification of 
the scheduled castes is constitutionally permissible for the 

purposes of reservation. He has clearly opined that this Court 
in Indra Sawhney (Supra) never intended to limit the 
application of sub-classification to the other backward classes 
only. If any class is not integrated it can be further classified 
and such sub-classification of a class would not be violative of 
Article 14 of the Constitution, so long persons in a class are not 
similarly situated. There is no violation of Article 341(2) of the 
Constitution in sub-classification within the scheduled caste as 
by such sub-classification no caste is being included or 
excluded from the list of scheduled castes. 
80. His Lordship Justice Gavai in his opinion quoted an example 
where a member of a backward class becomes an IAS or an IPS 
or any other officer of the All India Service and improves upon 
his status in the society but even then his children get full 
benefits of reservation. No doubt, “one swallow does not make 
a summer” meaning thereby that if few members of a particular 
caste/class advances in the society the entire caste or class 
would not cease to be backward. Nonetheless if any member of 
designated backward class acquires a higher status and attains 
equality with the forward class, it is difficult to comprehend how 

his children would be treated as depressed, downtrodden or 
backward in any manner be it socially, economically or 
educationally. Therefore, the caste to which this person belongs 
may not be excluded as a whole from the benefit of reservation 
but certainly the family which has obtained the benefit once 
shall not be allowed to take advantage of reservation in the next 
generation. The reservation to such families has to be confined 
to one generation only. 
81. It has rightly been stated by my brother Justice Gavai in his 
opinion that Justice Krishna Iyer in N. M. Thomas (supra) has 
repeatedly observed that State is entitled to take steps for 
weeding out socially, economically and educationally advanced 
sections of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes from the 
ambit of reservation. 
82. 
It has rightly been observed that a child studying in St. 
Stephen’s College or any good urban college cannot be equated 
with a child studying in a rural school/college and that he 
cannot be grouped into a same bracket. 
83. 
In these circumstances my brother Justice Gavai has rightly 
concluded that the State must evolve a policy of identifying the 

creamy layer even from the scheduled castes and scheduled 
tribes so as to exclude them from the benefit of reservation. 
84. Agreeing with the scholarly separate opinions authored by the 
Chief Justice and Brother Gavai, J., I summarise my views as 
under: 

The policy of reservation as enshrined under the 
Constitution and by its various amendments requires a 
fresh re-look and evolvement of other methods for 
helping and uplifting the depressed class or the 
downtrodden or the persons belonging to SC/ST/OBC 
communities. So long no new method is evolved or 
adopted, the system of reservation as prevailing may 
continue to occupy the field with power to permit sub-
classification of a class particularly scheduled caste as 
I would not be suggesting dismantling of an existing 
building without erecting a new one in its place which 
may prove to be more useful; 

In the Constitutional regime, there is no caste system 
and the country has moved into a casteless society 

except for the deeming provision under the Constitution 
for the limited purposes of affording reservation to the 
depressed class of persons, downtrodden or belonging 
to SC/ST/OBC. Therefore, any facility or privilege for 
the promotion of the above categories of persons has to 
be on a totally different criteria other than the caste may 
be on economic or financial factors, status of living, 
vocation and the facilities available to each one of them 
based upon their place of living (urban or rural); 
(iii) The reservation, if any, has to be limited only for the 
first generation or one generation and if any generation 
in the family has taken advantage of the reservation and 
have achieved higher status, the benefit of reservation 
would not be logically available to the second 
generation; and 

It is reiterated that periodical exercise has to be 
undertaken to exclude the class of person who after 
taking advantage of reservation has come to march, 
shoulder to shoulder with the general category. 

85. The reference is accordingly answered and it is held that sub-
classification of scheduled castes is permissible in law for the 
purposes of reservation. 

……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL) 

 etc. etc. 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE / ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
 ETC. ETC. 
 
THE STATE OF PUNJAB & 
ORS. 

VERSUS 
DAVINDER SINGH & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 
SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA, J. 
1. 
I have had the privilege of reading the lucid and detailed opinion(s) 
authored by Hon’ble Dr. Justice D.Y.Chandrachud, Chief Justice of India 
and Hon’ble Mr. Justice B.R. Gavai, respectively. I am fully in agreement 
with both opinions to the extent that the validity of sub-classification 
within Scheduled Castes has been held to be constitutionally permissible. 
Moreover, I am fully in agreement with the opinion(s) to the extent that 
any exercise involving sub-classification by the State, must be supported 
by empirical data that ought to underscore the more ‘disadvantaged’ 
status of the sub-group to which such preferential treatment is sought to 
be provided vis-à-vis the Constitutional Class as a whole. etc. etc. 
2. 
However, on the question of applicability of the ‘creamy layer 
principle’ to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, I find myself in 
agreement with the view expressed by Justice Gavai i.e., for the full 
realisation of substantive equality inter se the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes, the identification of the ‘creamy layer’ qua Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes ought to become a constitutional imperative 
for the State. 
 
…………………………………………J. 
[ SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA ] 
 
New Delhi 
August 01, 2024.