SLP (Crl.) No.2011 of 2024 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Appeal No. of 2024 
( SLP (Crl.) No.2011 of 2024) 

Sudeep Chatterjee 

 …Appellant(s) 
Versus 
 
The State of Bihar & Anr. 
 …Respondent(s) 

JUDGMENT 

C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J. 
 
Leave granted. 
1. 
‘Lex non cogit ad impossibilia’ means ‘the law does 
not compel a man to do what he cannot possibly 
perform’. The said maxim is being followed as an adage 
and with alacrity. We are constrained to refer to the said 
maxim on being pained to see that despite a catena of 
decisions deprecating the practice of putting onerous 
conditions for pre-arrest bail such orders are being 
passed without giving due regard to the binding 
precedents. 

SLP (Crl.) No.2011 of 2024 
2. 
The case on hand arises from an order dated 
30.08.2023 passed by the High Court of Judicature at 
Patna in 
whereby and whereunder the High Court granted 
provisional pre-arrest bail in Complaint Case No.1100 of 
2021 registered against the appellant herein, alleging 
commission of offences punishable under Section 498A 
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short ‘the IPC’) and 
Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961. 
3. 
Heard the learned counsel appearing for the 
appellant, learned counsel appearing for the State and 
also the learned counsel appearing for the second 
respondent. The second respondent filed reply affidavit 
and resisted the prayer for interfering with the 
conditions put in the impugned order. The counsel for 
the State endorsed the view and contentions raised on 
behalf of the second respondent. 
4. 
Complaint Case No.1100 of 2021, produced in this 
proceeding as Annexure P-1, would reveal that distrust 
and discordancy among the couple viz., the appellant 
and the second respondent led to disputes and then 
divorceable situation. In fact, the appellant moved a 
petition for dissolution of their marriage before the Court 
of learned Principal Judge, Family Court, Bhagalpur. 
Complaint Case No.1100 of 2021 has been filed by the 

SLP (Crl.) No.2011 of 2024 
second respondent-wife alleging commission of the 
aforesaid offences against the appellant. Earlier, in 
connection with the aforesaid Complaint Case, the 
appellant moved an application for pre-arrest bail 
before the Court of Sessions Judge, Katihar. On its 
dismissal vide order dated 24.05.2023, the above-
mentioned application for an anticipatory bail was 
moved before the High Court which culminated in the 
impugned order. The relevant paragraphs in the 
impugned order that compelled us to make the opening 
remarks read thus: - 
 
“6. Considering the desire of the parties, both 
the parties are directed to file a joint affidavit 
before the Court below to the effect that the parties 
have agreed to live together and petitioner must 
give specific statement in the said joint affidavit that 
he undertakes to fulfill all physical as well as 
financial requirement of the complainant so that 
she can lead a dignified life without any 
interference of any of the family members of the 
petitioner. 
7. If such affidavit is filed within a period of 
four weeks, petitioner, above named, is directed to 
be released on Provisional Bail, in the event of his 
arrest or surrender before the Court below within 
a period of four weeks from today, on furnishing 

SLP (Crl.) No.2011 of 2024 
bail bond of Rs. 10,000/- (Ten Thousand) each with 
two sureties of the like amount each to the 
satisfaction of learned C.J.M, Katihar in connection 
with Complaint Case No.1100 of 2021, subject to 
the condition as laid down under Section 438(2) of 
the Cr.P.C. 
8. It is made clear that Provisional bail shall 
continue till four weeks from the date of passing of 
this order to enable him to file joint affidavit along 
with withdrawal order of the divorce case.” 
 
5. 
Before scanning the conditions as mentioned 
above, we think it appropriate to refer to some of the 
relevant decisions of this Court, in the contextual 
situation. A Constitution Bench of this Court in Shri 
Gurbakash Singh Sibbia & Ors. v. State of Punjab1 held 
thus: - 
 
“26. We find a great deal of substance in 
Mr.Tarkunde’s submission that since denial of bail 
amounts to deprivation of personal liberty, the 
court should lean against the imposition of 
unnecessary restrictions on the scope of Section 
438, especially when no such restrictions have 
been imposed by the legislature in the terms of that 
section. Section 438 is a procedural provision 
 
1 (1980) 

SLP (Crl.) No.2011 of 2024 
which is concerned with the personal liberty of the 
individual, who is entitled to the benefit of the 
presumption of innocence since he is not, on the 
date of his application for anticipatory bail, 
convicted of the offence in respect of which he 
seeks bail. An over-generous infusion of 
constraints and conditions which are not to be 
found in Section 438 can make its provisions 
constitutionally vulnerable since the right to 
personal freedom cannot be made to depend on 
compliance with unreasonable restrictions. The 
beneficent provision contained in Section 438 must 
be saved, not jettisoned. No doubt can linger after 
the decision in Maneka Gandhi [Maneka Gandhi v. 
Union of India, (1978) ], that in order to 
meet the challenge of Article 21 of the Constitution, 
the procedure established by law for depriving a 
person of his liberty must be fair, just and 
reasonable. Section 438, in the form in which it is 
conceived by the legislature, is open to no 
exception on the ground that it prescribes a 
procedure which is unjust or unfair. We ought, at 
all costs, to avoid throwing it open to a 
Constitutional challenge by reading words in it 
which are not to be found therein.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

SLP (Crl.) No.2011 of 2024 
6. 
In Parvez Noordin Lokhandwalla v. State of 
Maharashtra & Anr.2 this Court held: - 
“…The human right to dignity and the 
protection of constitutional safeguards should 
not become illusory by the imposition of 
conditions which are disproportionate to the 
need to secure the presence of the accused, the 
proper course of investigation and eventually to 
ensure a fair trial. The conditions which are 
imposed by the court must bear a proportional 
relationship to the purpose of imposing the 
conditions. The nature of the risk which is 
posed by the grant of permission as sought in 
this case must be carefully evaluated in each 
case.” 
 
7. 
We do not think it necessary to burden this 
judgment by multiplying the authorities on this subject 
as the constant and consistent view of this Court on 
matters granting a prayer for bail under Section 438 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short ‘the 
Cr.P.C.’) is that after forming an opinion, taking note of 
all relevant aspects, that bail is grantable, conditions 
shall not be put to make it impossible and impracticable 
 
2 (2020) 

SLP (Crl.) No.2011 of 2024 
for the grantee to comply with. As held by this Court in 
Parvez Noordin’s case (supra), the ultimate purpose of 
putting conditions while granting pre-arrest bail is to 
secure the presence of the accused and thus, eventually 
to ensure a fair trial and also for the smooth flow of the 
investigating process. 
8. 
In view of the unfortunate instances imposing very 
onerous conditions, especially in cases which are 
nothing but an off-shoot of matrimonial discordance, we 
would reiterate the view that courts have to be very 
cautious in imposing conditions while granting bail upon 
finding pre-arrest bail to be grantable. This is to be done 
warily, especially when the couple concerned who are 
litigating in divorce proceedings, jointly though 
lukewarmly, agreed to attempt to reconcile and re-unite. 
The impugned order itself would reveal that the parties 
who were about to part company, rethought and 
expressed their readiness to bury the hatchet and to re-
unite and the appellant has also agreed to withdraw the 
divorce case. One should not be oblivious of the fact that 
a boy or girl, will be bonded to kith and kins besides 
parents and siblings and such bonded relationships 
cannot be severed solely due to affine and affinity 
towards the affinal as also cognate relationships has to 
be taken forward with same cordialness. Relation 

SLP (Crl.) No.2011 of 2024 
through marriage sans support from both the families 
may not flourish but may perish. Viewed from any angle, 
putting conditions as has been done in this case, 
requiring a person to give an affidavit carrying a specific 
statement in the form of an undertaking that he would 
fulfil all physical as well as financial requirements of the 
other spouse so that she could lead a dignified life 
without interference of any of the family members of the 
appellant, can only be described as an absolutely 
improbable and impracticable condition. The second 
respondent may not misuse such a condition. However, 
giving such a carte blanche, is nothing but making one 
dominant over the other, which in no way act as a catalyst 
to create a comely situation in domesticity. On the 
contrary, such conditions will only be counter-
productive. There can be no doubt that a re-union after 
a marital discord is possible only if the parties are put to 
a conducive situation to regain the mutual respect, 
mutual love and affection. No doubt putting a condition 
that one of the parties should undertake to fulfil all 
physical as well as financial requirements of the other 
party could not bring about such a situation. It may 
compel one among the couple to be susceptive and turn 
the other supercilious. When the couple who are trying 
to bridge their emotional differences putting one among 

SLP (Crl.) No.2011 of 2024 
them under such an onerous condition would deprive a 
dignified life not only to the grantee but to both. It is to 
be noted that with the said conditions the appellant was 
granted only a provisional bail. In short, we stress upon 
the need to put compliable conditions while granting 
bail, recognizing the human right to live with dignity and 
with a view to secure the presence of the accused as also 
unhindered course of investigation, ultimately to ensure 
a fair trial. In respect of matters relating to matrimonial 
cases, conditions shall be put in such a way to make the 
grantee of the bail as also the griever to regain the lost 
love and affection and to come back to peaceful 
domesticity. In this case, the parties, obviously, 
expressed their desire and willingness to live together 
and in that regard the appellant-husband, expressed his 
willingness to withdraw the divorce case. 
9. 
The above discussions tend us to hold that the 
conditions as mentioned above contained in paragraph 
6 of the impugned order for the release of the appellant 
on the provisional bail cannot be sustained and as such 
the said conditions to give undertaking that the appellant 
would fulfil all physical and financial requirements by 
way of an affidavit are set aside. However, this shall not 
be understood to have an order releasing both of their 
marital obligations and duties and we hope and trust that 

SLP (Crl.) No.2011 of 2024 
the couple will continue to strive to restore their 
domesticity. 
10. 
The order granting the bail is made absolute and 
the appellant in the event of his arrest be released on bail 
subject to the same terms stipulated by the High Court 
under the impugned order regarding suretyship as also 
the liability to comply with conditions as laid down under 
Section 438(2), Cr. P.C. Needless to say, that this will 
further be subject to the final outcome of the pending 
complaint case. The impugned order stands set aside 
only to the aforesaid extent and accordingly, the appeal 
stands disposed of. 
11. 
Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of. 

……………………, J. 
 (C.T. Ravikumar) 

………………….….……, J. 
 (Prashant Kumar Mishra) 

New Delhi; 
August 02, 2024.