1 | P a g e 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
Writ Petition (Civil) No 335 of 2024 
 
Vanshika Yadav 

 …Petitioner 
Versus 
Union of India & Ors 

 …Respondents 
 
With 
W.P.(C) No.362/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.369/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.368/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.431/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.379/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.377/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.376/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.375/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.425/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.401/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.415/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.407/2024 

2 | P a g e 
 
With 
W.P.(C) No.412/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.383/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.419/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.406/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.403/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.414/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.423/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.427/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.441/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.420/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.430/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.446/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.410/2024 
With 
T.P.(C) No.1602/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.382/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.394/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.384/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.389/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.417/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.393/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.435/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No.449/2024 

3 | P a g e 
 
And With 
W.P.(C) No.392/2024 

4 | P a g e 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 
Table of Contents 
A. 
Background... 5 
B. 
Previous orders of the Court... 8 
C. 
Submissions... 16 
D. 
Issues... 20 
E. 
Analysis... 20 
i. 
Facts which have emerged during the course of the hearing... 20 
a. 
Chain of custody of question papers as detailed by NTA... 20 
b. 
Issues in Hazaribagh, Sawai Madhopur, Patna and other places... 23 
ii. 
The marks awarded for one of the questions must be revised because 
only one of the options is the correct answer.... 26 
iii. There is no conflict of interest with the Director of IIT, Madras analysing 
the data in this case... 30 
iv. There is no evidence to indicate a systemic leak as on date... 33 
a. 
Position of law... 33 
b. 
The present case... 38 
F. 
The conduct of NTA: Cause for concern... 51 
G. Issues in the conduct of the examination and the remit of the committee 
constituted by the Union Government... 55 
H. 
Parting remarks... 61 

PART A 
5 | P a g e 
 
1. 
This batch of matters concerns the validity of the National Eligibility cum Entrance 
Test1 for undergraduate students. The petitions were disposed of in terms of the 
directions issued by this Court by its judgment dated 23 July 2024. Detailed 
reasons were to follow the order. They are recorded in this judgment. 
A. 
Background 
2. 
The National Testing Agency2 conducts the NEET every year for admission into 
medical colleges. A total of 1,08,000 seats are available for the MBSS course. 
Of the seats available for the MBBS course, approximately 56,000 seats are in 
government hospitals and about 52,000 are in private colleges. Admissions to 
undergraduate courses in Dentistry, Ayurveda, Unani, and Siddha also utilise the 
results of the NEET for admission. 
3. 
The NEET is divided into four segments comprising Physics, Chemistry, Botany, 
and Zoology. Each section contains forty-five questions. The test comprises a 
total of one hundred and eighty questions. Four marks are awarded for every 
question which is attempted correctly and one mark is subtracted for each 
incorrect answer. Questions which are not attempted attract neither positive nor 
negative marks. Hence, the test carries a maximum of 720 marks in total. The 
total duration of the test was three hours and twenty minutes. 
4. 
This year, NTA opened the online portal for registration for the NEET on 9 
February 2024. NEET was conducted on 5 May 2024 for over 23 lakh candidates 
at 4750 centres in 571 cities. The exam was also conducted in fourteen cities 
overseas. Soon after the exam, it became known that the question paper was 
 
1 “NEET” 
2 “NTA” 

PART A 
6 | P a g e 
 
leaked or illegally circulated amongst some students prior to the conduct of the 
exam at Hazaribagh in Jharkhand and in Patna. First Information Reports3 were 
registered in multiple states including Bihar, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Rajasthan 
and Jharkhand. The Bihar Police appears to have issued a press release4 stating 
that its Economic Offences Unit had arrested thirteen persons in Patna in 
connection with the leak. The Additional Director General of Police, Economic 
Offences Unit appears to have issued a communication stating that the 
Economic Offences Unit has not released an official press statement. 
5. 
When the results were declared by NTA on 4 June 2024, it emerged that 
compensatory or grace marks were awarded to 1563 candidates at certain 
centres who did not have the opportunity to utilize the entire duration of the exam 
(i.e., 3 hours 20 minutes). The compensatory marks were awarded upon the 
recommendation of the Grievance Redressal Committee constituted by NTA. 
Following the grant of grace marks, these candidates scored in the range of -20 
to 720 marks. 
6. 
The investigation into the leak of the paper and the adoption of other unfair 
means by candidates was transferred from the Bihar State police to the 
Economic Offences Unit in Bihar. The investigation was later transferred to the 
Central Bureau of Investigation.5 
 
3 “FIR” 
4 Dated 10 May 2024 
5 “CBI” 

PART A 
7 | P a g e 
 
7. 
Various writ petitions were instituted inter alia for cancellation of the exam and 
conduct of a fresh exam. The petitions variously sought the issuance of the 
following directions: 
a. Direct NTA to conduct a fresh examination; 
b. Stay the counselling process scheduled to begin from 6 July 2024; 
c. Direct all states to constitute Special Investigation Teams to investigate 
paper leaks in their jurisdictions and to submit status reports on the same; 
d. Constitute an expert committee to: 
i. 
Enquire into the examination process and results; and 
ii. 
Make recommendations on how to improve the process of 
conducting the examination; 
e. Set aside the portion of the NTA Information Bulletin that discriminates 
between wrong questions and questions having two wrong answers; 
f. Issue guidelines to prevent papers from leaking in the future; 
g. Direct NTA to correct and republish the results, ranks, and percentiles 
based on the revised marks; 
h. Declare the award of grace marks to candidates unequally as arbitrary and 
illegal; and 
i. Stay the declaration of results. 

PART B 
8 | P a g e 
 
B. 
Previous orders of the Court 
8. 
Some candidates who had appeared for the NEET objected to the award of 
compensatory marks to 1563 candidates on various grounds. By its order dated 
13 June 2024, this Court noted that NTA constituted another committee to 
reconsider the issue. The second committee met on 10, 11 and 12 June 2024 to 
discuss the grievances raised. It recommended that the grace marks be revoked, 
and the affected candidates be given the option to take a fresh test. 
9. 
The 1563 affected candidates were given two options – they could either choose 
to attempt the re-test, in which case they would be ranked based solely on their 
scores in the re-test, or they could retain their scores from the first test without 
the compensatory marks. This Court found this course of action to be fair, 
reasonable and justified. It also recorded the submission of NTA that the re-test 
would be conducted on 23 June 2024 and the results would be declared before 
30 June 2024. The re-test was conducted and the results were declared. 
10. By its order dated 8 July 2024, this Court noted the central submissions urged 
on behalf of the petitioners. It observed that the question of whether the paper 
leak was confined only to Patna or extended across cities was a matter which 
must be reserved for more detailed consideration. It also noted that the litmus 
test for whether a re-test ought to be directed was based on the following 
aspects: 
a. Whether the alleged breach took place at a systemic level; 
b. Whether the breach was of a nature which affected the integrity of the 
entire examination process; and 

PART B 
9 | P a g e 
 
c. Whether it was possible to segregate the beneficiaries of the fraud from 
the untainted students. 
11. The Court also made certain observations on the competing considerations in a 
case such as the present one: 
“12. In a situation where the breach in the 
sanctity of an examination affects the entirety 
of the process and it is not possible to 
segregate those who are the beneficiaries of 
wrongdoing from others, a re-test is likely to 
be the most appropriate course of action. On 
the contrary, where the breach is confined to 
specific areas or centres and it is possible to 
identify those who are the beneficiaries of 
wrongdoing, it may not be appropriate to order 
a re-test particularly in an examination which 
has been conducted on such a massive scale 
and which involves over 23 lakh students. The 
Court cannot also be unmindful of the social 
consequences involving such a large body of 
students 
who 
have 
studied 
for 
the 
examination, undertaken costs and expenses 
and would have to undergo the rigours of a 
fresh examination if one were to be ordered 
by the Court. Balancing these considerations 
requires a careful assessment of the extent 
and impact of the breach on the integrity of the 
examination process, ensuring fairness to all 
stakeholders.” 
12. Noting that a final decision in the matter would depend on a more detailed set of 
facts which must be placed on record, it issued five directions requiring the Union 
of India, NTA, and the Central Bureau of Investigation to each make certain 
disclosures. First, NTA was required to clarify the following aspects on the basis 
of all the material which was in its possession as of that date: 

PART B 
10 | P a g e 
 
“14. … (i) When and how NTA first became 
aware of the paper leak, including any internal 
notifications or external reports; 
(ii) The cities or towns and the centres at 
which a leak has been noticed or in which 
candidates have complained of a leak; 
(iii) The manner in which the question papers 
leaked were disseminated to candidates or 
other persons who would, in turn, distribute 
them 
to 
candidates. 
In 
other 
words, 
information about the medium through which 
the leak took place and whether it was 
electronic (including social media or mobile 
applications) or physical shall be placed on 
record; 
(iv) The duration of time between the 
occurrence of the leak or the suspected 
occurrence of the leak and the actual conduct 
of the examination which took place between 
2 pm and 5:20 pm on 5 May 2024; 
(v) The chain of custody of the question paper 
from the time of its preparation to the time of 
its dissemination to candidates on the day of 
the examination; and 
(vi) Whether the entirety of the question paper 
was leaked or whether certain sections or 
questions were leaked.” 
 
13. Second, the Court directed the Investigating Officer of the CBI to file a status 
report indicating the status of the investigation and the material which had been 
gathered until date. The Investigating Officer was directed to specify the 
modalities by which the leaked question paper was made available to students. 

PART B 
11 | P a g e 
 
Additionally, both NTA and the CBI were directed make a disclosure in regard to 
the steps which had been taken to identify the beneficiaries of the leak. They 
were required to detail the following: 
“16. … (i) The steps which were taken by NTA 
to identify the centres/cities at which the leak 
took place; 
(ii) The modalities followed for identifying the 
beneficiaries of the leak; and 
(iii) The number of students who have so far 
been identified to be the beneficiaries of the 
leaked question papers and the centres at 
which they appeared for the examination.” 
14. Third, the Union of India and NTA were directed to inform the Court as to whether 
it was feasible to use data analytics to identify suspicious cases. If such an 
approach was found to be feasible, the parameters used for flagging such cases 
(such as abnormal score patterns) were required to be placed on record. 
15. Fourth, NTA was required to make submissions on the decision to be taken on 
the status of counselling, in view of the potential exercise to be conducted by 
NTA or the Union Government to identify further beneficiaries of the leak of the 
question paper. 
16. Finally, the government was required to apprise the Court of the steps which 
were being taken to ensure that the sanctity of the NEET was not compromised 
in future iterations and issues similar to the ones which arose in 2024 are not 
repeated in the future. The Court was of the opinion that this was essential 
because the students who appeared for the examination and whose careers 
hung in the balance must have confidence in the process. The Court observed 

PART B 
12 | P a g e 
 
that the government must consider constituting a multi-disciplinary committee 
with experts which could recommend measures to obviate breaches of the NEET 
as well as other exams conducted by NTA. If such a committee had already been 
constituted, the Court was to be apprised of its composition to enable it to 
consider whether the composition ought to be strengthened. 
17. The Union of India as well as NTA filed affidavits complying with the above 
directions. The Ministry of Education requested IIT Madras to undertake 
comprehensive data analytics on the NEET results of 2024. The report submitted 
by IIT Madras was also tendered to the Court. 
18. On 18 July 2024, this Court heard detailed arguments from Mr. Narendra Hooda, 
senior counsel for the petitioners, on the various issues arising for consideration 
in this matter. The Solicitor General appearing for the Union of India and Mr. 
Naresh Kaushik, senior counsel for NTA, also addressed the Court on certain 
aspects of the case. Other counsel on behalf of the petitioners and intervenors 
were heard. 
19. The Court was of the opinion that it would subserve the principle of transparency 
if the results were published by NTA and made available to the public at large. 
Accordingly, it directed NTA to publish the city-wise and centre-wise results of 
candidates on its website after anonymising them, by 12 noon on 20 July 2024. 
Further, the Bihar Police was directed to apprise the Court of the material 
collected by it before the investigation was transferred to CBI. These directions 
were complied with. 

PART B 
13 | P a g e 
 
20. On 22 July 2024, counsel for one of the petitioners advanced submissions inter 
alia on whether the approach adopted by NTA towards one of the questions in 
the examination was proper. The contours of this issue are delineated in detail 
in subsequent segments of this judgment. As one of the sub-issues concerned 
the correct answer to the question, the Court sought an expert opinion from the 
Indian Institute of Technology,6 Delhi. The Director of IIT, Delhi was requested 
to constitute a team of three experts to determine the correct answer to the 
question and communicate its opinion to the Court by 12 noon on the following 
day. The opinion of the expert committee was then communicated to the Court, 
as requested. 
21. On 23 July 2024, the arguments in the case were concluded and the conclusions 
were pronounced in court after the hearings concluded. The Court held that the 
standard prescribed by decisions of this court for the cancellation of the test had 
not been met and that a re-test was not warranted. The conclusion of the Court 
rested on the absence of sufficient material, as on that date, indicative of a 
widespread or systemic leak or other malpractice. The conclusions of the Court 
are reproduced below: 
“11. … (i) The fact that a leak of the NEET (UG) 2024 
paper took place at Hazaribagh in the State of 
Jharkhand and at Patna in the State of Bihar is not 
in dispute; 
(ii) Following the transfer of the investigation to it, the 
CBI has filed its status reports dated 10 July 2024, 
17 July 2024 and 21 July 2024. The disclosures by 
the CBI indicate that the investigation is continuing. 
The CBI has indicated that at the present stage, the 
material which has emerged during the course of the 
investigation would indicate that about 155 students 
 
6 “IIT” 

PART B 
14 | P a g e 
 
drawn from the examination centres at Hazaribagh 
and Patna appear to be the beneficiaries of the 
fraud; 
(iii) Since the investigation by the CBI has not 
attained finality at the present WPC 335/2024 7 point 
of time, this Court had in its previous order required 
the Union Government to indicate whether trends in 
regard to the existence of abnormalities can be 
deduced through data analytics on the basis of the 
results emanating from 4,750 centres situated in 571 
cities. Pursuant to the directions of the Court, the 
Union Government has produced a report of Indian 
Institute of Technology,6 Madras. The objection of 
the petitioners to the report of IIT, Madras on the 
grounds of alleged bias would be considered in the 
course of the reasoned judgment which will follow. 
At this stage, in order to obviate any controversy, the 
Court has independently scrutinized the data which 
has been placed on the record by the NTA; 
(iv) At the present stage, there is an absence of 
material on the record to lead to the conclusion that 
the entire result of the examination stands vitiated or 
that there was a systemic breach in the sanctity of 
the examination; 
(v) Added to the absence of conclusive material on 
the record at the present stage, the data which has 
been produced on the record city-wise and centre-
wise and the comparison of data for the years 2022, 
2023 and 2024 are not indicative of a systemic leak 
of the question paper impacting the sanctity of the 
examination; 
(vi) In arriving at the ultimate conclusion, the Court is 
guided by the well-settled 6 “IIT” WPC 335/2024 8 
test of whether it is possible to segregate tainted 
students from those whose candidature does not 
suffer from any taint. If the investigation reveals the 
involvement of an increased number of beneficiaries 
over and above those who are suspects at the 
present stage, action shall be pursued against every 
student found to be involved in wrong doing at any 
stage, notwithstanding the completion of the 
counselling process. No student who is revealed to 
have engaged in acts of fraud or to have been the 
beneficiary of malpractice would be entitled to claim 
a vested right or interest in the continuation of the 

PART B 
15 | P a g e 
 
admission in the future by virtue of the findings in this 
judgment; and 
(vii) Directing a fresh NEET (UG) to be conducted for 
the present year would be replete with serious 
consequences for over two million students who 
have appeared in the examination. Adopting such a 
course of action would, in particular, (i) lead to a 
disruption of the admission schedule for the 
commencement of medical courses, setting back the 
entire process by several months; (ii) lead to 
cascading effects on the course of medical 
education; (iii) impact the availability of qualified 
medical professionals in the future; and (iv) cause a 
serious element of disadvantage to students 
belonging to marginalized communities and weaker 
sections for whom reservation has been made in the 
allocation of seats.” 
22. The Court also accepted the report of IIT, Delhi on the correct answer to a 
particular question which was the subject of controversy. Consequently, NTA 
was directed to revise the marks of all candidates and update their ranks on the 
basis of the revised results. The Court also clarified that candidates could agitate 
any individual grievances, not bearing upon the issues resolved in that judgment, 
before the High Courts in accordance with law. Lastly, the Court noticed the 
constitution of the seven-member committee by the Union government to 
address any issues with the procedures adopted in the conduct of the exam and 
passed the following direction: 
“23. The Committee will abide by such further 
directions as may be issued by this Court in its final 
judgment and order in regard to the areas which 
should be enquired into by it so as to ensure that (i) 
the process of conducting the NEET (UG) and other 
examinations falling within the remit of the NTA is 
duly strengthened; and (ii) the instances which came 
to light during the course of the present year are not 
repeated in the future.” 

PART C 
16 | P a g e 
 
C. 
Submissions 
23. The petitioners, represented by Mr Narender Hooda, Mr Sanjay R. Hegde, senior 
counsel and others, have broadly submitted that: 
a. There was a widespread leak of the question paper prior to the conduct of 
the exam, leading to the integrity of the exam being vitiated on a systemic 
level; 
b. The scores and ranks of candidates are highly inflated in 2024 as compared 
to previous years; 
c. NTA’s explanation for the score and rank inflation is that they are due to a 
25% reduction in the syllabus. This explanation is misleading as the 
syllabus also included new topics; 
d. The significant score inflation in NEET in 2024 has disadvantaged 
deserving candidates, making it difficult for them to secure admission to 
government medical colleges and pushing them towards private 
institutions, which many middle-class families cannot afford. This inflation 
has disrupted rankings and affected admission opportunities; 
e. Concerns have been raised about the handling and transportation of 
examination materials. Reports indicate a six-day delay in transporting 
question papers to Hazaribagh, which raises issues of possible tampering. 
These concerns are compounded by reports that contradict NTA’s claims 
of secure transportation and live CCTV monitoring; 
f. The OMR sheets remain at the exam centre for some time after the exam, 
with persons who may tamper with them if they choose to; 

PART C 
17 | P a g e 
 
g. NTA has not adopted a fair marking system for one of the questions. 
Although only one option is the correct answer, it has treated two options 
as being correct and has awarded marks for both answers. This is unfair 
and disadvantages many candidates; 
h. The question paper was leaked via ‘Telegram’ (an instant messaging 
platform); 
i. There are discrepancies in the data provided in ‘Table 8’ of NTA’s press 
release dated 4 June 2024 compared to the results announced on 20 July 
2024; 
j. The report of the Director, IIT Madras overlooks critical issues such as: (i) 
the unusually high number of candidates scoring the perfect score i.e., 
720/720; (ii) a sharp increase in students scoring above 700 marks; (iii) 
significant rank inflation in the 600-720 range; and (iv) the concentration of 
top scorers in a limited number of cities; 
k. The report of the Director, IIT Madras is not reliable because there is a 
conflict of interest with this case. This is due to the Director being a member 
of the General Body of NTA; 
l. The selective awarding of compensatory marks to 1563 aspirants without 
transparent criteria as to how they were selected suggests manipulation to 
benefit certain candidates; 
m. Independent analyses suggest that anomalies in the data remain 
undetected, pointing to systemic issues rather than isolated incidents of 
cheating. This highlights the need for thorough scrutiny of the examination 
process; 

PART C 
18 | P a g e 
 
n. Systematic failures, including widespread paper leaks, tampering with OMR 
sheets, and misuse of compensatory marks, suggest a broader security 
lapse within NTA; 
o. NTA's lack of transparency is evident from its initial denial of leaks and 
inconsistent statements about the extent of paper leaks and compensatory 
marks; 
p. The re-examination process was discriminatory. It did not provide all 
affected candidates an opportunity to participate. Furthermore, NTA did not 
include details about compensatory marks in its official press release; 
q. NTA appoints private parties to be invigilators. No adequate system of 
oversight is present to ensure that these private parties do not enable 
malpractice or are not corrupt; and 
r. The scandal has undermined public trust in the examination system and the 
medical profession, leading to mental health issues among students. 
Immediate reforms are necessary to restore public confidence and ensure 
fairness in the examination process. 
24. The Solicitor General for the Union of India and Mr Naresh Kaushik, senior 
counsel for NTA, advanced the following submissions: 
a. No mass malpractice has taken place. There were only isolated incidents 
of malpractice which have been identified and dealt with. Cancelling the 
exam and conducting a re-exam is not warranted and is contrary to public 
interest; 
b. In Godhra, the attempt to cheat was foiled by prompt action by the 
authorities. In Patna, the investigation is underway and the results of some 
candidates have been withheld. However, the preliminary number of 

PART C 
19 | P a g e 
 
candidates alleged to have cheated is miniscule compared to the total 
number of candidates; 
c. The high number of perfect scores and generally higher marks is because 
of a reduction in the syllabus by approximately 22-25% compared to last 
year. Further, the questions were prepared on the basis of universally 
accessible textbooks to ensure that those from disadvantaged 
socioeconomic backgrounds do not suffer and to reduce dependency on 
coaching centres. The top 100 candidates were from 95 different centres in 
fifty-six different cities in eighteen States or Union Territories; 
d. With reference to the question in controversy, the information bulletin 
released before the exam clearly states that if there are two correct 
answers, those who marked either one will be awarded marks. Therefore, 
candidates cannot claim that they did not answer this question because two 
correct answers were present; 
e. The report by the Director of IIT, Madras indicated that there was no 
evidence of mass malpractice or localized advantages in score distribution. 
It observed that there was an increase in marks, particularly in the range of 
550 to 720, and attributed this to a 25% reduction in syllabus. Candidates 
achieving high scores were found across multiple cities and centres, 
suggesting minimal likelihood of malpractice; 
f. There was no leak of the question paper via Telegram; 
g. The results of candidates suspected of malpractice have been withheld. 
Show cause notices have been issued to such persons. NTA will respond 
appropriately to any future cases of malpractice as well; 

PART D&E 
20 | P a g e 
 
h. A committee has been constituted to look into improvements to the exam; 
i. The reopening of the registration window did not lead to the facilitation of 
malpractice; and 
j. There is no conflict of interest with the Director of IIT, Madras analysing the 
data in this case because he is only an ex officio member. 
 
D. 
Issues 
25. The following issues arose for consideration in this case: 
a. Whether the answer for the question in controversy ought to be revised by 
NTA; 
b. Whether there was a conflict of interest with the Director of IIT, Madras 
analysing the data in this case; and 
c. Whether the sanctity and integrity of the exam were compromised at a 
systemic level. 
 
E. 
Analysis 
i. 
Facts which have emerged during the course of the hearing 
a. 
Chain of custody of question papers as detailed by NTA 
26. In its affidavits as well as during the course of hearing, NTA provided a 
comprehensive account of the chain of custody for the question papers, detailing 
their handling of the question paper, from its preparation to its distribution on the 
day of the exam. The information provided by NTA is detailed in this segment. 

PART E 
21 | P a g e 
 
27. The process begins with the preparation of the question bank. From August to 
December 2023, experts were invited to the NTA office to create questions in 
workshop mode. These sessions took place in a restricted area, with the experts 
sealing their work daily to maintain the security and confidentiality of the content. 
28. The next phase involves the preparation, vetting, solving, and typing of the 
question papers. From 16 February to 28 February 2024, subject experts 
developed two independent sets of question papers under continuous CCTV 
surveillance. These papers underwent a rigorous vetting and solving process 
from 1 March to 7 March 2024, where feedback was collected, and necessary 
changes were implemented. The final versions of the question papers were then 
typed confidentially, with the question papers and answer keys lodged separately 
to prevent any breaches of security. 
29. Following the preparation, the manuscripts were dispatched to two separate 
printing presses on 31 March 2024, adhering to stringent security protocols. Each 
press was tasked with producing twenty-four sets of question papers with 
randomized sequencing, overseen by two officers to ensure compliance with 
security measures. 
30. Simultaneously, OMR sheets were printed at a different location and paired with 
the corresponding question papers which were then sealed in polythene covers 
to be accessible only to the candidates. These materials, totalling 72 booklets 
per batch, were then secured in cloth-lined envelopes, strapped, and placed in 
GPS-enabled trunks with electronic locks, which were monitored via real-time 
CCTV throughout the process. 

PART E 
22 | P a g e 
 
31. The final stage involves the transportation and distribution of the question papers 
to the examination centres. The question papers for Hazaribagh, Jharkhand, 
were dispatched on 28 April 2024, via a private logistics company and 
transported in dedicated closed-body vehicles with electronic locks and GPS 
tracking. 
32. The two different sets of question papers were stored in two separate custodian 
banks, in all cities: one set was stored in Canara Bank and the other in State 
Bank of India.7 Upon arrival at the custodian banks on 3 May 2024, the materials 
were stored in safety vaults. The papers were then transported from the banks 
to the examination centres using e-rickshaws. 
33. On the day of the examination, city coordinators, appointed and authorized by 
the Director General of NTA are responsible for collecting the correct set of 
question papers from the custodian bank. According to the procedure, the city 
coordinator is required to accompany both the centre superintendent and a 
neutral observer appointed by NTA. The NTA uses a mobile application to 
communicate to the city coordinators as to which set of papers should be taken, 
from either Canara Bank or SBI. The city coordinators collected the materials on 
5 May 2024 from SBI, upon being intimated that the question papers from SBI 
were to be distributed to the students. 
34. We were informed that the question paper trunks were stored in CCTV-monitored 
rooms and opened 45 minutes before the exam (at 1:15 pm), with the process 
witnessed and certified by two invigilators and two candidates. Each invigilator 
 
7 “SBI” 

PART E 
23 | P a g e 
 
received an envelope containing 24 booklets, which were distributed according 
to the seating plan. Candidates were allowed to open the question paper seals 
at 1:55 pm, just before the commencement of the exam. b. 
Issues in Hazaribagh, Sawai Madhopur, Patna and other places 
35. Counsel for the parties disagreed on when the paper was leaked. During the 
course of the hearing, the petitioners submitted that the leak occurred before 5 
May 2024. They argued that the paper was leaked on 3 May, prior to being 
deposited in the bank, suggesting that the leak took place at an early stage in 
the process. The Solicitor General of India stated that the paper leaked on the 
morning of 5 May 2024, purportedly from the Oasis School, Hazaribagh, 
Jharkhand. 
36. The NTA has reported that the leak of the examination paper occurred between 
8:02 am and 9:23 am on 5 May 2024. According to their submission, the accused 
gained unauthorized access by entering the strongroom at Oasis School through 
a rear door. Once inside, the individual accessed one of the trunks containing 
the examination materials. This trunk was part of the secure storage intended to 
safeguard the question papers before distribution. CCTV footage from the school 
shows him entering at 8:02 am and leaving at 9:23 am. It was also submitted that 
the accused opened the trunk from the rear so as not to break the seal, took the 
papers from the trunk, photographed them, resealed the envelope, and delivered 
the digital copies to the paper solvers by around 9:30 am. 
37. Following the transfer of the investigation to it, the CBI has filed its status reports 
dated 10 July 2024, 17 July 2024 and 21 July 2024. The reports presently 

PART E 
24 | P a g e 
 
indicate that the Botany and Zoology segments were solved first, followed by the 
Physics and Chemistry segments. According to the report, the scanned papers 
were subsequently sent over WhatsApp to persons in Patna. Furthermore, the 
reports stated that the solved papers were sent to persons in Hazaribagh. 
Specifically, two locations in Patna and two in Hazaribagh were identified in the 
report. The investigation (at this stage) has revealed that the question paper was 
shared with the candidates only after 10:15 AM, and after 12 noon, they were 
asked to go to their examination centres. 
38. NTA issued a press release on 5 May 2024, acknowledging the issue of incorrect 
distribution of question papers, which resulted in a significant loss of time for the 
candidates at Girls Higher Secondary Model School, Mandir, Mantown, Sawai 
Madhopur, Rajasthan. However, during the course of arguments before us, it 
emerged that twelve centres initially received question papers from Canara Bank 
instead of SBI. Of these, four centres replaced the papers originating in Canara 
Bank with papers lodged in safe custody with SBI upon realizing the mistake. 
Consequently, in eight centres, candidates attempted the Canara Bank paper in 
full. As a result, approximately 3,307 candidates were assessed on their 
performance with respect to the Canara Bank papers instead of the SBI papers. 
NTA has stated that both sets of papers were prepared by moderators to ensure 
that the difficulty level was the same. 
39. The reports filed by the CBI indicate that the investigation is ongoing. At this 
stage, the CBI has indicated that the material gathered during the investigation 
suggests that about 155 students from the examination centres in Hazaribagh 
and Patna appear to be beneficiaries of the fraud (around 30 in Patna and around 

PART E 
25 | P a g e 
 
125 in Hazaribagh). No material has been placed before us to demonstrate that 
the question paper or the solved answers were circulated at random or en masse 
over social media. 
40. Separately, it appears that a plan to use unfair means in Godhra was uncovered 
before it could be executed. The affidavit filed by NTA states that a Deputy 
Superintendent of Examination had conspired with some students to fill in the 
answers in the OMR sheet after the conclusion of the test. The affidavit further 
states that the police became aware of this plan and that they arrested the 
accused persons before the test began. The candidates suspected to be involved 
in this conspiracy were identified. NTA submits that their results were withheld 
and that show cause notices were issued to them. 
41. This situation highlights several administrative and procedural flaws within NTA's 
management of the exam. Firstly, the fact that question papers from Canara 
Bank were distributed to students in twelve centres instead of papers from SBI 
reveals a lapse in coordination and oversight. The fact that four centres managed 
to rectify the mistake while eight continued with the incorrect papers suggests a 
lack of effective communication between NTA, the centre-coordinators and the 
banks involved in the distribution process. 
42. Secondly, the use of e-rickshaws for transporting question papers to examination 
centres raises concerns about the security and reliability of paper-handling 
procedures. E-rickshaws are relatively unsecured and lack proper monitoring, 
making them unsuitable for the secure transit of sensitive examination materials. 
This method might be vulnerable to theft, tampering, and mishandling, posing a 
serious risk to the integrity of the examination process. Although no lapses on 

PART E 
26 | P a g e 
 
this count have emerged this year, the possibility of such lapses is enough to 
warrant a change in the mode of transportation. 
43. Thirdly, the use of private courier services for transporting examination materials 
introduces variability in handling standards and may not ensure the same level 
of security as official channels. Proper protocols and accountability measures 
need to be in place to ensure that such services maintain the highest standards 
of security and reliability. 
44. Fourthly, CCTV surveillance is essential for monitoring activities and ensuring 
that all procedures are followed correctly. Any deficiency makes it challenging to 
prevent, detect, and address any irregularities or breaches that may occur during 
the examination process. ii. 
The marks awarded for one of the questions must be revised because only 
one of the options is the correct answer. 
45. One of the questions in the NEET (UG) 2024 exam was as follows: 
“Given below are two statements: 
Statement I: Atoms are electrically neutral as they 
contain an equal number of positive and negative 
charges. 
Statement II: Atoms of each element are stable and 
emit their characteristic spectrum. 
In light of the above statements, choose the most 
appropriate answer from the options given below: 
(1) Statement I is incorrect but Statement II is 
correct. 
(2) Both Statement I and Statement II are correct. 

PART E 
27 | P a g e 
 
(3) Both Statement I and Statement II are incorrect. 
(4) Statement I is correct but Statement II is 
incorrect.” 
46. We have not specified the question number, as both the question and the options 
may vary across different series of the question paper. Initially, the NTA answer 
key indicated that the fourth option was correct. 
47. Subsequently, based on representations submitted to NTA, a decision was taken 
to treat both option (2) and option (4) as correct answers. The representations 
highlighted that the second option was based on an older edition of the NCERT 
textbook. Many candidates had relied on the outdated textbook and accordingly, 
sought the award of four marks if they had marked option (2) as the correct 
answer. They also relied on the NTA Information Bulletin 2024. This bulletin 
states that if a question is found to be incorrect or dropped after key verification, 
all candidates will be awarded four marks, regardless of whether they attempted 
the question.8 The relevant portion is as follows: 
“(vi) If none of the options is found correct or a 
Question is found to be wrong or a Question is 
dropped then all candidates who have appeared will 
be given four marks (+4) irrespective of the fact 
whether the question has been attempted or not 
attempted by the candidate.” 
In response to the representations from aspirants, NTA amended its answer key 
and awarded marks to all students who had selected either option (2) or option 
(4). 
 
8 NTA Information Bulletin 2024, Chapter 3: Examination Scheme, Clause 3.2 - Pattern of the Test. 

PART E 
28 | P a g e 
 
48. Some petitioners argue that this change in marking led to unfair advantages for 
some students while disadvantaging others, thereby impacting the overall merit 
list and the rankings. This discrepancy could have altered admission outcomes 
for many students who narrowly missed the cut-off marks or ranks due to the 
inclusion of the second option as correct. As held in Kanpur University v. Samir 
Gupta,9 if prima facie a question is considered ambiguous, such a question 
should be deleted. This precedent emphasizes the need for clarity and precision 
in competitive examinations to maintain fairness and transparency. 
49. On 22 July 2024, this Court requested the Director of IIT, Delhi to constitute a 
three-member committee to determine the correct answer. The Director and 
Professor from the Department of Energy Science & Engineering, reported on 
23 July 2024, that a committee had been formed. This committee consisted of 
Professors Pradipta Ghosh, Aditya Narain Agnihotri, and Sankalpa Ghosh from 
the Department of Physics. 
 
50. The expert team constituted has opined that option (4) is the correct answer. This 
answer reads as follows: 
“(4) Statement I is correct but Statement II is incorrect.” 
51. The committee formed at IIT, Delhi has unequivocally clarified the correct 
answer, confirming that option (4) is indeed accurate. This option was initially 
 
9 1983. 

PART E 
29 | P a g e 
 
identified by the NTA as the correct answer. Moreover, options (2) and (4) are 
mutually exclusive, meaning they cannot both be correct simultaneously. 
52. The team of experts from IIT Delhi has unequivocally opined that the fourth option 
(noted above) is the one and only correct answer to the question. NTA did not 
dispute this during the hearing. We accept the report of IIT, Delhi. The contention 
based on the NTA Information Bulletin is fallacious. The question itself was not 
incorrect. Nor was it the case that none of the options were correct. Further, this 
is not a case where there were two correct answers. Only one of the answers 
was correct. The issue arose due to the discrepancy in an outdated version of 
the textbook, not due to an inherent flaw in the question or the absence of correct 
options. NTA's decision to award marks for both options was not justified. The 
validity of the question is upheld, and NTA must treat only option (4) as the 
correct answer. 
53. This is crucial to ensure the integrity and fairness of the examination process. 
The recalibration of ranks is necessary to reflect the true merit of the candidates, 
correcting any distortions caused by the earlier inclusion of an incorrect answer. 
This action will restore confidence in the examination system, ensuring that all 
candidates are evaluated on an equal and just basis. It also addresses the 
grievances of those who may have been unfairly disadvantaged, thus upholding 
the principles of equity and transparency in competitive examinations. 

PART E 
30 | P a g e 
 
iii. 
There is no conflict of interest with the Director of IIT, Madras analysing the 
data in this case 
54. In response to the query of this Court as to whether it was possible to use data 
analytics to identify suspicious cases or suspicious trends in the results of the 
NEET, the Union of India filed an affidavit answering the question. Pursuant to 
the order of the Court, the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education 
made a request to the Director, IIT Madras to undertake comprehensive data 
analytics of the results of all candidates who appeared in the exam this year. A 
set of parameters was also requested to be devised. 
55. IIT, Madras then analysed the data. The affidavit states that this was done with 
the help of Python for data processing, PostgreSQL for data storage and 
Metabase for analysis after receiving the relevant data and information from 
NTA. The executive summary of the report prepared by IIT Madras is as follows: 
“̌Executive Summary 
a. The marks distribution follows the bell-shaped 
curve that is witnessed in any large-scale 
examination indicating no abnormality. b. City wise and center wise analysis was done for 
two years (2023 and 2024) to find out if there are any 
abnormal indications. The Analysis is carried out for 
the Top 1.4 lakh ranks given that the total number of 
seats across the country is around 1.1 lakhs. c. This Analysis is granular enough to indicate any 
abnormality, had a large number of students gotten 
into high ranks (top 5%), due to malpractice or if 
students from a particular exam-centre or city were 
benefitted. d. The analysis shows that there is neither any 
indication of mass malpractice nor a localized set of 

PART E 
31 | P a g e 
 
candidate being benefitted leading to abnormal 
scores. e. There is an overall increase in the marks obtained 
by students, specifically in the range of 550 to 720. 
This increase is seen across the cities and centres. 
This is attributed to 25% reduction in syllabus. In 
addition, candidates obtaining such high marks are 
spread across multiple cities and multiple centers, 
indicating very less likelihood of malpractice.” 
56. Counsel for the petitioners expressed concerns about the independence and 
impartiality of the Director of IIT, Madras who signed the report analysing the 
data. The concern stemmed from the position held by the Director in the General 
Body of NTA. 
57. By a notification dated 6 March 2019, the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (which is now the Ministry of Education) constituted the General 
Body of NTA. The relevant part of the notification is extracted below: 
“(iii) Three Directors of IITs in their ex officio capacity 
as 
the 
present, 
preceding 
and 
succeeding 
chairpersons of JEE (Advanced) – Member” 
58. Since JEE (Advanced) was conducted by IIT Madras this year, the Director of 
the institution was the ex-officio member of the General Body by virtue of the 
notification referred to above. The bye-laws of NTA define the role of the General 
Body inter alia as providing overall policy guidance and direction, considering 
and approving the balance sheet and annual audited accounts presented by the 
Member Secretary along with the remarks of the Managing Committee, 
considering and approving the annual report, recommending the annual action 
plan and budget for the each year, nominating members of the General Body in 
terms of the relevant rules, delegating any of its powers to the Managing 

PART E 
32 | P a g e 
 
Committee or the Member Secretary, creating or abolishing posts in NTA, 
determining the procedure for appointment of persons to various posts, 
appointing committees or sub-committees for any purpose, demanding and 
receiving fees of the exams and tests conducted by NTA, and acquiring 
properties and investing surplus funds. 
59. The functions of the Managing Committee are also set out in the bye-laws. They 
include taking all operational decisions, managing the resources of NTA, 
handling its activities, monitoring the financial position to ensure smooth income 
flow, provide comments or inputs on the annual statements, annual reports, and 
other reports placed before the General Body. The general superintendence, 
direction and control of NTA and its income and property is also entrusted to the 
Managing Committee. Significantly, the bye-laws stipulate that all duties, powers 
and functions related to carrying on the objectives of NTA shall only be exercised 
or performed by the Managing Committee. The deliberations of the Managing 
Committee are required to be reported to the General Body from time to time and 
the former is required to work in terms of the policy laid down by the latter. 
60. From a comparison of the functions of the Managing Committee with those of the 
General Body, it is evident that the General Body is responsible for supervising 
the administration of NTA and exercising general oversight of its functioning 
while the Managing Committee is in charge of its day-to-day administration. 
Members of the General Body would not, it appears, have a hand in formulating 
the detailed protocol for the conduct of every examination or in responding to 
concerns that arise in real-time. Further, the current Director of IIT Madras, Prof. 
V Kamakoti nominated Prof. A Gopalakrishna to attend the most recently held 

PART E 
33 | P a g e 
 
meeting of the General Body, on 29 September 2023. The last meeting Prof. 
Kamakoti attended was on 29 December 2022. A combination of all these factors 
(including the fact that he is merely an ex officio member of the General Body) 
lead us to the conclusion that the report of the Director of IIT Madras cannot be 
faulted on the ground of bias. In any event, in the interests of justice and fairness, 
the Court has independently considered the data placed on record before 
reaching a decision on whether the petitions in this case ought to be allowed. iv. 
There is no evidence to indicate a systemic leak as on date 
a. 
Position of law 
61. The facts of this case and the resultant issue before this Court do not call for the 
development of new legal principles. It is settled law that the cancellation of an 
examination, either for the purposes of gaining admission into professional and 
other courses or for the purpose of recruitment to a government post, is justified 
only in cases where the sanctity of the exam is found to be compromised at a 
systemic level. Courts may direct the cancellation of an examination or approve 
such cancellation by the competent authority only if it is not possible to separate 
the tainted candidates from the untainted ones. 
62. In Anamica Mishra v. U.P. Public Service Commission,10 the recruitment 
process concerning appointment to various educational services posts in Uttar 
Pradesh was cancelled. The process consisted of two stages – a preliminary 
written examination and an interview. Only those candidates who scored high 
marks in the former were invited to participate in the latter. In that case, mistakes 
 
10 (1990) Supp SCC 692 

PART E 
34 | P a g e 
 
in data entry resulted in some candidates who scored high marks being left out 
of the interview process even as other candidates who scored low marks were 
interviewed and even selected. Upon realising this error, the State Public Service 
Commission cancelled the entire recruitment process. The High Court of 
Allahabad upheld this decision. The appeal against the decision of the High Court 
was allowed by this Court. This Court found that there was no justification for 
cancelling the written examination, considering that the errors were confined to 
the interview process. It found that a more appropriate course of action would 
have been to set aside the selection of candidates and conduct a fresh set of 
interviews on the basis of the written exam which had already taken place. 
Hence, in that case, the Court was of the opinion that it was not a suitable course 
of action to cancel an examination when no systemic issues persisted. Although 
not expressly stated by the Court, a proper appreciation of the decision leads to 
the conclusion that it considered whether a fresh examination was proportionate 
to the nature of grievance and the extent to which the integrity of the exam was 
vitiated. 
63. From the observations of this Court in Bihar School Examination Board v. 
Subhas Chandra Sinha,11 it can be seen that the number or proportion of 
students who can be believed to have indulged in malpractice is a relevant factor 
in deciding cases such as the present one. The relevant observations are 
extracted below: 
“13. This is not a case of any particular individual 
who is being charged with adoption of unfair means 
but of the conduct of all the examinees or at least a 
vast majority of them at a particular centre. If it is not 
 
11 (1970) 

PART E 
35 | P a g e 
 
a question of charging any one individually with 
unfair means but to condemn the examination as 
ineffective for the purpose it was held …” 
64. In Madhyamic Shiksha Mandal, M.P. v. Abhilash Shiksha Prasar Samiti,12 
the Board concerned with the exam in that case cancelled the exam upon 
receiving a report from a Naib Tehsildar who had visited the exam centre. He 
found that the students were copying even before the question paper was 
distributed and that they were permitted to enter the exam hall with their books 
and other material. The report also stated that the invigilators and supervisors 
did nothing to prevent the students from copying. This Court found that the Board 
was left with no alternative but to cancel the exam and that it was exceedingly 
difficult to identify the students who were committing malpractice and those who 
were not. 
65. In Sachin Kumar v. Delhi Subordinate Service Selection Board,13 the Court 
analysed multiple judgments related to the issue before us and made the 
following pertinent observations on the scope of judicial review in such 
proceedings: 
“56. The decisions in Railway Recruitment Board [All 
India Railway Recruitment Board v. K. Shyam 
Kumar, (2010): (2010) 2 SCC (L&S) 293], Gohil [Gohil Vishvaraj Hanubhai v. State of Gujarat, 
(2017): (2018) 1 SCC (L&S) 80] and 
Kalaimani [State of T.N. v. A Kalaimani, (2021): ] all go to 
emphasise that a recruiting authority is entitled to 
take a bona fide view, based on the material before 
it, that the entire process stands vitiated as a result 
of which a fresh selection process should be 
initiated. The integrity of the selection process 
cannot be lightly disregarded by the High Court 
 
12 (1998) 
13 (2021) 

PART E 
36 | P a g e 
 
substituting its own subjective opinion on the 
sufficiency of the material which has been taken into 
account 
by 
the 
decision 
making 
authority. 
Undoubtedly, fairness to candidates who participate 
in the process is an important consideration. There 
may be situations where candidates who have 
indulged in irregularities can be identified and it 
is then possible for the authority to segregate 
the tainted from the untainted candidates. On the 
other hand, there may be situations where the 
nature of the irregularities may be manifold and 
the number of candidates involved is of such a 
magnitude that it is impossible to precisely 
delineate or segregate the tainted from the 
untainted. A considered decision of the authority 
based on the material before it taken bona fide 
should not lightly be interfered in the exercise of the 
powers of judicial review unless it stands vitiated on 
grounds of unreasonableness or proportionality.” 
66. The purpose of testing whether the integrity of the exam has been compromised 
at a systemic level is to ensure that the cancellation of the exam which has 
already taken place and the conduct of a fresh examination is a proportionate 
response.14 This is also why courts are required to assess the extent of the use 
of unfair means and separately, consider whether it is possible to separate 
tainted and untainted candidates. A holistic view must be taken. 
67. In arriving at a conclusion as to whether an examination suffers from widespread 
issues, courts must ensure that allegations of malpractice are substantiated and 
that the material on record, including investigative reports, point to that 
conclusion. There must be at least some evidence to allow the Court to reach 
that conclusion. This standard need not be unduly strict. To elaborate, it is not 
necessary for the material on record to point to one and only conclusion which is 
that malpractice has taken place at a systemic level. However, there must be a 
 
14 In this regard, see our analysis of Anamica Mishra (supra) at paragraph 62 of this judgment as well as the 
observations of the Court in Rajesh PU (supra) at paragraph 69 of this judgment. 

PART E 
37 | P a g e 
 
real possibility of systemic malaise as borne out by the material before the Court. 
In Bihar School Examination Board (supra), this Court recognised that 
“sufficient material” must be present to justify a decision to cancel examinations: 
“14. … If at a centre the whole body of students 
receive assistance and are managed to secure 
success in the neighbourhood of 100% when others 
at other centres are successful only at an average of 
50%, it is obvious that the University or the Board 
must do something in the matter. It cannot hold a 
detailed quasi-judicial inquiry with a right to its 
alumni to plead and lead evidence etc., before the 
results are withheld or the examinations cancelled. If 
there is sufficient material on which it can be 
demonstrated that the university was right in its 
conclusion that the examinations ought to be 
cancelled then academic standards require that the 
university's appreciation of the problem must be 
respected.” 
68. In Madhyamic Shiksha Mandal, M.P. (supra), too, the Court placed great 
reliance on the report of the Naib Tehsildar, which indicated that the students in 
question were copying unchecked and that it was not possible to separate them 
from the ones who were not copying. 
69. In Union of India v. Rajesh P.U.,15 the Court was concerned with a case where 
it was possible to separate the beneficiaries of malpractice from the candidates 
who conducted themselves in an upright manner. It held that there was no 
justification to cancel the entire selection and emphasized the importance of the 
information available to the Court as well as that of concrete and relevant 
material, in the following terms: 
“In the light of the above and in the absence of any 
specific or categorical finding supported by any 
concrete and relevant material that widespread 
 
15 (2003) 

PART E 
38 | P a g e 
 
infirmities of an all-pervasive nature, which could 
be really said to have undermined the very process 
itself in its entirety or as a whole and it was 
impossible to weed out the beneficiaries of one or 
the other irregularities, or illegalities, if any, there 
was hardly any justification in law to deny 
appointment to the other selected candidates whose 
selections were not found to be, in any manner, 
vitiated for any one or the other reasons. Applying 
a unilaterally rigid and arbitrary standard to 
cancel the entirety of the selections despite the 
firm and positive information that except 31 of 
such selected candidates, no infirmity could be 
found with reference to others, is nothing but 
total disregard of relevancies and allowing to be 
carried away by irrelevancies, giving a complete go-
by to contextual considerations throwing to the winds 
the principle of proportionality in going farther than 
what was strictly and reasonably to meet the 
situation.” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
 
b. 
The present case 
70. That the question paper was leaked and some students indulged in malpractice 
is beyond cavil. No party before the Court including NTA disputes this. The 
question, however, is whether this leak was systemic and of a nature as to vitiate 
the sanctity of the exam. There are various aspects in this case which require 
the consideration of the Court – the inflation of marks and ranks, the leak of the 
question paper, other forms of malpractice, the reopening of the registration 
window, the change of city when the form was opened for corrections, and the 
award of compensatory marks to 1563 students. These are considered in turn. 
71. At the outset, it is necessary to understand certain aspects of the NEET. It is 
well-known that the counselling process or the process by which admission is 
gained into different medical colleges depends on the rank of the candidate. The 

PART E 
39 | P a g e 
 
concept of ‘qualifying marks’ is, however, sometimes misunderstood. The 
qualifying mark is arrived at after the declaration of results each year and 
corresponds to the 50th percentile. This year, the 50th percentile was identified to 
be at 164 marks of a total of 720 marks, for the unreserved category. Candidates 
who score 164 marks or above are eligible for admission to the MBBS course. 
However, not all those who have qualifying marks will necessarily gain admission 
to a medical college. The qualifying marks are necessary but not sufficient for 
admission. NTA, in its affidavit, states that the purpose of qualifying marks is to 
ensure that private colleges do not grant admission to totally undeserving 
candidates. Only a small percentage of those who obtain the qualifying marks 
will be allotted one of the 1,08,000 available seats. As mentioned above, 56,000 
seats of the total figure are in government medical colleges and the remaining 
52,000 are in private colleges. Hence, it is appropriate to assess the percentage 
of success with respect to the 1,08,000 available seats. Rank 1,08,000 
corresponds to 577 marks and rank 56,000 corresponds to 622 marks. 
72. Data analysis of results has long been an accepted method of discerning the 
extent to which an examination has been vitiated. In Bihar School Examination 
Board (supra), this Court considered the validity of the decision to cancel a 
secondary school examination conducted at a particular centre in Bihar due to 
the adoption of unfair means by the students. At the centre in which malpractice 
appeared to have taken place, the percentage of successful examinees was 
about 80%. In stark contrast, the average percentage of successful candidates 
at other centres was 50%. The Court also considered the percentage of success 
subject-wise for thirteen subjects. The marks detailed in the judgment indicate 
that the candidates performed exceedingly well in all subjects, leading the Court 

PART E 
40 | P a g e 
 
to hold that the “figures speak for themselves”. Despite this conclusion, the Court 
called for some answer booklets and inspected them. Its conclusion (which was 
based on the data) that the exam was vitiated was substantiated by the answer 
booklets, which showed that there was “remarkable agreement in the answers”. 
Data analysis is a useful tool in the endeavour to detect malpractice. 
73. The data placed before us on the percentage of success from different centres 
did not account for seats which would be allotted on the basis of reservation for 
the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Castes, and 
Economically Weaker Sections. Were such seats to be accounted for, the figure 
of 1,08,000 would almost be halved. Hence, the data analysis errs on the side of 
caution. 
74. Certain centres found themselves in the midst of the controversy in this case. It 
was averred that malpractice was widespread in Hazaribagh, Jharkhand, Patna, 
Bihar, and Godhra, Gujarat. The data provided by NTA in relation to Hazaribagh 
for 2024 is as below: 
a. 2733 candidates in total appeared for the exam; 
b. 126 candidates are within Rank 1,08,000. This indicates a success rate of 
4.6%; and 
c. 58 candidates are within Rank 56,000. This indicates a success rate of 
2.1%. 
Further, the statistics from previous editions of the NEET indicate that the 
success rate (relative to the total number of available seats) for Hazaribagh was 
7.2% in 2022 and 6.0% in 2023. When these figures are compared with the 

PART E 
41 | P a g e 
 
success rate for 2024 which is 4.6%, no abnormality becomes evident. To the 
contrary, the success rate for this year is lower than for the past two years. 
75. Similar data for Patna for 2024 is encapsulated below: 
a. 48,643 candidates in total appeared for the exam. The exam was 
conducted in 70 centres across the city; 
b. 2691 candidates are within Rank 1,08,000. This indicates a success rate of 
5.5%; and 
c. 1482 candidates are within Rank 56,000. This indicates a success rate of 
3.0%. 
In 2022, the success rate (relative to the total number of available seats) was 
8.9% and in 2023, the success rate was 7.7%. In Patna, too, the success rate for 
this year (5.5%) is lower than for the past two years. Even otherwise, there is no 
irregularity which comes to light. 
76. The numbers for Godhra for 2024 are as follows: 
a. 2484 candidates in total appeared for the exam. The exam was conducted 
in 2 centres; 
b. 21 candidates are within Rank 1,08,000. This indicates a success rate of 
0.8%; and 
c. 13 candidates are within Rank 56,000. This indicates a success rate of 
0.05%. 

PART E 
42 | P a g e 
 
To compare, the success rate (relative to the total number of available seats) in 
Godhra was 1.5% in 2022 and 2.1% in 2023. Hence, in Godhra, fewer candidates 
are within the zone in 2024. There are no other deviations in the data which are 
cause for concern and which meet the standard of indicating a systemic malaise. 
77. From the above figures, it becomes clear that there are no abnormalities in the 
results for 2024 when compared with the results for the past two years. The 
report of the Director of IIT, Madras also supports the conclusion of this Court. 
The report stated that there were no “abnormal indications” in the results for this 
year, when compared to previous years. It also stated that “analysis shows that 
there is neither any indication of mass malpractice nor a localized set of 
candidates being benefitted leading to abnormal scores.” Hence, an analysis of 
the results does not lend support to the case of the petitioners who seek the 
cancellation of the exam. The leak of the paper does not appear to be widespread 
or systemic. It appears to be restricted to isolated incidents in some cities, which 
have been identified by the police or are in the process of being identified by the 
CBI. 
78. We now turn to the issue of the reopening of registration for NEET. The 
registration window was initially to be open from 9 February 2024 to 9 March 
2024. The last date for registration was later extended to 16 March 2024. 
Thereafter, NTA reopened the registration portal for two days – 9 and 10 April 
2024. During the course of the hearing, the Court enquired into the reasons for 
the reopening as well as the performance of the candidates who registered when 
the portal was reopened. 

PART E 
43 | P a g e 
 
79. NTA stated that it received numerous representations from candidates who 
raised issues related to One Time Passwords, Aadhar authentication, uploading 
of documents, and payment. Other technical issues were also raised. Further, it 
appears that the High Courts of Rajasthan and Karnataka directed NTA to permit 
certain petitioners, who reported such issues during their registration, to register 
after the last date. NTA states that it reopened the registration portal to permit all 
similarly situated candidates to submit their forms for the exam. 
80. The data submitted to the Court reflects the performance of the candidates who 
registered for the exam on 9 and 10 April 2024 and thereafter, appeared for the 
exam. The students who registered on these dates but did not appear for the 
exam are excluded from this analysis. Of the 8039 candidates who registered on 
9 April 2024, it is seen that five candidates were within the top 1,08,000 ranks 
and two candidates were in the top 56,000 ranks. This indicates a success rate 
of 0.06% and 0.02% respectively. Further, of the 14,007 candidates who 
appeared after having registered on 10 April 2024, forty-four were within the top 
1,08,000 ranks and twenty-three were in the top 56,000 ranks. The success rate 
was 0.31% and 0.14% respectively. This data does not indicate that an abnormal 
number of candidates who registered on 9 and 10 April 2024 were successful. 
We do not find that an unusually high number of students who registered on 
these dates have been successful. Hence, the Court cannot reach the conclusion 
that the reopening of the registration portal led to or facilitated malpractice. There 
is no other material on record at the present time which would indicate the same. 
81. The next aspect which falls for consideration is that some candidates changed 
their preferred cities for the exam, which in turn led to the change of their exam 

PART E 
44 | P a g e 
 
centre. The petitioners averred that this was done to enable malpractice. After 
changing their preferred city, 33 aspirants went to Hazaribagh, 637 went to 
Patna, and 24 went to Godhra. Out of the 33 who appeared from Hazaribagh, 
only one candidate’s scores placed him in a rank higher than or equal to Rank 
56,000. Thus, the success rate is 3%. Out of 637 candidates who changed their 
centre to Patna, only 35 were in the top 1,08,000 ranks, indicating a success rate 
of 5.5%. 17 candidates scored more than 622 marks (corresponding to Rank 
56,000). The success rate is 2.7%. Out of 24 candidates who went to Godhra, 
no candidate scored more than 577 marks (corresponding to 1,08,000 rank). 
Here, too, the data is not abnormal and therefore does not indicate that a 
systemic breach has taken place. An unusual number of candidates who 
changed their preferred cities do not appear to have a higher rate of success. 
This is a facility which is intended to subserve the interests of candidates. 
Therefore, the fact that some aspirants changed their preferred cities, taken 
alone, cannot be considered evidence of malpractice or of dishonest intention. 
The choice to appear for the exam from a different city may be motivated by 
myriad factors and the option to change the preferred city is made available every 
year. Some other relevant and concrete material must be present before the 
Court can infer that this led to mass malpractice. 
82. The parties in the hearing also addressed submissions on a video on Telegram 
(an instant messaging application) purportedly showing the leaked paper. It was 
alleged that the leak took place on 4 May 2024. The NTA, in its affidavit, stated 
that the video shared on Telegram was fabricated and the time-stamp was 
altered to indicate that the leak took place before the examination date. The 
investigation by CBI revealed that the images in the video were indeed doctored. 

PART E 
45 | P a g e 
 
The Telegram channel itself was created on 6 May 2024 and the paper was 
uploaded on 7 May 2024. Hence, there is no merit in this allegation. 
83. As for the re-exam conducted for the 1563 candidates who were initially awarded 
compensatory marks, the order of this Court dated 13 June 2024 found the re-
exam to be fair and justified. The issue no longer subsists. NTA was also 
permitted to act accordingly following the test which was held, by the order of this 
Court dated 23 July 2024. 
84. Hence, sufficient material is not on record at present which indicates a systemic 
leak or systemic malpractice of other forms. The material on record does not, at 
present, substantiate the allegation that there has been a widespread 
malpractice which compromised the integrity of the exam. To the contrary, an 
assessment of the data indicates that there are no deviations which indicate that 
systemic cheating has taken place. The information before us at this stage does 
not show that the question paper was disseminated widely using social media or 
the internet, or that the answers were being communicated to students using 
sophisticated electronic means which may prove difficult to trace. The students 
who were beneficiaries of the leak at Hazaribagh and Patna are capable of being 
identified. The CBI investigation reveals the number of students who are the 
beneficiaries of the malpractice at Hazaribagh and Patna at this stage. This leads 
us to conclude that it is possible to separate the beneficiaries of malpractice or 
fraud from the honest students. This being the case, the Court cannot direct a 
re-exam. 
85. In the previous section which sets out the position of law on this issue, this Court 
noticed that the purpose of assessing whether the sanctity of the exam has been 

PART E 
46 | P a g e 
 
vitiated at a systemic level was to facilitate and encourage a proportional 
response. If it is possible to separate the tainted candidates from the untainted 
ones, there would be no justification to cancel the exam. This is because honest 
candidates would be made to suffer without reason due to the actions of some 
unscrupulous candidates. It is also important for the response to malpractice to 
be proportionate. Ordering a re-test would disrupt the academic schedule for the 
year. The delay in completing admission will impact the availability of resident 
doctors to attend to patient care in the future. Any such direction will have 
disproportionate consequences for candidates from marginalised backgrounds. 
They would be disadvantaged, in the event of a re-exam – neither are desirable 
outcomes. 
86. The petitioners have placed reliance on the judgments of this Court in Tanvi 
Sarwal v. CBSE16 and Sachin Kumar (supra) in support of their contention that 
a re-test must be directed. It is necessary to briefly advert to the facts and the 
ruling in these cases to appreciate their applicability to the present case. 
87. In Tanvi Sarwal’s case (supra), the Court adjudicated writ petitions challenging 
the validity of the All India Pre-Medical and Pre-Dental Entrance Test 2015 on 
the ground that the integrity of the exam had been compromised by the use of 
unfair means. After the exam was conducted, news reports revealed that answer 
keys had been transmitted to many candidates in the course of the examination, 
using electronic devices. The Court noticed the following from multiple status 
reports filed by the investigating agency in that case: 
 
16 (2015) 

PART E 
47 | P a g e 
 
a. Some arrested persons stated that they had planned to recover Rs. 20 lakhs 
from each student who wished to avail of their services to cheat in the exam; 
b. One of the arrested persons was a doctor. Several answer keys were found 
to be stored on his mobile phone. They were also forwarded to two other 
mobile numbers using WhatsApp; 
c. Vests for men and women fitted with micro SIMs were recovered from some 
persons suspected to be involved in the scam; 
d. Bluetooth devices were recovered from a person suspected of facilitating 
cheating; 
e. The question paper had been leaked in Behror, Alwar District, Rajasthan. The 
arrested persons planned to communicate the answers to the students during 
the conduct of the examination using the vests fitted with micro SIMs. At least 
three hundred such vests were used; 
f. The persons suspected of being the masterminds of the scam were found to 
have called several people in Jharkhand, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
Delhi, Maharashtra, Odisha and Haryana, using different phone numbers; 
g. 358 mobile numbers were used to transmit the answers to the question paper 
to various beneficiaries across the country; 
h. Some candidates admitted to having received the answers during the exam, 
through electronic devices supplied to them by the alleged offenders; 
i. Until that point, forty-four beneficiaries of the leak had been identified; 

PART E 
48 | P a g e 
 
j. The investigating agency stated that it was beyond doubt that the plan to 
provide answers during the exam was prepared and executed by an 
organised gang with a network spreading across the country; and 
k. The Inspector General of Police, Haryana admitted that it may not be possible 
to identify every single beneficiary of the leak. 
88. On the basis of the information before it, the Court noted that it could choose one 
of two alternatives – direct that the results of the forty-four beneficiaries of 
malpractice be withheld and permit the counselling process to proceed or direct 
the conduct of a fresh exam. The Court was of the opinion that the modus 
operandi of the leak made it likely that numerous candidates, apart from the forty-
four who had been identified at the time, were likely to have been beneficiaries 
of that system of malpractice. It held that it was not possible to identify all the 
beneficiaries of the leak. Further, it ruled that the segregation of the forty-four 
identified beneficiaries of the leak was not a viable solution because there was a 
possibility that unidentified beneficiaries would stand to gain at the cost of honest 
candidates. The Court, finding that the sanctity of the exam had been 
compromised, cancelled the exam and directed the conduct of a fresh exam. 
89. Tanvi Sarwal’s case (supra) is distinguishable from the case before us on many 
counts. First and foremost, the unscrupulous candidates in that case used 
sophisticated technology including vests fitted with micro SIMs to cheat. No such 
technology has come to light at present, in this case. Second, the question paper 
was found to have been shared on WhatsApp before the date of the exam. Once 
shared through social media, it is exceedingly difficult to trace the journey of a 
post or message or document. Here, the record at present does not indicate that 

PART E 
49 | P a g e 
 
the question paper was shared on social media before the date of the exam. 
Third, In Tanvi Sarwal’s case (supra), the assistance of a gang with a 
nationwide network was stated to have been taken and calls were made by the 
accused to persons living in numerous states in the country. No such nationwide 
ring is seen at present in this case. Fourth, the Court found that it was not 
possible to separate the beneficiaries of the leak from the honest candidates. 
Here, the Court has concluded that the fraudulent candidates may be identified 
by the investigating agency. For these reasons, the decision in Tanvi Sarwal 
(supra) does not support the case of the petitioners. The allegations in this case 
are not substantiated by the material on record. 
90. In Sachin Kumar’s case (supra), the two-Judge Bench of this Court (of which 
one of us, D Y Chandrachud, J., was a part) was concerned with the recruitment 
process for the post of Head Clerk. The Government of the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi cancelled the process on the basis of certain irregularities in 
the conduct of the examination. The Central Administrative Tribunal annulled this 
decision of the Government. In proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution 
before a Division Bench of the Delhi High Court, the decision of the Central 
Administrative Tribunal was partly affirmed. The appeals arising from the 
decision of the High Court resulted in the case before this Court. 
91. In that case, a committee was appointed to conduct an enquiry into the 
complaints regarding malpractice during the exam. In its report, the committee 
inter alia found that a large number of candidates in the zone of selection hailed 
from a small geographical area within Delhi, a significant proportion of candidates 
belonged to the same community (as indicated by their surnames), and the 

PART E 
50 | P a g e 
 
failure to randomise the seating plan resulted in candidates from the same family 
being seated in consecutive seats. In addition, the committee noted that certain 
persons had masterminded a racket which led to the impersonation of 
candidates, the leakage of question papers, and the dilution of the processes in 
place to ensure the fair conduct of the exam, including blurring of videography, 
faulty jammers, etc. 
92. The Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi then constituted a 
second committee to scrutinise candidates who were in the zone of consideration 
with a view to identifying cases of impersonation. This committee found that there 
were no irregularities with the candidature of those persons who had come forth 
for assessment. The Deputy Chief Minister of Delhi then cancelled the 
examination, leading to the eventual challenge of his decision. 
93. The question in Sachin Kumar (supra) was whether the decision to cancel the 
recruitment process was justified. The Court held that the credibility of the entire 
exam stood vitiated by systemic irregularities, as highlighted by the findings of 
the first committee appointed by the government. It found that the allegations 
made regarding the sanctity of the exam had been substantiated by the 
investigation which followed. It therefore upheld the decision of the Deputy Chief 
Minister to cancel the exam and set aside the judgment of the High Court. 
94. That case, too, is distinct from the one before us. In Sachin Kumar (supra), the 
material before the Court was sufficient to lead to the conclusion that there was 
mass malpractice, which attacked the integrity of the exam at a systemic level. 
This is indicated by the fact that a large number of candidates in the zone of 
selection were from the same concentrated geographical region and that 

PART F 
51 | P a g e 
 
candidates from the same family were sitting in consecutive spots during the 
exam. There was also impersonation and the coordinated dilution of security 
protocols in that case. There was an abundance of material before the Court in 
that case. The same cannot be said to be true in the instant case. Hence, the 
ruling in that case cannot influence the outcome in this case. Moreover, in cases 
such as these, courts must take a holistic view of the facts before them and reach 
an independent conclusion. Different courses of action are appropriate in 
different circumstances. 
F. 
The conduct of NTA: Cause for concern 
95. While the various issues discussed until now do not lead to the conclusion that 
the integrity of the NEET was vitiated at a systemic level, the manner in which 
NTA has organised the exam this year gives rise to serious concerns. The Court 
is cognizant of the fact that national-level exams with participation from tens of 
lakhs of students require immense resources, coordination, and planning. But 
that is precisely the reason for the existence of a body such as NTA. It is no 
excuse to say that the exam is conducted in myriad centres or that a large 
number of aspirants appear for the exam. NTA has sufficient resources at its 
disposal. It has adequate funding, time, and opportunities to organise exams 
such as the NEET without lapses of the kind that occurred this year. 
96. Multiple occurrences in the conduct of the exam prompt the Court to make these 
observations. The paper was leaked in Patna and Hazaribagh. In one of the 
centres, the rear door of the strongroom was opened and unauthorised persons 
were permitted to access the question papers. This indicates that there is a 
serious lapse in security and that security measures which are stringent and 

PART F 
52 | P a g e 
 
effective must be implemented by NTA. Further, it came to light that the question 
papers were sometimes transported in e-rickshaws and that the services of 
private courier companies were availed of. Mr. Hooda, learned senior counsel for 
the petitioners, also rightly pointed out that NTA did not specify a time by which 
the OMR sheets were required to be sealed after the conclusion of the exam. In 
the absence of a stipulation in this regard, dishonest persons may tamper with 
the OMR sheets even after the candidates have submitted them and exited the 
exam hall. Another point of concern is that NTA relies on persons over whom it 
does not exercise direct oversight to be the invigilators for the exam. There are 
various methods which may be adopted to ensure appropriate oversight over 
invigilators and decrease the likelihood of the use of unfair means. All of these 
issues indicate that the security protocols must be tightened to decrease the 
possibility of malpractice and fraud and to lessen access by private persons to 
the question papers. 
97. In at least twelve centres, the question paper stored in Canara Bank was wrongly 
distributed to candidates. The question paper which should have been distributed 
was the one stored in SBI. In many centres, aspirants completed the incorrect 
question paper and were ultimately evaluated while in others, the relevant 
authorities realised the mistake and then distributed the correct question paper. 
This either indicates that the city coordinators were irresponsible and not fit for 
duty or that the information as to which question paper was to be distributed to 
candidates was not properly communicated to them. Certainly, neither Canara 
Bank nor SBI appear to have been notified as to whether the papers in their 
custody were to be released. As long as the city coordinators furnished proof of 
authorisation, the papers were released without question. The custodian banks 

PART F 
53 | P a g e 
 
have to be informed as to whether they should release the question papers in 
their possession. Had the custodian banks been informed whether or not to 
release the papers in their possession, the city coordinators would have been 
unable to collect the incorrect set of question papers, even if they made an 
honest mistake. NTA must consider the various possibilities and plan the protocol 
to be followed after careful consideration. 
98. The use of mobile applications to communicate with the relevant parties would 
permit real-time communication and allow NTA to inform the banks even a few 
minutes before the time at which the city coordinator was authorised to collect 
the papers. This would ensure that no unscrupulous persons from the custodian 
banks can take advantage of the information made available to them. NTA 
already uses a mobile application to communicate with the city coordinators and 
others so it would not be difficult to communicate with the custodian banks. Other 
modes of communication may be explored and adopted, as long as the custodian 
banks are informed whether to release the papers they have stored for 
safekeeping. 
99. The highest scoring candidates in a competitive exam usually have the option of 
gaining admission into the best institutions. It is consequential in more ways than 
one to be a candidate who obtains a perfect score. When the results were 
released, it appeared that sixty-seven aspirants had scored a perfect score of 
720 / 720. After the removal of the compensatory marks and the conduct of the 
re-test for 1563 candidates, the number of persons who had a perfect score 
dropped to sixty-one. Subsequently, in the course of the hearing, we were 
informed that forty-four of the sixty-one top scorers had marked the incorrect 

PART F 
54 | P a g e 
 
option to the question in controversy. By its judgment dated 23 July 2024, this 
Court directed NTA to treat only one of the options as the correct answer and 
recompute the marks and ranks on the basis of this revision to the answer key. 
The necessary consequence of these directions is that the scores of the same 
forty-four aspirants will no longer be 720 / 720. The number of scorers with 
720/720 marks then drops to seventeen. It is a matter of serious concern that 
this number fell from sixty-seven to seventeen during the course of the hearing. 
The intervention of the Court, reports by the media, and representations by 
candidates ensured that these changes were made in the interests of fairness 
and justice. However, the system adopted by NTA should be such that just 
outcomes are reached even when these external catalysts are not present. The 
system must be such as to inspire public confidence. 
100. Another aspect which is most unfortunate is the lack of responsible decision-
making with respect to the 1563 candidates who were initially awarded 
compensatory marks. As noticed above, a committee constituted by NTA first 
recommended that the compensatory marks be awarded. However, as the 
controversy surrounding the award of these marks became more prominent, a 
second committee was constituted. This committee recommended the 
cancellation of compensatory marks and the conduct of a re-exam in their place 
for those students. A body such as NTA which is entrusted with immense 
responsibility in relation to highly important competitive exams cannot afford to 
misstep, take an incorrect decision, and amend it at a later stage. All decisions 
must be well-considered, with due regard to the importance of the decision. Flip-
flops are an anathema to fairness. 

PART G 
55 | P a g e 
 
101. Intense competition amongst the aspirants coupled with the commercialisation 
of education has led to a few towns or cities becoming hubs for classes which 
train candidates for competitive exams. While these towns or cities may have a 
higher rate of success than some others, instances of malpractice at such 
centres should be treated on par with any other instance. All instances of the use 
of unfair means must be dealt with firmly. 
102. NTA is directed to ensure that all the concerns highlighted by the Court in this 
judgment are addressed. The committee constituted by the Union Government 
is also requested to keep these issues in mind while formulating its 
recommendations. 
G. 
Issues in the conduct of the examination and the remit of the committee 
constituted by the Union Government 
103. During the hearing, the petitioners urged that there were systemic flaws in the 
conduct of the examination and that a more thorough procedure needs to be put 
in place to ensure that malpractice is avoided. Given the crucial role of the 
examination in shaping the careers of future medical professionals responsible 
for public health, any compromise in the merit-based selection process 
jeopardizes the quality of healthcare as well as the careers of aspirants. The 
fairness and reliability of the examination system cannot be such that public 
confidence is lost. 
104. The formation of a committee is essential to thoroughly investigate and address 
the structural issues. A dedicated committee with suitably qualified experts can 
ensure a comprehensive review of the security measures, candidate verification 

PART G 
56 | P a g e 
 
processes, and the overall management of the examination. By identifying and 
rectifying vulnerabilities, such a committee will help restore trust in the 
examination system and implement robust safeguards to prevent future 
malpractice. 
105. The Court has been apprised of the fact that the Union Government has 
constituted a seven-member expert committee, chaired by Dr K Radhakrishnan, 
former Chairman, ISRO, consisting of the following members: 
“(i) 
Dr Randeep Guleria, Member 

Prof B J Rao, Member 

Prof Ramamurthy K, Member 

Shri Pankaj Bansal, Member 

Prof Aditya Mittal, Member 

Shri Govind Jaiswal, Member Secretary” 
106. The remit of the Committee, in addition to the tasks that it has been entrusted 
with by the Union government and the NTA, shall encompass the following: 
a. Examination Security and Administration 
i. 
Evaluate and recommend reforms in the mechanism of administration of 
the exam. This includes ensuring rigorous checks and balances at every 
stage, from setting the question papers to declaring the final results; 
ii. 
Formulate standard operating procedures17 which set out the timelines for 
registration, changes to preferred cities, the sealing of OMR sheets once 
 
17 “SOP” 

PART G 
57 | P a g e 
 
candidates submit them to the invigilator, and other processes related to 
the conduct of the exam. Once adopted by NTA, the SOP must be adhered 
to, to maintain the integrity of the exam; 
iii. 
Review the process by which exam centres are currently allotted to 
candidates and recommend any changes which may be required in the 
interests of fairness and transparency. The preferences of candidates may 
continue to be accounted for; 
iv. 
Recommend stricter procedures for verifying candidate identities, if 
required, with a view to preventing impersonation and ensuring that only 
registered and authorized candidates are allowed to take the exams. Such 
processes may include, but are not limited to, enhanced identity checks at 
various stages of the exam (such as registration, entry to the exam centre, 
and before the commencement of the exam) and technological innovations 
to prevent impersonation. All procedures should comply with laws on 
privacy; 
v. 
Consider the viability of comprehensive CCTV surveillance systems at all 
examination centers, including real-time monitoring and recording of all 
activities. The aim is to deter and detect any malpractice or unauthorized 
activities and to provide evidence in case of incidents; 
vi. 
Review and suggest enhancements for the processes for the setting, 
printing, transportation, storage, and handling of question papers. This may 
include tamper-evident packaging and using secure logistics providers to 
prevent unauthorized access and leaks during critical phases. The viability 

PART G 
58 | P a g e 
 
of utilizing closed vehicles with locks and real-time tracking systems rather 
than e-rickshaws may be considered; 
vii. 
Consider the viability of conducting regular audits and surprise inspections 
of examination centres. This is to ensure compliance with established 
security protocols, identify and address potential vulnerabilities or lapses in 
the system, and ensure that all centres adhere to the highest standards of 
examination security; and 
viii. 
Recommend the development of a robust grievance redressal mechanism. 
This should allow candidates to report any irregularities or issues promptly; 
b. Data Security and Technological Enhancements 
i. 
Research and suggest advanced data security protocols, including 
encryption and secure data transmission methods. These measures should 
protect examination materials from unauthorized access and potential 
leaks, ensuring that all sensitive information remains secure; 
ii. 
Recommend systems to monitor and track digital footprints related to the 
examination materials. This might include digital watermarking and tracking 
technologies to trace the origin of leaked documents and identify potential 
breaches in the electronic dissemination process; 
iii. 
Consider how regularly cybersecurity audits and vulnerability assessments 
must be conducted to identify and address potential weaknesses in the 
electronic dissemination and storage systems. These audits should 
evaluate the effectiveness of current security measures and recommend 
improvements based on the latest cybersecurity trends; and 

PART G 
59 | P a g e 
 
iv. 
Explore technological innovations to enhance examination security and 
efficiency. This could include advancements in digital authentication, 
secure online platforms, and other emerging technologies that can 
safeguard against potential threats; 
c. Policy and Stakeholder Engagement 
i. 
Review and recommend updates to the policies and SOPs of NTA to align 
with best practices, ensuring that the agency is equipped to handle evolving 
challenges in examination security; 
ii. 
Establish a transparent communication strategy to keep all stakeholders, 
including candidates, educational institutions, and the public, informed 
about the measures being taken to ensure the integrity and fairness of the 
examination process as well as of the response of NTA to any malpractice 
which is identified; 
iii. 
Recommend the implementation of a comprehensive communication 
strategy to keep all stakeholders involved in the process — including banks, 
examination centres, and logistical partners — well-informed. This strategy 
should detail the protocols for secure transportation, storage, and handling 
of examination materials, and ensure regular updates on any issues or 
changes; and 
iv. 
Recommend measures to address and mitigate any socioeconomic 
disparities that may affect candidates' ability to participate in or benefit from 
the examination process. This might include providing support and 

PART G 
60 | P a g e 
 
resources to underprivileged candidates to ensure equal opportunities and 
reduce barriers to entry; 
d. Collaboration and International Cooperation 
i. 
Consider the viability of NTA engaging in international cooperation with 
examination bodies and educational authorities from other countries to 
share best practices, security measures, and innovative solutions; and 
ii. 
Suggest the creation of a management framework to identify, assess, and 
mitigate potential risks related to examination security. This framework 
should include protocols for assessing risks, contingency plans, and 
strategies for dealing with unforeseen challenges that may arise during the 
examination process; 
e. Support and Training 
i. 
Recommend plans or strategies for the development and implementation 
of mental health support programs for students, including counselling 
services and stress management workshops. These programs should 
address the psychological impact of exams and also ensure the well-being 
of all candidates throughout the examination process. Qualified experts 
from relevant fields must be consulted for this purpose; and 
ii. 
Consider the viability of NTA conducting comprehensive training programs 
for all staff involved in the examination process (including but not limited to 
question paper setters, invigilators, and administrative personnel). These 
programs should cover security protocols, ethical standards, and the latest 

PART H 
61 | P a g e 
 
technology to ensure everyone involved is well-equipped to maintain the 
integrity of the examination. 
107. While carrying out its mandate, the committee must bear in mind the facts and 
issues highlighted in Section F of this judgment. 
108. The Ministry of Education constituted the committee by a notification dated 22 
June 2024. The notification stated that the report of the committee shall be 
submitted within two months from the date of the issue of the notification. This 
would be 22 August 2024. However, in view of the expanded remit of the 
committee in terms of this judgment, additional time may be required for a holistic 
report on various aspects related to the conduct of the NEET. Therefore, the 
report of the committee shall be submitted to the Ministry of Education by 30 
September 2024. The Ministry of Education shall take a decision on the 
recommendations made by the committee within a period of one month from 
receiving the report. It shall prepare and begin to implement a plan of action on 
this basis. The Ministry of Education shall report compliance with these directions 
within two weeks of taking the decision on the implementation of the 
recommendations. 
 
H. 
Parting remarks 
109. The principal issue which the Court was concerned with in this case is whether 
the sanctity of the NEET was compromised this year and whether the process 
should be scrapped and a fresh test should be convened. Having answered the 
question in the above terms, it needs to be clarified that if any student, including 
in the present batch, has an individual grievance not bearing on the issues which 

PART H 
62 | P a g e 
 
have been resolved by this judgment, it would be open to them to pursue their 
rights and remedies in accordance with law, including by moving the jurisdictional 
High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution. However, before moving the 
High Court for the grant of relief, the petitioners would have to seek the 
withdrawal of their petitions before this Court, if any have been filed. 
110. The transfer petitions at the instance of the NTA or any other party raising the 
issue as regards the validity of NEET in 2024 are allowed. The resulting 
transferred cases shall stand disposed of in terms of the above directions subject 
to the clarification that individual grievances, if any, that remain, may be 
addressed before the jurisdictional High Court. The interlocutory applications 
raising individual grievances are similarly permitted to be withdrawn with liberty 
reserved in the above terms. 
111. Nothing in this judgment shall be construed as a finding of fact in relation to 
criminal proceedings arising from the leak of the question paper or from other 
forms of malpractice. However, the ruling of the Court will not be relied on to 
refrain from prosecuting individuals found to have indulged in malpractice in any 
centres, irrespective of whether such fraud has already been identified or is 
identified in the future. Stringent action in accordance with law shall be taken 
against every candidate who is detected or who may hereafter be detected to 
have been the beneficiary of any malpractice. 
112. List before an appropriate Bench to verify compliance with the directions issued 
in this judgment. 

PART H 
63 | P a g e 
 
113. The Petitions shall stand disposed of in the above terms...…..…..…...…...……………….…...CJI. 
 [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 

….…...…..…...…...……………….… 
 [J B Pardiwala].……...…..…...…...……………….… 
 [Manoj Misra] 

New Delhi; 
August 02, 2024