IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

M/S D. KHOSLA AND COMPANY …PETITIONER(S) 

VERSUS 

THE UNION OF INDIA 

JUDGMENT 

 PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
Heard Smt. Jyoti Mendiratta, learned counsel for the 
petitioner and Smt. Aishwarya Bhati, learned A.S.G. for 
the Union of India. 
2. 
In connection with a contract of 1984-85 between the 
petitioner and the respondent, an award came to be 
passed by the Arbitrator on 17.09.1997 under the Indian 
Arbitration Act, 19401. It was made the rule of the court 
 
1 hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’ 

under Section 14 read with Section 17 of the Act and a 
decree was accordingly drawn. 
3. 
The award vide its paragraph 12 provided for the interest 
on the amount awarded. The interest was awarded for 
two periods viz. (i) from the date of completion of the work 
up to the date of the award @ 12% per annum (simple 
interest); and (ii) @ 15% per annum from the date of the 
award till the date of its payment or the date of the court 
decree, whichever is earlier. 
4. 
The portion of the award which is relevant for our 
purpose concerning interest is reproduced hereinbelow: 
“12. Interest:- The Union of India shall 
pay to M/s D Khosla & Company simple 
interest @ 12% per annum on the amount 
awarded from the date of completion of 
work ·upto the date of award and 15% 
from the date of award to the date of its 
payment 
or 
date 
of 
court 
decree 
whichever is earlier.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
5. 
The decree of the court that was drawn according to the 
award reads as under: 
“02) Decree for Rs.21,56,745 (Rupees 
Twenty One Lac Fifty Six thousands seven 
hundred and forty five) in terms of 
Arbitration 
Award 
to 
be 
drawn 
on 
payment of the Court Fees by the 

Opponent no.1. Opponent no.2- Union of 
India is hereby ordered to pay interest @ 
12% p.a. on the awarded amount up to 
the date of the award and interest @ 15% 
p.a. from the date of award till the 
realization of the decreetal amount as per 
the terms of award.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
6. 
A simple reading of the aforesaid decree reveals that 
interest has been awarded in two parts on the amount 
of Rs.21,56,745/- i.e. (i) 12% per annum on the 
awarded amount up to the date of award; and (ii) 15% 
per annum from the date of award till the realization of 
the decretal amount. 
7. 
It appears that the petitioner was paid the principal 
amount of compensation awarded and interest of 12% 
and 15% for the two periods i.e. pre-award and post-
award on the principal amount awarded. However, 
petitioner was not satisfied and he moved execution for 
the realization of certain amount as shortfall of the 
interest. The petitioner contended that insofar as 15% 
interest is concerned, it is payable on the principal 
amount of compensation awarded plus 12% simple 
interest on the said amount. In other words, petitioner 

sought to include 12% interest in the principal amount 
of compensation awarded for the purposes of claiming 
15% simple interest for the post-award period. 
8. 
The Principal Senior Civil Judge, Khambhalia, in 
Execution Petition No.9 of 2006 preferred by the 
petitioner, refused to accept the contention of the 
petitioner so as to award 15% interest on the principal 
amount of compensation awarded plus 12% simple 
interest thereof. In a way, he declined to grant interest 
upon interest for the reason that the Arbitrator has not 
awarded it in so many words. 
9. 
In the petition preferred by the petitioner before the 
High Court, the same view was adopted by the High 
Court vide its judgment and order dated 06.09.2013. It 
held that as the Arbitrator had used word ‘simple 
interest’ and had not specifically awarded compound 
interest, therefore, the petitioner is only entitled to 
simple interest @ 12% per annum on the amount 
awarded as compensation for the pre-award period and 
simple interest @ 15% per annum for the post-award 
period only on the amount of compensation awarded. 

10. Aggrieved by the judgment and order of the High Court 
dated 06.09.2013 and that of the Principal Senior Civil 
Judge, Khambhalia, dated 29.08.2008, the petitioner 
has preferred this Special Leave Petition. 
11. Ms. Mendiratta, learned counsel for the petitioner 
argued that 12% interest per annum awarded for the 
pre-award period is part of the principal sum and it has 
lost its character as separate interest. Therefore, 15% 
interest per annum awarded for the post-award period 
is both on the principal sum and the 12% interest 
inclusive. 
12. In contrast, Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional 
Solicitor General appearing on behalf of the respondent, 
has argued that though there is no controversy with 
regard to the power of the arbitrator to award interest 
on interest or compound interest in a given case. 
However, it cannot be paid to the claimant until and 
unless it is specifically granted by the award or the 
order of court. 
13. In the instant case, the arbitrator had granted interest 
for two separate periods on the principal sum adjudged 

only and there is no direction that the interest for the 
subsequent period would be payable on the principal 
sum adjudged including interest for the first period. 
14. The sole simple issue herein for our opinion is whether 
interest is payable on interest or whether 15% interest 
per annum awarded would be on the principal sum 
award plus 12% per annum interest on it for the pre-
award period. 
15. Section 29 of the Act provides that the court may in the 
decree order interest at the rate deemed reasonable to 
be paid on the principal sum as adjudged by the award 
meaning thereby in drawing the decree, the court may 
order for payment of interest on the principal sum as 
adjudged by the award. In other words, the court 
cannot order for payment of interest on interest but only 
on the principal sum adjudged. 
16. Since the award under the Act is in the nature of a 
decree in terms of Section 17 of the aforesaid Act, it 
attracts the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure2 
also to a limited extent namely insofar as award of 
 
2 hereinafter referred to as “CPC” 

interest is concerned and for the execution of the decree 
drawn pursuant to the award. 
17. Section 34 of the CPC provides that where the decree is 
for payment of money, the court may order interest at 
such rate as the court deems reasonable to be paid on 
the principal sum adjudged. Again, the reading of the 
aforesaid Sub-Section (1) of Section 34 CPC would 
reveal that the interest is payable on the principal sum 
adjudged and not on interest part of the award. 
18. The Interest Act, 1978 vide Sub-Section (3) of Section 3 
specifically lays down that nothing in Section 3 which 
permits the court to award interest shall empower the 
court to award interest upon interest. It means that 
ordinarily the courts are not entitled to award interest 
upon interest unless specifically provided either under 
any statute or under the terms and conditions of the 
contract. 
19. In Oil and Natural Gas Commission vs. M.C. Clelland 
Engineers S.A.3 which was also a case under the Act, 
this Court observed that there cannot be any doubt that 
 
3 (1999) 

the Arbitrators have power to grant interest akin to 
Section 34 CPC and it is clear that interest is not 
permissible upon interest awarded but only upon the 
claim made. In the aforesaid case, the claim made was 
in two parts, and in the second part, interest on delayed 
payment was also claimed. In that situation, the court 
held that the interest awarded would form part of the 
damages or compensation for delayed payment and 
would become part of the principal amount and thus, in 
that circumstances, Arbitrator has the power to grant 
interest on interest which partakes the compensation 
awarded. 
20. In State of Haryana and Others vs. S.L. Arora and 
Company4, it was observed that interest, unless 
otherwise specified, refers to simple interest and that 
interest is payable only on principal amount and not on 
any accrued interest. It was further held that the 
compound interest can be awarded if there is a specific 
provision under the statute or in the contract for 
compounding of interest but no general discretion lies 
 
4 (2010) 

with the courts or tribunals to award compound interest 
or interest upon interest. 
21. In Hyder Consulting (UK) Limited vs. Governor, 
State of Orissa5, this Court was dealing with Section 
31(7) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, 
wherein for the purposes of payment of post-award 
interest, the phrase ‘sum directed to be paid by award’ 
was used and it was held that it includes the pre-award 
interest and, therefore, post-award interest is payable 
on the sum awarded which includes pre-award interest. 
However, a distinction was made between Section 31(7) 
which simply uses the word ‘sum’ and Section 34 CPC 
wherein the phrase ‘on principal sum adjudged’ has 
been used. The departure in the use of the language in 
the two provisions was held to be of great significance 
which clearly showed that the term ‘sum’ under Section 
31(7) refers to aggregate amount of the award and the 
pre-award interest whereas ‘principal sum adjudged’ 
under Section 34 CPC refers only to the amount 
awarded. 
 
5 (2015) 

22. The case of UHL Power Company Limited vs. State of 
Himachal 
Pradesh6, 
is 
again 
in 
relation 
to 
interpretation of Section 31(7) of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996, wherein the principal laid down 
in Hyder Consulting (UK) Limited (supra) has been 
accepted. 
23. In the light of the above legal provisions and the case 
law on the subject, it is evident that ordinarily courts 
are not supposed to grant interest on interest except 
where it has been specifically provided under the 
statute or where there is specific stipulation to that 
effect under the terms and conditions of the contract. 
There is no dispute as to the power of the courts to 
award interest on interest or compound interest in a 
given case subject to the power conferred under the 
statutes or under the terms and conditions of the 
contract but where no such power is conferred 
ordinarily, the courts do not award interest on interest. 
24. Neither the Act specifically empowers the Arbitrator or 
the court to award interest upon interest or compound 
 
6 (2022) 

interest nor there is any other provision which provides 
for grant of compound interest or interest upon interest. 
Even Section 34 CPC is silent in this regard whereas 
Sub-Section (3) of Section 3 of the Interest Act 
specifically prohibits the same. 
25. In view of the above legal position, we have to examine 
the award in question and the decree drawn in 
pursuance thereof to find out if compound interest or 
interest upon interest has been awarded. 
26. The relevant part of the award pertaining to the interest 
and 
that 
of 
the 
decree 
has 
been 
reproduced 
hereinbefore. 
27. A plain reading of the aforesaid award and decree 
reveals that interest awarded under the award has been 
dissected into two parts. The first part relates to the 
pre-award period from the date of the completion of the 
work till the passing of the award whereas the second 
part is the post-award period commencing from the date 
of the award till the satisfaction of the award. In the 
first part, simple interest @ 12% per annum has been 
awarded on the ‘amount awarded’ whereas in the 

second part, interest @ 15% per annum has been 
awarded referring to the ‘amount awarded’. The amount 
awarded in both the situations have to be the same and 
cannot be two distinct amounts. The ‘amount awarded’ 
refers to the principal amount of compensation awarded 
that is Rs.21,56,745/-. The award and the decree 
nowhere specifically contemplate for awarding 15% 
interest per annum on the amount awarded including 
the interest component i.e. the pre-award interest. This 
could not have been done even otherwise as there is no 
provision to that effect under the relevant statutes or 
the contract. No material has been placed before us or 
as a matter of fact before any court below to show that 
the terms and conditions of the contract contained any 
such provision. 
28. In the light of the above discussion, we do not deem it 
appropriate under the facts and circumstances of the 
case to exercise our discretionary jurisdiction under 
Article 136 of the Constitution of India so as to interfere 
with the opinion expressed concurrently by the two 

courts below. Therefore, the Special Leave Petition is 
dismissed....………………………….. J. 
(PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)...……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL)