1|SLP(C)NOS.30188-89/2018 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. ……………. OF 2024 
( SLP(C)Nos.30188-30189/2018) 

PREM LAL ANAND & ORS. 

… APPELLANT (S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
NARENDRA KUMAR & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 

SANJAY KAROL, J. 
 
Leave Granted. 
2. 
These appeals by special leave are directed against the judgment and order 
dated 26th October, 2017 of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in First 
Appeal from Order No.341 of 1997 and dated 13th July, 2018 in Civil Misc. Recall 
Application No.360830 of 2017 in First Appeal from Order No.341 of 1997 
between the self-same parties. The appeal to the High Court was filed by the 

2|SLP(C)NOS.30188-89/2018 
 
claimants (appellants herein) against Order dated 8th January, 1997 passed by 
M.A.C.T./XIVth Additional District Judge, Ghaziabad in Motor Accident Claim 
No.570 of 1994. 
3. 
 The claimant-appellant No.1 along with his wife aged about 45 years were 
travelling by motorcycle and as they were crossing village Mehrauli, on their way 
to Noida to visit a friend, they were faced with two rashly and speedily driven 
tractors resulting into an accident, with the claimant sustaining several injuries 
including a broken jaw and fracture(s) in his leg. Unfortunately, claimant-
appellant’s wife died on the spot, as a result of the impact of the accident. 
4. 
The claimant-appellant and his deceased wife were engaged in business, 
jointly earning Rs.5,000/- from their business concern, namely, M/s. Sonali 
Fabrics. It was urged that due to the sudden death of the wife of the deceased, 
the entire business, which was earning profits, for example, Rs.60,000/- in the 
year 1994 and Rs.50,000/- in 1993, the income therefrom was lost. 
5. 
Hence, the claimant filed a claim for Rs.12,00,000/- before the concerned 
Motor Accident Claims Tribunal. 
6. 
The Tribunal framed five issues in respect of rash and negligent driving; 
claimants being the legal heirs of the deceased wife, the quantum of her earnings; 
liability of the insurance company; whether the driver of the offending vehicle 
had a valid licence; and lastly what relief, if any. 

3|SLP(C)NOS.30188-89/2018 
 
7. 
In regard to contributory negligence, it was held that the claimant and the 
respondent both were responsible equally. The claimants were held to be legal 
heirs of the deceased. The driver of the offending vehicle had a valid licence. 
The final order given by the Tribunal is reproduced hereinbelow:- 
“The Motor Accident Claim of Claimants for the compensation of 
Rs.12 Lacs is hereby rejected. Claim is decreed against the 
Respondents Narendra Kumar, Jagbir and M/s United India Insurance 
Co.Ltd. for the compensation of Rs.1,01,250/- with cost. Claim against 
the Respondent No.4 Charan Singh is rejected. Claimant shall be 
entitled to interest @ 12% per annum on the amount of abovesaid 
compensation e.e.f. 9.10.1994. Respondents are directed to deposit the 
aforesaid amount in this Court within a period of two months. Failing 
which the appropriate action according to Law shall be initiated against 
them for the recovery of amount. In case any interim compensation has 
already been paid to the Claimants the same shall be adjusted in this 
amount.” 
 
8. 
Seeking enhancement of compensation, the claimant-appellant(s) 
approached the High Court. Vide the impugned order dated 26th October, 2017 
the High Court partly allowed the appeal, observing that there is an apparent error 
in the Tribunal applying multiplier 9 to calculate the compensation whereas, 
accordingly applied the multiplier as 14. The Tribunal was, therefore, directed 
to calculate the enhanced compensation, carrying the rate of interest as awarded 
by the Tribunal. 
9. 
Subsequently, was 
preferred by the claimant-appellant(s) against the order impugned herein. 
However, the same was dismissed. It is against both these orders that the 
claimant-appellant(s) have approached this Court. 

4|SLP(C)NOS.30188-89/2018 
 
10. 
The primary ground on which compensation truncated, in nature was 
awarded to the claimant-appellant(s), was the finding of contributory negligence 
returned by the Tribunal. In answering the third issue, the liability of the 
insurance company to pay compensation, it was observed that the responsibility 
for the accident could be apportioned to both the claimant-appellant(s) and the 
respondent at 50% each. 
11. 
At this stage, it would be appropriate to consider pronouncements of this 
Court on contributory negligence. 
11.1 
In Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay v. Laxman Iyer & 
Anr.1, this Court discussed the concept of negligence and its types, i.e., 
composite and contributory, in the following terms:- 
“6. …. Negligence is omission of duty caused either by an omission 
to do something which a reasonable man guided upon those 
considerations, who ordinarily by reason of conduct of human affairs 
would do or be obligated to, or by doing something which a prudent 
or reasonable man would not do. Negligence does not always mean 
absolute carelessness, but want of such a degree of care as is required 
in particular circumstances. Negligence is failure to observe, for the 
protection of the interests of another person, the degree of care, 
precaution and vigilance which the circumstances justly demand, 
whereby such other person suffers injury. The idea of negligence and 
duty are strictly correlative. Negligence means either subjectively a 
careless state of mind, or objectively careless conduct. Negligence is 
not an absolute term, but is a relative one; it is rather a comparative 
term. No absolute standard can be fixed and no mathematically exact 
formula can be laid down by which negligence or lack of it can be 
infallibly measured in a given case. What constitutes negligence 
varies under different conditions and in determining whether 
negligence exists in a particular case, or whether a mere act or course 
of conduct amounts to negligence, all the attending and surrounding 
facts and circumstances have to be taken into account. It is absence 
 
1 (2003) 

5|SLP(C)NOS.30188-89/2018 
 
of care according to circumstances. To determine whether an act 
would be or would not be negligent, it is relevant to determine if any 
reasonable man would foresee that the act would cause damage or 
not. The omission to do what the law obligates or even the failure to 
do anything in a manner, mode or method envisaged by law would 
equally and per se constitute negligence on the part of such person. 
If the answer is in the affirmative, it is a negligent act. Where an 
accident is due to negligence of both parties, substantially there 
would be contributory negligence and both would be blamed. In a 
case of contributory negligence, the crucial question on which 
liability depends would be whether either party could, by exercise of 
reasonable care, have avoided the consequence of the other's 
negligence. … Contributory negligence is applicable solely to the 
conduct of a plaintiff. It means that there has been an act or omission 
on the part of the plaintiff which has materially contributed to the 
damage, the act or omission being of such a nature that it may 
properly be described as negligence, although negligence is not 
given its usual meaning. …. It is now well settled that in the case of 
contributory negligence, courts have the power to apportion the loss 
between the parties as seems just and equitable.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
11.2 
This Court in Pramodkumar Rasikbhai Jhaveri v. Karamasey 
Kunvargi Tak & Ors.2 observed: 
 
“9. Subject to non-requirement of the existence of duty, the question 
of contributory negligence is to be decided on the same principle on 
which the question of the defendant's negligence is decided. The 
standard of a reasonable man is as relevant in the case of a plaintiff's 
contributory negligence as in the case of a defendant's negligence. 
But the degree of want of care which will constitute contributory 
negligence, varies with the circumstances and the factual situation of 
the case. The following observation of the High Court of Australia 
in Astley v. Austrust Ltd. [(1999) 73 ALJR 403] is worthy of 
quoting: 
“A finding of contributory negligence turns on a factual 
investigation whether the plaintiff contributed to his or her own loss 
by failing to take reasonable care of his or her person or property. 
What is reasonable care depends on the circumstances of the case. In 
many cases, it may be proper for a plaintiff to rely on the defendant 
to perform its duty. But there is no absolute rule. The duties and 
responsibilities of the defendant are a variable factor in determining 
 
2 (2002) 

6|SLP(C)NOS.30188-89/2018 
 
whether contributory negligence exists and, if so, to what degree. In 
some cases, the nature of the duty owed may exculpate the plaintiff 
from a claim of contributory negligence; in other cases, the nature of 
the duty may reduce the plaintiff's share of responsibility for the 
damage suffered; and in yet other cases the nature of the duty may 
not prevent a finding that the plaintiff failed to take reasonable care 
for the safety of his or her person or property. Contributory 
negligence focuses on the conduct of the plaintiff. The duty owed by 
the defendant, although relevant, is one only of many factors that 
must be weighed in determining whether the plaintiff has so 
conducted itself that it failed to take reasonable care for the safety of 
its person or property.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
12. 
Record reveals that driver of the tractor No.UP 14-A 1933 had maintained 
slow speed, prompting the claimant-appellant No.1 to overtake, but, however, the 
driver of the another tractor bearing No.UP 14-B 9603 was rash and negligent in 
his act, inasmuch as, not only did he overspeed, but also came from the wrong 
side, resulting in the collusion. 
13. 
In the attending facts and circumstances, merely because a person was 
attempting to overtake a vehicle, cannot be said to be an act of rashness or 
negligence with nothing to the contrary suggested from the record. Further, it is 
the claimant-appellant(s) who lost a member of their family. Not only was the 
claimant-appellant, Prem Lal Anand doing an act which is an everyday 
occurrence on the road that is overtaking a vehicle, but resultantly suffered 
extensive injuries himself. That apart, it has also been proved that the offending 
vehicle was driven rashly and negligently. These two factors taken together lead 
us to the conclusion that the finding of contributory negligence against the 

7|SLP(C)NOS.30188-89/2018 
 
appellant No.1 was erroneous and unjustified. Consequently, compensation 
awarded on this count has to be revised. 
14. 
A further contention by the claimant-appellant(s) was the misapplication 
of the multiplier in Sarla Verma v. Delhi Transport Corporation3. It is argued 
that the multiplier applicable will be 15, in accordance with the Second Schedule 
to the Motor Vehicle Act as on 22nd May 2018. The statute as it stands today, 
does not have a Second Schedule, with the same being omitted on 25th February 
2022. The Special Leave Petition in the present matter was filed on 10th October 
2018, on which date the Schedule was in force. Therefore, we find force in the 
submission of the learned counsel for the claimant-appellant(s) 
15. 
Another aspect to be considered is the grant of future prospects as per 
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Pranay Sethi4. Para 59.4 thereof provides that if 
the deceased was self-employed or on a fixed salary, considering the age of the 
deceased, certain percentages as provided have to be added in respect of future 
prospects. In the present case, the deceased was between the age of 40 and 50 and 
accordingly, 25% addition is to be made, to the established income. The Tribunal 
notes the income of the deceased to be Rs.5000/- per month, therefore 25% of 
5000 equals Rs.1,250/-. Yearly income as a result would be Rs 6250 x 12 which 
equals to Rs.75,000/- per year. 
 
3 (2009) 
4 (2017) 

8|SLP(C)NOS.30188-89/2018 
 
16. 
Compensation as calculated, in accordance with the above discussion 
would be 75,000/- (which includes Future Prospects) x 15 (Multiplier) = 
Rs. 11,25,000/-. 
17. 
Hence, the claimant would be entitled to a total sum of 
Rs.11,25,000/- instead of Rs.1,01,250/- as awarded by the Tribunal, as 
compensation. 
18. We clarify that the other directions of the Tribunal shall remain undisturbed 
except that the rate of interest would be 8% instead of 12%. 
19. 
The Appeals are allowed in aforesaid terms. The impugned Award dated 
8th January, 1997 titled as Prem Lal Anand & Ors. v. Narendra Kumar & Ors. in Motor Accident Claim No.570 of 1994 stands modified to the aforesaid extent. 
Pending applications, if any, are also disposed of. 

…………….…………J. 
(C.T. RAVIKUMAR ) 

………………………J. 
(SANJAY KAROL) 
Dated: August 07, 2024; 
Place: New Delhi.