IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

DLF LTD. (FORMERLY KNOWN AS 
DLF UNIVERSAL LTD) AND ANR....APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
KONCAR GENERATORS AND MOTORS LTD. 

JUDGMENT 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
The issue arising in the present appeal relates to enforcement 
of an arbitral award expressed in foreign currency. In this context, 
two questions arise for consideration. First, what is the correct and 
appropriate date to determine the foreign exchange rate for 
converting the award amount expressed in foreign currency to 
Indian rupees. Second, what would be the date of such conversion, 
when the award debtor deposits some amount before the court 
during the pendency of proceedings challenging the award. Two 
uncertainties have a direct bearing on the question to be answered, 
the time lapse between the date of the award and its enforceability- 

a local factor, and the ever-fluctuating exchange rates- a global 
factor. 
1.1 Taking into account these two factors and the statutory 
provisions, coupled with the decisions of this Court, we have 
formulated twin principles: First, following the principle in Forasol 
v. Oil and Natural Gas Commission1, the date when the arbitral 
award becomes enforceable shall be the date for conversion. Under 
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 19962 this date is when the 
objections against the award are dismissed, and award attains 
finality. Second, in the event that the award amount or part of it is 
deposited in court pending objections, enabling withdrawal by the 
decree holder, that date of such deposit shall be the relevant date 
for conversion as per the principle in Renusagar Power Co Ltd v. 
General Electric Co3. Before we consider the submissions of the 
counsels representing the parties, followed by our reasons and 
decision, we will refer to the relevant facts of the case. 
2. 
Facts: The relevant facts are that the appellants are Indian 
companies and the respondent is a Croatian company. The parties 
entered a contract for the design, engineering, manufacturing, and 
 
1 1984 Supp SCC 263. 
2 Hereinafter ‘the Act’. 
3 1994 Supp (1) SCC 644. supply of two generators by the respondent. Certain disputes arose 
between them that were referred to arbitration before the 
International Chamber of Commerce4, Paris. The three-member 
arbitral tribunal passed its award dated 12.05.2004 in favour of 
the respondent-claimant and held the appellants to be jointly and 
severally liable to pay Euros 10,93,989, along with interest, as 
follows: 
i. 
Euros 9,60,308.41 with interest of 5% p.a. starting on 
31.10.1999 until final repayment; 
ii. 
Euros 18,411.40 for the storage and maintenance of the 
goods with interest of 5% p.a. starting from the date of the 
award; 
iii. 
Euros 5,545.40 relating to lawyer expenses of the 
claimant, euros 99,482.70 relating to arbitration fees paid 
to the ICC, euros 3,389.57 as guaranty expenses relating 
to the repayment of the appellants’ arbitration fee to the 
ICC, euros 6,852 relating to the arbitration costs in Paris, 
all these amounts with interest of 5% p.a. from the date of 
the award. 
 
4 Hereinafter “ICC”. 

2.1 The respondent filed for execution of the award in 2004, while 
the appellants filed a petition under Section 34 of the Act, which 
was dismissed on 28.04.2010. In 2010, the appellants then filed 
objections against the award under Section 48 of the Act and also 
filed a Section 37 appeal against the Section 34 order. The High 
Court dismissed the appeal by its order dated 15.10.2010, the 
terms of which are important for our purpose and are hence 
extracted: 
“After arguing for some time learned counsel have reached 
a consensus on the present appeal. It has been agreed by 
learned counsel for the appellants that the appeal as well 
as the application under Section 34 of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 would be dismissed as withdrawn. It 
has been further agreed that the appellants would deposit 
an amount of Rs.7.5 Crores before the Executing Court on 
or before 08.11.2010. 
It has been agreed by learned counsel for the respondent 
that the application under Section 48 which has been filed 
by the appellants would be decided on its own merits 
without being influenced by any findings or observations in 
the order on the application under Section 34 dated 
28.04.2010. It has further been agreed by learned counsel 
for the respondent that the amount of Rs. 7.5 Crores which 
would be deposited by the appellants would be released to 
it only consequent to furnishing a bank guarantee of a 
scheduled bank of India in the amount of Rs. 7.5 Crores in 
favour of the Executing Court and the said bank guarantee 
would be kept alive during the proceedings under Section 
48 and for a period of 60 days thereafter. The final order 
thereon would obviously be passed by the Executing Court 
after the conclusion of the proceedings under Section 48.” 
 
2.2 In accordance with the above, the appellants deposited 
Rs. 7.5 crores with the Executing Court on 22.10.2010. 

2.3 The Trial Court dismissed the objections filed under 
Section 48 by order dated 02.04.2011. The appellants filed a 
revision, which the High Court admitted by order dated 
03.06.2011. By this order, the High Court also stayed the 
operation of the Trial Court order dismissing objections, subject to 
the appellants depositing a further amount of Rs. 50 lakhs, in 
addition to Rs. 7.5 crores, with the Executing Court. The Court 
directed that the amount shall be disbursed to the successful party 
on the final adjudication of this lis. It also rejected the respondent’s 
prayer for deposit of the amount in euros. Pursuant to this order, 
the 
appellants 
deposited 
Rs. lakhs 
on 
15.07.2011. 
Subsequently, the revision came to be dismissed by the High Court 
on 01.07.2014, by which the award attained finality as this order 
was not challenged any further. 
2.4 In the execution proceedings, the Trial Court by order dated 
24.08.2016 permitted the respondent to withdraw the entire 
deposit of Rs. 8 crores as per the direction of the High Court. On 
10.10.2016, the respondent received Rs. 11,60,12,100, including 
the interest that had accrued on the deposited amount. 
2.5 The execution petition was allowed by the Trial Court by its 
order dated 03.02.2017, wherein it was held that the relevant date 

to convert the award amount expressed in euros to Indian rupees 
(the foreign exchange rate) is 01.07.2014, i.e., the date on which 
all the objections against the award were finally decided as it is 
only on such date that the award is deemed to be a decree. The 
Trial Court accepted the calculation as submitted by the 
respondent. 
2.6 The appellants filed a revision petition against this order, 
which was dismissed by the High Court by order dated 
26.02.20185, which is impugned herein. The High Court rejected 
the appellant’s reliance on this Court’s decision in Forasol (supra) 
to submit that the date of decree shall be deemed as the relevant 
date for conversion and since the award dated 12.05.2004 is a 
deemed decree under the Act, the exchange rate as on the date of 
the award should be applied. The Court reasoned that this Court’s 
judgment in Forasol (supra) was passed under the Arbitration Act, 
1940 and hence, does not apply in the present case. Instead, the 
High Court referred to the Delhi High Court’s decision in Progetto 
Grano S.P.A. v. Shri Lal Mahal Limited6, against which this Court 
dismissed the SLP7, where it was held that the relevant date for 
 
5 In CR No. 1827 of 2017 (O&M), Punjab and Haryana High Court (hereinafter “impugned judgment”). 
6 2014 SCC OnLine Del 3348. 
7 SLP No. 27041/2014, order dated 21.11.2014. conversion is when the objections filed under Section 48 are finally 
decided. Further, the Court referred to Section 49 of the Act8 that 
provides that the foreign arbitral award shall be deemed to be a 
decree of the court when it is satisfied that it is enforceable under 
Part II, Chapter I of the Act. It reasoned that such satisfaction 
required under Section 49 is complete only when the objections 
filed under Section 48 are finally decided, which was on 
01.07.2014 in the present case (when the High Court dismissed 
the revision). It also observed that the appellants delayed execution 
of the award by initially filing under Section 34, despite such 
application not being maintainable and then filing an appeal 
against this order and subsequently withdrawing it. The appellants 
cannot be permitted to benefit from the fluctuation in exchange 
rates when the delay is attributable to them. Therefore, the 
relevant date for conversion is 01.07.2014. 
2.7 While issuing notice on the special leave petition filed by the 
appellant on 10.09.20189, this Court confined the issue to 
 
8 Section 49 of the Act reads: 
“49. Enforcement of foreign awards.—Where the Court is satisfied that the foreign award is 
enforceable under this Chapter, the award shall be deemed to be a decree of that Court.” 
9 By order 10.09.2018, this Court ordered: “Issue notice, returnable within four weeks, limited to the conversion 
rate that would be applicable on 15.10.2010 insofar as the deposit of Rs. 7.5 Crores is concerned. The same will 
apply to the further deposit of Rs. 50,00,000/-.” 

determining whether the foreign exchange rate as on 15.10.2010 
would apply to the deposit of Rs. 8 crores. 
3. 
Submissions: Learned senior counsel Mr. Pinaki Mishra 
appeared on behalf of the appellants. Initially, he submitted that 
01.07.2014 would not be the relevant date for conversion for the 
entire amount and argued for using the exchange rate on 
02.04.2011, when the Trial Court dismissed objections under 
Section 48. However, he later restricted his submissions to the 
exchange rate that applies when the amount of Rs. 8 crores was 
deposited by the appellants on 22.10.2010 as per the order dated 
15.10.2010. The crux of his argument is that the deposited 
amount stands converted as on the date of its deposit, and this 
amount then cannot be converted again as per the exchange rate 
prevailing on 01.07.2014. He has submitted that the High Court 
passed an order dated 15.10.2010 directing the appellants to 
deposit Rs. 7.5 crores on the consent of both parties, and also 
permitted the respondent to withdraw this amount on furnishing 
a bank guarantee in Indian rupee for the entire amount, to which 
the respondent had agreed at the time. He further submitted that 
the appellants cannot be faulted for the respondent not 
withdrawing the amount when it was deposited. In response to the 

respondent’s contention regarding their inability to furnish a bank 
guarantee of a scheduled Indian bank, he submitted that the 
respondent had agreed to this condition when the order was 
passed, and in any case, it could have applied for a modification 
but did not do so. Since the respondent consented to the deposit 
of Rs. 7.5 crores and it was also permitted to withdraw the same, 
the amount stood converted as on the date of its deposit on 
22.10.2010. The exchange rate on this date was 1 euro = Rs. 
59.17. While the arbitral award along with interest was euros 
16,73,469.07, the deposited amount of Rs. 7.5 crores gets 
converted to euros 12,67,534.22 at that exchange rate, and the 
balance of the award would be euros 4,05,934.85 that remained 
pending as on this date. Subsequently, pursuant to the High 
Court’s interim order dated 03.06.2011 in revision against the 
Trial Court dismissing the objections petition, the appellant 
deposited an additional amount of Rs. 50 lakhs on 15.07.2011. As 
on this date, the amount of arbitral award including interest 
pending payment was euros 4,17,278.78, i.e., after converting and 
adjusting the earlier deposit against the award. Using the 
prevailing exchange rate of 1 euro = Rs. 62.89 as on 15.07.2011, 
the appellant’s deposit amounts to euros 79,503.90. Therefore, a 

balance of euros 3,37,774.88, along with interest, remains pending 
for which the exchange rate as on 01.07.2014 would apply. 
3.1 Mr. Mishra concluded by submitting that the appellants 
would be required to pay only Rs. 3.19 crores if their calculation is 
accepted. On the other hand, if the impugned judgment is upheld, 
they would be required to be pay more than double the amount, 
i.e., Rs. 6.48 crores. 
3.2 Mr. Abhay Mahajan, learned counsel, appearing for the 
respondent submitted that the exchange rate on 01.07.2014 would 
apply to the entire award amount. He submitted that the 
respondent had not consented to the deposit of Rs. 7.5 crores and 
that the High Court did not convert the amount but only directed 
deposit of a lump sum amount. He relied on this Court’s decision 
in P.S.L. Ramanathan Chettiar v. O.R.M.P.R.M. Ramanathan 
Chettiar10 where it was held that the judgment debtor depositing a 
sum in court during the pendency of the appeal does not pass the 
title and vest the money with the decree-holder. The decree-holder 
may withdraw the amount only on furnishing security, which 
means that the payment is not in satisfaction of the decree. 
Further, the judgment debtor can proceed against the security in 
 
10 (1968). case he succeeds in the appeal. Rather, the purpose of the deposit 
is to obtain a stay of execution and to put the money beyond the 
reach of the parties pending the disposal of the appeal. On this 
basis, Mr. Mahajan submitted that the deposit of Rs. 8 crores 
during the pendency of the objections under Section 48 does not 
pass the title of this amount to the respondent and such deposit 
was not under the arbitral award as the award can be deemed to 
be a decree only on 01.07.2014 when all the objections to the 
award stood dismissed. Hence, this is the relevant date for 
conversion. 
3.3 As per the calculation sheet submitted by the respondent, the 
exchange rate as on this date is 1 euro = Rs. 82.21 and this rate 
must be used for converting the entire arbitral award and interest. 
The amount of Rs. 11.6 crores withdrawn by the respondent on 
10.10.2016 must first be appropriated towards interest and then 
towards the principal sum. After adjusting this amount and after 
accounting for interest, the respondent submits that it is entitled 
to Rs. 6,57,62,057 from the appellants. 
4. 
Analysis – Statutory Scheme: It is important to first set out 
the statutory scheme for the enforcement of foreign arbitral awards 
in India. Under the Act, Part II deals with the enforcement of 

certain foreign arbitral awards. Chapter I deals with awards under 
the New York Convention. Section 45 provides for the power of a 
court to refer parties to arbitration.11 Section 46 provides that a 
foreign award which is enforceable under this Chapter shall be 
treated as binding for all purposes on the persons between whom 
it is made.12 Section 47 provides for the evidentiary requirements 
for enforcement of a foreign award.13 Section 48 sets out various 
grounds on which the court may refuse the enforcement of a 
foreign award.14 Section 49 provides that where the court is 
 
11 Section 45 reads: 
“45. Power of judicial authority to refer parties to arbitration.—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in Part I or in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), a judicial authority, when 
seized of an action in a matter in respect of which the parties have made an agreement referred to 
in section 44, shall, at the request of one of the parties or any person claiming through or under 
him, refer the parties to arbitration, [unless it prima facie finds] that the said agreement is null and 
void, inoperative or incapable of being performed.” 
12 Section 46 reads: 
“46. When foreign award binding.—Any foreign award which would be enforceable under this 
Chapter shall be treated as binding for all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, 
and may accordingly be relied on by any of those persons by way of defence, set off or otherwise in 
any legal proceedings in India and any references in this Chapter to enforcing a foreign award shall 
be construed as including references to relying on an award.” 
13 Section 47 reads: 
“47. Evidence.—(1) The party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award shall, at the time of 
the application, produce before the court— 
(a) the original award or a copy thereof, duly authenticated in the manner required by the law of 
the country in which it was made; 
(b) the original agreement for arbitration or a duly certified copy thereof; and 
(c) such evidence as may be necessary to prove that the award is a foreign award. 
(2) If the award or agreement to be produced under sub-section (1) is in a foreign language, the 
party seeking to enforce the award shall produce a translation into English certified as correct by 
a diplomatic or consular agent of the country to which that party belongs or certified as correct in 
such other manner as may be sufficient according to the law in force in India. 
[Explanation.—In this section and in the sections following in this Chapter, “Court” means the 
High Court having original jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-matter of the 
arbitral award if the same had been the subject-matter of a suit on its original civil jurisdiction and 
in other cases, in the High Court having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of courts 
subordinate to such High Court.]” 
14 Section 48 reads: 
“48. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards.—(1) Enforcement of a foreign award may be 
refused, at the request of the party against whom it is invoked, only if that party furnishes to the 
court proof that— 

satisfied that a foreign award is enforceable under this Chapter, it 
shall be deemed to be a decree of that court. Section 50 provides 
for appeal against certain orders, i.e., orders refusing to refer 
parties to arbitration under Section 45 and orders refusing to 
enforce a foreign award under Section 48.15 Finally, Section 5116 is 
 
(a) the parties to the agreement referred to in section 44 were, under the law applicable to them, 
under some incapacity, or the said agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have 
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the country where the award was 
made; or 
(b) the party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment of 
the arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or 
(c) the award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the 
submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to 
arbitration: 
Provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated from 
those not so submitted, that part of the award which contains decisions on matters submitted to 
arbitration may be enforced; or 
(d) the composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with 
the agreement of the parties, or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance with the law of the 
country where the arbitration took place; or 
(e) the award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has been set aside or suspended by a 
competent authority of the country in which, or under the law of which, that award was made. 
(2) Enforcement of an arbitral award may also be refused if the Court finds that— 
(a) the subject-matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of 
India; or 
(b) the enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of India. 
[Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award is in conflict with the 
public policy of India, only if,— 
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation of 
section 75 or section 81; or 
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or 
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice. ] 
[Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a contravention with 
the fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a review on the merits of the dispute.] 
(3) If an application for the setting aside or suspension of the award has been made to a competent 
authority referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) the Court may, if it considers it proper, adjourn 
the decision on the enforcement of the award and may also, on the application of the party claiming 
enforcement of the award, order the other party to give suitable security.” 
15 Section 50 reads: 
“50. Appealable orders.—(1) [Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, an appeal] shall lie from the order refusing to— 
(a) refer the parties to arbitration under section 45; 
(b) enforce a foreign award under section 48, to the court authorised by law to hear appeals from 
such order. 
(2) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but nothing in this 
section shall affect or take away any right to appeal to the Supreme Court.” 
16 Section 51 reads: 
“51. Saving.—Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any rights which any person would have had 
of enforcing in India of any award or of availing himself in India of any award if this Chapter had 
not been enacted.” 

a savings clause and Section 5217 provides that Chapter II of Part 
II shall not apply to awards governed under this Chapter. 
4.1 From the statutory scheme, it is clear that a foreign arbitral 
award is binding between the parties when it is enforceable under 
Part II, Chapter I of the Act (Section 46). The enforceability of the 
award can be challenged under Section 48, and the order passed 
on such an application can be appealed under Section 50 only if it 
is allowed and the court refuses enforcement of the award. 
Therefore, a foreign award can be enforced when the objections 
against it are finally decided and dismissed. At this point, the 
award is deemed to be a decree of the court as per Section 49.18 
Unlike under the Arbitration Act, 1940, there is no requirement for 
a separate decree by a court for making the award a rule of the 
court.19 
5. 
Case-law on Relevant Date for Conversion: Now, we will 
discuss the case-law on the relevant date of conversion, both in 
the context of arbitral awards and judgments where the decretal 
amount is expressed in a foreign currency. The seminal case that 
first decided this question was Forasol v. ONGC (supra). Forasol 
 
17 Section 52 reads: 
“52. Chapter II not to apply.—Chapter II of this Part shall not apply in relation to foreign awards 
to which this Chapter applies.” 
18 See Fuerst Day Lawson v. Jindal Exports Limited, (2001), paras 30 and 31. 
19 ibid. was a French company that was awarded a tender for structural 
drilling of oil for exploration by ONGC. Pursuant to certain 
disputes that arose between the parties, the matter was referred to 
arbitration and on 21.12.1974, an arbitral award was passed in 
Forasol’s favour where the amount was expressed in French 
francs. This award was made under the Arbitration Act, 1940. The 
Court held that the award can be enforced either in foreign 
currency or in Indian rupee. The principles for determining 
conversion to Indian rupee are as follows: 
5.1 Where the contract provides for a rate of exchange, the same 
must be used to convert the amount in accordance with the 
wording of the contractual clause. In this case, article IX-3.1 of the 
contract provided for the exchange rate of FF 1.033 = Re. 1.000, 
which the Court held as applying to only 20% of the fees and 
charges computed in French francs based on contractual 
interpretation.20 Further, the arbitral award provided for an 
enhanced rate of conversion of FF 1.000 = Rs. 1.5178 as applicable 
to payments in Indian rupee on or after 30.11.1966 as the Indian 
rupee was depreciated at this time. The Court interpreted the 
arbitral award and held this exchange rate to apply in place of what 
 
20 Forasol (supra), para 16. was provided in article IX-3.1 to the extent of payments made in 
Indian rupee on and after 30.11.1966.21 
5.2 For the remaining amount that still required to be converted 
to Indian rupee for which no exchange rate was provided in the 
contract or the arbitral award, the Court considered six possible 
dates as the proper date for fixing the rate of exchange22: 
i. the date when the amount became due and payable; 
ii. the date of the commencement of the action; 
iii. the date of the decree; 
iv. the date when the court orders execution to issue; 
v. the date when the decretal amount is paid or realised; 
vi. and in cases where a decree is passed by the court in terms 
of an arbitral award in foreign currency, the date of the 
award. 
5.3 After an extensive discussion of English jurisprudence on the 
point, the Court noted the position of law in England at the time.23 
Briefly stated, the position is as follows: Both courts and 
arbitrators in England have the jurisdiction to make a judgment/ 
award in foreign currency in certain circumstances. In the 
 
21 ibid, paras 17-22. 
22 ibid, paras 24-25. 
23 ibid, para 39. 

Jugoslavenska case24, the Court of Appeal held that in cases of 
arbitral awards, the date of award is the relevant date for 
determining the exchange rate. This was a departure from the 
‘breach date rule’, i.e., the conversion must be as per the exchange 
rate on the date when the debt was payable, which principle was 
laid down by the House of Lords in the Havana case25. 
Subsequently, in the Schorsch Meier case26 (this was not a case of 
arbitration but a claim for payment of price of goods in a foreign 
currency filed before English courts), the Court of Appeal held that 
the date of conversion should be the date of payment, i.e., the date 
on which the court authorises enforcement of the judgment in 
terms of sterling. Finally, in the Miliangos case27, the House of 
Lords also held that the date of conversion should be the date 
when the court authorises enforcement of the judgment in terms 
of sterling pound. While Jugoslavenska (supra) was not expressly 
overruled by the House of Lords, its correctness was doubted. 
5.4 The Court held that there is no bar on courts in India to pass 
a decree for a sum expressed in foreign currency. However, for the 
purpose of payment of such amount, the limitations and 
 
24 Jugoslavenska Oseanska Plovidba v. Castle Investment Co. Inc., [1973] 3 All E.R. 498. 
25 In re United Railways of the Havana and Regia Warehouses, Ltd.,[1959] 1 All E.R. 214 (CA). 
26 Schorsch Meier GmbH v. Hennin, [1975] 1 All E.R. 152 
27 Miliangos v. George Prank (Textiles) Ltd., 1976 AC 443. restrictions under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 
(that was in force at the time) must be considered. If permission is 
not granted by the authorities to pay the decretal amount in 
foreign currency, the amount would have to be converted to Indian 
rupees for payment of an equivalent amount. The date of 
conversion becomes relevant here, as the “court must select a date 
which puts the plaintiff in the same position in which he would have 
been had the defendant discharged his obligation when he ought to 
have done, bearing in mind that the rate of exchange is not a 
constant factor but fluctuates, and very often violently fluctuates, 
from time to time.”28 These are the guiding principles and 
considerations for the Court to determine the relevant date, which 
are apposite even today. 
5.5 The Court then undertook a detailed examination of each of 
the 6 dates that it set out earlier and held that the date of the 
decree (the third option) is the most appropriate amongst them. 
The Court adopted the approach of eliminating other possible 
dates, on the following grounds: 
i. 
The date when the amount becomes due and payable does 
not have the same effect of putting the plaintiff in the same 
 
28 Forasol (supra), para 40. position that he would have been in if the defendant had 
discharged his obligation. Due to the fluctuations in 
exchange rate, using this date could result in the decree-
holder only receiving a fraction of or a lot more than what 
he is entitled to.29 
ii. 
The second date – when the action or suit commenced – 
was rejected for the same reason as above, considering 
that there is usually a large period of time between the 
filing of the suit, the decree by the Trial Court, subsequent 
appeals, revisions, and reviews, and the final decision.30 
iii. 
The Court favourably discussed the third option, i.e., the 
date of the decree or judgment. It held that the decree 
crystallises the amount payable to the decree-holder. To 
account for appeals and revisions, the date when the 
action is finally disposed of and when the decree becomes 
final and binding on both parties, after exhausting all 
remedies, can be used. However, it observed that the only 
objection to be considered against this date is that there is 
 
29 ibid, para 41. 
30 ibid, para 42. a significant lapse of time between the decree and its 
execution.31 
iv. 
The Court rejected the fourth date, i.e., the date of court 
order for execution, despite the same being used in English 
law as per the decision in Miliangos (supra). It noted that 
the process of execution in India is a lengthy one that may 
require attachment of property, deciding third party claims 
to such property, proclamation with particulars, and 
auction sale. Moreover, multiple applications for execution 
may be required if the initial attachment and sale does not 
cover the decretal amount. Hence, it may lead to a 
situation where there are multiple execution orders, 
meaning multiple exchange rates would have to be 
considered. Another difficulty is that the execution 
application itself requires the amount to be expressed in 
Indian currency.32 
v. 
The date of payment was also rejected as the proper date 
due to practical and procedural difficulties of having to pay 
court fees on a determined amount in Indian rupee; the 
pecuniary limit of the jurisdiction of courts would depend 
 
31 ibid, para 43. 
32 ibid, paras 44-46. on the amount claimed, which must again be in Indian 
rupee; and execution is for a specific sum expressed in 
Indian rupee. For these reasons, the Court held that the 
conversion of the amount to the domestic currency cannot 
be left to the date of payment as the legal procedures in 
India require the amount to be determined in domestic 
currency before that.33 
vi. 
Among the remaining dates, the Court was of the opinion 
that the date of the judgment/decree is the most 
appropriate.34 It rejected the date of the arbitral award as 
the proper date while observing that the Jugoslavenska 
case (supra), where this date was used, was doubted even 
by the House of Lords in Miliangos (supra). If the law laid 
down in Miliangos (supra) were to be applied to arbitral 
awards, the date of conversion would be when the court 
grants leave under Section 26(1) of the Arbitration Act, 
1950 (UK) to enforce such award in the same manner as a 
judgment or to the same effect.35 Further, noting the 
differences between the statutory scheme for enforcement 
 
33 ibid, paras 47-52. 
34 ibid, para 53. 
35 ibid, paras 61-62. of foreign arbitral awards in the UK and in India, it held 
that the Jugoslavenska case (supra) will not apply in the 
Indian context considering the procedure under Section 17 
is different from the procedure under English law.36 
Section 17 of the Arbitration Act, 194037 required a 
judgment and decree to give an award the status of a 
decree, i.e., making it a rule of court, for the award to 
become enforceable. On the other hand, English law38 did 
not require a judgment to be passed in all cases and it was 
sufficient for the court to grant leave to enforce the award 
in the same manner as a judgment. In Indian law, it was 
not the arbitral award but only the decree of the court that 
could be enforced by an application for execution.39 Hence, 
the Court found that rather than the date of the arbitral 
award, the date of the judgment and decree under Section 
17 is the most appropriate one to determine the conversion 
 
36 ibid, paras 63-65. 
37 Section 17 reads: 
“17. Judgment in terms of award.—Where the Court sees no cause to remit the award or any of 
the matters referred to arbitration for reconsideration or to set aside the award, the Court shall, 
after the time for making an application to set aside the award has expired, or such application 
having been made, after refusing it, proceed to pronounce judgment according to the award, and 
upon the judgment so pronounced a decree shall follow and no appeal shall lie from such decree 
except on the ground that it is in excess of, or not otherwise in accordance with, the award.” 
38 See Section 26(1) of the Arbitration Act, 1950, which provides: 
“26. Enforcement of award.—(1) An award on an arbitration agreement may, by leave of the High 
Court or a Judge thereof, be enforced in the same manner as a judgment or order to the same effect, 
and where leave is so given, judgment may be entered in terms of the award…” 
39 Forasol (supra) paras 65-66. rate as it was only then that the arbitral award became 
enforceable. 
6. 
The above extensive discussion on Forasol (supra) is 
necessary to understand the principles set out by this Court to 
determine the relevant date for conversion. The law laid down in 
this case was subsequently affirmed by a 3-judge bench of this 
Court in Renusagar Power Co. Ltd v. General Electric Co40 in 
the context of the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) 
Act, 1961. A foreign arbitral award in favour of the respondent-
claimant, which is an American company, was passed where the 
amount was expressed in US dollars. The respondent then filed for 
enforcement of this award before the Bombay High Court under 
the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961 as 
the appellant was an Indian company. Both the single judge and 
division bench of the High Court allowed the enforcement of the 
award and dismissed Renusagar’s objections under Section 7 of 
this Act. The matter was then appealed to this Court, which dealt 
with several issues on objections to the enforceability of foreign 
awards, including the scope of inquiry under Section 7 and the 
meaning of ‘public policy’. The most relevant issues framed by the 
 
40 Renusagar (supra), see paras 131-133. 

Court, for our purpose, are which law would govern the rate of 
exchange for conversion in proceedings for enforcement of a 
foreign arbitral award and whether Forasol (supra) required 
reconsideration. The Court held that the applicable law to 
determine the proper date for conversion is the lex fori41, which 
would be Indian law. After extensively discussing the principles 
under English law as well as the reasoning in Forasol (supra), the 
Court rejected the contention that Forasol (supra) required 
reconsideration42. 
7. 
The law laid down in Forasol (supra) has also been used in 
other cases though they do not pertain to arbitration but involved 
an issue of a debt expressed in foreign currency that required to 
be converted to Indian rupee. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. 
Kantika Colour Lab43 involved a consumer complaint for 
payment of an insurance claim due to the damage of a printer in 
transit. This Court did not cite Forasol (supra) but used the date 
of its judgment as the proper date for conversion of the cost of the 
printer that was expressed in Singaporean dollars. In Meenakshi 
Saxena v. ECGC Limited44, again was a consumer complaint for 
 
41 ibid, paras 107-108. 
42 ibid, para 133. 
43 (2010). 
44 (2018). payment under an insurance contract for loss suffered during 
export of goods, the Court noted that the contract provided for a 
date on which the exchange rate must be determined and followed 
Forasol (supra) to hold that this is the proper date. 
7.1 In certain other cases, the principle in Forasol (supra) has 
been considered but not applied due to the peculiar facts of those 
cases. For example, in cases of motor accident deaths where the 
deceased was earning in foreign currency, the Court has refused 
to use the date of the judgment as the proper date and has instead 
used the date of filing the claim as the claims in these cases were 
filed in Indian rupee and the Tribunal also decided the cases in 
Indian rupee. Hence, it was held that the amount already stood 
converted in the claim itself.45 Similarly, in Triveny Kodkany v. 
Air India Limited46 involving claim for compensation due to the 
death of an airline passenger, the Court considered Forasol (supra) 
and Renusagar (supra) but did not apply them. It differentiated the 
facts in those cases as in both of them, the award holders were 
foreign companies. However, in this case, the claimants seeking 
compensation were residing in India. Further, like in motor 
 
45 See United India Insurance Co. Ltd v. Patricia Jean Mahajan, (2002); Jiju Kuruvila v. Kunjujamma 
Mohan, (2013). 
46 (2021). accident cases, it found that the claim for payment was itself in 
Indian rupees and interest was also provided on such amount. 
Hence, it found that the date of filing the complaint is the proper 
date for conversion. 
8. 
It is therefore clear from the above-referred analysis of 
judicial determinations that the principle and law laid down in 
Forasol (supra) has been widely considered and followed by this 
Court in various types of matters. There is no impediment for us 
to apply this decision to cases under the 1996 Act, even though it 
was decided under the Arbitration Act, 1940. We therefore disagree 
with the High Court that Forasol (supra) does not apply to cases 
under the 1996 Act. 
9. 
The Delhi High Court has also relied on Forasol (supra) in 
several cases on the enforcement of domestic and foreign arbitral 
awards where the amount is expressed in foreign currency: 
9.1 In Fuerst Day Lawson v. Jindal Exports Ltd47, the High 
Court relied on Forasol (supra) and analogised that the date on 
which the objections to the enforcement of the award are finally 
rejected and the foreign award becomes enforceable would be the 
 
47 2012 SCC OnLine Del 5647. date that it is deemed to be a decree under Section 49. Hence, this 
would be the relevant conversion date. 
9.2 This case was followed in Progetto (supra), where the 
relevant date was held to be when this Court dismissed the SLP in 
the objections petition. The award debtor herein had deposited the 
entire amount only after the dismissal of the SLP by using the 
exchange rate as on the date of deposit, which was higher than the 
rate as on date of dismissal of SLP. Hence, the High Court while 
deciding the execution petition directed refund of the excess 
amount by using the date of this Court’s order as the relevant date. 
In so far as the present appeal is concerned, we have already 
mentioned that the respondent was permitted to withdraw 7.5 
crores during the pendency of the proceedings. 
9.3 Similarly, in Trammo AG v. MMTC Limited48, the date of 
dismissal of review by this Court in the proceedings to set aside 
the award was held to be the relevant date. 
9.4 In Voith Hydro v. NTPC Limited49, the award debtor had 
paid some part of the arbitral award amount during the pendency 
of proceedings to set aside the award. It paid 75% of the amount 
on 06.11.2018, against bank guarantees by the award holder, in 
 
48 2019 SCC OnLine Del 7337. 
49 2021 SCC OnLine Del 1325. accordance with a Niti Aayog Circular. Subsequently, this Court 
dismissed the SLP in the 22.09.2020. The High Court held that the 
exchange rate as on 06.11.2018 would apply insofar as 75% of the 
deposit is concerned as the claimant had received this part-
payment and the exchange rate on 22.09.2020 was higher than on 
06.11.2018. Relying on Forasol (supra), Renusagar (supra), and 
Fuerst Day Lawson (supra), it held that the exchange rate on 
22.09.2020 would apply to the remaining amount. 
9.5 In Karamchand Thapar & Bros. (Coal Sales) Ltd. v. 
MMTC Ltd.50, the date on which the arbitral award attained finality 
(when the SLP in the Sections 34 and 37 proceedings was 
dismissed) was determined as the relevant date for the exchange 
rate. Here, the award debtor had deposited an amount subsequent 
to the dismissal of the SLP at the exchange rate as on date of 
deposit, which was higher than the exchange rate when the SLP 
was dismissed. The High Court therefore also directed the award 
holder to refund the excess amount paid by the award debtor. This 
case does not involve deposit during the pendency of the 
objections. 
 
50 2022 SCC OnLine Del 949. 

10. Applying the Principle in Forasol under the 1996 Act: The 
reason that this Court in Forasol (supra) determined the date of 
the decree under Section 17 of the 1940 Act as the proper date is 
that it is only then that the arbitral award becomes enforceable. 
However, as set out earlier, the statutory scheme under the 1996 
Act does not require such a judgment or decree to be passed for a 
foreign award to be enforceable. Rather, the enforceability of a 
foreign award is automatic and deemed under Section 49 after the 
objections against such an award under Section 48 are finally 
decided and disposed of. At this point, the award is enforceable as 
a decree of a court (Section 49). Hence, the date on which the 
objections are finally decided and dismissed would be the proper 
date for determining the exchange rate to convert an amount 
expressed in foreign currency. 
10.1 
In the present case, this date is 01.07.2014 – when the 
High Court dismissed the revision petition against the Trial Court 
order dismissing the appellants’ objections. No further appeal was 
preferred from this order and hence, it attained finality. While the 
learned counsels have not contested this issue, it was necessary 
for us to delve into the reason and principle behind selecting this 

date and to settle the position of law on the applicability of Forasol 
(supra) under the 1996 Act. 
11. Conversion of Deposited Amounts: The primary contention by 
the learned counsels was regarding the proper date to determine 
the exchange rate to the extent of Rs. 8 crores that was deposited 
in the court pursuant to certain orders. The learned counsels have 
both referred to decisions by the Delhi High Court on this point. 
Mr. Mishra heavily relied on Voith Hydro (supra), where the arbitral 
award was partly paid against bank guarantees under a Niti Ayog 
circular, before the objections were finally decided. The High Court 
here held that the paid amount stood converted as on the date of 
payment as it was received by the award-holder and the exchange 
rate increased by the time the objections were finally decided. On 
the other hand, Mr. Mahajan has relied on Karam Chand Thapar 
(supra), where again a deposit of some part of the amount was 
made, albeit after the final decision on objections. Here the High 
Court held that the date on which the SLP in the objections was 
dismissed would be the proper date. 
11.1 
In the present case, it is important to note the terms on 
which the two deposits of Rs. 7.5 crores and Rs. 50 lakhs were 
made. From the order of the High Court dated 15.10.2010, it is 

clear that such order for deposit of Rs. 7.5 crores and for 
furnishing a bank guarantee of an Indian bank for the release of 
the deposit was made in accordance with the consent of the 
parties. Mr. Mahajan’s submission that the respondent did not 
consent to the deposit hence cannot be accepted. The further 
deposit of Rs. 50 lakhs was made pursuant to an interim order of 
the High Court dated 03.06.2011, which stayed the Trial Court 
order dated 02.04.2011 and directed the deposit. However, unlike 
the previous order, neither was this order passed on the consent 
of the parties nor did it permit the respondent to withdraw the 
money during the pendency of the proceedings. Rather, it directed 
that the amount shall be deposited in a fixed deposit receipt and 
shall be disbursed to the successful party on the final adjudication 
of the objections. 
11.2 
We will first deal with the deposit of Rs. 7.5 crores. 
Despite being permitted to withdraw this amount by furnishing a 
bank guarantee, the respondent did not do so until 2016. Mr. 
Mahajan contended that being a foreign company, it was unable 
to obtain a bank guarantee from an Indian bank. However, the 
order of 15.10.2010 clearly records the respondent’s consent to 
this condition. Further, when it was unable to comply with the 

same, it also did not apply for a modification or removal of the 
condition. Hence, the respondent, in its own discretion, did not 
withdraw Rs. 7.5 crores when it was deposited in 2010. 
11.3 
A similar situation arose in this Court’s decision in 
Renusagar (supra) as well. This Court was deciding an appeal 
against the dismissal of Renusagar’s objections under Section 7 of 
the Foreign Awards Act, 1961. During the pendency of the appeal, 
by order dated 21.02.1990, this Court stayed the operation of the 
High Court order subject to deposit of one-half of the decretal 
amount calculated as on date. General Electric was permitted to 
withdraw the deposited amount by furnishing security by way of 
bank guarantee for the sum to be withdrawn in excess of Rs. 4 
crores. It also directed that 10% interest p.a. would be payable by 
Renusagar on the balance of the decretal amount in case the 
appeal is dismissed, and the same interest would be payable by 
General Electric on the amount withdrawn by it if the appeal is 
allowed. Pursuant to this order, Renusagar deposited Rs. 9.69 
crores on 20.03.1990, which was withdrawn by the respondent on 
furnishing necessary bank guarantee. In a subsequent order, this 
Court directed a further deposit of Rs. 1 crore and bank guarantee 
of Rs. 1.92 crores to be furnished by Renusagar. The deposit was 

made on 03.12.1990, which was also withdrawn51. However, 
General Electric contended that it was unable to use a large part 
of this amount as it had not received permission from the Reserve 
Bank of India to convert the same into US dollars due to the 
pendency of the appeals. 
11.4 
After rejecting various submissions by the appellant 
regarding the enforceability of the award, this Court decided the 
question of the amount in Indian rupee that was to be paid. The 
relevant portion on this point is extracted: 
“141. As indicated earlier, in pursuance to the orders of this Court 
dated February 21, 1990, Renusagar deposited a sum of Rs 
9,69,26,590 on March 20, 1990 and a further amount of Rs 
1,00,00,000 was deposited by Renusagar in pursuance to the order 
dated November 6, 1990 on December 3, 1990. These amounts have 
been withdrawn by General Electric. The question is how and at what 
rate the said amount should be adjusted against the decretal amount. 
It is not disputed that on the date when the said deposits were made 
by Renusagar and were withdrawn by General Electric, rupee-dollar 
exchange rate was Rs 17 per dollar. Shri Shanti Bhushan has, 
however, submitted that although General Electric had withdrawn 
the amount deposited by Renusagar, it was not able to use the same 
because the Reserve Bank of India did not grant the permission to 
General Electric to remit the amount by converting the same into U.S. dollars on account of the pendency of these appeals in this Court… 
Shri Shanti Bhushan has, therefore, submitted that the amounts 
deposited by Renusagar should be converted from Indian rupees into 
U.S. dollars at the exchange rate prevalent on the date of the 
judgment of this Court and not on the basis of the rate of exchange 
prevalent at the time of the said payments by Renusagar. We are 
unable to agree with this submission. The convertibility into U.S. dollars of money paid by Renusagar in Indian rupees is not the 
condition for discharge of the decree and as laid down in Forasol 
case the decree can be discharged by payment in Indian rupees and 
it is for General Electric to obtain the necessary permission from the 
Reserve Bank of India for such conversion of Indian rupees to U.S. 
 
51 Renusagar (supra), para 18. dollars and the transfer thereof to the United States. If General 
Electric were finding a difficulty in such transfer on account of the 
pendency of these appeals in this Court they could have moved this 
Court and obtained necessary clarification in this regard. They did 
not choose to do so. In these circumstances, the amount of Rs 
10,69,26,590 which has been paid by Renusagar in pursuance to the 
orders dated February 21, 1990 and November 6, 1990 has to be 
converted into U.S. dollars on the basis of the rupee-dollar exchange 
rate of Rs 17.00 per dollar prevalent at the time of such payment and 
calculated on that basis the said amount comes to US $ 6,289,800.00. 
142. The judgment of the High Court passing a decree in terms of the 
award is, therefore, affirmed… The amount paid by Renusagar 
during the pendency of these appeals will have to be adjusted against 
the said decretal amount and the present liability of Renusagar under 
this decision has to be determined accordingly. Calculating on this 
basis the amount payable by Renusagar under the decree in terms of 
U.S. dollars is: 
Amount awarded by the Arbitral 
Tribunal: 
12,215,622.14 
Interest on US $ 2,716,914.72 
(the total amount awarded under 
item Nos. 1, 3 and 5) @ 8% per 
annum from 1-4-1986 to 15-10-
1986 in terms of the award: 
117,733.00 
12,333,355.14 
Less: Amount paid by Renusagar 
in pursuance of the orders dated 
21-2-1990 and 6-11-1990 during 
the pendency of the appeals in 
this Court 
6,289,800.00 
6,043,555.14 

143. In accordance with the decision in Forasol case the said amount 
has to be converted into Indian rupees on the basis of the rupee-dollar 
exchange rate prevailing at the time of this judgment. As per 
information supplied by the Reserve Bank of India, the Rupee-Dollar 
Exchange (Selling) Rate as on October 6, 1993 was Rs 31.53 per 
dollar.” 

11.5 
From the above, it is clear that the Court adjusted the 
amounts deposited during the pendency of the proceedings and 
against security by converting them to US dollars as on the date of 
their deposit. It applied the date of its own judgment only for 
converting the remaining portion of the award in accordance with 
Forasol’s (supra) ruling that the date of decree or judgment, after 
exhausting all remedies, is the proper date. It rejected the 
respondent’s argument regarding its inability to convert the 
amount on the grounds that a decree in foreign currency can be 
validly satisfied by payment in Indian rupee and the respondent 
did not move the Court for necessary clarification. 
12. The facts in this case are similar to Renusagar (supra) for an 
analogy to be drawn. Here as well, the deposit was made during 
the pendency of the proceedings under the objections petition. It 
was permitted to be withdrawn against a bank guarantee of an 
Indian bank. Here the respondent was entirely unable to withdraw 
the amount, while the issue there was that it was only unable to 
convert the amount to US dollars. However, in both cases, the 
respondent failed to move the Court for necessary orders to be able 
to receive and utilise the amount. In this case, there is the added 
fact that the respondent consented to the deposit and the condition 

requiring security. In light of these similarities, it is appropriate for 
us to adopt the Court’s approach in Renusagar (supra). 
13. We therefore hold that the deposit of Rs. 7.5 crores stands 
converted as on the date of deposit (22.10.2010), when the rate of 
exchange as submitted by the appellants is 1 euro = Rs. 59.17. We 
also reject the submission by Mr. Mahajan that the respondent 
was unable to furnish a bank guarantee of an Indian bank. This 
argument is only to serve its own interest to be able to benefit from 
a higher exchange rate but does not address the principle that 
operates while enforcing a sum expressed in foreign currency. 
14. It is important to appreciate the consequence and effect of 
deposit during the pendency of proceedings to understand the 
need to convert this amount on that date. Through a deposit, the 
award debtor parts with the money on that date and provides the 
benefit of that amount to the award holder. Provided that the 
award holder is permitted to withdraw this amount, it can convert, 
utilise, and benefit from the same at that point in time. 
Considering that the deposited amount inures to the benefit of the 
award holder, it would be inequitable and unjust to hold that the 
amount does not stand converted on the date of its deposit. 

15. A similar logic underscores the statutory provisions in Order 
21, Rule 1 and Order 24 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 190852 to 
determine whether interest will continue to operate on an amount 
deposited before a court. It would be relevant for us to briefly 
discuss the law on this point: 
15.1 
A constitution bench of this Court in Gurpreet Singh v. 
Union of India53 extensively discussed the rules governing interest 
calculation when the defendant/ judgment-debtor deposits some 
part of the amount. Order 24 governs deposits at the pre-decretal 
stage and Order 21, Rule 1 at the post-decretal stage.54 The 
essence of these provisions is that on any amount deposited into 
the court, interest shall cease to run from the date when the 
depositor serves a notice to the plaintiff/decree-holder. Similarly, 
when payment is tendered to the decree-holder outside the court, 
interest ceases on such amount even if the payment is refused.55 
15.2 
Order 21, Rule 1 embodies a rule of prudence that once 
the amount is tendered to the decree-holder by the judgment-
debtor, whether in the form of a court deposit or other forms of 
 
52 Hereinafter “CPC”. 
53 (2006). 
54 ibid, para 14. 
55 ibid, paras 15, 25 and 26. payment such as demand draft or cheque, the judgment-debtor 
cannot be made liable to then pay interest on such amount.56 
15.3 
The rationale for this rule has been explained in Nepa 
Limited v. Manoj Kumar Agrawal57 through a similar logic of the 
decree-holder being able to benefit from the deposited amount. In 
this case, the award-debtor deposited 50% of the awarded amount 
before the executing court to obtain a stay on the execution 
proceedings of the arbitral award during the pendency of appeal 
under Section 37 of the 1996 Act. This amount was withdrawn by 
the award holder, and the issue before this Court was whether 
interest is payable on the deposited amount even after the date of 
deposit. The Court held as follows: 
“21. In the present case, the appellate court, on the appeal preferred 
under Section 37 of the Act did grant stay, subject to the condition 
that the appellant would deposit 50% of the amount. Rs. 7,78.280/- 
was deposited by the appellant on 05.11.2001. The stay, therefore, 
only operated for the balance amount. On the balance amount, 
certainly, the appellant would be liable to pay interest @ the rate of 
18% per annum till the date of actual payment. However, on Rs. 
7,78,280/- paid, after adjusting/appropriating payment due on the 
interest accrued, on the balance principal amount paid to the 
respondent, interest would not be payable. 
24. The respondent submits that the payment of Rs. 7,78,280/- being 
conditional, the respondent would have been under an obligation to 
refund the said amount in case the appellant had succeeded in the 
appeal under Section 37 of the Act, 1996. This argument does not 
impress, as in the event the appellant had succeeded in their appeal, 
the entire amount paid would have been refundable. The undertaking 
was not onerous, and was to operate only if the amount of Rs. 
7,78,280/- was not refunded by the respondent. The respondent had 
 
56 KL Suneja v. Dr Manjeet Kaur Monga, (2023), para 36. 
57. obviously used and utilized the money. The appellant did not have 
any right on the money paid to the respondent, who could use it in a 
manner and way he wanted. There was no charge. Money is fungible 
and would have gotten mixed up with the other amounts available 
with the respondent. Right to restitution would not make the payment 
conditional. Interest has been jurisprudentially defined as the price 
paid for money borrowed, or retained, or not paid to the person to 
whom it is due, generally expressed as a percentage of amount in one 
year. It is in the nature of the compensation allowed by law or fixed 
by parties, for use or forbearance or damage for its detention. In the 
context of the present case, interest would be the compensation 
payable by the appellant to the respondent, for the retention or 
deprivation of use of money. Therefore, once the money was paid to 
the respondent, interest as compensation for deprivation of use of 
money will not arise.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
15.4 
Therefore, the ability of the decree-holder to access and 
use the money in a manner he deems fit was considered by this 
Court while deciding the issue. 
15.5 
Here, the Court also differentiated P.S.L. Ramanathan 
Chettiar (supra), which has also been relied on by the respondent 
in the present matter, and another decision by this Court in Delhi 
Development Authority v. Bhai Sardar Singh and Sons58. P.S.L. 
Ramanathan Chettiar (supra) holds that a deposit is only a way to 
obtain a stay on execution and does not pass title to the decree-
holder, and hence, is not in satisfaction of a decree. The decree-
holder in Delhi Development Authority (supra) was not permitted to 
withdraw the deposited amount and hence, interest was calculated 
on the same. The Court in Nepa Limited (supra) however held that 
 
58 C.A. 3867 of 2010. these cases do not apply in its facts as the respondent here was 
permitted to withdraw the deposited sum and did so. Hence, the 
Court instead relied on the ability of the respondent to use the 
deposited money as it deems fit. 
16. These cases demonstrate that once there is a deposit by the 
award debtor and the award holder is permitted to withdraw the 
same, even if such withdrawal is conditional and subject to the 
final decision in the matter, the court must consider that the 
award holder could access and benefit from such deposit. It is then 
the burden of the award holder to furnish security, as required by 
the court’s orders, to utilise the amount or to make an application 
for modification of the condition if it is unable to fulfil the same. 
17. In furtherance of the above, we therefore reiterate that the 
deposit of Rs. 7.5 crores must be converted as on the date of such 
deposit, i.e., 22.10.2010, when the rate of exchange as submitted 
by the appellants was 1 euro = Rs. 59.17. 
18. The second deposit of Rs. 50 lakhs pursuant to the High 
Court order dated 03.06.2011 stands on a different footing from 
the first deposit. This order did not permit the respondent to 
withdraw this amount till the completion of the proceedings. 
Hence, the amount cannot be converted as on the date of deposit 

as the respondent could not have benefitted from the same. This 
amount could be withdrawn only in 2016, pursuant to the 
Executing Court’s order dated 24.08.2016. The respondent 
withdrew the entire deposit of Rs. 8 crores, along with the interest 
that accrued on this amount, on 10.10.2016. 
19. From the above discussion on the first deposit, it is clear that 
the exchange rate on 22.10.2010 would apply to that extent and 
non-withdrawal by the respondent of Rs. 7.5 crores was in its own 
discretion and inaction. However, since the order of 03.06.2011 
permits withdrawal of Rs. 50 lakhs on the completion of the 
proceedings, that would be the appropriate date for determining 
the exchange rate. Here, the revision proceedings were complete 
on 01.07.2014. Hence, it would be appropriate to apply the 
exchange rate as on this date to convert the deposit of Rs. 50 lakhs. 
20. Our conclusions from this judgment can be summarised as 
follows: 
i. 
The statutory scheme of the Act makes a foreign arbitral 
award enforceable when the objections against it are finally 
decided. Therefore, as per the Act and the principle in 
Forasol (supra), the relevant date for determining the 

conversion rate of foreign award expressed in foreign 
currency is the date when the award becomes enforceable. ii. 
When the award debtor deposits an amount before the 
court during the pendency of objections and the award 
holder is permitted to withdraw the same, even if against 
the requirement of security, this deposited amount must 
be converted as on the date of the deposit. iii. 
After the conversion of the deposited amount, the same 
must be adjusted against the remaining amount of 
principal and interest pending under the arbitral award. 
This remaining amount must be converted on the date 
when the arbitral award becomes enforceable, i.e., when 
the objections against it are finally decided. 
21. As per these conclusions, the first deposit of Rs. 7.5 crores 
must be converted as on the date of deposit being 22.10.2010. The 
second deposit of Rs. 50 lakhs as well as the remaining amount 
due under the award must be converted when the objections 
proceedings attained finality on 01.07.2014. The Executing Court, 
being the Additional District Judge cum Commercial Court, must 
determine the amount payable by taking into account the 
exchange rate as on 01.07.2014. 

22. In light of the above, we partly allow the appeal, and set aside 
the findings of the High Court in the impugned judgment to the 
extent that Forasol (supra) does not apply under the 1996 Act and 
that the exchange rate on 01.07.2014 must be used for converting 
the entire arbitral award and interest. 
23. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 
24. No order as to costs. 
 
………………………………...J. 
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 
 
………………………………...J. 
[ARAVIND KUMAR]