IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

JALALUDDIN KHAN 

 …APPELLANT 

VERSUS 

UNION OF INDIA 
 
 …RESPONDENT 

JUDGMENT 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
The appellant is being prosecuted for the offences 
punishable under Sections 121, 121A and 122 of the Indian 
Penal Code (for short, ‘the IPC’) and Sections 13, 18, 18A and 
20 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (for short, 
‘the UAPA’). A charge sheet was filed on 7th January 2023. He 
is shown as accused no.2 in the charge sheet. The appellant 
applied for bail before the Special Court under the UAPA, which 
was rejected. Hence, the appellant and some co-accused 
applied for bail before the High Court. By the impugned 
judgment, the prayer for bail made by the appellant was 
rejected, while bail was granted to a co-accused. 

SUBMISSIONS 
2. 
The submission of Ms Mukta Gupta, learned senior 
counsel, is that there is absolutely no material to link the 
appellant with the offences under the UAPA. She pointed out 
that, at highest, the allegation is that the appellant’s wife was 
the owner of a building known as Ahmad Palace and that the 
appellant had clandestinely shown that premises on the first 
floor of the said building were given on rent to one Athar Parwez 
– accused no. 1. The allegation is that, the first floor premises 
are being used for objectional activities of an organisation 
called Popular Front of India (PFI). She submitted that taking 
the charge sheet as it is, no connection has been established 
between the activities of PFI and the appellant. Even prima facie 
material for connecting the appellant with PFI is not available. 
She submitted that various people occupy other premises in 
the building. The building has a pathology laboratory, a clinic, 
and shops. She pointed out that, therefore, CCTV cameras were 
fixed on the property. She submitted that if the activities of PFI 
were really being carried out in the building with the 
connivance of the appellant, he would not fix CCTV cameras 
inside the property. She would submit that the appellant's case 
satisfies the tests laid down by Section 43D (5) of the UAPA, as 
there are no reasonable grounds for believing that the 
accusations against the appellant are prima facie true. Learned 
senior counsel relied upon a decision of this Court in the case 
of Shoma Kanti Sen v. State of Maharashtra and another1. 
 
1 (2024) 

3. 
Ms Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor General 
of India, invited our attention to statements of the protected 
witnesses V, Y, and Z, tendered on record, in a sealed cover. 
She pointed out that CCTV footage seized by the Investigating 
Agency of the building Ahmad Palace shows that on 6th and 7th 
July 2022, the appellant and accused no. 1 were seen shifting 
certain items from the first floor of the building. When the 
police conducted a raid on 11th July 2022, those items were not 
found, and therefore, the appellant tampered with the 
evidence. Relying upon paragraph 17.16 of the charge sheet, 
she submitted that protected witness Z disclosed that on 29th 
May 2022, the appellant attended a meeting-cum-training on 
the first floor of the building Ahmad Palace along with several 
other accused who were associated with PFI. During this 
meeting, the subjects relating to the expansion of the 
organisation, basic and advanced training of PFI members, 
Muslim empowerment, and future plans for PFI were 
discussed. She pointed out that the protected witness Z stated 
that after considering the remarks made by one Nupur Sharma 
on the Prophet Mohammed, directions were issued to the 
trained PFI members to attack and kill the selected targets who 
were involved in making derogatory remarks against the 
religion. Learned ASG pointed out that paragraph 17.26 of the 
charge sheet shows that on 12th May 2022, a sum of Rs. 
25,000/- was transferred to the account of the appellant’s son, 
from an account of an absconding accused. She submitted that 
the rent agreement was bogus and was made to mislead the 
police, and the appellant had knowingly allowed the first floor 

premises to be used for PFI’s activities. She would submit that 
there was enough material in the documents produced along 
with the charge sheet, which shows that a strong prima facie 
case is made about the appellant's involvement in the offences 
punishable under Sections 13, 18, 18A and 20 of the UAPA. 
She pointed out that accused no.1, in whose name the tenancy 
of the first floor was shown, had been an active member of a 
banned terrorist organisation - the Student Islamic Movement 
of India (SIMI). 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
4. 
The appellant was arrested on 12th July 2022. The Trial 
has not made any progress. The building Ahmad Palace stands 
in the name of the appellant’s wife. The appellant is a retired 
police constable. The allegation is that on 11th July 2022, in 
the evening, the police carried out a raid on the first floor 
premises of Ahmad Palace. At that time, there was a recovery 
and seizure of incriminating articles and documents relating to 
PFI. Paragraph 17.1 of the charge sheet reads thus: 
“17.1 
Bihar Police had received information 
about a plan to disturb the proposed visit of 
Hon’ble Prime Minister to Bihar by some 
suspected persons who had assembled in 
Phulwarisharif area. On 11.07.2022 at about 
1930 hrs, on secret information, a raid was 
carried out by the Police Officers of PS 
Phulwarisharif, 
Patna 
at 
the 
rented 
house/premises of Athar Parvej (A-1) and 
recovered 05 sets of document “India 2047 
Towards Rule of Islamic India, Internal 
Document: Not for circulation”, Pamphlets 
“Popular front of India 20 February, 2021”- 25 

copies in Hindi and 30 copies in Urdu, 49 cloth 
Flags, 02 magazines “Mulk ke liye Popular front 
ke saath” and one copy of rent agreement on 
non Judicial Stamp by Farhat Bano w/o Md 
Jalaluddin Khan (A-2) with tenant Athar Parvej 
(A-1) son of Abdul Qayum Ansari. The 
recovered articles and a Samsung mobile 
phone having SIM card of accused Mohammed 
Jalaluddin (A-2) were seized in the instant case. 
They were related to anti-India activities.” 
5. 
Following are the other paragraphs in the charge sheet 
relied upon by the respondent: 
“17.16 Protected witness-“Z” further stated 
that on 29th May 2022, a meeting cum training 
was organized in Ahmad Palace, Phulwarisharif 
Parna, a rented accommodation arranged by 
Athar Parvej (A-1) and others in this criminal 
conspiracy. This meeting was chaired by Riyaz 
Firangipet 
(A-20) 
of 
Karnataka 
and 
approximate 40-45 persons including Mahboob 
Alam Nadvi (A-7), Sanaullah (A-5), Riyaz Mourif 
(A-4), Mehboob- Ur-Rehman (A-11), Ehsan 
Parvez (A-7), Ansarul Huque (A-21), Riyaz 
Ahmed (A-17), Perwez Alam (A-26), Tausif Alam 
(A-6), Athar Parvej (A-1), Md. Jalaluddin (A-2) 
and others, who are associated with PFI, 
attended this meeting. During this meeting, the 
points related to expansion of organisation, 
basic and advance training of PFI members, 
Muslim empowerment and future plan of PFI 
were discussed. Protected Witness-Z also 
stated that after the remark of Nupur Sharma 
on Prophet Mohammad, directions were given 
to the trained PFI cadres to attack and kill 
selected targets who were involved in making 
derogatory remarks against Islam.” 
“15.5 
During 
the 
investigation, 
Hard 
Disk/DVR of the CCTV installed in Ahmad 

Palace was seized by the investigating officer of 
police station Phulwarisharif, Patna. The 
mirror images of CCTV footages have been 
received from CDAC, Thiruvananthapuram, 
Kerala. The CCTV footage confirmed the 
presence of FIR named accused persons 
including Athar Parvej (A-1) in the Ahmad 
Palace, Phulwarisharif, Patna on 6th and 7th 
July, 2022. The CCTV footage also confirmed 
that the Police of PS Phulwarisharif carried out 
raid at the first floor of Ahmad Palace 
Phulwarisharif on 11.07.2022 at around 7 PM 
in presence of Athar Parvej (A-1) and Md. 
Jalaluddin (A-2). It also established that Md 
Jalaluddin (A-2) tampered the evidence by 
shifting of items from the first floor of Ahmad 
Palace, Phulwarisharif, Patna before raid of 
Police dated 11.07.2022.” 
“17.2 
Investigation brought out that during 
preliminary questioning by Police of PS 
Phulwarisharif, Patna, Md. Jalaluddin (A-2), 
owner of the house, revealed that the first floor 
of his house was taken on rent by Athar Parvej 
(A-1) for imparting training. On 6th and 7th July 
2022, the training was conducted here, in 
which participants from other states were also 
present. 
………………………………………………………….” 
“17.26 During the investigation, the account 
statement of SBI account No. 33767976372 
was sought from the State Bank of India, 
Branch Walmi, Patna and analysed. On 
analysis it revealed that on 12.05.2022, Rs. 
25000/- were transferred into the account of 
Aamir Jalal s/o Md. Jalaluddin (A-2) from the 
Punjab 
National 
Bank, 
Bharwara, 
Distt-
Muzaffarpur account no. 0772010316309 of 
Saqeeb Ahmad, s/o Md. Nayaj Ahmad Ankhuli 
Bhandhpur Katra, Muzaffarpur, Bihar. On 
analysis of the call data records of mobile 

number 9262711612 of said Saqeeb Ahmad, it 
was found that this mob no. was connected 
with accused Sanaullah (A-3) on the relevant 
dates which corroborated that the said amount 
was transferred on the direction of Sanaullah 
(A-5).” 
6. 
Regarding giving the first floor of the building on rent, the 
prosecution's case is that though the land and the building 
stand in the name of the appellant’s wife, she is merely a name 
lender. The appellant purchased the property on 19th April 
2005 for the consideration of Rs. 1,25,000/-. In the counter, 
the respondent has relied upon the appellant's disclosure 
/confessional statement. Whether such a statement is 
admissible in evidence or not is another thing. In the statement 
of the appellant relied upon by the respondent, it is stated that 
accused no.1, Athar Parvez, met his elder son – Aamir Jalal 
Khan, in April 2022 and discussed renting the first floor of the 
building to him. The appellant’s elder son - Aamir Jalal Khan, 
quoted rent of Rs 25,000/- per month. After that, there were 
negotiations, and finally, the rent was fixed at Rs. 16,000 per 
month. Accused no.1 gave Aamir Jalal Khan an advance of Rs. 
5,000/-. Thereafter, a sum of Rs. 25,000/- was transferred by 
accused no.1 to the account of Aamir Jalal Khan and the 
remaining amount of Rs. 2,000/- was paid at the time of 
execution of the lease. In the appellant’s statement, it is stated 
that this amount of Rs. 32,000/- was paid as advance rent for 
two months. In the statement, the appellant stated that 
accused no.1 gave him information about the PFI organisation. 
The appellant stated that people from Bihar and other States 

used to visit the premises taken on rent by accused no.1. He 
stated that as he suspected that there would be a police raid, 
he removed items kept on the first floor premises, like gas 
cylinders, etc. Even the statement of accused no.1 relied upon 
in the counter gives the same facts. Thus, the material on 
record, including the so-called discovery statement of the 
appellant and co-accused, shows that the premises on the first 
floor of the building Ahmad Palace were let out to accused no.1, 
who agreed to pay rent of Rs. 16,000/- per month and gave an 
advance of Rs. 32,000/- towards rent for two months. We may 
note here that, assuming that the appellant knew that co-
accused Athar Parvez was associated with PFI, it is not listed 
as a terrorist organisation within the meaning of Section 2(m) 
of UAPA. Moreover, the charge sheet does not contain any 
material to show any connection of the appellant with PFI 
before letting out first floor premises to accused no.1. 
7. 
About the sum of Rs. 25,000/- received by the appellant’s 
son in his account, there is an explanation in the so-called 
discovery statement of the appellant relied upon by the 
respondent. Therefore, what is brought on record is that after 
the appellant’s son negotiated with accused no.1, the premises 
on the first floor were let out to accused no.1 at the monthly 
rent of Rs. 16,000/- per month, and the amount received by 
appellant’s son in his account was towards the part payment 
of the advance of rent for two months. 
8. 
Now, we come to the other circumstances against the 
appellant. In paragraph 15.5 of the charge sheet, it is alleged 

that the appellant shifted certain items from the first floor 
before the raid was conducted on 11th July 2022. In the 
discovery statement of the appellant relied upon by the 
respondent in its counter, the appellant stated that he had kept 
items like gas cylinders, etc., in the first floor premises, which 
he removed. 
9. 
In the raid on the first floor premises on 11th July 2022, 
certain documents were recovered as stated in paragraph 17.1 
of the charge sheet. No recovery has been shown from the 
appellant. The charge sheet describes in detail the contents of 
the document styled “India 2047 Towards Rule of Islamic 
India”. It is alleged in the charge sheet that the scrutiny of the 
said documents revealed that the said documents were about 
establishing Islamic rule in India. It is pertinent to note that 
there is no mention in the charge sheet about the nature of the 
articles allegedly shifted earlier by the appellant from the first 
floor premises. If the appellant intended to shift incriminating 
material circulated by PFI, he would have shifted the material 
mentioned in paragraph 17.1 of the charge sheet. A statement 
by Syed Abu Monawwar discloses that there were commercial 
premises, such as shops, pathology labs, etc., on the ground 
floor of the said building. If the appellant intended to allow the 
conduct of the objectionable activities of PFI by giving first floor 
premises on rent, he would not have installed CCTV cameras. 
10. 
Now, we turn to the circumstance relied upon by learned 
ASG, which is in paragraph 17.16. Paragraph 17.16 purports 

to reproduce what protected witness Z stated. We again 
reproduce the said paragraph, which reads thus: 
“17.16 Protected witness-“Z” further stated 
that on 29th May 2022, a meeting cum training 
was organized in Ahmad Palace, Phulwarisharif 
Parna, a rented accommodation arranged by 
Athar Parvej (A-1) and others in this criminal 
conspiracy. This meeting was chaired by Riyaz 
Firangipet 
(A-20) 
of 
Karnataka 
and 
approximate 40-45 persons including Mahboob 
Alam Nadvi (A-7), Sanaullah (A-5), Riyaz Mourif 
(A-4), Mehboob- Ur-Rehman (A-11), Ehsan 
Parvez (A-7), Ansarul Huque (A-21), Riyaz 
Ahmed (A-17), Perwez Alam (A-26), Tausif Alam 
(A-6), Athar Parvej (A-1), Md. Jalaluddin (A-2) 
and others, who are associated with PFI, 
attended this meeting. During this meeting, the 
points related to expansion of organisation, 
basic and advance training of PFI members, 
Muslim empowerment and future plan of PFI 
were discussed. Protected Witness-Z also 
stated that after the remark of Nupur Sharma 
on Prophet Mohammad, directions were given 
to the trained PFI cadres to attack and kill 
selected targets who were involved in making 
derogatory remarks against Islam.” 
Thus, paragraph 17.16 purports to reproduce the statement of 
protected witness Z. In terms of our earlier order, the translated 
version of the statement of protected witness Z, recorded before 
the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Patna, has been 
produced in a sealed envelope. We find that the statement 
substantially differs from what is narrated in paragraph 17.16 
of the charge sheet. 
11. 
The perusal of the statement shows that protected 
witness Z did not expressly state that the appellant participated 

in the meeting held on 29th May 2022. He has set out the names 
of several persons who attended the meeting. The appellant’s 
name is not included in the names set out. In fact, the 
statement of protected witness Z indicates that after the 
meeting, the appellant was introduced as the owner of the 
building. Paragraph 17.16 alleges that protected witness Z 
stated that in the meeting, subjects such as the expansion of 
the organisation, basic and advanced training of PFI members 
and future PFI plans were discussed, and a direction was given 
to trained PFI cadre to eliminate one Nupur Sharma. In the 
statement of protected witness Z, all that is not found. In fact, 
protected witness Z stated that during the meeting, emphasis 
was given on strengthening the status of Muslims, imparting 
them basic and advanced training and strengthening the 
status of education, politics and administration of Muslims and 
Muslim empowerment. Going by the witness's version, we find 
that there was no discussion about the activities of PFI in the 
meeting held on 29th May 2022. According to the witness, the 
direction to kill Nupur Sharma was issued in June 2022 and 
not in the meeting of 29th May 2022. We are not reproducing 
the statement of the protected witness Z as it has been kept in 
a sealed cover. Suffice it to say that what is reproduced in 
paragraph 17.16 is not correct. The material portion of witness 
Z's actual statement has been completely distorted in 
paragraph 17.16 of the charge sheet. Several things which 
protected witness Z did not state have been incorporated in 
paragraph 17.16. Unfortunately, paragraph 17.16 attributes 
certain statements to protected witness Z, which he did not 

make. NIA owes an explanation for that. The investigating 
machinery has to be fair. But, in this case, paragraph 17.16 
indicates to the contrary. 
12. 
Now, we come to the provision relating to bail under the 
UAPA, which is sub-Section 5 of Section 43D of the UAPA, 
which reads thus: 
“43-D. 
Modified 
application 
of 
certain 
provisions of the Code.— 
………………………………………………………….. 

Notwithstanding anything contained in 
the Code, no person accused of an offence 
punishable under Chapters IV and VI of this 
Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or 
on his own bond unless the Public Prosecutor 
has been given an opportunity of being heard 
on the application for such release: 
Provided that such accused person shall not be 
released on bail or on his own bond if the 
Court, on a perusal of the case diary or the 
report made under Section 173 of the Code is 
of the opinion that there are reasonable 
grounds for believing that the accusation 
against such person is prima facie true. 
………………………………………………………….” 
13. 
Learned ASG relied upon a decision of this Court in the 
case of Gurwinder Singh v. State of Punjab and Another2. 
This Court extensively considered its earlier decision in the 
case of National Investigation Agency v. Zahoor Ahmad 
 
2 (2024) 

Shah Watali3, which deals with interpretation of Section 
43D(5). Paragraph 32 of the said decision reads thus: 
“32. In this regard, we need to look no further 
than Watali case [NIA v. Zahoor Ahmad Shah 
Watali, (2019): (2019) 2 SCC (Cri) 383] 
which has laid down elaborate guidelines on the 
approach that courts must partake in, in their 
application of the bail limitations under the 
UAP Act. On a perusal of paras 23 to 24 and 26 
to 27, the following 8-point propositions emerge 
and they are summarised as follows: 
32.1.Meaning of “prima facie true”: 
On the face of it, the materials must show 
the complicity of the accused in commission 
of the offence. The materials/evidence must 
be good and sufficient to establish a given 
fact or chain of facts constituting the stated 
offence, unless rebutted or contradicted by 
other evidence. 
32.2. Degree of satisfaction at pre charge-
sheet, post charge-sheet and post-charges 
— compared: 
“26. … once charges are framed, it would be 
safe to assume that a very strong suspicion was 
founded upon the materials before the Court, 
which 
prompted 
the 
Court 
to 
form 
a 
presumptive opinion as to the existence of the 
factual ingredients constituting the offence 
alleged against the accused, to justify the 
framing of charge. In that situation, the 
accused may have to undertake an arduous 
task to satisfy the Court that despite the 
framing of charge, the materials presented 
along with the charge-sheet (report under 
Section 173 of CrPC), do not make out 
 
3 (2019) 

reasonable grounds for believing that the 
accusation against him is prima facie true. 
Similar opinion is required to be formed by the 
Court whilst considering the prayer for bail, 
made after filing of the first report made under 
Section 173 of the Code, as in the present case.” 
32.3. Reasoning, necessary but no detailed 
evaluation of evidence: 
“24. … the exercise to be undertaken by the 
Court at this stage—of giving reasons for grant 
or non-grant of bail—is markedly different from 
discussing merits or demerits of the evidence. 
The elaborate examination or dissection of the 
evidence is not required to be done at this 
stage.” 
32.4. 
Record 
a 
finding 
on 
broad 
probabilities, not based on proof beyond 
doubt: 
“The Court is merely expected to record a 
finding 
on 
the 
basis 
of broad 
probabilities regarding the involvement of the 
accused in the commission of the stated offence 
or otherwise.” 
32.5. Duration of the limitation under 
Section 43-D(5): 
“26. … the special provision, Section 43-D of 
the 1967 Act, applies right from the stage of 
registration of FIR for the offences under 
Chapters IV and VI of the 1967 Act until the 
conclusion of the trial thereof.” 
32.6. Material on record must be analysed 
as a “whole”; no piecemeal analysis 
“27. … the totality of the material gathered by 
the investigating agency and presented along 
with the report and including the case diary, is 

required to be reckoned and not by analysing 
individual pieces of evidence or circumstance.” 
32.7. Contents of documents to be presumed 
as true: 
“27. … The Court must look at the contents 
of the document and take such document 
into account as it is.” 
32.8. Admissibility of documents relied 
upon by prosecution cannot be questioned: 
The 
materials/evidence 
collected 
by 
the 
investigation 
agency 
in 
support 
of 
the 
accusation against the accused in the first 
information 
report must 
prevail 
until 
contradicted and overcome or disproved by other 
evidence…. In any case, the question of 
discarding the document at this stage, on the 
ground of being inadmissible in evidence, is not 
permissible.” 
(emphasis added) 
14. 
There is one more decision of this Court in the case of 
Thwaha Fasal v. Union of India4, which again deals with the 
scope of Section 43D(5) of UAPA. After considering the decision 
in the case of Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali3, in fact, in 
paragraph 24, the case has been extensively reproduced. 
Thereafter, in paragraph 26, this Court held thus: 
 
“26. Therefore, while deciding a bail petition 
filed by an accused against whom offences 
under Chapters IV and VI of the 1967 Act have 
been alleged, the court has to consider whether 
there are reasonable grounds for believing that 
the accusation against the accused is prima 
facie true. If the court is satisfied after 
 
4 (2022) 

examining the material on record that there 
are no reasonable grounds for believing that 
the accusation against the accused is prima 
facie true, then the accused is entitled to 
bail. Thus, the scope of inquiry is to decide 
whether prima facie material is available 
against the accused of commission of the 
offences alleged under Chapters IV and VI. 
The 
grounds 
for 
believing 
that 
the 
accusation against the accused is prima 
facie true must be reasonable grounds. 
However, the court while examining the 
issue of prima facie case as required by sub-
section (5) of Section 43-D is not expected 
to hold a mini trial. The court is not 
supposed to examine the merits and 
demerits of the evidence. If a charge-sheet 
is already filed, the court has to examine the 
material forming a part of charge-sheet for 
deciding the issue whether there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that the 
accusation against such a person is prima 
facie true. While doing so, the court has to 
take the material in the charge-sheet as it 
is.” 
(emphasis added) 
15. 
As held in the case of Thwaha Fasal4, the Court has to 
examine the material forming part of the charge sheet to decide 
whether there are reasonable grounds for believing that the 
accusations against the person applying for bail are prima facie 
true. While doing so, the court must take the charge sheet as 
it is. 
16. 
Now, we come to the offences alleged against the 
appellant. Offences punishable under Sections 13, 18, 18A, 
and 20 of the UAPA have been alleged against the appellant. 
Section 13 reads thus: 

“13. Punishment for unlawful activities.— 
(1) Whoever— 
 
(a) takes part in or commits, or 
 
(b) advocates, abets, advises or incites the 
commission of, any unlawful activity, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to seven years and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
(2) Whoever, in any way, assists any unlawful 
activity of any association, declared unlawful 
under section 3, after the notification by which 
it has been so declared has become effective 
under sub-section (3) of that section, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years, or with fine, or 
with both. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any 
treaty, agreement or convention entered into 
between the Government of India and the 
Government of any other country or to any 
negotiations therefor carried on by any person 
authorised in this behalf by the Government of 
India.” 
The term unlawful activity has been defined in Section 2(o), 
which reads thus: 
“2 Definitions.—…………………………… 
(o) “unlawful activity”, in relation to an 
individual or association, means any action 
taken by such individual or association 
(whether by committing an act or by words, 
either spoken or written, or by signs or by 
visible representation or otherwise),— 
(i) which is intended, or supports any claim, to 
bring about, on any ground whatsoever, the 

cession of a part of the territory of India or the 
secession of a part of the territory of India from 
the Union, or which incites any individual or 
group of individuals to bring about such 
cession or secession; or 
(ii) which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is 
intended to disrupt the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of India; or 
(iii) which causes or is intended to cause 
disaffection against India; 
………………………………………………………….” 

Sections 18 and 18A of UAPA read thus: 
“18. Punishment for conspiracy, etc.—
Whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or 
advocates, abets, advises or incites, directly or 
knowingly facilitates the commission of, a 
terrorist act or any act preparatory to the 
commission of a terrorist act, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than five years but 
which may extend to imprisonment for life, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
18A. Punishment for organising of terrorist 
camps.—Whoever organises or causes to be 
organised any camp or camps for imparting 
training in terrorism shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than five years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to 
fine.” 
There is nothing in the charge sheet which shows that the 
appellant has taken part in or has committed unlawful 
activities as defined in the UAPA. There is no specific material 
to show that the appellant advocated, abetted, or incited 

commission of any unlawful activities. A terrorist act is defined 
in Section 15(1). Assuming that the co-accused were indulging 
in terrorist acts or were making any act preparatory to the 
commission of terrorist acts, there is absolutely no material on 
record to show that there was any conspiracy to commit any 
terrorist act to which the appellant was a party. There is no 
material produced on record to show that the appellant 
advocated, abetted, advised, or incited the commission of 
terrorist acts or any preparatory activity. 
17. 
We must note here that the appellant’s son conducted the 
negotiations for giving the first floor on rent. Taking the charge 
sheet as correct, it is not possible to record a prima facie finding 
that the appellant knowingly facilitated the commission or 
preparation of terrorist acts by letting out the first floor 
premises. Again, there is no allegation in the charge sheet 
against the appellant that he organised any camps to impart 
training in terrorism. 
18. 
Now, we come to Section 20 of UAPA, which reads thus: 
“20. Punishment for being member of 
terrorist gang or organisation.—Any person 
who is a member of a terrorist gang or a 
terrorist organisation, which is involved in 
terrorist 
act, 
shall 
be 
punishable 
with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to 
fine.” 
 
Terrorist gang has been defined in Section 2(L), which reads 
thus: 
“2 Definitions.—……………………………………. 

(L) “terrorist gang” means any association, 
other than terrorist organisation, whether 
systematic or otherwise, which is concerned 
with, or involved in, terrorist act; 
………………………………………………………….” 
There is not even an allegation in the charge sheet that the 
appellant was a member of any terrorist gang. As regards the 
second part of being a member of a terrorist organisation, as 
per Section 2(m), a terrorist organisation means an 
organisation listed in the first schedule or an organisation 
operating under the same name as the organisation was listed. 
The charge sheet does not mention the name of the terrorist 
organisation within the meaning of Section 2(m) of which the 
appellant was a member. We find that the PFI is not a terrorist 
organisation, as is evident from the first schedule. 
19. 
Therefore, on plain reading of the charge sheet, it is not 
possible to record a conclusion that there are reasonable 
grounds for believing that the accusation against the appellant 
of commission of offences punishable under the UAPA is prima 
facie true. We have taken the charge sheet and the statement 
of witness Z as they are without conducting a mini-trial. 
Looking at what we have held earlier, it is impossible to record 
a prima facie finding that there were reasonable grounds for 
believing that the accusation against the appellant of 
commission of offences under the UAPA was prima facie true. 
No antecedents of the appellant have been brought on record. 
20. 
The upshot of the above discussion is that there was no 
reason to reject the bail application filed by the appellant. 

21. 
Before we part with the Judgment, we must mention here 
that the Special Court and the High Court did not consider the 
material in the charge sheet objectively. Perhaps the focus was 
more on the activities of PFI, and therefore, the appellant's case 
could not be properly appreciated. When a case is made out 
for a grant of bail, the Courts should not have any hesitation 
in granting bail. The allegations of the prosecution may be very 
serious. But, the duty of the Courts is to consider the case for 
grant of bail in accordance with the law. “Bail is the rule and 
jail is an exception” is a settled law. Even in a case like the 
present case where there are stringent conditions for the grant 
of bail in the relevant statutes, the same rule holds good with 
only modification that the bail can be granted if the conditions 
in the statute are satisfied. The rule also means that once a 
case is made out for the grant of bail, the Court cannot decline 
to grant bail. If the Courts start denying bail in deserving cases, 
it will be a violation of the rights guaranteed under Article 21 
of our Constitution. 
22. 
Hence, the impugned orders are set aside. The appeal is 
allowed. The appellant is directed to be enlarged on bail on the 
terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Special Court. For 
that purpose, the appellant shall be produced before the 
Special Court within a maximum of 7 days from today. The 
Special Court shall enlarge the appellant on bail until the 
conclusion of the trial on appropriate terms and conditions. 
The Special Court shall hear the counsel for the respondent 
before fixing the terms and conditions. 

23. 
We make it clear that the tentative findings recorded in 
this judgment are only for considering the prayer for bail. The 
reasons are confined to the case of the appellant. The same will 
have no bearing on the trial and cases of the co-accused. 
 
……….……………………..J. 

 (Abhay S. Oka) 
 
……………………………..J. 
(Augustine George Masih) 
New Delhi; 
August 13th, 2024.