IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
SMW (Crl) No 2 of 2024 

IN RE: ALLEGED RAPE AND MURDER INCIDENT OF A TRAINEE 
DOCTOR IN R.G. KAR MEDICAL COLLEGE AND 
HOSPITAL, KOLKATA AND RELATED ISSUES Versus 

ORDER 
 
1. On 9 August, 2024, a thirty-one year old postgraduate doctor at RG Kar 
Medical College Hospital, Kolkata who was on a thirty six hour duty shift 
was murdered and allegedly raped inside the seminar room of the hospital. 
As horrific details have emerged in the course of media reportage, the 
brutality of the sexual assault and the nature of the crime have shocked 
the conscience of the Nation. The name and graphic images of the 
deceased have been widely circulated on social media without regard to 
her privacy or dignity. 
2. Writ petitions were instituted before the Calcutta High Court seeking 
among other things, a court-monitored investigation of the crime and the 
conduct of the hospital authorities, including the role of the Principal of the 
medical college and other officials by a special team of investigating 
officers. It has been alleged that the parents of the deceased were initially 
informed that their daughter had committed suicide; they were permitted to 
see the dead body after several hours and a first information report in 
regard to the murder was registered belatedly by the police after several 
hours. 
3. By its order dated 13 August 2024, the High Court transferred the 
investigation to the Central Bureau of Investigation. 
4. Following the incident, agitations and protests were called by doctors’ 
associations, student bodies and civic groups across the country. On the 
eve of Independence Day, several areas in Kolkata saw protests spurred 
by the ‘Reclaim the Night’ campaign. At 12.30 am on 15 August, when a 

protest was underway at the hospital, a large mob assembled at the 
premises of the RG Kar Medical College Hospital and vandalized the 
Emergency Ward and other departments of the hospital. Following the acts 
of wanton destruction and vandalism, the Indian Medical Association (a 
private and voluntary organization of doctors in India) called for a nation-
wide withdrawal of medical services, except emergency services, for 
twenty-four hours on 17 August 2024. 
5. In the aftermath of the brutal incident and the demonstrations which 
followed, the State Government was expected to ensure the deployment of 
the state machinery to prevent a breach of law and order. It was all the 
more necessary to do so since investigation of the crime which took place 
in the precincts of the hospital was under way. We are unable to 
comprehend how the State was not prepared to deal with the incident of 
vandalization of the premises of the hospital. 
6. Nation-wide protests following the brutal incident in RG Kar Medical 
College Hospital have brought the issue of the lack of institutional safety 
for doctors to the forefront. Medical Associations have consistently raised 
issues of the lack of workplace safety in health care institutions. Medical 
professionals in the performance of their duties have been unfortunate 
targets of various forms of violence. Hospitals and medical care facilities 
are open throughout the day and night. Medical professionals - doctors, 
nurses and paramedic staff - work round the clock. Unrestricted access to 
every part of healthcare institutions has made healthcare professionals 
susceptible to violence. Patients of relatives in anguish are quick to 
attribute untoward results to the negligence of medical professionals. Such 

allegations are immediately followed by violence against medical 
professionals. In May 2024, two on-duty doctors were allegedly attacked 
by relatives of a patient who died during treatment in a hospital in West-
Bengal.1 In another incident in May 2024 in Bihar, following the death of a 
twenty-five year old pregnant patient, a nurse was allegedly pushed off the 
first floor of the building by the kin of the patient.2 In August 2024, a final 
year resident in a hospital in Hyderabad was allegedly assaulted by a 
patient’s attendants after the patient died due to medical conditions.3 
These incidents of violence are a few amongst the many that have been 
unleashed against members of the medical community in the recent past. 
They are portents of a systemic failure to protect doctors, nurses and para 
medical staff in the confines of hospitals. With few or no protective systems 
to ensure their safety, medical professionals have become vulnerable to 
violence. With the involvement of systemic issues for healthcare across the 
nation, this court has had to intervene. 
7. Women are at particular risk of sexual and non-sexual violence in these 
settings. Due to ingrained patriarchal attitudes and biases, relatives of 
patients are more likely to challenge women medical professionals. In 
addition to this, female medical professionals also face different forms of 
sexual violence at the workplace by colleagues, seniors and persons in 
authority. Sexual violence has had its origins even within the institution, the 
case of Aruna Shanbag being a case in point. There is a hierarchy within 
 
1 https://medicaldialogues.in/news/health/doctors/mob-attack-2-surgeons-brutally-attacked-after-
patient-death-admitted-in-icu-128063 
2 https://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/india/pregnant-womans-death-sparks-violence-by-kin-nurse-
thrown-off-1st-ﬂoor-of-bihar-nursing-home/articleshow/110475737.cms 
3 https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/hyderabad/hyderabad-doctor-attacked-in-hospital-by-
attendants-after-patient-dies-8604280/ 

medical colleges and the career advancement and academic degrees of 
young professionals are capable of being affected by those in the upper 
echelons. The lack of institutional safety norms at medical establishments 
against both violence and sexual violence against medical professionals is 
a matter of serious concern. While gendered violence is the source of the 
more malevolent manifestations of the structural deficiencies in public 
health institutions, the lack of safety is of concern to all medical 
professionals. Preserving safe conditions of work is central to realizing 
equality of opportunity to every working professional. This is not just a 
matter of protecting doctors. Their safety and well-being as health 
providers is a matter of national interest. As more and more women join 
the work force in cutting edge areas of knowledge and science, the nation 
has a vital stake in ensuring safe and dignified conditions of work. The 
constitutional value of equality demands nothing else and will not brook 
compromises on the health, well being and safety of those who provide 
health care to others. The nation cannot await a rape or murder for real 
changes on the ground. 

8. Several States, such as Maharashtra4, Kerala5, Karnataka6, Telangana7, 
West Bengal8, Andhra Pradesh9 and Tamil Nadu10 have enacted legislation 
to protect healthcare service professionals from violence and damage to 
property. All these enactments prohibit any act of violence against medical 
professionals. The offence is non-bailable and punishable with three years 
of imprisonment. However, these enactments do not address the 
institutional and systemic causes that underlie the problem. An enhanced 
punishment without improving institutional safety standards falls short of 
addressing the problem effectively. 
9. We have attempted to flag here the ground reality indicating the lack of 
institutional safety standards in health care establishments. A non-
exhaustive formulation is set out below: 
a. Medical professionals who are posted for night-duties are not 
provided adequate resting spaces. More often, doctors rest in the 
patients’ room or in available public spaces. Duty rooms are scant. 
Separate duty rooms for male and female medical professionals are 
conspicuous by their absence in most health care establishments; 
 
4 See Maharashtra Medicare Service Persons and Medicare Service Institutions (Prevention of violence 
and damage or loss to property) Act 2010 
5 See Kerala Healthcare Service Persons and Healthcare Service Institutions (Prevention of Violence and 
Damage to property) Act 2012 
6 See The Karnataka Prohibition of Violence Against Medicare Service Personnel and Damage to Property 
in Medicare Service Institutions Act 2009 
7 See Telangana Medicare Service Persons and Medicare Service Institutions (Prevention of Violence and 
Damage to Property) Act 2008 
8 See West Bengal Medicare Service Persons and Medicare Service Institutions (Prevention of Violence 
and Damage to Property) Act 2009 
9 See Andhra Pradesh Medicare Service Persons and Medicare Service Institutions (Prevention of 
Violence and Damage to Property) Act 2008 
10 See Tamil Nadu Medicare Service Persons and Medicare Service Institutions (Prevention of Violence 
and Damage or Loss to Property) Act 2008 

b. Interns, residents and senior residents are made to perform thirty-six 
hour shifts in conditions where even basic needs of sanitation, 
nutrition, hygiene and rest are lacking. There is an absence of 
uniformity in terms of a standard national protocol. The fear of 
retribution prevents most health care professionals from questioning 
the absence of facilities for basic well-being; 
c. Lack of security personnel in medical care units is more of a norm 
than an exception. More often than not, medical professionals, 
which includes young resident doctors, interns and nurses are left to 
handle unruly attenders. Open access to healthcare facilities leaves 
medical professionals vulnerable to undesirable elements; 
d. Medical care facilities do not have sufficient toilet. Most often there 
is only one common toilet for medical professionals in one 
department; 
e. The hostels or places of stay for medical professionals are situated 
far from the hospital. Doctors and nurses who have to travel to and 
from the hospital are not provided transport facilities by the 
institution. Even within the precincts of the sprawling spaces of 
public hospitals there is either inadequate or no transportation 
facilities for the safe commute of professionals; 
f. There is an absence or lack of properly functioning CCTV cameras 
to monitor ingress and egress to the hospital and to control access 
to sensitive areas; 

g. The patients and their attenders have unrestricted access to all 
places within the hospital, including Intensive Care Units and the 
doctors resting rooms; 
h. Lack of screening for arms and weapons at the entrance of the 
hospitals; 
i. Dingy and ill-lit places within the hospitals; 
j. Medical professionals have to shoulder the responsibility of being 
both medical and ‘emotional’ caregivers to patients and their 
relatives. There are no supportive facilities and no training in 
communication skills; and 
k. Certain spaces within hospitals such as the Intensive Care Unit and 
the Emergency Wards are prone to a greater risk of violence 
because of the severity of medical conditions of patients in these 
departments. 
10. We have in this backdrop formed the view that a national consensus must 
be evolved - after due consultation with all stake-holders - on the urgent 
need to formulate protocols governing the issues which this order has 
highlighted. We have attempted to compose for this purpose a diverse 
body of persons with experience in healthcare institutions. A National Task 
Force (NTF) with the following members of the medical profession is 
constituted: 
a. Surgeon Vice Admiral Arti Sarin, AVSM, VSM, Director General, 
Medical Services (Navy); 
b. Dr D Nageshwar Reddy, Chairman and Managing Director, Asian 
Institute of Gastroenterology and AIG Hospitals, Hyderabad; 

c. Dr M Srinivas, Director, All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS), Delhi; 
d. Dr Pratima Murthy, Director, National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru; 
e. Dr Goverdhan Dutt Puri, Executive Director, All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Jodhpur; 
f. Dr 
Saumitra 
Rawat, 
Chairperson, 
Institute 
of 
Surgical 
Gastroenterology, 
GI 
and 
HPB 
Onco-Surgery 
and 
Liver 
Transplantation and Member, Board of Management, Sir Ganga 
Ram Hospital, New Delhi; Member, Court of Examiners, Royal 
College of Surgeons, England; 
g. Professor Anita Saxena, Vice-Chancellor, Pandit B D Sharma 
Medical University, Rohtak. Formerly Dean of Academics, Chief- 
Cardiothoracic Centre and Head Cardiology Department at All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Delhi; 
h. Dr Pallavi Saple, Dean, Grant Medical College and Sir JJ Group of 
Hospitals, Mumbai; and 
i. Dr Padma Srivastava, formerly Professor at the Department of 
Neurology, AIIMS Delhi. Currently serving as the Chairperson of 
Neurology at Paras Health Gurugram. 

11. The following shall be the ex-officio members of the NTF: 
a. Cabinet Secretary, Government of India; 
b. Home Secretary, Government of India; 
c. Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of 
India; 
d. Chairperson, National Medical Commission; and 
e. President, National Board of Examinations. 
12. The NTF shall formulate effective recommendations to remedy the issues 
of concern pertaining to safety, working conditions and well-being of 
medical professionals and other cognate matters highlighted in the above 
segments of this order. The NTF shall while doing so, consider the 
following aspects to prepare an action-plan. The action plan may be 
categorized under two heads (I) Preventing violence, including gender-
based violence against medical professionals; and (II) Providing an 
enforceable national protocol for dignified and safe working conditions for 
interns, residents, senior residents, doctors, nurses and all medical 
professionals. 
I. 
Prevention of violence against medical professionals and providing 
safe working conditions 
 
a. Ensuring due security in medical establishments: 
 
i. Triaging departments and places within the hospital based on 
the degree of volatility and the possibility of violence. Areas 
such as the emergency rooms and the Intensive Care Units 
are prone to a greater degree of violence and may possibly 
need additional security in place to deal with any untoward 
incident; 

ii. A baggage and person screening system at every entrance of 
the hospital to ensure that arms are not carried inside the 
medical establishment; 
iii. Preventing intoxicated persons from entering the premises of 
the medical establishment, unless they are patients; and 
iv. Training security personnel employed at Hospitals to manage 
crowds and grieving persons. b. Infrastructural development: 
i. Provision of separate resting rooms and duty rooms in each 
Department for (a) male doctors; (b) female doctors; (c) male 
nurses; (d) female nurses; and (e) a gender-neutral common 
resting space. The room must be well-ventilated, have 
sufficient bed spaces, and provide a facility for drinking water. 
Access to these rooms must be restricted through installation 
of security devices; 
ii. Adopting appropriate technological intervention to regulate 
access to critical and sensitive areas including through use of 
bio-metric and facial recognition; 
iii. Ensuring adequate lighting at all places in the hospital and, if 
it is a hospital attached to a medical college, all places within 
the campus; 
iv. Installation of CCTV cameras at all the entrance and exit 
points of the hospitals, and the corridors leading up to all 
patient rooms; and 

v. If the hostels or rooms of the medical professionals are away 
from the hospital, provision of transport between 10 pm to 6 
am to those who wish to travel to or from their place of stay to 
the Hospital. c. Employment of social workers trained in grief and crisis counselling 
at all medical establishments; 
d. Conducting workshops for all employees of medical establishments 
including doctors, nurses and helpers on handling grief and crisis; 
e. Constitution of “Employees Safety Committees” composed of 
doctors, 
interns, 
residents 
and 
nurses 
at 
every 
medical 
establishment to conduct quarterly audits on institutional safety 
measures; 
f. Including additional requirement(s) on institutional safety measures 
for medical professionals as a criteria for accreditation of healthcare 
establishments by the National Accreditation Board for Hospitals & 
Healthcare Providers; and 
g. The possibility of establishing police posts in medical facilities 
commensurate with the footfall, bed strength and facilities. 
II. 
 Prevention of sexual violence against medical professionals: 
a. The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, 
Prohibition and Redressal) Act 2013 applies to hospitals and nursing 
homes11 (including private health providers12). In terms of the 
 
11 See Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act 2013; 
Section 2(o)(iii) 
12 See Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act 2013; 
Section 2(o)(ii) 

provisions of the Act, an Internal Complaints Committee must be 
constituted in all hospitals and nursing homes; 
b. The duties of an employer listed under Section 19 of the Sexual 
Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and 
Redressal) Act 2013 which includes organizing sensitization 
programmes and providing a safe working space must be discharged; 
and 
c. Ensuring for every medical institution a helpline number for medical 
professionals which is open 24 x 7 and emergency distress facilities. 
13. It is clarified that the phrase medical professionals used in this judgment 
encompasses every medical professional including doctors, medical 
students who are undergoing their compulsory rotating medical internship 
(CRMI) as a part of the MBBS course, resident doctors and senior resident 
doctors and nurses (including those who are nursing interns). The phrases 
Medical Establishments/Hospitals/Medical Institutions are interchangeably 
used. 
14. The NTF shall be at liberty to make recommendations on all aspects of the 
action-plan highlighted above and any other aspects which the members 
seek to cover. They are at liberty to make additional suggestions, where 
appropriate. The NTF shall also suggest appropriate timelines by which 
the recommendations could be implemented based on the existing 
facilities in Hospitals. The NTF is requested to consult all stake-holders. 
Bearing in mind the gravity and urgency of the situation we have included 
the heads of the National Medical Commission and the National Board of 

Examinations as Ex-officio members of the NTF. Bearing in mind the 
national concerns which have been raised over the issue and the high 
priority which must be given to the creation of safe working conditions in 
healthcare institutions, we request the Cabinet Secretary to the Union 
Government to associate with the work of the NTF. The Home Secretary of 
the Union Government has also been made a member of the NTF in order 
to facilitate proper co-ordination with the State Governments. The 
Secretary to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of the Government 
of India will be the Member-Secretary of the NTF. The Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare will provide all logistical support including making 
arrangements for travel, stay and secretarial assistance and bear the 
expenses of the members of the NTF. 
15. The NTF is requested to submit an interim report within three weeks and 
the final report within two months from the date of this order. 
16. All State Governments and UT Governments, through their Secretaries, in 
the Ministries of Health and Family Welfare and the Central Government, 
through the Secretary, Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare must 
collate information from all hospitals run by the State and the Central 
Government, respectively on the following aspects: 
a. How many security personnel are employed at each Hospital and 
each department; 
b. Whether there is a baggage and person screening mechanism in 
place at the entrance of the medical establishment; 

c. The total number of resting/duty rooms in the Hospital and specific 
details of the number in each Department; 
d. The facilities provided in the resting/duty rooms; 
e. Information on whether all areas of the hospital are accessible to the 
general public and if so, with or without any security restrictions; 
f. Whether there are CCTV cameras in the hospital. If there are, how 
many and in which locations; 
g. Whether the institution provides medical professionals training to 
appropriately handle the grief of patients. If so, the details of the 
training must be provided; 
h. Whether social workers who specialize in handling grief of families of 
the patients are employed at the hospital. If so, the total number of 
social workers must be provided; 
i. Whether there are police posts within the premises of the Hospital or 
the Medical College Hospital campus; 
j. Whether an Internal Complaints Committee in terms of the Sexual 
Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and 
Redressal) Act 2013 has been constituted; and 
k. Whether the employer of the establishment has discharged the duties 
prescribed by Section 19 of the Sexual Harassment of Women at 
Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act 2013. If so, 
details of it. 
The data as submitted shall be tabulated and filed with an affidavit by the Union 
Government within one month of this order. 

17. The Central Bureau of Investigation shall submit a status report to this 
Court by 22 August 2024 on the progress in the investigation of the crime 
at RG Kar Medical College Hospital. The State of West Bengal shall also 
file a status report by 22 August 2024 on the progress of the investigation 
on the acts of vandalism which took place at the Hospital in the aftermath 
of the incident. 
18. The matter shall be listed on 22 August 2024...….…….……………………………………CJI 
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 

…….……………………………………………J 
[J B Pardiwala] 

…….……………………………………………J 
 [Manoj Misra] 

New Delhi; 
 
August 20, 2024