IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

SHABNA ABDULLA 

VERSUS 

THE UNION OF INDIA & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 

B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
1. 
The present appeal challenges the final judgment and order 
dated 24th January 2023 in, 
passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Kerala, whereby 
the High Court dismissed the petition filed by the appellant, who 
is the sister-in-law of the detenue, and thereby upheld the 
detention order dated 24th August, 2021 issued against the 
detenue (one Abdul Raoof) under Section 3 of the Conservation 
of Foreign Exchange & Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 

1974 (hereinafter referred to as, “COFEPOSA”) and its 
confirmation vide order dated 24th May, 2022. 
2. 
The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeal are as 
given below. 
2.1 On 20th April, 2021, the unaccompanied baggage of one 
Althaf Moosan Mukri was checked and inside the compressor of 
a refrigerator amongst the baggage, contraband gold weighing 
14,763.30 grams valued at Rs. 7,16,16,768/- was found and 
seized. 
2.2 Statements of co-accused persons were recorded, whereby 
they admitted that the detenue who was residing in Dubai, UAE, 
was running a cargo handling and forwarding business and was 
scouting passengers who had unaccompanied cargo to be sent to 
India. It was stated that the detenue would send contraband gold 
concealed 
in 
compressors 
of 
refrigerators 
along 
with 
unaccompanied baggage. 
2.3 On 24th August, 2021, detention orders under Section 3 of 
COFEPOSA were issued against the three co-accused persons 
namely Mohammad Ali (father-in-law of detenue), Abdulla S.S. 
(brother-in-law of detenue) and Biju V. Joy (Customs G 

Cardholder) and they were arrested. They later challenged their 
respective detention orders by way of separate Writ Petitions filed 
before the High Court of Kerala. 
2.4 On 27th December, 2021, the detenue reached India. He 
repeatedly wrote letters/issued reminders to the Director 
General (DG), Central Economic Intelligence Bureau (hereinafter, 
“CEIB”) as well as the Joint Secretary, COFEPOSA, stating that 
he has not received any information of a detention order issued 
against him. 
2.5 On 5th March, 2022, the detenue was arrested and he was 
served with the detention order dated 24th August, 2021. He was 
supplied the grounds of detention on 7th March, 2022. 
Thereafter, by an order dated 24th March, 2022, the case of the 
detenue was referred by the CEIB to the Advisory Board under 
Section 8(b) of COFEPOSA Act. 
2.6 On 5th April, 2022, the detenue wrote letters to the DG, 
CEIB and Joint Secretary (COFEPOSA), seeking various 
documents that had not been provided to the detenue. He inter-
alia sought audio recordings of the voice messages pertaining to 
the WhatsApp conversations relied upon by the Detaining 

Authority, as was evident from the grounds of detention. The 
Joint Secretary (COFEPOSA) rejected the request of the detenue, 
whereas the DG, CEIB kept the request pending for the Advisory 
Board to take an opinion on. 
2.7 On 24th May, 2022, in view of the opinion of the Advisory 
Board, the Central Government confirmed the detention order of 
the detenue for a period of one year from the date of detention. 
2.8 On 3rd June, 2022, a Division Bench of the High Court by a 
common judgement, allowed the three writ petitions filed by the 
co-accused persons being W.P. (Crl.) Nos. 107-109 of 2022. The 
High Court was of the opinion that documents sought had been 
relied upon in the detention orders and the same ought to have 
been furnished to the detenus when they requested for the same. 
It, accordingly, held that the non-supply had vitally affected the 
right of the detenus under Article 22(5) of the Constitution of 
India & therefore, the detention order was bad. 
2.9 On 29th June, 2022, the appellant filed a Writ Petition being 
W.P. (Crl.) No. 596 of 2022, challenging the detention order dated 
24th August, 2021, as well as the confirmation of detention vide 
order dated 24th May, 2022, by the Central Government on the 

ground of non-supply of relevant documents and therefore 
sought release of the detenue. 
2.10 On 24th January, 2023, a Division Bench of the High Court 
(other than the one which adjudicated upon the writ petitions 
filed by the co-accused persons), dismissed the Writ Petition filed 
by the appellant. Aggrieved thereby, the present appeal arises. 
3. 
We have heard Mr. Raghenth Basant, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing for the appellant and Mr. Nachiketa Joshi, 
learned Senior Counsel for the respondent(s). 
4. 
Mr. Raghenth Basant, learned Senior Counsel, submitted 
that the Division Bench of the High Court while dismissing the 
petition of the present appellant has failed to take into 
consideration the judgment and order dated 3rd June 2022 in the 
cases of Nushath Koyamu vs. Union of India and others1 and 
other connected matters delivered by a Coordinate Bench of the 
same High Court wherein it was held that the detention of the 
co-detenus was vitiated on account of non-supply of WhatsApp 
chats. He submits that the grounds of detention, insofar as the 
detenue in the present appeal is concerned, are identical with the 
 
1 [2022 (3) KLT 885] 

grounds of detention with that of the co-detenue Mr. Biju V. Joy 
and two other detenus, whose detention was set aside by the 
order of the High Court dated 3rd June 2022. It is, therefore, 
submitted that the detention order is liable to be quashed on this 
short ground. 
5. 
Mr. Nachiketa Joshi, learned counsel appearing on behalf 
of the Union of India, submits that the learned Division Bench of 
the High Court has rightly distinguished the decision of the 
Coordinate Bench of the same High Court in the cases of 
Nushath Koyamu (supra) and other connected matters. He, 
therefore, submitted that no inference with the impugned 
judgment and order is warranted. 
6. 
The material placed on record would reveal that the grounds 
of detention insofar as the present detenue and Mr. Biju V. Joy 
and other two detenus, whose detention has been held to be 
illegal by the judgment and order 3rd June 2022 passed by the 
Coordinate Bench of the same High Court in the cases of 
Nushath Koyamu (supra) are almost identical. 
7. 
It will be relevant to refer to the following ground of 
detention: 

“1. 
Mr. Biju V. Joy, G card holder of M/s The 
Mercantile and Marine services was summoned 
on 03.08.2021 and his voluntary statement was 
recorded under Section 108 of Customs Act, 
1962 wherein he, inter alia, reiterated that his 
previous statements dated 20.04.2021 and 
28.04.2021 were true and correct. He further 
submitted 
printouts 
of 
WhatsApp 
chats 
between him and Mr. Abdul Raoof i.e. you 
containing the passport details of passenger Mr. 
Althaf Moosan Mukri and details of previous 
consignments which were cleared on behalf of 
Mr. Abdul Raoof i.e. you; that he signed on the 
printouts of same and confirmed that they were 
retrieved from his mobile phone.” 
 
8. 
Undisputedly, the said WhatsApp chats refer to the detenue 
in the present appeal as well as said Biju V. Joy. 
9. 
In the cases of Nushath Koyamu (supra) and other 
connected matters, the Coordinate Bench of the same High Court 
has recorded the submissions of the petitioner(s) therein with 
regard to non-supply of the WhatsApp chats. The same reads 
thus: 
“15. The learned counsel for the petitioner 
submits that in W.P. (Crl) No. 107 of 2022, the 
detenue had filed Ext. P12 request for supply of 
the documents mentioned therein, particularly, 
a screen shot taken from the detenus phone 
which was relied upon by the detaining 
authority. It is mentioned in Ext. P12 that there 
were at least six voice messages visible on the 
screen shot which were relied on and those 
messages appear to be of 19th April 2021, a day 

before the detenus in this case were taken into 
custody by the DRI. It is the contention that 
from the screen shot, the contents of the 
whatsapp chat cannot be understood and 
unless the chats in electronic form is provided, 
an effective representation cannot be made. 
Thus, the whatsapp chat in electronic form 
which was to be given on a pen drive or such 
other media to facilitate them to hear them and 
understand 
the 
content 
and 
offer 
the 
explanation has been deprived offending the 
right under Article 22(5) of the Constitution of 
India.” 
 
10. On recording of the said submissions, the Coordinate 
Division Bench of the same High Court observed thus: 
“17. On a consideration of the rival submission 
on this aspect, we notice that there has been 
reliance made in the detention order regarding 
the documents mentioned above which might 
have forced the detaining authority to reach the 
conclusion about the previous smuggling 
activities and which necessitated the present 
order of detention. In spite of a specific request, 
as seen from Ext. P12 in the above cases, we 
find copies were not given. In as much as the 
contents of the above being relied upon and they 
have not been given despite asking for them, we 
feel there has been infraction of the right of the 
detenus to make an effective representation 
seeking release. 
 
18. The learned counsel for the petitioner is 
right in stating that the detaining authority 
ought to have furnished the said materials as 
their right to make an effective representation 
has been impaired. It is relevant to note in the 
decision of the Supreme Court in Atma Ram 

Vaidya v. State of Bombay [AIR 1951 SC 157]. 
The Hon'ble Supreme Court held that: 
 
Para 10. “To put, it in other words, the detaining 
authority has made its decision and passed its 
order. The detained person is then given an 
opportunity to urge his objections which in 
cases of preventive detention comes always at a 
later stage. The grounds may have been 
considered sufficient by the Government to pass 
its judgment. But to enable the detained person 
to make his representation against the order, 
further details may be furnished to him. In our 
opinion, this appears to be the true measure of 
the procedural rights of the detained person 
under Article 22 (5).” 
 
Para 12. “The conferment of the right to make a 
representation necessarily carries with it the 
obligation on the part of the detaining authority 
to furnish the grounds, i.e., materials on which 
the detention order was made. In our opinion, it 
is therefore clear that while there is a 
connection between the obligation on the part of 
the detaining authority to furnish grounds and 
the right given to the detained person to have an 
earliest opportunity to make the representation, 
the test to be applied in respect of the contents 
of the grounds for the two purposes is quite 
different. As already pointed out, for the first, 
the test is whether it is sufficient to satisfy the 
authority. For the second, the test is, whether it 
is sufficient to enable the detained person to 
make 
the 
representation 
at 
the 
earliest 
opportunity”. 
 
Para 13 “But when grounds which have a 
rational connection with the ends mentioned in 
section a of the Act are supplied, the first 
condition is satisfied. If the grounds are not 

sufficient to enable the detenue to make a 
representation, the detenue can rely on his 
second right and if he likes may ask for 
particulars which will enable him to make the 
representation. On an infringement of either of 
these two rights the detained person has a right 
to approach the court and complain that there 
has been an infringement of his fundamental 
right and even if the infringement of the second 
part of the right under Article 22 (5) is 
established he is bound to be released by the 
court”. 
 
19. In the light of the above, we cannot accept 
the contention of the learned counsel for the 
respondents that there was no duty to supply 
the documents mentioned above to the detenus. 
The decisions relied on by the learned counsel 
for the respondent for the proposition that the 
documents sought for in the instant cases need 
not be granted cannot be accepted as the same 
are rendered on different sets of facts. In as 
much as the documents sought has been relied 
upon in the detention orders, the same ought to 
have been furnished to the detenus when they 
requested for the same. The learned counsel for 
the petitioners is also right in relying on the 
following judgments for canvassing the same 
position that the relevant electronic info to be 
provided in the same format: 
 
1. 2016 (3) KHC – Reshmi v. Union of 
India 
2. 2019 KHC 914 – Hajira N.K. v. Union 
of India 
3. 2020 KHC 167 – Beevikunju v. Union 
of India 
4. 2021 KHC 303 - Waheeda Ashraf v. 
Union of India 

In the light of the discussion above, we are 
convinced that the non-supply has vitally 
affected the right of the detnus under Article 
22(5) of the Constitution of India. We, 
accordingly, hold that the detention order is bad 
for the non-supply of these documents sought 
for in Ext. P12.” 

11. After observing the aforesaid, the Coordinate Division 
Bench of the same High Court held that non-supply of the 
documents had vitally affected the right of the detenus to make 
an effective representation and the detention order came to be 
quashed on the said ground. 
12. In the present case also, the detenue had sought the copies 
of the said WhatsApp chats. However, the Division Bench of the 
High Court in the present case, while rejecting the case of the 
detenue, observed that the detaining authority had arrived at a 
subjective satisfaction on the basis of various documents and 
that non-supply of the WhatsApp chats would not vitiate the 
detention order. It, therefore, held that the findings of the 
Coordinate Bench of the same High Court in the cases of 
Nushath Koyamu (supra) and other connected matters in 
respect of other detenus could not be followed in the present 
case. 

13. We may gainfully refer to the following observations of this 
Court in the case of Official Liquidator vs. Dayanand and 
others2: 
“90. We are distressed to note that despite 
several pronouncements on the subject, 
there is substantial increase in the 
number of cases involving violation of the 
basics of judicial discipline. The learned 
Single Judges and Benches of the High 
Courts refuse to follow and accept the 
verdict and law laid down by coordinate 
and even larger Benches by citing minor 
difference in the facts as the ground for 
doing so. Therefore, it has become 
necessary to reiterate that disrespect to 
the constitutional ethos and breach of 
discipline have grave impact on the 
credibility of judicial institution and 
encourages chance litigation. It must be 
remembered 
that 
predictability 
and 
certainty is an important hallmark of 
judicial jurisprudence developed in this 
country in the last six decades and 
increase in the frequency of conflicting 
judgments of the superior judiciary will do 
incalculable harm to the system inasmuch 
as the courts at the grass roots will not be 
able to decide as to which of the judgments 
lay down the correct law and which one 
should be followed. 
 
91. We may add that in our constitutional 
set-up every citizen is under a duty to 
abide by the Constitution and respect its 
ideals and institutions. Those who have 
 
2 (2008) 

been 
entrusted 
with 
the 
task 
of 
administering the system and operating 
various constituents of the State and who 
take oath to act in accordance with the 
Constitution and uphold the same, have to 
set 
an 
example 
by 
exhibiting 
total 
commitment to the constitutional ideals. 
This principle is required to be observed 
with greater rigour by the members of 
judicial fraternity who have been bestowed 
with the power to adjudicate upon 
important constitutional and legal issues 
and protect and preserve rights of the 
individuals and society as a whole. 
Discipline is sine qua non for effective and 
efficient functioning of the judicial system. 
If the courts command others to act in 
accordance with the provisions of the 
Constitution and rule of law, it is not 
possible to countenance violation of the 
constitutional principle by those who are 
required to lay down the law.” 
 
14. The aforesaid observations of this Court aptly apply to the 
facts of the present case. 
15. When the Coordinate Bench of the same High Court based 
on same grounds of detention and on the basis of the same 
material, which was relied on by the detaining authority, had 
come to a considered conclusion that non-supply of certain 
documents had vitiated the right to make an effective 
representation of the detenus, another Coordinate Bench could 
not have ignored the same. 

16. No doubt that, the second Division Bench has sought to 
justify its decision by holding that the findings in the cases of 
Nushath Koyamu (supra) and other connected matters would 
not be applicable to it since the detaining authority had also 
taken into consideration the other material while arriving at its 
subjective satisfaction. However, it is to be noted that if that was 
so in the case of present detenue, that was also so in the cases 
of other detenus. 
17. We are of the considered opinion that the Division Bench of 
the High Court while passing the impugned judgment and order 
should have followed the view taken by another Division Bench 
of the same High Court specifically when the grounds of 
detention and the grounds of challenge were identical in both the 
cases. In the event, the Division Bench of the High Court was of 
the view that the earlier decision of the Coordinate Bench of the 
same High Court was not correct in law, the only option available 
to it was to refer the matter to a larger Bench. 
18. In that view of the matter, the present appeal deserves to be 
allowed on this short ground. We accordingly pass the following 
order. 

The appeal is allowed. 

Order of detention dated 24th August 2021 passed by the 
Central Economic Intelligence Bureau, COFEPOSA Wing 
is quashed and set aside. 
(iii) Order of confirmation of detention order dated 24th May 
2022 passed by the Central Economic Intelligence 
Bureau, COFEPOSA Wing is quashed and set aside....J 
(B.R. GAVAI)...J 
(PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)...J 
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)