IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

REKHA SHARMA 

 APPELLANT(S) 
 
 VERSUS 
 
THE RAJASTHAN HIGH COURT, JODHPUR 
 & ANR. RESPONDENT(S)

WITH 

RATANLAL APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 

THE RAJASTHAN HIGH COURT, JODHPUR 
& ANR. RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 

BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. 
 
1. Both the appeals having common question of law and facts were heard 
together and are being decided by this common judgment. 
2. The facts in nutshell are that the respondent High Court had issued an 
advertisement for the direct recruitment of 120 posts of Civil Judge and 
Judicial Magistrate under the Civil Judge Cadre. The appellant-Ms. 

Rekha Sharma, having 40% permanent disability in relation to her eyes, 
had applied for the said post. The appellant-Ratan Lal having locomotor 
disability i.e. 55% permanent physical impairment in relation to his right 
upper limb, had also applied for the said post. Both having appeared in 
the Preliminary Examination were declared “not successful.” As per the 
result declared on 11.01.2022, the cut off marks in respect of every 
category mentioned in the advertisement were shown except the cut off 
marks for the category of Persons with benchmark disabilities. 
3. Being aggrieved by the said result, the appellant-Ratan Lal (in C.A. No. 
5052/2023) had preferred D.B., 
which came to be dismissed by the High Court vide the judgment and 
order dated 02.03.2022. The appellant-Rekha Sharma (in C.A. No. 
5051/2023) had also filed D.B. which 
came to be dismissed by the High Court vide the order dated 06.04.2022 
relying upon the judgment dated 02.03.2022 passed in. 
4. The bone of contention raised by the learned counsels appearing for 
both the appellants in the instant appeals is that the respondents while 
declaring the result of Preliminary Examination showing the cut off 
marks for each of the categories mentioned in the advertisement in 
question, had not shown the cut off marks for the category of Persons 

with benchmark disabilities. According to them, the said action of the 
respondents was discriminatory and violative of their Fundamental 
Rights enshrined in Article 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution of India, 
and also violative of the Rajasthan Judicial Service Rules, 2010 read 
with Rajasthan Rights of Persons with Disabilities Rules, 2018. 
5. According to the learned Senior Counsel Ms. Pinky Anand appearing 
for the respondents, the appellant-Rekha Sharma having obtained 57 
marks in the EWS category for which the cut off marks were 69 marks, 
and the appellant-Ratan Lal having secured 59 marks in the OBC-NCL 
category for which the cut off marks were 67 marks, were found to be 
not qualified for appearing in the Main Examination. She further 
submitted that the entire selection process was over on 30.08.2022 and 
the appointments of successful candidates have already been made by 
the respondents on 09.03.2023. The fresh advertisement for the 
vacancies of 2022-2024 was issued on 09.04.2024 and the result of the 
Preliminary Examination in respect of the said advertisement has also 
been declared on 15.07.2024. 
6. Before dealing with the rival contentions raised by the learned counsels 
for the parties, let us refer to the relevant paragraphs of the 
advertisement dated 22.07.2021 in question. 
“1. The Rajasthan High Court, Jodhpur under the Rajasthan Judicial Service 
Rules, 2010 (As amended) is inviting online application in the prescribed online 
format for direct recruitment on 120 vacant posts (89 posts of 2020 and 31 

posts of 2021) of Civil Judge and Judicial Magistrate under the Civil Judge 
Cadre on probation at the pay scale of 27700-770-33090-920-40450-1080-
44770. 
 
2-3………….. 
 
4. 
Number of Vacant Posts and Reservations: - 
 
Total no. of 
vacancies 
Year 
General 
Reserved 
Persons 
with 
benchmark 
disabilities 

SC 
ST 
OBC 
EWS 
MBC 

(upto 
Dec. 
2020) 
35 out of 
which 10 
posts for 
women 
out of 10 
posts 02 
posts 
reserved 
for widow 
14 out of 
which 04 
posts for 
women 
out of 04 
posts 01 
post 
for 
widow 
10 out 
of 
which 

posts 
for 
women 
18 out 
of 
which 

posts 
for 
women 
out of 

posts 
01 post 
for 
widow 
08 out 
of 
which 
02 post 
for 
women 
04 out 
of 
which 
01 post 
for 
woman 
Out of 89 
vacancies 
04 posts for 
persons 
with 
benchmark 
disabilities 

(upto 
Dec. 
2021) 
14 out of 
which 04 
posts for 
women 
out of 4 
posts 01 
post 
reserved 
for widow 
04 out of 
which 01 
post 
for 
woman 

06 out 
of 
which 
01 post 
for 
woman 

Out of 31 
vacancies, 
01 post for 
persons 
with 
benchmark 
disabilities 
 
*Out of 05 posts reserved for persons with Benchmark Disabilities, 01 
(one)post is reserved for blindness and low vision, 01 (one) for deaf and hard 
of hearing, 01 (one) for locomotor disability including cerebral palsy, leprosy 
cured, dwarfism, acid attack victim and muscular dystrophy and 02 (two) for 
autism, intellectual disability, specific learning disability and mental illness and 
multiple disabilities from amongst persons under clause (a) to (d) including 
deaf blindness in the posts identified for each disabilities. 
 
5. In relation to reservation in various categories: - 
 
i. The reservation in the reserved post for women (widow or divorcee) shall be 
category wise horizontal in the vacant posts, which means that the category 
(Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes/Other Backward Class/Extremely 
Backward Class/ Economically Weaker Sections/General Category) of 
woman applicant selected will be adjusted in the same category for which she 
filed application. ii. The reservation for the handicapped shall be horizontal against the total 
vacant posts, which means that category (Scheduled Caste/Scheduled 
Tribes/Other Backward Class/ Extremely Backward Class/ Economically 

Weaker Sections/General Category) of handicapped applicant selected will be 
adjusted in the same category for which he filed application. iii. In case candidates for Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes/Other Backward 
Class/ Extremely Backward Class/ Economically Weaker Sections/Women 
(Widow or divorcee)/handicapped of Rajasthan State is not available then 
these posts shall be filed as per the procedure and customs of the Rajasthan 
Judicial Service Rules, 2010. iv. For selection to the post of general category, the candidates of reserved 
category should be eligible like the candidates of general category. 
 
6-14 
 
15. Scheme & Syllabus of Examination: - 
 
(1) The competitive examination for the recruitment to the post of Civil Judge 
shall be conducted in two stages, i.e., Preliminary Examination and Main 
Examination. The marks obtained in the Preliminary Examination by the 
candidate who are declared qualified for admission to the Main Examination 
will not be counted for determining final merit. 
 
 (2) The number of candidate to be admitted to the Main Examination will be 
fifteen times the total number of vacancies (category-wise) but in the said 
range all those candidates who secure the same percentage of marks on the 
last cut-off will be admitted to the main examination. 
 
Note: - To qualify for Main Examination, the candidates of SC/ST category 
shall have to secure minimum 40% marks and candidates of all other 
categories shall have to secure 45% minimum marks in the Preliminary 
Examination. 
 
(3) The number of candidates to be admitted to the interview shall be, as far 
as practicable three times the total number of vacancies category-wise. 
Provided that to qualify for interview, a candidate shall have to secure a 
minimum of 35% marks in each of the law papers and 40% marks in aggregate 
in the Main Examination. 
Provided further that a candidate belonging to Scheduled Caste or Scheduled 
Tribe category, shall be deemed to be eligible for interview, if he has obtained 
minimum of 30% marks in each of the law papers and 35% marks in the 
aggregate in the Main Examination. 
 
(4) It shall be compulsory to appear, in each and every paper of written test, 
as also before the lnterview Board for viva voce. A candidate, who has failed 
to appear in any of the written paper or before the board for viva voce shall 
not be recommended for appointment. 
 
(5) The examination scheme for recruitment to the cadre of Civil Judge shall 
consist of: 

l. Preliminary Examination (Objective Type) 
ll. Main Examination (Subjective Type) 
lll. Interview……” 
7. As per the notice dated 11.01.2022 declaring the result of the 
Preliminary Examination held on 28.11.2021, the respondents had 
mentioned the following cut off marks for the respective categories 
mentioned in the advertisement. 
Cut-off Marks 
 
Category 
Cut Off 
Marks 
General 

General (Divorcee) 

General (Widow) 

SC 

SC (Divorcee) 

ST 

OBC-NCL 

OBC-NCL 

OBC-NCL (Widow) 

MBC-NCL 

EWS 

8. Though the Learned Counsels for the appellants have strenuously 
urged that it was incumbent on part of the respondents to show the cut 
off marks for the category of Persons with benchmark disabilities, 
particularly when the cut off marks for each of the categories mentioned 
in the advertisement in question were shown, it is difficult to accept the 
said submissions. Apart from the fact that the appellants having 
participated in the Selection Process in respect of the advertisement in 
question and having failed to succeed in the Preliminary Examination, 
had filed the writ petitions in the High Court, the appellants have also 

failed to substantiate their contention that it was incumbent on part of 
the respondents to fix the cut off marks for the category of Persons with 
benchmark disabilities. As could be seen from the advertisement itself, 
the reservation in favour of the Persons with disabilities was an Overall 
Horizontal Reservation and was not compartmentalised reservation, 
because out of the total vacancies mentioned in the advertisement, five 
posts were reserved for the Persons with benchmark disabilities. 
9. It is quite well settled that the Horizontal Reservation is of two types: - 
(i) Compartmentalised Horizontal Reservation, and (ii) Overall 
Horizontal Reservation. The Compartmentalised Horizontal Reservation 
is such wherein the proportionate vacancies are reserved in each 
vertical reserved category. However, in case of Overall Horizontal 
Reservation, the Reservation is provided on the total post advertised i.e. such reservation is not specific to each vertical category. As per the 
advertisement dated 22.07.2021, the vacancies in case of women 
candidates were classified/identified for each category i.e. General, 
OBC, SC, ST, MBC whereas for the Persons with benchmark 
disabilities, no such vacancies were mentioned in the said categories. 
Further, in the three-tier process of the Examination Scheme, the 
number of candidates to be admitted to the Main Examination were 
fifteen times the total number of vacancies (category wise) and the 
candidates had to qualify themselves by securing the minimum 

percentage of marks fixed for each of the categories in the Preliminary 
Examination. Therefore, the Persons with benchmark disabilities falling 
under the Overall Horizontal Reservation had to qualify for the Mains 
Examination by securing minimum cut off marks fixed for the concerned 
category in which he/she had applied. 
10. Apart from the fact that there was nothing provided in the advertisement 
for the fixation of cut off marks for the Persons with benchmark 
disabilities, who fall under the Overall Horizontal Reservation, the 
learned counsels for the appellant have also failed to point out from the 
Rajasthan Judicial Services Rules, 2010 under which the recruitment 
process was undertaken, that such fixation of cut off marks for the 
Persons with benchmark disabilities was mandatory. The reliance 
placed by the learned counsels for the appellants on the notification 
dated 14.10.2021 issued by the Rajasthan Government is also not 
helpful to them in as much as the said notification was given effect to, in 
the notification dated 16.04.2024 amending the RJS Rules, 2010, 
providing relaxation in age and concession of 5% in marks in favour of 
Persons with benchmark disabilities. None of the said notifications or 
amendment in the RJS Rules, 2010 make it mandatory on part of the 
respondents to declare separate cut off marks for the Persons with 
benchmark disabilities. 

11. It cannot be gainsaid that the said Act of 2016 is a social legislation 
enacted for the benefit of the Persons with disabilities and its provisions 
must be interpreted in order to enhance its objectives, so that the 
Persons with disabilities enjoy the right to equality, life with dignity and 
respect for his or her integrity equally with others as contemplated under 
the Act. However, there is no such provision either in the said Act of 
2016 or in the Rules of 2018 framed by the State of Rajasthan, which 
could be said to have been violated by the respondents by not fixing the 
cut off marks for the Persons with benchmark disabilities. 
12. Undisputedly, the reservation for the Persons with disabilities has been 
treated as Horizontal Reservation i.e. the reservation under Clause (1) 
of Article 16, and not the Vertical reservation i.e. the reservation under 
Clause (4) of Article 16 of the Constitution of India. In the case of Indra 
Sawhney & Others vs. Union of India and Others1 the concept of 
“Vertical Reservations” and “Horizontal Reservations” has been aptly 
explained. The relevant paragraph 812 thereof reads as under: - 
“812. We are also of the opinion that this rule of 50% applies only 
to reservations in favour of backward classes made under Article 
16(4). A little clarification is in order at this juncture: all 
reservations are not of the same nature. There are two types of 
reservations, which may, for the sake of convenience, be referred 
to as ‘vertical reservations’ and ‘horizontal reservations’. The 
reservations in favour of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes 
and other backward classes under Article 16(4) may be called 
vertical reservations whereas reservations in favour of physically 
handicapped under clause (1) of Article 16 can be referred to as 
 
1 1992 Supp. (3) SCC 217 

horizontal reservations. Horizontal reservations cut across the 
vertical reservations — what is called interlocking reservations. 
To be more precise, suppose 3% of the vacancies are reserved 
in favour of physically handicapped persons; this would be a 
reservation relatable to clause (1) of Article 16. The persons 
selected against this quota will be placed in the appropriate 
category; if he belongs to SC category he will be placed in that 
quota by making necessary adjustments; similarly, if he belongs 
to open competition (OC) category, he will be placed in that 
category by making necessary adjustments. Even after providing 
for these horizontal reservations, the percentage of reservations 
in favour of backward class of citizens remains — and should 
remain — the same. This is how these reservations are worked 
out in several States and there is no reason not to continue that 
procedure.” 

13. Thus, in view of the said clarification made in Indra Sawhney, there 
remains no doubt that the reservation for persons with disabilities would 
be relatable to Clause (1) of Article 16 and the persons selected against 
this quota will be placed in appropriate category i.e. if he/she belongs to 
Scheduled Category, he/she will be placed in that category by making 
necessary adjustments, and if he/she belongs to open category, 
necessary adjustments will be made in the open category. 
14. The concept of Overall Reservations and Compartmentalised 
Reservations is also aptly explained by this Court in Anil Kumar Gupta 
and Others vs. State of U.P. and Others2. It has been observed 
therein that where the seats reserved for the Horizontal Reservations 
are proportionately divided amongst the Vertical (Social) Reservations 
and are not intertransferable, it would be a case of Compartmentalised 
 
2 (1995) 

Reservations, whereas in the Overall Reservation, while allocating the 
special reservation candidates to their respective social reservation 
category, the Overall Reservation in favour of special reservation 
categories has to be honoured. Meaning thereby the special 
reservations cannot be proportionately divided among the Vertical 
(Social) reservation categories, and the candidates eligible for special 
reservation categories have to be provided overall seats reserved for 
them, either by adjusting them against any of the Social/Vertical 
reservations or otherwise, and thus they are intertransferable. 
15. As could be seen from the advertisement itself, the reservation for 
women (widow or divorcee) was compartmentalised reservation, 
whereas the reservation for the persons with benchmark disabilities was 
overall reservation. The respondents therefore in the notice declaring 
result of Preliminary Examination had rightly shown the cut off marks for 
all the categories except for the category of persons with benchmark 
disabilities. The Persons with benchmark disabilities for being adjusted 
in the category for which he or she had applied, had to secure the 
minimum cut off marks fixed for such category under which he or she 
had applied. Such fixation of cut off marks for other categories and non 
fixation of cut off marks for the category of persons with benchmark 
disability could neither be said to be arbitrary nor violative of any of the 
Fundamental Rights of the appellants. 

16. As well settled, the candidates who consciously took part in the process 
of selection cannot be permitted to question the advertisement or the 
methodology adopted by the respondents for making selection, on their 
having been declared as unsuccessful in the Preliminary Examinations. 
The appellants after they having found that their names do not appear 
in the list of successful candidates of Preliminary Examination, could not 
have questioned the result on the ground that the respondents had not 
declared the cut off marks for the Persons with benchmark disabilities. 
As stated earlier, the respondents have declared the cut off marks for 
the persons falling under Compartmentalised Horizontal Reservation 
and not for the Overall Horizontal Reservation under which the 
appellants fall. Such action could neither be said to be arbitrary nor 
violative of Article 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution of India. 
17. In that view of the matter, we do not find any illegality or infirmity in the 
impugned judgements and orders passed by the High Court. Both the 
appeals are dismissed accordingly...……..… 
 [BELA M. TRIVEDI]..………..… 
 [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 
 
NEW DELHI; 
AUGUST 21, 2024