IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

GIRISH GANDHI 

 PETITIONER (s) 

VERSUS 

THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS. RESPONDENT(s) 

JUDGMENT 
 
K.V. Viswanathan, J. 
1. 
The present Writ Petition, under Article 32 of the Constitution 
of India, has been filed by the petitioner-Girish Gandhi seeking an 
appropriate Writ or Direction to the effect that the personal bonds and 
sureties executed by the petitioner in connection with FIR No. 0030 
of 2021 dated 21.01.2021 registered at P.S. Sadar, District Gurugram, 
shall hold good for eleven other bail orders passed in his favour from 
the Courts of different States. Details of the bail orders in different 
FIRs have been elaborated hereinbelow. 

2. The question that arises for consideration is, is the petitioner 
entitled to the relief of treating the personal bond and one set of 
sureties already furnished as holding good for the other bail orders 
also? 
Brief Facts:- 
3. 
Very broadly, the prosecution case is that the company in which 
the petitioner was concerned with, namely, White Blue Retail Pvt. 
Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Company’) allowed the use of its 
trade name through franchisee agreement for opening of Grocery 
Shops. The Company also took the franchisee amounts and 
refundable security. The substratum of the allegation is that the 
Company which was to give space to open store on rent in some 
cases; 5% commission on monthly sale in some; 10% margin on 
goods sales in some others; 12% interest as dividend on investment 
in a few and minimum 24% profit in certain agreements, failed in its 
promise. 
4. 
Totally, 13 FIRs came to be registered against the petitioner 
under various Sections viz., 406, 420 and 506 of IPC. The petitioner 

has been granted the benefit of bail with the conditions in all of them. 
A chart setting out the FIR nos. and the place where the FIR is 
registered and the bail conditions are set out hereinbelow: 
List of Bail Orders 
S. 
No. 
FIR No. 
Place of FIR 
Bail Conditions 
1. 
190/2020 
P.S. Savina, Udaipur, 
Rajasthan 
Personal 
Bond 
of 
Rs. 
50,000/- and two sureties of 
Rs. 25,000/- including one 
local surety. 
2. 
1028/2020 
P.S. 
Civil 
Lines, 
Moradabad, 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
Personal 
Bond 
and 
furnishing of two sureties 
each in the like amount to the 
satisfaction of Court (amount 
not mentioned). 
3. 
685/2020 
P.S. 
Vrindavan, 
Mathura, 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
Personal 
Bond 
and 
furnishing of two sureties 
each in the like amount to the 
satisfaction of Court (amount 
not mentioned). 
4. 
190/2020 
P.S. Kotgate, Bikaner, 
Rajasthan 
Personal 
Bond 
of 
Rs. 
1,00,000/- and two sureties 
of Rs. 50,000/- each. 
5. 
309/2020 
P.S. 
Siddhartha 
Nagar, 
Siddhartha 
Nagar, Uttar Pradesh 
Personal 
Bond 
of 
Rs. 
75,000/- and two sureties of 
Rs. 75,000/- each. 
6. 
146/2020 
P.S. 
Jwalapur, 
Haridwar, 
Uttarakhand 
Personal 
Bond 
and 
furnishing of two sureties 
each in the like amount to the 
satisfaction of Court (amount 
not mentioned). 

7. 
53/2020 
P.S. 
Pinarayi, 
Pinarayi, Kerala 
Personal 
Bond 
of 
Rs. 
10,000/- and two solvent 
sureties of Rs. 10,000/- each. 
8. 
343/2020 
P.S. 
Kotwali, 
Mathura, 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
Personal 
Bond 
and 
furnishing of two sureties 
each in the like amount to the 
satisfaction of Court (amount 
not mentioned). 
9. 
294/2020 
P.S. 
Sipri 
Bazar, 
Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh 
Personal 
Bond 
and 
furnishing of two sureties 
each in the like amount to the 
satisfaction of Court (amount 
not mentioned). 
10. 
30/2021 
P.S. 
Sadar, 
Gurugram, Haryana 
Personal Bail Bonds with 
sum of Rs.50,000/- and one 
surety of Rs.50,000/-. 
11. 
521/2020 
P.S. 
Sadar, 
Gurugram, Haryana 
Fixed Deposit Receipts in the 
sum of Rs. 1,00,000/-. 
12. 
297/2020 
P.S. Kotwali, Patiala, 
Punjab 
Personal 
Bond 
and 
furnishing of two sureties 
each in the like amount to the 
satisfaction of Trial Court. 
13. 
222/2020 
P.S. 
Tulsipur, 
Balrampur, 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
Furnishing a Personal Bond 
and two sureties each in the 
like 
amount 
to 
the 
satisfaction of the Court 
concerned. 
 
5. The petitioner submits that he has already furnished personal bail 
bonds with a sum of Rs. 50,000/- and one surety of Rs. 50,000/- in 
the Trial Court in respect of FIR no. 0030 of 2021 registered at P.S. 
Sadar, Gurugram. The petitioner also submits that he has fulfilled the 
conditions of bail with respect to the order passed by the Learned 

Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Thalassery, Kerala in FIR No. 
53 of 2020 registered at P.S. Pinarayi, Kerala. 
6. 
The petitioner’s contention is that he was the main bread earner 
of the family. The Petitioner claims that he was merely working in 
the Company as In-charge (Accounts), though this is disputed by the 
prosecution. The claim of the complainants in some of the FIRs is 
that he was the Director of the Company. We are not to resolve that 
issue here. The petitioner further contends that his wife is physically 
handicapped and is a teacher in a private school and barely earns 
enough to eke out a living for herself and their son. Petitioner also 
avers that he has an aged mother to take care of. 
7. 
The main plea of the petitioner is that he is not in a position to 
furnish separate sureties, as directed in the remaining 11 bail orders. 
In view of that he seeks for treating the sureties already furnished in 
two cases in such a manner as to enure to the benefit of all the other 
eleven cases. 
8. 
When the matter came up on 08.04.2024, this Court made the 
following order: 

“1. Mr. Prem Prakash, learned counsel for the petitioner, contends that 
in spite of bail orders being passed in 11 cases, the petitioner is not able 
to avail his liberty due to his inability to produce the sureties. Learned 
counsel prays for a direction that the personal bonds and the sureties 
that are executed in connection with FIR No.0030 of 2021, dated 
21.01.2021, registered at P.S. Sadar, District Gurugram, should be held 
good for the other bail orders set out in the prayer clause of the petition. 
2. Issue notice to the respondents. 
3. Dasti, in addition, is permitted. 
4. Liberty is granted to the petitioner to serve the standing counsel for 
the respondent-States. 
5. List the matter on 15.04.2024 for further consideration.” 
9. 
To this Writ Petition, the States of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand and Jail Superintendent Bhondsi Jail, 
Gurugram are arrayed as Respondent no. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 
respectively. A perusal of the chart mentioned above would reveal 
that while in the State of Uttar Pradesh there are six FIRs, in Haryana 
there are two FIRs, in Punjab there is one FIR, in Rajasthan there are 
two FIRs and in Uttarakhand there is one FIR. There is also one FIR 
in Kerala where sureties have already been furnished. 
10. As far as the State of Haryana is concerned, out of the two FIRs 
where bail orders have been obtained, sureties have been furnished in 
FIR No. 30 of 2021 registered at Police Station Sadar, Gurgaon. 

11. Counter affidavits have been filed by the respective States. The 
State of Uttar Pradesh has contended that in FIR No. 685 of 2020, the 
charge-sheet has been submitted on 07.07.2022 for the offences 
under Sections 420, 406, 506, 467, 468 and 471 of IPC before the 
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Mathura, UP. Insofar as FIR No. 343 of 
2020 is concerned, charge-sheet has been filed on 14.07.2022 for the 
offences under Sections 420, 406 and 506 of IPC against the 
petitioner before the Learned Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, 
Mathura. According to the State, for each crime number, separate 
surety is required and a particular surety cannot be made liable to pay 
the amount in excess of the amount of bond that the surety has 
furnished. In view of that, according to the State, bond of one surety 
cannot be mixed up with the bond executed or to be executed in other 
cases against different crime numbers. Stating so, the State opposes 
the prayer of the petitioner. 
12. Similarly, counter affidavit has been filed by the State of 
Rajasthan. The State points out that apart from the two FIRs 
mentioned above, there is one more FIR No. 230 of 2020 registered 
at Police Station Sadarpur, District Jodhpur, Rajasthan. The State 

contends that separate sureties are required and a common surety 
cannot be made liable to pay the amount in excess of the amount of 
bond that he or she furnishes. The State has also opposed the prayer 
of the petitioner. 
13. Equally, the State of Uttarakhand has averred that separate 
personal bond and sureties ought to be furnished insofar as the sole 
FIR pending in the State is concerned. The Superintendent, Bhondsi 
Jail, Gurugram has also filed a counter affidavit opposing the prayer 
of the petitioner. 
14. The petitioner has also filed an additional affidavit placing on 
record certain subsequent events pointing out that two more FIRs 
have been registered against him viz., FIR No. 608 of 2022 registered 
at Police Station, Vibhuti Khand, District Lucknow, U.P. on 
13.09.2022 under Sections 406 and 420 of IPC and FIR No. 141 of 
2023 dated 21.05.2023 registered at Police Station Tulsipur, District 
Balrampur under Section 3(1) of the Uttar Pradesh Gangsters and 
Anti Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986. The petitioner has also 
averred that insofar as FIR No. 608 of 2022 registered at Police 

Station Vibhuti Khand is concerned, the petitioner had filed Writ 
Petition ( in this Court. We 
noticed that the said proceeding is disposed of giving him liberty to 
approach the High Court. We say nothing more insofar as FIR No. 
608 of 2022 is concerned. 
15. A prayer is made that the bail granted in FIR No. 222 dated 
08.09.2020 registered at P.S. Tulsipur, District Balrampur, U.P. be 
allowed to enure to the benefit of the petitioner in connection with 
FIR No. 0141 of 2023 dated 21.5.2023 registered at PS Tulsipur, 
District Balrampur, U.P. We outrightly reject this prayer. The 
petitioner is at liberty to move appropriate proceedings which may be 
decided in accordance with law and uninfluenced by the present 
order. We are in the present matter only concerned as to whether 
insofar as the eleven FIRs are concerned in which bail has already 
been granted, there could be any order for consolidation of sureties 
and, if so, in what manner. 

Contentions: 
16. We have heard Mr. Prem Prakash, learned counsel for the 
petitioner and the learned senior counsels and counsels appearing for 
the respective States. We have considered the documents on record 
and the arguments advanced by the parties. 
Analysis and Reasoning: 
17. It is undisputed that in the 13 matters set out in the chart 
hereinabove, the petitioner stands enlarged on bail. The bail orders 
have become final and have not been challenged by the prosecution. 
It is also undisputed that in two of them FIR no. 0030 of 2021 
registered at P.S. Sadar, Gurugram and FIR No. 53 of 2020 registered 
at P.S. Pinarayi surety already stands furnished. The situation today 
is, in spite of obtaining bail in 13 cases, the petitioner has not been 
able to furnish sureties. There are two cases where bail has not been 
granted and we have already observed that the present proceedings 
do not concern them. 
18. Section 441 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which deals with 
bonds and sureties, reads as under: 

“441. Bond of accused and sureties. – (1)Before any person is 
released on bail or released on his own bond, a bond for such sum 
of money as the police officer or Court, as the case may be, thinks 
sufficient shall be executed by such person, and, when he is 
released on bail, by one or more sufficient sureties conditioned that 
such person shall attend at the time and place mentioned in the 
bond, and shall continue so to attend until otherwise directed by 
the police officer or Court, as the case may be. 
(2) Where any condition is imposed for the release of any person 
on bail, the bond shall also contain that condition. 
(3) If the case so requires, the bond shall also bind the person 
released on bail to appear when called upon at the High Court, 
Court of Session or other Court to answer the charge. 
(4) For the purpose of determining whether the sureties are fit or 
sufficient, the Court may accept affidavits in proof of the facts 
contained therein relating to the sufficiency or fitness of the 
sureties, or, if it considers necessary, may either hold an inquiry 
itself or cause an inquiry to be made by a Magistrate subordinate 
to the Court, as to such sufficiency or fitness.” 
19. Section 446 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which deals with 
procedure when bond has been forfeited, reads as under: 
“446. Procedure when bond has been forfeited. – (1) Where a 
bond under this Code is for appearance, or for production of 
property, before a Court and it is proved to the satisfaction of that 
Court or of any Court to which the case has subsequently been 
transferred, that the bond has been forfeited, 
or where in respect of any other bond under this Code, it is 
proved to the satisfaction of the Court by which the bond was 
taken, or of any Court to which the case has subsequently been 
transferred, or of the Court of any Magistrate of the first class, that 
the bond has been forfeited, 

the Court shall record the grounds of such proof, and may call 
upon any person bound by such bond to pay the penalty thereof or 
to show cause why it should not be paid.” 
20. As set out earlier, the cases against the petitioner span over six 
States. Insofar as the case in Kerala is concerned, he has already 
furnished sureties and there is only one case in that State. Insofar as 
Haryana is concerned, of the two cases, he has furnished sureties in 
one and in the other case what has been ordered is Fixed Deposit 
Receipt (FDR) for a sum of Rs. 1,00,000/-. We do not propose to 
interfere with this order. The remaining States are Uttar Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Punjab and Uttarakhand. In these States, even though in 
the cases concerned, the bail has been ordered, the petitioner is still 
in custody because he is unable to furnish sureties. 
21. The Oxford Dictionary defines ‘surety’ as “a person who takes 
responsibility for another’s obligation”. Advanced Law Lexicon by 
P. Ramanatha Aiyar, 3rd Edition 2005 defines ‘surety’ to mean “the 
bail that undertakes for another man in a criminal case.” 

22. Whether it is to get individuals, to stand as a guarantor for a 
loan transaction or as a Surety in a criminal proceeding, the choice 
for a person is very limited. It will very often be a close relative or a 
longtime friend. In a criminal proceeding, the circle may get even 
more narrowed as the normal tendency is to not disclose about the 
said criminal proceeding to relatives and friends, to protect one’s 
reputation. These are hard realities of life in our country and as a court 
of law we cannot shut our eyes to them. A solution, however, has to 
be found strictly within the framework of the law. 
23. From time immemorial, the principle has been that the 
excessive bail is no bail. To grant bail and thereafter to impose 
excessive and onerous conditions, is to take away with the left hand, 
what is given with the right. As to what is excessive will depend on 
the facts and circumstances of each case. In the present case, the 
petitioner is experiencing a genuine difficulty in finding multiple 
sureties. Sureties are essential to ensure the presence of the accused, 
released on bail. At the same time, where the court is faced with the 
situation where the accused enlarged on bail is unable to find sureties, 
as ordered, in multiple cases, there is also a need to balance the 

requirement of furnishing the sureties with his or her fundamental 
rights under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. An order which 
would protect the person’s fundamental right under Article 21 and at 
the same time guarantee the presence, would be reasonable and 
proportionate. As to what such an order should be, will again depend 
on the facts and circumstances of each case. 
24. In Satender Kumar Antil vs. Central Bureau of Investigation 
& Anr. (2022), this Court held that “imposing a condition 
which is impossible of compliance would be defeating the very object 
of release.” 
25. This Court, in SLP (Criminal) Nos. 8914-8915 of 2018 [Hani 
Nishad ohammad Imran ikky vs. The State of Uttar 
Pradesh], has made the following order in a situation where the 
petitioner was faced with 31 cases: 
“Considering the submissions, the impugned order is modified to 
the extent that the petitioner shall execute a personal bond for Rs. 
30,000/- (Rupees Thirty thousand only) and the same bond shall 
hold good for all 31 cases. There shall be two sureties who shall 
execute the bond for Rs. 30,000/- which bond shall hold good for 
all the 31 cases. It is clarified that the personal bond so executed 
by the Petitioner and the bond so executed by the two sureties shall 
hold good for all the 31 cases. 

With these observations, the Special Leave Petitions are disposed 
of. 
 
Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.” 
In Hani Nishad (supra) only one State was involved, as all the cases 
were pending in the State of Uttar Pradesh. 
26. We may also usefully note the order of this Court In Re Policy 
Strategy for Grant of Bail in SMWP ( reported 
in. By the order dated 31.01.2023, this 
Court endorsing certain directions sought by the Amicus 
Curiae passed an order for compliance with those directions. The two 
relevant directions are extracted hereunder:- 
“6) If the bail bonds are not furnished within one month from the 
date of grant bail, the concerned Court may suo moto take up the 
case and consider whether the conditions of bail require 
modification/relaxation. 
7) One of the reasons which delays the release of the 
accused/convict is the insistence upon local surety. It is suggested 
that in such cases, the courts may not impose the condition of local 
surety.” 
27. In the bail order in FIR No. 190/2020 registered at P.S. Savina, 
Udaipur, Rajasthan, there is an order for providing a local surety. The 
petitioner herein hails from Haryana and to secure a local surety will 

be an arduous task for him. This condition has virtually rendered 
ineffective the order for bail. We need to do nothing more than to 
recall the memorable words of Justice Krishna Iyer in Moti Ram and 
Ors. vs. State of Madhya Pradesh (1978):- 
“33. To add insult to injury, the magistrate has demanded sureties 
from his own district! (we assume the allegation in the petition). 
What is a Malayalee, Kannadiga, Tamil or Telugu to do if arrested 
for alleged misappropriation or theft or criminal trespass in Bastar, 
Port Blair Pahalgam or Chandni Chowk? He cannot have sureties 
owning properties in these distant places. He may not know any 
one there and might have come in a batch or to seek a job or in a 
morcha. Judicial disruption of Indian unity is surest achieved by 
such provincial allergies. What law prescribes sureties from 
outside or non-regional language applications? What law 
prescribes the geographical discrimination implicit in asking for 
sureties from the court district? This tendency takes many forms, 
sometimes, 
geographic, 
sometimes 
linguistic, 
sometimes 
legalistic. Article 14 protects all Indians qua Indians, within the 
territory of India. Article 350 sanctions representation to any 
authority, including a court, for redress of grievances in any 
language used in the Union of India. Equality before the law 
implies that even a vakalat or affirmation made in any State 
language according to the law in that State must be accepted 
everywhere in the territory of India save where a valid legislation 
to the contrary exists. Otherwise, an adivasi will be unfree in Free 
India, and likewise many other minorities. This divagation has 
become necessary to still the judicial beginnings, and to inhibit the 
process of making Indians aliens in their own homeland. Swaraj 
is made of united stuff.” 
 
In view of the above, we propose to relieve the petitioner from 
the direction to produce a local surety. 

28. Keeping the principles discussed hereinabove, we direct that for 
the FIRs pending in each of the States of Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
Punjab and Uttarakhand, in each State, the petitioner will furnish his 
personal bond for Rs. 50,000/- and furnish two sureties who shall 
execute the bond for Rs. 30,000/- each which shall hold good for all 
FIRs in the concerned State, for cases mentioned in the chart set out 
hereinabove. The same set of sureties is permitted to stand as surety 
in all the States. We feel that this direction will meet the ends of 
justice and will be proportionate and reasonable. For the State of 
Uttar Pradesh, the above direction shall hold good for FIR No. 
1028/2020 registered at P.S. Civil Lines, Moradabad, Uttar Pradesh, 
FIR No. 685/2020 registered at P.S. Vrindavan, Mathura, Uttar 
Pradesh, FIR No. 309/2020 registered at P.S. Siddhartha Nagar, 
Siddhartha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, FIR No. 343/2020 registered at P.S. 
Kotwali, Mathura, Uttar Pradesh, FIR No. 294/2020 registered at P.S. 
Sipri Bazar, Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh and FIR No. 222/2020 registered 
at P.S. Tulsipur, Balrampur, Uttar Pradesh. Insofar as the State of 
Uttar Pradesh is concerned, the personal bond for Rs. 50,000/- and 
two surety bonds of Rs. 30,000/- shall be executed in regard to FIR 

No. 685/2020 registered at P.S. Vrindavan, Mathura. This personal 
bond and the bond of surety will enure to the benefit of all the other 
FIRs in the State of Uttar Pradesh mentioned in the Chart set out in 
Para 4 herein above. 
29. For the State of Punjab, the above direction shall hold good for 
the FIR No. 297/2020 registered at P.S. Kotwali, Patiala, Punjab. 
30. For the State of Rajasthan, the above direction shall hold good 
for the FIR No. 190/2020 registered at P.S. Savina, Udaipur, 
Rajasthan and FIR No. 190/2020 registered at P.S. Kotgate, Bikaner, 
Rajasthan. The personal bond and the sureties as directed above, 
insofar as the State of Rajasthan is concerned, shall be executed in 
regard to FIR No. 190/2020 registered at P.S. Savina, Udaipur. This 
personal bond and the bond of surety will enure to the benefit of the 
other FIR registered in the State of Rajasthan as mentioned in the 
Chart set out in Para 4 herein above. 
31. For the State of Uttarakhand, the above direction shall hold 
good for the FIR No. 146/2020 registred at P.S. Jwalapur, Haridwar, 
Uttarakhand. 

32. This condition will supersede the condition imposed in the 
respective bail orders. We repeat that we have not dealt with FIR No. 
608 of 2022 dated 13.09.2022 registered at P.S. Vibhuti Khand, 
District Lucknow, U.P., FIR No. 141 of 2023 dated 21.05.2023 
registered at P.S. Tulsipur, District Balrampur, U.P. and FIR No. 230 
of 2020 registered at P.S. Sadarpur, District Jodhpur, Rajasthan or 
any other FIR other than the one mentioned in the chart mentioned in 
para 4 hereinabove which the petitioner may be involved with. 
Petitioner may pursue independent proceedings with regard to those 
matters. 
33. The writ petition is allowed in terms of the directions given 
hereinabove. 
 
 ……… 

 [B.R. GAVAI] 

……… 

 [K. V. VISWANATHAN] 

New Delhi; 
 
22nd August, 2024.