IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
[ SLP (] 

MAITREYEE CHAKRABORTY 

 APPELLANT(s) 

VERSUS 
 
THE TRIPURA UNIVERSITY & ORS. RESPONDENT(s) 

JUDGMENT 
 
K.V. Viswanathan, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeal calls in question the correctness of the 
judgment of the High Court of Tripura at Agartala dated 20.06.2022 in 
W.A. No. 5 of 2020. By virtue of the said judgment, the Division Bench 
of the High Court confirmed the judgment of the learned Single Judge 
dated 04.12.2019 dismissing the writ petition of the Appellant. 

Brief facts: 
3. 
The facts lie in a narrow compass. One Dr. Praveen Kumar 
Mishra was working as an Associate Professor in Law in the 
Respondent-University. On 27.11.2015, the Executive Council of the 
Respondent-University granted a lien for one year to Dr. Praveen 
Kumar Mishra to enable him to join the post of Associate Professor in 
Law in Sikkim University. On 02.12.2015, Dr. Praveen Kumar Mishra 
joined Sikkim University. 
4. 
On 
05.05.2016, 
the 
Respondent-University 
issued 
an 
advertisement through an employment notification for various posts by 
inviting applications from suitable candidates. In the Department of 
Law, for the post of Assistant Professor, three vacancies were 
advertised. One was an unreserved regular vacancy. One was a lien 
vacancy in the Open category and one was a lien vacancy for the OBC 
candidates. The pay-scale was Rs.15600-39100 and the Grade Pay was 
Rs.6,000/-. In the note appended in Clause 19, it was mentioned 
“Appointment made to the posts against LIEN vacancy are likely to be 
regularized subject to vacation of lien and satisfactory performance.” 
Importantly, it was a common advertisement for all the three vacancies. 

We say this, at the outset, because both the learned Single Judge and the 
Division Bench proceeded on the basis that what was advertised was 
only a lien vacancy. No doubt, two of the vacancies were lien 
vacancies. However, there was one regular post also notified in the 
Unreserved category and hence it will be too much to assume that 
candidates would not have applied in full measure on the premise that 
only lien vacancies were advertised. 
5. 
On 05.09.2016, pursuant to the Appellant’s application for the 
post of Assistant Professor in Law in the Unreserved category (UR), she 
was asked to appear before the Selection Committee. On 09.09.2016, 
a list of shortlisted candidates called for interview for the post of 
Assistant Professor along with the date and time for the interview was 
published. Insofar as the post of Assistant Professor (Law) was 
concerned, the time fixed was 12.30 PM on 21.09.2016 and about 16 
candidates including the Appellant and one Sri. Brij Mohan Pandey 
were called for the interview. 
6. 
On 20.11.2016, the 26th Meeting of the Executive Council of the 
University was held and the Agenda for consideration of the panel and 
names of persons recommended by the concerned Selection Committee 

for various teaching posts was taken up and approved. Insofar as the 
Assistant Professor in Law was concerned, the following was 
mentioned. 
4. Assistant 
Professor in Law 
2-UR 
(1 lien Vacancy) 
21.09.2016 
1. Brij 
Mohan 
Pandey 
2. Maitreyee 
Chakraborty 
 
A note was appended below which reads as under:- 
“N.B. Candidate at Serial No 2 against the post of Assistant Professor 
in Law shall be given the offer of appointment against Lien Vacancy. 
In case the candidate at Serial No 1 does not accept the offer of 
appointment given to him against regular/ substantive vacancy, the 
post shall go to the candidate at Serial No 2 and Candidate at Serial 
No 3 on the approved panel shall be given the offer of appointment 
against the Lien Vacancy.” 
 
7. 
As would be clear, at Serial Number No.1 was Sri. Brij Mohan 
Pandey and he was taken against the regular vacancy. The Appellant 
was adjusted against the Unreserved lien vacancy. There was a clear 
stipulation that in case Mr. Brij Mohan Pandey did not accept the offer 
of appointment given to him against the regular/substantive vacancy, 
the post was to go to the Appellant who was at Serial No.2. It is another 

matter that Mr. Brij Mohan Pandey took up the appointment. However, 
this is significant because this fact negates the reasoning of the 
University, the learned Single Judge as well as the Division Bench that, 
what was advertised was only a lien vacancy and, as such, many 
meritorious candidates would not have applied. 
8. 
Be that as it may, on 07.12.2016, an offer of appointment was 
made offering the Appellant the post of Assistant Professor in Law (UR) 
against lien vacancy. Paras 1 and 2 of the appointment letter are crucial 
and reads as under:- 
“In accordance with the decision of the 26th meeting of the Executive 
Council of the University held on 20th November, 2016, I am to 
inform you that you have been selected for appointment to the post 
of Assistant Professor in Law (UR) against Lien vacancy in the Pay 
Band of Rs. 15600-39100 plus Academic Grade Pay (AGP) of Rs. 
6000 and other admissible allowances subject to the terms and 
conditions as set out herein and as amended from time to time. 
2. Your appointment is against Lien vacancy and hence liable to be 
terminated with the joining of the incumbent concerned back to the 
substantive post held by him in this University. In case the lien is 
vacated, your service may be continued further with the approval of 
the Executive Council of the University.” 
 
9. 
To summarize, the appointment order mentioned that a) the 
appointment was against the lien vacancy; b) it was liable to be 

terminated with the joining of the incumbent concerned back to the 
substantive post and c) in case the lien is vacated, the Appellant’s 
service may be continued further with the approval of the Executive 
Council of the University. 
10. The Appellant, after resigning her job from the Tripura 
Government Law College, joined the University in the post of Assistant 
Professor in Law with effect from 17.01.2017 (F/N) and has been 
continuously working for the last seven years and six months. 
11. On 08.03.2017, the lien granted to Dr. Praveen Kumar Mishra was 
extended by six months with effect from 15.12.2016. When the matter 
stood thus, in the 29th Meeting of the Executive Council of the 
University held on 14.11.2017 vide Agenda 12/29/2017, the resignation 
tendered by Dr. Praveen Kumar Mishra vide letter dated 18.09.2017 
from the post of Assistant Professor, Department of Law, Tripura 
University was accepted. The situation then was that Dr. Praveen 
Kumar Mishra, who held the lien, forfeited any lien that may have 
existed. Ordinarily, by virtue of Note 19 of the employment notice, the 
Appellant was expecting her regularization since there was nothing 
adverse in her performance. However, that was not to be. 

12. In the 32nd Meeting of the Executive Council held on 13.12.2018, 
vide Agenda 18/32/2018, while other teachers working in their 
respective posts were confirmed, the Appellant was not confirmed and 
the Executive Council resolved to re-advertise the post. On 28.12.2018, 
the Appellant was informed by the Registrar as follows:- 
“No.F.TU/REG/PF-T/201/17 
 
Date 28.12.18 
To 
Smt. Maitreyee Chakraborty, 
Assistant Professor, 
Department of LAW, 
Tripura University 
 
Madam, 
You have joined this University to the Post of Assistant 
Professor, Department of LAW against lien Vacancy on 17.01.2016. 
As per resolution of 32nd Meeting of the Executive Council 
held on 13th December, 2018 your post has not been confirmed 
which will be re-advertised in time. 
This is for your information and doing the needful. 
(S.Debroy) 
Registrar (i/c)” 
 
13. Here again, nothing was mentioned about any adverse 
performance. On the same day, the Appellant wrote a letter asking for 
the reasons and pointing out that the Minutes of the 32nd Executive 
Council Meeting which was circulated in the official mail merely 

mentioned: “as per rules not confirmed”. In the 32nd Meeting of the 
Executive Council dated 13.12.2018, at Agenda 18/32/2018, the issue 
was to consider the confirmation of services of the teachers of the 
University to their respective posts which are mentioned in the table as 
Annexure-II. The Resolution was:- “as per rules not confirmed”. Post 
to be re-advertised.” 
14. On 06.02.2019, the Appellant was informed that (in continuation 
of the University’s letter of 28.12.2018) her continuation in the post 
beyond 28.02.2019 was not possible and that the service against the lien 
was to expire on 28.02.2019. She was also asked if she was interested 
to work as a Guest Faculty and if so, she was asked to apply for the 
same, after observing all the formalities. 
15. The Appellant represented to the Registrar, Tripura University, 
asking for reasons for the proposed discontinuance. The Appellant also 
sought a response to her letter of 28.12.2018 and further letters to the 
Vice-Chancellor and the Dean dated 24.01.2019. No reply was 
forthcoming. 

Proceedings before the High Court: 
16. The Appellant filed a before the 
High Court impugning the Resolution of the 32nd Meeting of the 
Executive Council dated 13.12.2018 and the letter of the Registrar dated 
06.02.2019 and prayed that she be confirmed in the post of Assistant 
Professor in Law, Tripura University. An interim order of 28.02.2019 
was passed suspending the Resolution of the 32nd Meeting of the 
Executive Council and the letter dated 06.02.2019 of the Registrar. 
17. A counter affidavit came to be filed by the Respondent-University. 
A plea was set up that discretion lay with the authority about the 
continuance of the Appellant, even if the candidate holding the lien had 
vacated the lien. It was further averred that the issue about regularizing 
or re-advertising was in the larger interest of the candidates who had 
not applied (as the post was under lien). What is significant is that 
nothing adverse about the appellant was set out anywhere in the counter. 
By a judgment of 04.12.2019, a learned Single Judge, while rejecting 
the contentions of the Appellant and dismissing the writ petition held as 
follows:- 

“[9] The stand taken by the Tripura University one can find no fault. 
It can be appreciated that when a temporary vacancy is advertised 
which vacancy is created on account of the substantive holder of the 
post not being available for a temporary period, many eligible 
interested candidates may be persuaded not to apply. If a person is 
holding a permanent post or even a semi-permanent engagement 
under some other organization, he may not want to join a temporary 
vacancy, resign from his permanent or semi-permanent engagement 
at the risk of being told sometime later and since the lien holder has 
returned back and is likely to join his original position he should 
vacate the post. In that view of the matter, the decision of the 
Executive Council to re-advertise the post once the post became 
permanently vacant stands to reason. The decision therefore must be 
upheld.” 
 
18. Aggrieved by the order of the learned Single Judge, the Appellant 
preferred a before the Division Bench of the 
High Court. The Division Bench of the High Court, by a judgment 
dated 20.06.2022, affirmed the order of the learned Single Judge and 
dismissed the Appeal. 
Contentions: 
19. We have heard Mr. Ghanshyam Joshi, learned counsel for the 
Appellant and Mr. Sujeet Kumar, learned counsel for the Respondent-
University. We have also considered the written submissions filed by 
the Appellant. 

20. Mr. Ghanshyam Joshi, learned counsel for the Appellant reiterated 
the submissions made before the courts below and contended that the 
decision of the Executive Council dated 13.12.2018 resolving not to 
confirm the Appellant and to readvertise the post was illegal and that it 
deserves to be quashed. Learned counsel also contended that the courts 
below have erred in appreciating the true nature and character of the 
advertisement issued. According to the learned counsel, the 
employment notice issued insofar as the unreserved category was 
concerned, advertised for two posts of Assistant Professor in Law. 
According to learned counsel, one was a full regular vacancy and the 
other was designated as a lien vacancy. 
 21. Learned counsel submits that it was an error to assume that all 
eligible candidates desiring to apply would not have applied since the 
vacancy was a lien vacancy as there was no separate method of applying 
prescribed. Whoever applied was entitled to be considered for the 
regular vacancy also and as such until the final selection there was no 
way of knowing against which vacancy they would be selected. 
According to learned counsel, this erroneous assumption formed the 

basis of the judgment of the learned Single Judge and the Division 
Bench. 
22. Learned counsel further made reference to Clause 19 in the 
employment notice as well as to the Minutes of the 26th meeting of the 
Executive Council dated 20.11.2016 and to the letter of offer of 
appointment, to contend that the absence of anything adverse being 
noticed in the performance of the Appellant, she ought to have been 
confirmed since she had undergone the normal process of selection. 
Learned counsel relied upon the judgment in Somesh Thapliyal & Anr. vs Vice Chancellor, H.N.B. Garhwal University & Anr., (2021) 10 SC 
116 and the judgment in Meher Fatima Hussain vs. Jamia Milia 
Islamia & Ors., in support of his submissions. Mr. 
Sujeet Kumar supported the findings in the judgment of the courts 
below and contended that there was no scope for interference with the 
same. 
Question for Consideration: 
23. The question that arises for consideration is whether the 
Respondent-University was justified in resolving on 13.12.2018 at the 

32nd Meeting in Agenda No.18/32/2018, that the Appellant was not to 
be confirmed and that the post was to be readvertised? If not, the further 
question would be as to what relief should the Appellant be entitled to? 
Reasoning and Conclusion: 
24. As explained earlier, the reasoning that many interested eligible 
candidates would not have been persuaded to apply is not correct 
because what was advertised was one regular vacancy and two lien 
vacancies, with one of the lien vacancies being unreserved. At least 16 
candidates were shortlisted for the interview from the many applicants. 
In our view, it would not be correct to assume that because one of the 
unreserved vacancies was a lien vacancy many eligible candidates 
would not have applied. One vacancy advertised being a regular 
vacancy, it is fair to assume that the interested candidates would have 
definitely applied and as such no prejudice has been caused to any 
person. This fact is reinforced by a perusal of the 26th Meeting of the 
Executive Committee dated 25.11.2016 whereby while offering Mr. 
Brij Mohan Pandey the regular vacancy, the Appellant at Serial No.2 
was offered the lien vacancy which is for the Unreserved Category (UR) 
with a note that, in case the candidate at Serial No.1 did not take the 

regular vacancy, the Appellant was to be accommodated against the 
same. No doubt Mr. Brij Mohan Pandey took the regular vacancy but 
it could not be disputed that all the candidates were competing against 
the regular vacancy also. 
25. Quite apart from that, Note 19 to the employment notice also 
indicated that, subject to satisfactory performance and on vacation of 
lien by the candidate holding the lien the appointee is likely to be 
regularized. No reasons have been given in the 32nd Meeting of the 
Executive Council dated 13.12.2018 or in the letter dated 28.12.2018 as 
to why the Appellant was not confirmed. The liberty reserved in the 
appointment order cannot be exercised in an arbitrary manner. There 
was no case made out by the University to deny the Appellant, her 
confirmation. 
26. The Appellant went through the normal process of selection. The 
employment notice set out that appointments made to the posts against 
LIEN vacancies are likely to be regularized subject to vacation of lien 
and satisfactory performance. The lien admittedly got vacated. The 
performance has been satisfactory as nothing adverse had been pointed 
out and the Appellant is discharging the duties for more than seven 

years. While approving the panel of names also it was clearly mentioned 
that in case the candidate at Serial No.1 – Sri. Brij Mohan Pandey did 
not accept the offer, the Appellant was to be accommodated against the 
regular vacancy. This clearly demonstrates that all the applicants 
competed for the regular post also and no one from the open market 
could have been prejudiced. Most importantly, the offer of appointment 
also stated that in case the lien was vacated, the Appellant’s service was 
to be continued further with the approval of the Executive Council of 
the University. 
27. In this background, particularly when the Appellant was put through 
the fire test of a regular selection, was the University justified in 
denying her confirmation when all the contingencies were cleared with 
the vacation of the lien and the performance being satisfactory? We 
think not. The University cannot be heard to say:- ‘may be the lien is 
vacated, and your performance is satisfactory, but we do not want to 
confirm your service’. The Respondent-University, being a statutory 
body, any such conduct would tantamount to an arbitrary and 
unreasonable exercise of power, apart from being unfair. The discretion 
vested in the Executive Council should be exercised in a fair and non-

arbitrary manner. It cannot be based on the whim and caprice of the 
decision-making authority. If asked to justify, the Executive Council 
must have good reasons to defend the exercise of power. In this case, 
alas, there are none. The resolution of the Executive Council denying 
confirmation and preferring readvertisement is delightfully vague and 
offers no justification. The justification desperately attempted in the 
counter affidavit to defend the decision has, as demonstrated above, 
come a cropper. 
28. In Somesh Thapliyal (supra) it was held as under:- 
“49. In our considered view, once the Appellants have gone through 
the process of selection provided under the scheme of the 1973 Act 
regardless of the fact whether the post is temporary or permanent in 
nature, at least their appointment is substantive in character and 
could be made permanent as and when the post is permanently 
sanctioned by the competent authority. 
50. In the instant case, after the teaching posts in the Department of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences have been duly sanctioned and approved 
by the University Grants Commission of which a detailed reference 
has been made, supported by the letter sent to the University Grants 
Commission dated 14-8-2020 indicating the fact that the present 
Appellants are working against the teaching posts of Associate 
Professor/Assistant Professor sanctioned in compliance of the norms 
of the AICTE/PCI and are appointed as per the requirements, 
qualifications and selection procedure in accordance with the 1973 
Act and proposed by the University, such incumbents shall be treated 
to be appointed against the sanctioned posts for all practical 
purposes.” 

29. Mehar Fatima Hussain (supra), while following Somesh 
Thapliyal (supra), held on the facts of that case that where appointment 
was after undergoing a regular selection process and the incumbents 
possess the relevant qualification, they should have been continued on 
the posts merged with the regular establishment of the University 
instead of adopting a fresh selection procedure. Further in that case the 
University’s action of not continuing the incumbents and starting a fresh 
selection process was held to be unjust, arbitrary and violative of Article 
14 of the Constitution of India. Directions to continue the employment 
were given. On the facts of the present case too we are inclined to adopt 
a similar course. 
30. Considering the facts obtaining in the present case, we are 
inclined to hold that, in the absence of any material indicating 
unsatisfactory performance, in the ordinary course of things, fair and 
just exercise of power would require that the Appellant be confirmed 
against the vacancy since there was no more a lien being exercised by 
Dr. Praveen Kumar Mishra. The reasoning given by the learned Single 
Judge and of the Division Bench, as demonstrated above, are fallacious. 
The Appellant has, after undergoing the regular selection process, been 

working since 17.01.2017, for the last seven years and approximately 
six months. Even in the impugned order, pending the proposed re-
advertisement, she was continued in service. 
31. The representations in the employment notice, the Resolution of 
the Executive Council and the appointment order did give rise to a 
legitimate expectation to the Appellant that in the event of the lien being 
vacated, the appellant would be continued in service and regularized in 
the said post. The only condition was that it will need the approval of 
the Executive Council. 
32. In Ram Pravesh Singh and Others vs. State of Bihar and Others, 
(2006), this Court observed that the repository of the 
legitimate expectation is entitled to an explanation as to the cause for 
denial of the expected benefit flowing from the representation held out. 
Ram Pravesh Singh (supra) was recently followed by the Constitution 
Bench in Sivanandan C.T. and Others vs. High Court of Kerala and 
Others, (2024). Chief Justice D.Y. Chandrachud, speaking 
for the Constitution Bench, after felicitously tracing the entire history 
of the development of the doctrine of legitimate expectation, held in 
para 18 as under:- 

"18. The basis of the doctrine of legitimate expectation in public law 
is founded on the principles of fairness and non-arbitrariness in 
Government dealings with individuals. It recognises that a public 
authority's promise or past conduct will give rise to a legitimate 
expectation. The doctrine is premised on the notion that public 
authorities, while performing their public duties, ought to honour 
their promises or past practices. The legitimacy of an expectation can 
be inferred if it is rooted in law, custom, or established procedure." 
 
33. In the said judgment of the Constitution Bench, it was further held 
following Food Corporation of India vs. M/s Kamdhenu Cattle Feed 
Industries, (1993) that public authorities have a duty to use 
their powers for the purpose of public good and that the said duty raises 
a legitimate expectation on the part of the citizens to be treated in a fair 
and non- arbitrary manner. One of the exceptions recognized in the 
above judgment is that the doctrine of legitimate expectation will cede 
to larger public interest. 
34. In the present case, the only explanation given in the counter 
affidavit of the State was that the University had a discretion and that 
the denial of regularization and the decision to re-advertise was in the 
larger interest of the candidates who had not applied as the post was 
under lien. This explanation found favour with the High Court. 
However, we have in our discussion above, demonstrated that one of 

the post of the Assistant Professor (Law) was clearly a regular post in 
the Unreserved Category. We have found that no prejudice to public 
interest could have been caused as eligible candidates desiring the 
appointment would have anyway applied to compete for the regular 
slot. In view of this, in the facts of the present case, we find that the 
legitimate expectation was not outweighed by any overriding public 
interest. 
35. The mandate of Ram Pravesh Singh (supra) as reiterated in 
Sivanandan C.T. (supra) that the appellant was entitled to an 
acceptable explanation for the denial of the expectation remains 
unfulfilled. This is an additional ground on which the appellant should 
succeed. 
36. In view of the aforesaid, we set aside the judgment of the learned 
Single Judge dated 04.12.2019 and of the Division Bench dated 
20.06.2022. We also set aside the Resolution in Agenda No.18/32/2018 
of the 32nd Meeting of the Executive Council held on 13.12.2018 insofar 
as it records that the Appellant is not confirmed in service and that the 
post should be readvertised. We also set aside the letter of the Registrar 
dated 06.02.2019 directing that her services will not be continued 

beyond 28.02.2019. We further issue a writ of mandamus directing the 
Respondent-University to place the Appellant’s case for confirmation 
before the Executive Council and that the Executive Council and the 
Respondent-University shall pass appropriate resolution/order(s), in 
accordance with the findings given in the present judgment. The said 
exercise is to be carried out within four weeks’ time. The Appellant 
should also be given all consequential benefits. 
37. The appeal stands allowed in the above terms. There shall be no 
order as to costs. 
……… 

 [J.K. MAHESHWARI] 

……… 

 [K. V. VISWANATHAN] 

New Delhi; 
22nd August, 2024.