IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
BRIJ NARAYAN SHUKLA (D) 
THR. LRS. 

VERSUS 
 
SUDESH KUMAR ALIAS 
SURESH KUMAR (D) 
THR. LRS. & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 
 
VIKRAM NATH, J. 
 
1. The plaintiff is in appeal assailing the correctness 
of the judgment and order dated 15.05.2012 
passed by the Lucknow Bench of the Allahabad 
High Court allowing Second Appeal No.202 of 
1980, Sudesh Kumar and others vs. Brij Narayan 
Shukla and others, whereby, both the judgments 
of the First Appeal Court and the Trial Court were 
set aside and the suit of the plaintiff appellant 

was dismissed on the ground of limitation being 
barred by time. 
 
2. Dispute relates to an area of 3500 sq. ft. (70 ft. x 
50 ft.) (2 Biswa 12 Biswani) of Plot No.1019 
situated in Village Hardoi within the limits of 
Nagar Palika Hardoi, Uttar Pradesh. The plaintiff 
claimed title through a registered sale deed dated 
21.01.1966 from the erstwhile Zamindar Rai 
Bahadur Mohan Lal. They also claimed to have 
received possession pursuant to the sale deed. It 
is also relevant to mention that the land 
purchased was an open piece of land. In 1975, 
when the appellant tried to raise the construction 
over the land purchased, the defendants objected 
and caused hindrance giving rise to the filing of 
the suit in question on 28.05.1975, registered as 
O.S.No.161 of 1975 praying for the relief of 
injunction with alternative relief for possession. 
 
3. The defendant respondent filed their written 
statement primarily alleging that there had been 
prior proceedings between Rai Bahadur Mohan 
Lal and his co-sharers and their tenants 

(ancestors of the respondent) in the year 1944 
where a suit was filed for arrears of rent with 
respect to Plot No.1019, 1022 and 1023. 
 
3.1 Further under the settlement between the 
Zamindar and co-sharers, the land in question 
came to Siddheshwari Narain and Deep Chandra 
in a private partition and as such these co-
sharers became the owners of the land. 
 
3.2 The defendant respondents having continued in 
possession at the time of abolition of Zamindari, 
became the owners. 
 
3.3 Lastly, it was contended that soon after the sale 
deed of January, 1966 in favour of plaintiff 
appellant, there was proceedings under section 
145 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19731 in 
May, 1966. In the said proceedings, it was found 
that 
the 
defendant 
respondents 
were 
in 
possession. 

1 CrPC 

4. Both the parties led evidence, both documentary 
and oral. The Trial Court found the plaintiff 
appellant to be the owner of the land in dispute 
as also in possession and accordingly decreed the 
suit 
for 
injunction 
vide 
judgment 
dated 
19.09.1979. 
 
5. The Trial Court had placed reliance upon the sale 
deed, the Mutation and the Khasra and Khewat 
entries. Further, the Trial Court had held that the 
proceedings under section 145 CrPC would not 
be of any benefit to the defendant respondents as 
it was not clear from the material placed that the 
said proceedings related to the land in question. 
 
6. The defendant respondent preferred appeal 
before the District Judge which was registered as. The District Judge, 
Hardoi, 
vide 
judgment 
dated 
29.11.1979 
dismissed the appeal. It however did not agree 
with a couple of findings recorded by the Trial 
Court and accordingly, recorded its own findings. 
According to the appellate court, the proceedings 
under section 145 CrPC were related to the land 

in dispute and that the possession of the 
defendant respondent was found over the land in 
dispute. It accordingly decreed the suit for 
possession and not for injunction as had been 
done by the Trial Court. The Appellate Court 
further held that the plaintiff-appellants were the 
owners of the land in dispute and they had been 
successful in establishing their title. 
 
7. Another finding recorded by the Appellate Court 
was that the land in dispute was a non-
agricultural land and there was no question of 
abolition of Zamindari with respect to the said 
land and therefore the claim of the defendants of 
becoming the owners on the abolition of 
Zamindari was not correct. It further found that 
the suit for arrears of rent filed in 1944 was with 
respect to some other land and not the land in 
dispute in as much as the suit land was vacant 
open piece of land whereas the 1944 suit for 
arrears of rent was with respect to the house of 
the defendants. Even the plot areas in the two 
suits were different. The Plot No.1019 being a 
huge piece of land where as the plaintiff appellant 

had purchased only a part of it, they had derived 
valid title from the Zamindars, the erstwhile 
owners. 
 
8. It accordingly held that the period of 12 years for 
perfecting rights on the basis of adverse 
possession would commence from 1966 and the 
suit having been filed in 1975 was well within 
time. 
 
9. The defendant respondent preferred Second 
Appeal before the High Court which was 
registered as Second Appeal No.202 of 1980. It is 
this appeal which has been allowed by the 
impugned judgment giving rise to the present 
appeal. The High Court dismissed the suit of the 
appellant on the ground of limitation as 
according to it, the defendant respondent had 
matured their rights or rather perfected their 
rights by adverse possession having continued so 
since 1944 when the first suit for arrears of rent 
was filed. We are, however, of the firm view that 
the High Court fell in serious error in holding so, 
for the following reasons: 

9.1 It has not dealt with the findings recorded by the 
Trial Court and the First Appeal Court with 
respect to the issue of Limitation and the 
evidence considered by them. 
 
9.2 The High Court was hearing the Second Appeal 
under section 100 of Code of Civil Procedure, 
19082 and it having reappreciated the findings to 
disturb findings of fact, committed an error. 
 
9.3 The High Court has not recorded any finding 
that the plaintiff appellants were not the owners 
or that they have failed to prove the ownership. 
 
9.4 The suit of the year 1944 was for the arrears of 
rent and not relating to any dispute of 
possession. The defendant respondents were 
tenants and therefore their possession was 
permissive as against the then landlords. There 
was no question of them claiming any adverse 
possession from 1944. 

2 CPC 

9.5 In our considered view, the plaintiff appellants 
got their ownership/title under the registered 
sale deed on 21.01.1966. The dispute for 
possession vis-à-vis the defendant respondents 
would arise only after the said date and not on 
any date prior to it. Admittedly from the date of 
the sale deed, the suit was filed within the period 
of 12 years in May, 1975. Even if it is assumed 
that 
the 
defendant 
respondents 
were 
in 
possession from prior to 1944, their possession 
could not have been adverse even to the 
Zamindars as they were tenants and their 
tenancy would be permissible in nature and not 
adverse. 
There 
were 
no 
proceedings 
for 
possession prior to 1966. 
 
9.6 Further, the first appellate court having recorded 
a specific finding that the land in suit was not 
covered by Zamindari Abolition as it was non-
agricultural land, the claim of ownership from 
the date of abolition of Zamindari was also 
without any merit. The finding has not been 
disturbed by the High Court. The defendant-
respondents thus having failed to establish their 

title, would have no right to retain the 
possession. 
10. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed, the impugned 
judgment and order of the High Court is set aside 
and that of the First Appellate Court decreeing 
the suit for possession is maintained. 
11. There shall be no order as to costs. 
12. Pending application(s), if any, is/are disposed of. 

……………………………………J. 
(VIKRAM NATH) 

……………………………………J. 
 (RAJESH BINDAL) 
 
NEW DELHI 
JANUARY 03, 2024