IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 30976 of 2017) 

RAJKARAN SINGH & ORS.. 

VERSUS 
 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS. 
 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Heard. 
2. Leave granted. 
3. 
The present appeal by special leave, is preferred on behalf of 
the appellants, assailing the judgment dated 25th April, 2017 
passed by the High Court of Delhi in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 3543 
of 2017, dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellants and 
upholding the judgment dated 4th October, 2016 passed by the 
Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi 
(hereinafter being referred to as the ‘Tribunal’) in Original 
Application Nos. 60 of 2013 and 459 of 2013. The Tribunal had 

rejected the appellants’ claim for benefits of the replacement scales 
of the Revised Pay Rules, 2008 (hereinafter referred to as ‘RP 
Rules’) in accordance with the 6th Pay Commission Report, with 
effect from 1st January, 2006. 
Brief facts: - 
4. 
The facts in a nutshell, are that the appellants (Appellant No. 
1 to Appellant No. 6) were appointed to manage the Compulsory 
Saving Scheme Deposits (hereinafter referred to as SSD) Fund of 
the Special Frontier Force (hereinafter referred to as SFF) in 
various positions such as Junior Accountant, Accountant, Upper 
Division Clerk (UDC), and Lower Division Clerk (LDC), on running 
pay scales. The SSD Fund is a welfare initiative funded through 
the personal contributions of the SFF troops from their salaries. 
Upon having been engaged as above, the appellants also received 
Traveling Allowance (TA), Dearness Allowance (DA), House Rent 
Allowance (HRA), Special Security Allowance (SSA), Gratuity, 
Bonus, Winter Allowance, and High-Altitude Allowance, etc. along 
with salary as per the 4th and 5th Central Pay Commissions (‘CPC’). 
5. 
On 1st January, 2006, the Union of India implemented the 6th 
Central Pay Commission and made the same applicable to all 
government employees of the SFF. However, these benefits were 

not extended to the appellants i.e. SSD employees and instead, an 
ad-hoc amount of Rs. 3,000/- per month was given to each of 
them. For the sake of brevity, the details of the appellants with 
reference to their appointments, retirement, length of service, and 
their salaries in accordance with the different CPC are illustrated 
in a tabular form below: - 
Name 
of 
the 
Appellant 
Appointment 
Date 
Post 
Date 
of 
Retirement 
Service 
rendered 
Salary 
paid 
initially 
Salary 
paid after 

Rajkaran 
Singh (‘A1’) 
1st 
January, 

Lower 
Division 
Clerk 
31st August 

37 years 
and 

months 
Rs. 
220-

As per the 
5th CPC 
& 
Rs. 
3,000/- 
instead of 
6th 
CPC 
Jagat Ram 
Joshi (‘A2’) 
25th April, 1975 
Lower 
Division 
Clerk 
28th 
February 

37 years 
and 

months 
Rs. 220-

As per the 
5th CPC 
& 
Rs. 
3,000/- 
instead of 
6th 
CPC 
Vishu Dutt 
Tripathi 
(‘A3’) 
2nd May, 1978 
Lower 
Division 
Clerk 
31st 
July 

35 years 
and 

months 
Rs. 
260-

As per the 
5th CPC 
& 
Rs. 
3,000/- 
instead of 
6th 
CPC 
HK Naithani 
(‘A4’) 
27th 
November,1982 
Lower 
Division 
Clerk 
31st August 

35 years 
and 

months 
Rs. 260-

As per the 
5th CPC 
& 
Rs. 
3,000/- 
instead of 
6th 
CPC 

Shiv Kumar 
(‘A5’) 
25th May, 2005 
Junior 
Accoun
tant 
18th 
February 
2014 (VRS) 

years 
and 

months 
Rs. 5000-

As per the 
5th CPC 
& 
Rs. 
3,000/- 
instead of 
6th 
CPC 
Surat 
Singh (‘A6’) 
16th July, 1977 
Lower 
Division 
Clerk 
1st January 
2009 (VRS) 
31 years 
and 

months 
Rs. 
260-

As per the 
5th CPC 
& 
Rs. 
3,000/- 
instead of 
6th 
CPC 

6. 
Upon attaining the age of superannuation i.e., 60 years, the 
appellants claimed pensionary benefits under the 6th Central Pay 
Commission (‘CPC’). On 28th July, 2011, appellant No. 1 (Rajkaran 
Singh) filed a representation to the respondent No. 1 seeking 
pensionary benefits under the 6th CPC, however, the same was 
rejected vide order dated 15th October, 2012, on the ground that 
he was not a government employee and had not been appointed by 
following any Recruitment Rules, and therefore, the Central Civil 
Services (Pension) Rules, 1972(hereinafter being referred to as 
‘CCS Rules’), would not apply to him. The other appellants 
(appellant No. 2-appellant No. 6) also filed similar representations 
to the respondents which met a similar fate on the same 
reasoning. 

7. 
Aggrieved by the rejection of their claim for pensionary 
benefits under the 6th CPC, the appellants filed Original 
Applications before the Tribunal, laying a challenge to the non-
implementation of the benefits of the 6th CPC and also raising a 
grievance about the lack of General Provident Fund (GPF) 
provisions in the SSD Fund, despite they having been appointed 
to posts created under the authorisation of the Cabinet Secretariat 
and after following the due process of law in making the 
appointments. 
8. 
The Tribunal, vide order dated 4th October, 2016 dismissed 
the Original Applications and rejected the appellants' claims 
holding that they were not employed in government service. The 
Tribunal referred to Rule 2 of the CCS Rules, and held that the 
appellants were not entitled to the benefits under the CCS Rules 
as their salaries were neither paid from the Consolidated Fund of 
India, the Contingent Fund or the Public Accounts Funds, nor 
were their services governed by statutory obligations i.e. no 
recruitment rules were applicable to them. The Tribunal further 
held 
that 
the 
appellants 
were 
not 
recruited 
under 
an 
advertisement issued where people at large were given the 
opportunity of appearing; there was no question of any obligation 

cast under the Factories Act for running the SSD Fund, as it was 
not covered under the definition of a factory; and the services 
performed were not statutory in nature because the SSD Fund is 
a voluntary contribution made by the SFF employees. The Tribunal 
found that the SSD Fund was financed by voluntary contributions 
from SFF employees and hence the services rendered therein did 
not qualify as government service. 
9. 
The appellants challenged the Tribunal’s order by filing a writ 
petition before the Delhi High Court which came to be rejected and 
the Tribunal’s order was affirmed, taking note of the fact that the 
appellants were appointed for the purpose of maintaining the SSD 
Fund, a welfare scheme run through personal contributions made 
by the troops of SFF. The High Court held that while the troops of 
SFF, undoubtedly, are government servants, however, that by 
itself would not clothe the appellants with the status of government 
servants. The impugned order dated 25th April, 2017 passed by the 
High Court is subjected to challenge in this appeal by special leave. 
Submissions on behalf of the appellants: - 
10. Ms. Neha Rathi, learned counsel representing the appellants, 
vehemently and fervently contended that the appellants had 
served the department for more than three decades to maintain 

the accounts of the SSD Fund and therefore, not granting them 
pensionary and other service benefits in accordance with the 6th 
CPC on a surmise, that their employment was temporary/non-
governmental in nature, tantamounts to grossly arbitrary action, 
violative of the fundamental rights of the appellants as guaranteed 
under the Constitution of India. 
11. Learned Counsel submitted that the appellants satisfy all the 
characteristics of regular government servants, considering the 
fact that they were appointed in a regular pay scale and received 
increments and promotions at par with those being admitted to 
other government employees, along with leave and other benefits 
and emoluments. Additionally, they were granted the benefits of 
Assured Career Progression (ACP). 
12. Learned counsel further contended that the nature of the 
work assigned to the appellants was similar to the work of the 
regular employees of the Accounts Section of SFF HQ Estt. No.22. 
Moreover, permanent employees of the SFF Accounts are also 
working with the SSD Staff for maintaining the SSD Fund, 
performing the same duties. Learned counsel submitted that 
following the transfer of the SSD Funds Accounts to HQ SFF w.e.f. 
1st April 2003, the SSD Funds are being managed by the Deputy 

Director (AG) at HQ SFF, under the overall control of the Inspector 
General of SFF. Consequently, the appellants’ services have been 
brought within the jurisdiction of HQ SFF and fall under the aegis 
of the Inspector General of SFF. It was further contended that for 
all other purposes, the appellants have been treated at par with 
regular employees of the Accounts Section, which places them at 
same level with government employees. Therefore, the appellants 
are entitled to receive the same benefits as the regular employees 
of the Accounts Section and also to receive the pensionary as well 
as consequential benefits flowing from the 6th CPC. 
13. Learned counsel also submitted that the denial of pensionary 
benefits to the SSD Fund staff, while granting the same to the SFF 
personnel and other SFF Accounts staff, constitutes an arbitrary 
and 
discriminatory 
decision, 
violating 
Article 

of 
the 
Constitution of India. The pensionary benefits were extended to 
SFF personnel from 1st January, 2009 and to other SFF Accounts 
staff employed through the same procedure at SSF HQ Estt. No. 
22, under the Commandant's authority, from the onset of their 
employment (initially temporary for six months). Despite being 
part of the same establishment and governed by the same 
Commandant, the appellants working at the SSD Fund were 

unjustly excluded from these benefits. This differential treatment 
lacks a reasonable basis and is discriminatory. Learned counsel 
highlighted the comparative statement of benefits and allowances 
granted to SSD Fund and SFF permanent employees as per the 
following table: 
Particulars 
SSD Staff 
SFF Permanent 
employees 
Basic Pay 
Yes 
Yes 
Dearness allowance 
Yes 
Yes 
TA/DA (on deputation) 
Yes 
Yes 
House Rent Allowance 
Yes 
Yes 
Transport Allowance 
Yes 
Yes 
Children Education Allowance 
No 
Yes 
High Altitude Allowance 
Yes 
Yes 
Winter Allowance 
Yes 
Yes 
Ration Allowance 
Yes 
Yes 
Special Security Allowance 
Yes 
Yes 
Gratuity 
Yes 
Yes 
Leave Encashment (Not paid at the time 
of retirement after 6th CPC) 
No 
Yes 
Yearly Bonus 
Yes 
Yes 
Yearly increments 
Yes 
Yes 
LTC 
Yes 
Yes 
ACR (till 6th CPC) 
Yes 
Yes 
Maintenance of Service Book (till 6th CPC) 
Yes 
Yes 
ACP for higher pay scale 
Yes 
Yes 
Promotions 
Yes 
Yes 

Member of SSD Provident Fund 
Yes 
Yes 
Member of Group Insurance Policy 
Yes 
Yes 
CGHS facility (at New Delhi) 
No 
Yes 
Medical facility at Military Hospital 
Yes 
Yes 

14. Learned counsel further contended that the responsibility to 
devise a suitable scheme for the regularisation of employees who 
have served for more than ten years lies with the respondents i.e., 
the State. She submitted that the respondent had rejected the 
appellants’ representation on a purely arbitrary ground that they 
were not appointed through a rigorous selection process and that 
the CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1964 did not apply to them. She urged 
that the appointment of the appellants was conducted under due 
process of selection, following the rules of the Cabinet Secretariat, 
and cannot be deemed irregular or illegal simply for the lack of 
statutory recruitment and service rules. Learned counsel in this 
regard placed reliance upon the decision of this Court in the case 
of the State of Karnataka & Ors. v. M.L. Kesari & Ors1. 
15. Learned counsel further submitted that the case of the 
appellants is squarely covered by the principle of “equal pay for 
equal work” and that the right of equal wages conferred upon 
 
1 (2010) 

temporary employees flows, inter alia, from Article 39 of the 
Constitution of India. This principle of “equal pay for equal work” 
expounded through various decisions of this Court constitutes the 
law, which is binding upon all the Courts in India and 
consequently upon the respondents. It also extends to temporary 
employees performing the same duties and responsibilities as 
regular employees. Learned counsel in this regard placed reliance 
upon the decisions of this Court in the cases of Surinder Singh 
and Another v. Engineer-in-Chief, C.P.W.D. and Another2, 
State of Punjab & Ors. v. Jagjit Singh & Ors.3, Union of India 
v. Dineshan K.K.4, and Randhir Singh v. Union of India & 
Ors.5. 
On these grounds, learned counsel for the appellants 
implored the Court to accept the appeal, set aside the impugned 
judgments and direct the respondents to release in favour of the 
appellants, the benefits of the replacement scales set out in the RP 
Rules issued in pursuance of the 6th CPC report with effect from 
1st January, 2006. 
 
2 (1986) 
3 (2017) 
4 (2008) 
5 (1982) 

Submissions on behalf of the Respondents: - 
16. Mr. 
K.M. 
Nataraj, 
learned 
ASG, 
representing 
the 
respondents, vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions 
advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant. He submitted 
that the SSD Fund is a welfare scheme, introduced with effect from 
1st October 1964, for force personnel on the analogy of the Armed 
Force Personnel Provident Fund to cater to their welfare measures. 
It is a contributory fund subscribed by force personnel for their 
better future and no government funds are involved in the SSD 
Fund, thereby, establishing a clear alienation from the Central 
government. The government has no control what to talk of deep 
and pervasive control over the affairs of the fund. 
17. Learned ASG further submitted that the appellants were 
hired on a temporary basis to manage the SSD Fund, which is 
generated from the difference between the interest earned on the 
invested amount and the annual interest paid to subscribers. The 
recruitment, selection, and promotion process for SSD Fund 
employees (i.e. appellants) did not adhere to the procedures 
applicable to regular Central government employees. Since the 
appellants were hired temporarily, they were not subjected to 
probation or given confirmation letters as permanent employees 

and unlike Central government employees, there was no provision 
for the annual evaluation of their performance. The terms of 
engagement of these employees explicitly outlined their temporary 
status and the associated conditions, including the potential for 
termination without prior notice. This aligns with the fundamental 
nature of their employment, which does not confer upon them, the 
status 
or 
entitlements 
typically 
associated 
with 
regular 
government employees. 
18. Learned ASG also submitted that the appellants’ salaries, 
which were finally increased by Rs. 3,000/- per month in 
September 2009, are paid from the SSD Fund, which is 
contributed by SFF personnel and involves no government money. 
Furthermore, following the 4th and 5th CPC, the Government 
examined and extended limited benefits thereof to the SSD Fund 
employees (i.e., appellants), but with specific reference to maintain 
the fund's objectives. These conditions include not comparing their 
pay scales to those recommended by the 4th CPC in future 
references and considering pay increments or Dearness Allowance 
instalments on an ad hoc basis, when necessary. He urged that 
the Commandant, SFF HQ Estt. No. 22, holds discretionary 
authority over the SSD Fund in accordance with the Cabinet 

Secretariat Order No. EA/EF-EST-13/75 dated 11th October, 
1976. This order underscores the fact that the fixation of pay for 
these employees is not mandated to adhere to scales applicable to 
Central government employees. 
19. Learned ASG further submitted that the claim of benefits 
accorded under the 6th CPC and RP Rules relied upon by the 
appellants is totally unfounded. These benefits are expressly 
designed for and applicable exclusively to Central government 
employees and do not extend to individuals engaged in roles akin 
to those overseeing contributory schemes like the SSD Fund. While 
certain benefits were extended to the fund employees post the 5th 
CPC, the feasibility of aligning their compensation with the 6th CPC 
was constrained by the financial limitations of the SSD Fund. Any 
enhancements in pay, allowances, or promotions were dispensed 
judiciously as welfare measures, guided by the operational 
imperatives and financial health of the SSD Fund. 
20. Learned counsel further submitted that the appellants' 
entitlements, including any financial assistance and promotions, 
were provided in consideration of their service and the prevailing 
socio-economic conditions, and do not establish a precedent for 
future claims. The respondents maintain that these distinctions 

are essential to uphold the integrity and sustainability of the SSD 
Fund, 
which 
operates 
independently 
of 
governmental 
appropriations and is solely reliant on contributions from 
subscribing SFF personnel. 
 
On these grounds, the learned Additional Solicitor General 
implored the Court to dismiss the appeal and affirm the impugned 
judgments. 
Discussion and Conclusion: - 
21. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at a bar and have perused the impugned 
judgments. With the assistance of learned counsel for the parties, 
we have thoroughly examined the material available on record. 
22. The core issue presented for adjudication by the Court is 
whether the appellants herein, despite being classified as 
temporary employees of a scheme managed by contributory 
pooling of funds, can claim entitlement to pensionary benefits in 
accordance with the 6th CPC. 
23. To address this issue, we must first consider the legal 
framework established by this Court in various landmark 
decisions, particularly in Ajay Hasia and Others v. Khalid Mujib 

Sehravardi and Others6 and Pradeep Kumar Biswas v. Indian 
Institute of Chemical Biology and Others7. While Ajay 
Hasia(supra) and Pradeep Kumar Biswas(supra) primarily dealt 
with determining whether a corporation could be considered an 
instrumentality of the state, the principles laid down therein 
provide valuable guidance in assessing the nature of employee-
employer relationships. The relevant paragraphs of Ajay 
Hasia(supra) are reproduced below: - 
“7. …..If a corporation is found to be a mere agency or surrogate 
of the Government, “in fact owned by the Government, in truth 
controlled by the Government and in effect an incarnation of 
the Government”, the court, must not allow the enforcement of 
fundamental rights to be frustrated by taking the view that it is 
not the Government and therefore not subject to the 
constitutional limitations. We are clearly of the view that where 
a corporation is an instrumentality or agency of the 
Government, it must be held to be an “authority” within the 
meaning of Article 12 and hence subject to the same basic 
obligation to obey the Fundamental rights as the Government. 
8. We may point out that this very question as to when a 
corporation can be regarded as an “authority” within the 
meaning of Article 12 arose for consideration before this Court 
in R.D. Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India[(1979) 
]…. 
The court then addressed itself to the question as to how to 
determine whether a corporation is acting as an instrumentality 
or agency of the Government and dealing with that question, 
observed: 
“A corporation may be created in one of two ways. It 
may be either established by statute or incorporated 
under a law such as the Companies Act, 1956 or the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860. Where a corporation 
 
6 (1981) 
7 (2002) 

is wholly controlled by Government not only in its 
policy-making but also in carrying out the functions 
entrusted to it by the law establishing it or by the 
charter of its incorporation, there can be no doubt 
that it would be an instrumentality or agency of 
Government. But ordinarily where a corporation is 
established by statute, it is autonomous in its 
working, subject only to a provision, often times 
made, that it shall be bound by any directions that 
may be issued from time to time by Government in 
respect of policy matters. So also a corporation 
incorporated under law is managed by a board of 
Directors 
or 
committees 
of 
management 
in 
accordance with the provisions of the statute under 
which it is incorporated. When does such a 
corporation become an instrumentality or agency of 
Government? Is the holding of the entire share capital 
of the Corporation by Government enough or is it 
necessary that in addition there should be a certain 
amount of direct control exercised by Government 
and, if so, what should be the nature of such control? 
Should the functions which the corporation is 
charged to carry out possess any particular 
characteristic or feature, or is the nature of the 
functions immaterial? Now, one thing is clear that if 
the entire share capital of the corporation is held by 
Government, it would go a long way towards 
indicating that the corporation is an instrumentality 
or agency of Government. But, as is quite often the 
case, a corporation established by statute may have 
no shares or shareholders, in which case it would be 
a 
relevant 
factor 
to 
consider 
whether 
the 
administration is in the hands of a board of Directors 
appointed by Government though this consideration 
also may not be determinative, because even where 
the Directors are appointed by Government, they may 
be completely free from Governmental control in the 
discharge of their functions. What then are the tests 
to determine whether a corporation established by 
statute 
or 
incorporated 
under 
law 
is 
an 
instrumentality or agency of Government? It is not 
possible to formulate an all-inclusive or exhaustive 
test which would adequately answer this question. 
There is no cut and dried formula, which would 
provide the correct division of corporations into those 

which 
are 
instrumentalities 
or 
agencies 
of 
Government and those which are not.” 
The court then proceeded to indicate the different tests, apart 
from ownership of the entire share capital: (SCC pp. 508 & 509, 
paras 15 & 16) 
“….. 
……There is also another factor which may be 
regarded as having a bearing on this issue and it is 
whether the operation of the corporation is an 
important public function. It has been held in the 
United States in a number of cases that the concept 
of private action must yield to a conception of State 
action where public functions are being performed. 
Vide Arthur S. Miller: The Constitutional Law of the 
‘Security State’ [5 10 Stanford Law Review 620, 644] 
…. It may be noted that besides the so-called 
traditional functions, the modern State operates a 
multitude of public enterprises and discharges a host 
of other public functions. If the functions of the 
corporation are of public importance and closely 
related to Governmental functions, it would be a 
relevant factor in classifying the corporation as an 
instrumentality or agency of Government. This is 
precisely what was pointed out by Mathew, J., in 
Sukhdev v. Bhagatram [(1975) ] where the 
learned Judge said that ‘institutions engaged in 
matters of high public interest of performing public 
functions are by virtue of the nature of the functions 
performed Government agencies. Activities which are 
too fundamental to the society are by definition too 
important 
not 
to 
be 
considered 
Government 
functions'.” 
…. 
These observations of the court in the International Airport 
Authority case have our full approval. 
9. The tests for determining as to when a corporation can be 
said to be an instrumentality or agency of Government may now 
be culled out from the judgment in the International Airport 
Authority case…..We may summarise the relevant tests 
gathered from the decision in the International Airport 
Authority case as follows: 

“(1) One thing is clear that if the entire share capital 
of the corporation is held by Government, it would go 
a long way towards indicating that the corporation is 
an instrumentality or agency of Government. (SCC p. 
507, para 14) 
(2) Where the financial assistance of the State is so 
much as to meet almost entire expenditure of the 
corporation, it would afford some indication of the 
corporation being impregnated with Governmental 
character. (SCC p. 508, para 15) 
(3) It may also be a relevant factor … whether the 
corporation enjoys monopoly status which is State 
conferred or State protected. (SCC p. 508, para 15) 
(4) Existence of deep and pervasive State control may 
afford an indication that the corporation is a State 
agency or instrumentality. (SCC p. 508, para 15) 
(5) If the functions of the corporation are of public 
importance and closely related to Governmental 
functions, it would be a relevant factor in 
classifying the corporation as an instrumentality 
or agency of Government. (SCC p. 509, para 16) 
(6) ‘Specifically, if a department of Government is 
transferred to a corporation, it would be a strong 
factor supportive of this inference’ of the corporation 
being an instrumentality or agency of Government.” 
(SCC p. 510, para 18) 
If on a consideration of these relevant factors it is found that 
the corporation is an instrumentality or agency of Government, 
it would, as pointed out in the International Airport Authority 
case, be an “authority” and, therefore, ‘State’ within the 
meaning of the expression in Article 12. 
…. 
11. We may point out that it is immaterial for this purpose 
whether the corporation is created by a statute or under a 
statute. The test is whether it is an instrumentality or agency 
of the Government and not as to how it is created. The inquiry 
has to be not as to how the juristic person is born but why it 
has been brought into existence. The corporation may be a 
statutory corporation created by a statute or it may be a 
government Company or a Company formed under the 
Companies Act, 1956 or it may be a society registered 

under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or any other 
similar statute. Whatever be its genetical origin, it would 
be an “authority” within the meaning of Article 12 if it is 
an instrumentality or agency of the Government and that 
would have to be decided on a proper assessment of the 
facts in the light of the relevant factors. The concept of 
instrumentality or agency of the Government is not limited 
to a corporation created by a statute but is equally 
applicable to a Company or society and in a given case it 
would have to be decided, on a consideration of the relevant 
factors, 
whether 
the 
Company 
or 
society 
is 
an 
instrumentality or agency of the Government so as to come 
within the meaning of the expression “authority” in Article 
12.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
24. This Court in Ajay Hasia(supra) established several tests to 
determine whether an entity can be considered an instrumentality 
or agency of the Government, and thus an "authority" under Article 
12 of the Constitution of India. These tests include but are not 
limited to; 
1. 
Extent of financial support from the government; 
2. 
Deep and pervasive control of the government; 
3. 
Functions performed are of public importance and 
closely related to governmental functions; 
4. 
Entity enjoys monopoly status conferred or protected by 
the State; 
5. 
The government department has been transferred to the 
entity. 

25. In Pradeep Kumar Bishwas(supra), this Court held that the 
tests laid down in Ajay Hasia(supra) are relevant for the purpose 
of determining whether an entity is an instrumentality or agency 
of the State. Neither all the tests are required to be answered in 
positive nor a positive answer to one or two tests would suffice. It 
will depend upon a combination of one or more of the relevant 
factors depending upon the essentiality and overwhelming nature 
of such factors in identifying the real source of governing power, if 
need be by removing the mask or piercing the veil disguising the 
entity concerned. 
26. The relevant paragraphs of Pradeep Kumar Biswas(supra) 
are reproduced below: - 
“98. We sum up our conclusions as under: 
(1) Simply by holding a legal entity to be an instrumentality or 
agency of the State it does not necessarily become an authority 
within the meaning of “other authorities” in Article 12. To be an 
authority, the entity should have been created by a statute or 
under a statute and functioning with liability and obligations to 
the public. Further, the statute creating the entity should have 
vested that entity with power to make law or issue binding 
directions amounting to law within the meaning of Article 13(2) 
governing its relationship with other people or the affairs of 
other people — their rights, duties, liabilities or other legal 
relations. If created under a statute, then there must exist some 
other statute conferring on the entity such powers. In either 
case, it should have been entrusted with such functions as are 
governmental or closely associated therewith by being of public 
importance or being fundamental to the life of the people and 
hence governmental. Such authority would be the State, for, 
one who enjoys the powers or privileges of the State must also 
be subjected to limitations and obligations of the State. It is this 
strong statutory flavour and clear indicia of power — 

constitutional or statutory, and its potential or capability to act 
to the detriment of fundamental rights of the people, which 
makes it an authority; though in a given case, depending on the 
facts and circumstances, an authority may also be found to be 
an instrumentality or agency of the State and to that extent 
they may overlap. Tests 1, 2 and 4 in Ajay Hasia [Ajay Hasia v. 
Khalid 
Mujib 
Sehravardi, 

] 
enable 
determination of governmental ownership or control. Tests 3, 5 
and 6 are “functional” tests. The propounder of the tests himself 
has used the words suggesting relevancy of those tests for 
finding out if an entity was instrumentality or agency of the 
State. Unfortunately thereafter the tests were considered 
relevant for testing if an authority is the State and this fallacy 
has occurred because of difference between “instrumentality 
and agency” of the State and an “authority” having been lost 
sight of sub silentio, unconsciously and undeliberated. In our 
opinion, and keeping in view the meaning which “authority” 
carries, the question whether an entity is an “authority” cannot 
be answered by applying Ajay Hasia [Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib 
Sehravardi, (1981) ] tests. 
(2) The tests laid down in Ajay Hasia case [Ajay Hasia v. 
Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, (1981) ] are relevant 
for the purpose of determining whether an entity is an 
instrumentality or agency of the State. Neither all the tests 
are required to be answered in the positive nor a positive 
answer to one or two tests would suffice. It will depend 
upon a combination of one or more of the relevant factors 
depending upon the essentiality and overwhelming nature 
of such factors in identifying the real source of governing 
power, if need be by removing the mask or piercing the veil 
disguising the entity concerned. When an entity has an 
independent legal existence, before it is held to be the 
State, the person alleging it to be so must satisfy the court 
of brooding presence of the Government or deep and 
pervasive control of the Government so as to hold it to be 
an instrumentality or agency of the State.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
27. Applying these principles to the case at hand, we find 
compelling evidence on record which establishes that the 
appellants meet the characteristics of regular government 
servants. Admittedly, the appellants were appointed on a regular 

pay scale. This factor strongly indicates a formalised employee-
employer relationship akin to permanent government employees. 
In Ajay Hasia(supra), this Court observed that the nature of 
financial arrangements can indicate governmental character. The 
use of government pay scales for the appellants suggests a level of 
integration into the government's financial structure that goes 
beyond typical temporary employment. During the course of their 
service, the appellants received increments and promotions 
comparable to those of other government employees. This pattern 
of career progression mirrors that of regular government servants 
and suggests a deep and pervasive governmental control over their 
employment terms. In Ajay Hasia (supra), the degree of state 
control was highlighted as a key factor for identifying State 
instrumentalities. The chart(supra) provides positive evidence to 
show that the appellants' career paths were managed like 
permanent employees indicating a level of governmental oversight 
and 
control 
consistent 
with 
regular 
government 
service. 
Furthermore, the office order dated 12th March 2003, issued by the 
Deputy Director (AG), which transferred the SSD Funds Accounts 
to HQ SFF under the overall control of the Inspector General of 
SFF, along with the associated documents and clerical staff, 

demonstrates that administrative recognition of the appellants’ 
services was made which is integral to the governmental structure. 
This transfer of the entire cadre of SSD Fund to the HQ SFF aimed 
at ensuring better utilization and monitoring of the fund, fortifies 
the concept that the appellants possessed the characteristics of 
regular government servants. 
28. The provisions of leave and other benefits, including grant of 
Assured Career Progression (ACP), further reinforces the similarity 
between the appellants' employment conditions and those of 
regular government employees. These benefits are typically 
associated with formalized, long-term employment relationships 
within the government sector. The proceedings of the Board of 
Officers dated 23rd June, 2006 unequivocally acknowledged that 
the terms and conditions, including the pay and allowances 
payable to SSD Fund staff, were fixed in March 1978 in accordance 
with those applicable to the ministerial staff employed in the 
Accounts Section of SSF HQ Estt. No. 22. The extension of Assured 
Carrer Progression (ACP) and alignment of terms and conditions 
with regular government employees, in particular, is an affirmative 
action indicating that the government viewed and treated these 
employees as long-term assets, despite their ostensibly temporary 

status. Substantially, the appellants' charter of duties involving 
the maintenance of accounts for the SSD Fund, can be considered 
as an assignment of public importance closely related to 
governmental functions. This aligns with another test laid down in 
Ajay Hasia(supra), which considers the public importance and 
governmental nature of the functions performed. The management 
of funds generated from the personal provident fund contributions 
of the entire SFF cadre is a critical function that has a direct 
bearing on the public interest and the effective operation of 
government services. 
29. Indisputably, the appellants have served SFF HQ Estt. No. 22 
for over three decades. While the duration of service alone may not 
be determinative, it is a significant factor when considered in 
conjunction with the other aspects of their employment. Such 
long-term service suggests a level of permanence and integration 
into the governmental structure that belies their classification as 
temporary employees. The appellants performed duties similar to 
those of regular employees in the Accounts Section of SFF HQ Estt. 
No.22. This similarity in job functions further blurs the line 
between the appellants' status and that of regular government 
employees, suggesting that the distinction may be more formal 

than substantive. The extension of significant elements from the 
4th and 5th CPC to the appellants further cements their plea of 
being employed in governmental functions. 
30. Learned ASG appearing for the respondents has argued that 
the recruitment, selection, and promotion processes for SSD Fund 
employees did not follow the procedures used for regular 
employees and that the appellants were not subjected to probation 
or given confirmation letters as permanent employees. However, 
this Court finds such argument to be untenable as it fails to 
account for the substantive nature of the appellants' employment 
over an extended period running into three decades. In this regard, 
reference may be made to the judgment of this Court in the case 
of Vinod Kumar and Others v. Union of India8, wherein this 
Court noted; 
“5. Having heard the arguments of both the sides, this Court 
believes that the essence of employment and the rights 
thereof cannot be merely determined by the initial terms 
of appointment when the actual course of employment has 
evolved significantly over time. The continuous service of 
the appellants in the capacities of regular employees, 
performing 
duties 
indistinguishable 
from 
those 
in 
permanent posts, and their selection through a process 
that mirrors that of regular recruitment, constitute a 
substantive departure from the temporary and scheme-
specific nature of their initial engagement. Moreover, the 
appellants' promotion process was conducted and overseen by 
a Departmental Promotional Committee and their sustained 

service for more than 25 years without any indication of the 
temporary nature of their roles being reaffirmed or the duration 
of such temporary engagement being specified, merits a 
reconsideration of their employment status. 
6. The application of the judgment in Uma Devi (supra) by the 
High Court does not fit squarely with the facts at hand, given 
the specific circumstances under which the appellants were 
employed and have continued their service. The reliance on 
procedural formalities at the outset cannot be used to 
perpetually deny substantive rights that have accrued over 
a considerable period through continuous service. Their 
promotion was based on a specific notification for vacancies 
and a subsequent circular, followed by a selection process 
involving written tests and interviews, which distinguishes their 
case from the appointments through back door entry as 
discussed in the case of Uma Devi (supra). 
7. The judgment in the case Uma Devi (supra) also 
distinguished between “irregular” and “illegal” appointments 
underscoring 
the 
importance 
of 
considering 
certain 
appointments even if were not made strictly in accordance with 
the prescribed Rules and Procedure, cannot be said to have 
been made illegally if they had followed the procedures of 
regular appointments such as conduct of written examinations 
or interviews as in the present case. Paragraph 53 of the Uma 
Devi (supra) case is reproduced hereunder: 
“53. One aspect needs to be clarified. There may be 
cases where irregular appointments (not illegal 
appointments) as explained in S.V. Narayanappa 
[(1967) ], R.N. Nanjundappa [(1972) ] and B.N. Nagarajan [(1979) ] and 
referred to in para 15 above, of duly qualified persons 
in duly sanctioned vacant posts might have been 
made and the employees have continued to work for 
ten years or more but without the intervention of 
orders of the courts or of tribunals. The question of 
regularisation of the services of such employees may 
have to be considered on merits in the light of the 
principles settled by this Court in the cases above 
referred to and in the light of this judgment. In that 
context, the Union of India, the State Governments 
and their instrumentalities should take steps to 
regularise as a one-time measure, the services of such 
irregularly appointed, who have worked for ten years 
or more in duly sanctioned posts but not under cover 

of orders of the courts or of tribunals and should 
further 
ensure 
that 
regular 
recruitments 
are 
undertaken to fill those vacant sanctioned posts that 
require to be filled up, in cases where temporary 
employees or daily wagers are being now employed. 
The process must be set in motion within six months 
from this date. We also clarify that regularisation, if 
any already made, but not sub judice, need not be 
reopened based on this judgment, but there should 
be no further bypassing of the constitutional 
requirement and regularising or making permanent, 
those not duly appointed as per the constitutional 
scheme.” 
8. In light of the reasons recorded above, this Court finds merit 
in the appellants' arguments and holds that their service 
conditions, as evolved over time, warrant a reclassification from 
temporary to regular status. The failure to recognize the 
substantive nature of their roles and their continuous service 
akin to permanent employees runs counter to the principles of 
equity, 
fairness, 
and 
the 
intent 
behind 
employment 
regulations.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
31. As held in Vinod Kumar(supra), "the essence of employment 
and the rights thereof cannot be merely determined by the initial 
terms of appointment when the actual course of employment has 
evolved significantly over time." 
32. This Court fully associates with this principle and finds it 
wholly applicable in the present case, especially in light of the 
administrative orders and Board proceedings referred to supra that 
have consistently treated the appellants as equivalent to regular 
government employees. The mere classification of employees as 
'temporary' or 'permanent' is not merely a matter of nomenclature 

but carries significant legal implications, particularly in terms of 
service benefits and protections. 
33. In the present case, the totality of circumstances indicates 
that despite their formal classification as temporary employees, 
the appellants' employment bears substantial hallmarks of regular 
government service. The denial of pensionary benefits solely on the 
basis of their temporary status, without due consideration of these 
factors, appears to be an oversimplification of their employment 
relationship with the government. This approach runs the risk of 
creating a class of employees who, despite serving the government 
for decades in a manner indistinguishable from regular employees, 
are deprived of the benefits and protections typically accorded to 
government servants. 
34. Thus, we are of the opinion that the denial of pensionary 
benefits to the appellants is not tenable or justifiable in the eyes of 
law as the same is arbitrary and violates the fundamental rights 
as guaranteed by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. It 
is indeed relevant to note that the appellants’ batch seems to be 
the last in their genre of SSD Fund temporary employees and thus, 
manifestly, the direction to extend the benefits of the 6th CPC and 

the RP Rules to the appellants shall not form a precedent so as to 
have a detrimental effect on the financial health of the SSD Fund. 
35. In the wake of the discussion made hereinabove, we are of 
the view that the impugned judgment rendered by the High Court 
does not stand to scrutiny and the same is unsustainable in the 
eyes of law and is set aside. 
36. The respondents are directed to extend the benefits of the 6th 
Central Pay Commission including the pensionary benefits under 
the Revised Pay Scale Rules, 2008 to the appellants herein in the 
same terms as are being afforded to their peers in the Accounts 
Section of SFF HQ Estt. No. 22. 
37. The appeal is allowed in these terms. No costs. 
38. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

(HIMA KOHLI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
August 22, 2024