IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Delhi Race Club (1940) Ltd. & Ors. 

 …Appellant(s) 

Versus 

State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr. 

 …Respondent(s) 

JUDGMENT 

J. B. PARDIWALA, J.: 

1. This appeal arises from the order passed by the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad dated 03.04.2024 in Application No. 15453 of 2023 filed by the 
appellant herein by which, the High Court rejected the same and thereby declined 
to quash and set aside the summoning order dated 28.02.2023 passed by the 
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Khurja, Bulandshahar in Complaint Case 
No. 547 of 2021. 

2. Facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarised as under: 

The respondent No. 2 herein is the original complainant. He lodged a 
private complaint in the court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, 
Khurja, Bulandshahar against the appellants herein for the offence 
punishable under Sections 406, 420 & 120B respectively of the Indian 
Penal Code, 1860 (for short, “IPC”). 
 
The complaint reads thus: 
“It is most respectful that the Applicant Vipin Kumar Agarwal, 
son of Late Shri Bhagwat Swaroop Agarwal, who is the owner of 
a firm Agarwal Udyog, New Mandi, Khurja. The applicant’s firm 
used to supply horse feed, barley and oats to Delhi Race Club 
1940 Limited, New Delhi since 1990. In the year 1995, the then 
head of the Race Club, Shri PS Vedi and the then Secretary 
Sehgal told the applicant that from now on the bills for the supply 
of horse grain and oats would be made in the name of Delhi 
Horse Trainers Association, Race Course Road, New Delhi. And 
the Head and Secretary of the same association have now been 
made separate, they will pay you for the goods supplied. Till the 
year 2017, the payment of the applicant’s firm continued to be 
regular and now at present Delhi Horse Trainers Association 
President Kazim Ali Khan and Secretary Sanjeev Charan owe a 
payment of Rs 9,11,434/- to the applicant's firm. Whenever the 
applicant makes demands, they keep evading when the applicant 
tried to talk to the current President of the Race Club, J. S. Vedi 
and the current Secretary about this. Then the Secretary GS Vedi 
said that you should demand your dues from Delhi Horse 
Trainers Association only, we have no relation with them, then 
the applicant tried to meet Kazim Ali Pradhan along with 
Manish Kumar Sharma, son of Mahesh Kumar Sharma, resident 
of Nawalpura Khurja and Chirag Agarwal, son of Vijay 
Agarwal, resident of Malpura, Khurja but they refused to talk to 
the applicant and threatened that if he came here again, it would 
be very bad and started a scuffle. The applicant feels that both 
the above mentioned officials of Delhi Race Club 1940 Limited, 
New Delhi and Delhi Horse Trainers Association, in connivance 
with each other, cheated the applicant and dishonestly obtained 

the goods from the applicant's firm in bad faith and they used it 
for their club and association and now they do not want to pay 
for the goods given by the applicant. All of them under 
conspiracy want to grab the money of the applicant's firm, after 
which the applicant had given a legal notice to the above 
mentioned people through his advocate on 18th June 2020 but 
even after receiving the notice, the above people neither gave 
any reply to the notice nor was the applicant's outstanding 
amount paid. In this context, the applicant gave an application 
to Inspector-in-charge of Kotwali Khurja Nagar on 25.07.2021 
and on 06.08.2021, an application letter was sent to SSP Sir 
Bulandshahar through postal registry, but till date no action has 
been taken nor has the applicant's report been registered. 
 
Therefore, it is prayed that after the investigation, please 
summon the accused along with evidence to the court and punish 
them for the crime committed by them. 
 
Date 27.08.2021” 

The plain reading of the complaint would indicate that the appellant No. 1 
is a legal entity. The appellant No. 2 is the Secretary of the appellant No. 
1 Company, and the appellant No. 3 is the Honorary President and Non-
Executive Director of the appellant No. 1 Company. They used to 
purchase grains and oats from the complainant meant to be fed to the 
horses maintained by the appellant No. 1 Company. According to the 
complainant, an amount of Rs. 9,11,434/- (Rupees Nine Lakh Eleven 
Thousand Four Hundred Thirty Four) is due and payable to him by the 
appellants towards the sale of horse grains and oats over a period of time. 
It is alleged that as the appellants failed to make the payment, he thought 
fit to file the complaint as according to him he has been cheated by the 
appellants. 

The court concerned initially took cognizance upon the complaint but 
postponed the issuance of process as it thought fit to initiate magisterial 
inquiry under Section 202 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for 
short, “CrPC”). The statement of the complainant recorded by the 
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate in the course of the magisterial 
inquiry under Section 202 of the CrPC reads thus: 
“Name of the witness Ankit Agarwal S/o Vipin Agarwal aged 
about 34 years, Occupation-Businessman, resident of 13, 
Malpura, Subhash Road, Khurja, PS-Khurja Nagar, District 
Bulandshahar today on 08.3.22 on oath gave statement that:- 
Vipin Kumar Agarwal is the owner of a firm Agarwal Udyog 
which is located in New Mandi Khurja. Delhi Race Course Club 
1940 Limited has been purchasing horse feed from the above 
mentioned firm for a long time and payment for the same has 
been done on time After the year 2017, Delhi Horse Trainers 
Association President Kazim Ali and Secretary Sanjeev Charan 
kept paying the goods. Since thereafter, the above mentioned 
people owe Rs 9,11,434/- to the above firm. After repeated 
requests, both the above mentioned firms have been telling to 
make payment to each other but the opposite party has also not 
made the payment. 
 
Delhi Race Course Club President JS Bedi and Secretary HK 
Uppal are delaying the payment of horse feed purchased by 
them. The people of the above two firms have colluded with each 
other and do not want to pay for the goods taken. Vipin Agarwal, 
proprietor of Agarwal Udyog, is my father hence I am aware of 
the entire matter” 

The Magistrate also recorded the statement of one Manish Kumar in 
course of the inquiry under Section 202 of the CrPC. The statement reads 
thus: 
“Witness name Manish Kumar Sharma father's name aged 33 

years occupation labourer resident of Nawalpura, Khurja Police 
Station Khurja Nagar District Bulandshahar today on 08.03.22 
on oath gave statement that:- 
 
I have been working as a bookkeeper for the last 17 years at 
Vipin Kumar Agarwal's firm Agarwal Udyog, which is located 
in New Mandi Khurja. From the above mentioned firm, Delhi 
Race Course Club 1940 Limited which is a New Delhi based 
firm. Have been buying horse grain and oats. President of this 
firm J S Bedi and Secretary H K Uppal have been coming to our 
firm to buy horse feed and oats and the firm has been paying for 
the purchased goods. It was said by the above two that now the 
bills for horse feed and oats will be made in the name of Delhi 
Horse Trainers Association Delhi and the Head of this firm, 
Kazim Ali and Secretary Sanjeev Charan will pay it. On the 
request of the above people, horse grain and oats continued to 
be supplied from our firm. The above mentioned people owes Rs. 
9,11,434/- to our firm, upon being repeatedly asked for payment, 
the above mentioned people are evading. Once Chirag Agarwal 
and I went to their office in New Delhi, they refused to talk to 
Vipin Agarwal and us and they threatened that if they come here 
again, it will be very bad and they started scuffle. The 
outstanding amount of Rs. 9,11,434/- has not yet been paid by 
the officials of the above two firms. The above mentioned people 
have fraudulently obtained the goods from our firm in bad faith 
and do not want to pay for the same. They have used the supplied 
goods. Certified after reading and listening.” 

At the end of the magisterial inquiry, the court issued process for the 
offence punishable under Section 406 of the IPC. The order issuing 
process reads thus: 
“Date:- 28.02.2023 
 
The file was presented for orders. The complainant has been 
heard on the question of summons on an earlier date. 
 
On behalf of the complainant Vipin Kumar Aggarwal, the above 
complaint was presented against the opposite parties Delhi Race 
Club etc. to the effect that the firm of the complainant was 

supplying horse grain, barley and oats to Delhi Race Club since 
the year 1990. In the year 1995, the President of the Race Club, 
Mr. P.S. Vedi and the then Sachin Sehgal ji said that the bill 
would be made in the name of Delhi Horse Trainers Association, 
Race Course Road, New Delhi and the Head and Secretary of 
the same association have now been made separately. They will 
make the payment for the goods given by you. Till the year 2017, 
the applicant's firm's payment continued to be regular and now 
at present the payment of Rs 9,11,434/- is outstanding from the 
applicant's firm when the applicant talked about this to the 
current President of the Race Club, J.S. Vedi and the current 
Secretary then the secretary said that you should demand your 
dues from Delhi Horse Trainers Association only. Then the 
applicant tried to meet Kajim Ali but he refused to talk to the 
applicant and got into a scuffle. The above two associations and 
officials unanimously cheated the applicant and obtained goods 
from the applicant's firm and do not want to pay for the goods 
given by the applicant. The applicant had given a legal notice to 
the above people through his advocate on 18 June 2020 but even 
after receiving the notice, the above people neither gave any 
reply to the notice nor paid the outstanding amount of the 
applicant. In this context, the applicant gave an application to 
Khurja Nagar police station and on 06.08.2021 an application 
was given to SSP Bulandshahar but no action has been taken till 
date. 
 
On behalf of the complainant, he got himself examined under 
Section 200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and under 
Section 202 CrPC, the statement of witnesses Ankit Aggarwal as 
PW-1 and Manish Kumar Sharma as PW-2 was recorded. In 
which they supported the statements mentioned in the complaint. 
One copy of the application sent by the complainant to the Senior 
Superintendent of Police as documentary evidence in support of 
his statements, a photocopy of the registry receipt, one copy of 
the net receipt postal registry, five copies of the bill book, one 
true copy of the remaining balance, one copy of receipt of goods, 
one copy of remaining balance, one copy of legal notice were 
filed per receipt. 
 
The complainant has stated in his statement under Section 200 
CrPC, "after five years of 1990, these people said that we will 
not make the payment. A separate organization has been formed 
for payment, which will do it. An organization named Delhi 

Trainers Association has been formed. Now I owe these people 
nine lakh eleven thousand four hundred thirty-four rupees. When 
we asked for money several times, we did not receive it. The 
President of Delhi Race Course is not ready to talk. I am 
suffering from cancer. Business is seen by children only. We also 
gave them legal notice but nothing happened.” 
 
Perused the entire evidence material available on file. 
 
On the basis of the evidence presented by the complainant under 
section 200 CrPC and section 202 CrPC, there is prima facie 
basis for summoning the opposition parties Delhi Race Course 
Club, Delhi Race Horse Trainers Association, JS Bedi, HK 
Uppal, Kazim Ali Khan and Sanjeev Charan for consideration 
under section 406 IPC. There are sufficient grounds for 
summoning for trial of a punishable offense under Section 406 
IPC. 
ORDER 
The opposite parties Delhi Race Course Club, Delhi Race Horse 
Trainers Association, JS Bedi, HK Uppal, Kazim Ali Khan and 
Sanjeev Charan are summoned for trial for the offense under 
section 406 of the Indian Penal Code. The complainant should 
process the summons against the opposition parties within a 
week, every summons should be issued along with a copy of the 
complaint letter, the complainant list should be filed and the 
witnesses should be filed. 
 
The case file be put up on 27.04.2023 for appearance.” 
 
3. In such circumstances referred to above, the appellants preferred an application 
under Section 482 of the CrPC in the High Court, praying for quashing of the 
summoning order dated 28.02.2023 passed by the Additional Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, Khurja, Bulandshahar. 
 
4. The High Court rejected the application filed by the appellants herein, observing 
as under: 

“15. 
On the basis of averments made in the complaint, it is a 
case of the complainant who was regularly supplying Oats, used 
for horses. In the year 1995, the complainant was asked to raise 
invoice in favour of the 'Association'. The complainant agreed 
and continued to raise invoice in favour of the 'Association'. After 
2017, an amount of Rs. 9,11,434/- became due upon the 
applicants. He contacted Delhi Race Club (1940) Ltd. and he 
was directed to contact the 'Association'. The applicant Delhi 
Race Club (1940) Ltd. and 'Association' are not separate legal 
entity. The applicants and the 'Association' were in collusion and 
committed fraud with complainant. The goods supplied by 
complainant were received but its payment was not made. 
 
16. Admittedly, no civil proceedings are pending for the amount 
in question between the parties. It is not the case of the applicants 
that transaction was a commercial transaction whereas the case 
of opposite party No. 2 is for the supply made by him. He is bound 
to raise his payment on the direction of the Delhi Race Club 
(1940) Ltd. He raised invoices in favour of the 'Association' from 
1995. There is no change in the manner of raising invoices by 
the complainant. Delhi Race Club (1940) Ltd. continued to make 
payment upto the year 2017. The complainant was not being paid 
Rs. 9,11,434/- by the applicants who instead transferred their 
responsibility to the 'Association’. 
 
17. Suffice to mention here that the copies of the invoices are 
brought on record through counter affidavit by the complainant 
and the same are not controverted by the applicants. Prima facie, 
it reflects that the invoices were raised by complainant in 
accordance with the advice received by him and he continued to 
receive payment on the basis of such invoices and when the 
payment of Rs. 9,11,434/- was not paid to the complainant he 
contacted Delhi Race Club (1940) Ltd. which averted him to the 
'Association'. It appears that Delhi Race Club (1940) Ltd. and 
the 'Association' are not separate entity. 
 
18. On the face of record, it appears that originally complainant 
was supplying oats to the 'Company'. In the year 1995, the 
complainant was directed to raise invoices in favour of the 
'Association'. The Company continued to receive supply of Oats 
made by the complainant even after 1995, whereas invoices were 
raised in favour of the 'Association'. This direction of the 
company goes to show that there was some mala fide intention 

on the part of the Company. The complainant bona fide 
continued to make supply under the direction of the Company. 
The invoices were raised by the complainant in similar manner 
since 1995 to 2017 and thereafter. It appears that there was an 
oral direction to raise invoices in favour of 'Association' made 
by the Company, which indicates mala fide of the Company. 
 
19. After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and after 
perusing the impugned order, this Court is of the opinion that 
impugned order has been passed on the basis of facts and 
circumstances of the case after considering the evidence on 
record. There is no legal infirmity in the impugned orders, which 
may call for any interference by this Court in exercise of powers 
conferred under Section 482 Cr.P.C.” 
 
5. Thus, according to the High Court, the intention on the part of the company was 
prima facie mala fide and the payment of Rs. 9,11,434/- could be said to be 
intentionally withheld. 
 
SCOPE OF INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 202 OF THE CRPC 
6. It is by now well settled that at the stage of issuing process it is not the duty of 
the Court to find out as to whether the accused will be ultimately convicted or 
acquitted. The object of consideration of the merits of the case at this stage could 
only be to determine whether there are sufficient grounds for proceeding further 
or not. Mere existence of some grounds which would be material in deciding 
whether the accused should be convicted or acquitted does not generally indicate 
that the case must necessarily fail. On the other hand, such grounds may indicate 
the need for proceeding further in order to discover the truth after a full and proper 
investigation. If, however, a bare perusal of a complaint or the evidence led in 
support of it shows essential ingredients of the offences alleged are absent or that 

the dispute is only of a civil nature or that there are such patent absurdities in 
evidence produced that it would be a waste of time to proceed further, then of 
course, the complaint is liable to be dismissed at that stage only. What the 
Magistrate has to determine at the stage of issue of process is not the correctness 
or the probability or improbability of individual items of evidence on disputable 
grounds, but the existence or otherwise of a prima facie case on the assumption 
that what is stated can be true unless the prosecution allegations are so fantastic 
that they cannot reasonably be held to be true. [See: D.N. Bhattacharjee v. State 
of West Bengal: (1972): AIR 1972 SC 1607: (1972 Cri LJ 1037)]. 
 
7. Further it is also well settled that at the stage of issuing process a Magistrate is 
mainly concerned with the allegations made in the complaint or the evidence led 
in support of the same and he is only to be prima facie satisfied whether there are 
sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused. It is not the province of the 
Magistrate to enter into a detailed discussion of the merits or demerits of the case 
nor can the High Court go into this matter in its inherent jurisdiction which is to 
be sparingly used. The scope of the inquiry under Section 202 of the CrPC is 
extremely limited — only to the ascertainment of the truth or falsehood of the 
allegations made in the complaint — (i) on the materials placed by the 
complainant before the Court (ii) for the limited purpose of finding out whether 
a prima facie case for issue of process has been made out, and (iii) for deciding 
the question purely from the point of view of the complainant without at all 

adverting to any defence that the accused may have. In fact in proceedings under 
Section 202 of the CrPC, the accused has got absolutely no locus standi and is not 
entitled to be heard on the question whether the process should be issued against 
him or not. It is true that in coming to a decision as to whether a process should 
be issued the Magistrate can take into consideration inherent improbabilities 
appearing on the face of the complaint or in the evidence led by the complainant 
in support of the allegations but there appears to be a very thin line of demarcation 
between a probability of conviction of the accused and establishment of a prima 
facie case against him. The discretion given to the Magistrate on this behalf has 
to be judicially exercised by him. Once the Magistrate has exercised his 
discretion, it is not for the High Court or even the Supreme Court to substitute its 
own discretion for that of the Magistrate or to examine the case on merits with a 
view to find out whether or not the allegations in the complaint, if proved, would 
ultimately end in the conviction of the accused. These considerations are totally 
foreign to the scope and ambit of an inquiry under Section 202 of the CrPC which 
culminates into an order under Section 204. [See: Smt. Nagawwa v. Veeranna 
Shivalingappa Kanjalgi: (1976) ]. It is no doubt true that in this very 
decision this Court has enumerated certain illustrations as to when the order of 
Magistrate issuing process against the accused can be quashed or set aside. These 
illustrations are as under:— 
“(1) Where the allegations made in the complaint or the 
statement of the witnesses recorded in support of the same taken 
at their face value make out absolutely no case against the 

accused or the complaint does not disclose the essential 
ingredients of an offence which is alleged against the accused. 
 
(2) Where the allegations made in the complaint are patently 
absurd and inherently improbable so that no prudent person 
can ever reach a conclusion that there is sufficient ground for 
proceeding against the accused. 
 
(3) Where the discretion exercised by the Magistrate in issuing 
process is capricious and arbitrary having been based either on 
no evidence or on materials which are wholly irrelevant or 
inadmissible; and 
 
(4) Where the complaint suffers from fundamental legal defects, 
such as want of sanction or absence of a complaint by legally 
competent authority and the like.” 

8. Each Penal Section of the Indian Penal Code or of the other laws can be subjected 
to an analysis by posing and answering the following questions: - 
I. 
What is the overt act stipulated in the Section, which overt act 
has resulted in an injury? 
II. 
What is the state of mind stipulated in respect of the accused 
and which state of mind must precede or accompany the act of 
the accused? 
 
ANALYSIS 
9. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone 
through the materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration 
is whether the High Court committed any error in passing the impugned order. 
 
10. The case at hand is one of an unpaid seller. It is the case of the complainant that 
he used to regularly supply consignments of grains & oats meant for horses at the 

Delhi Race Club. The complainant used to raise invoices in favour of the Club 
and the Club used to pay the requisite amount. However, according to the 
complainant after 2017, the Club stopped making the payment. It is the case of 
the complainant that an amount of Rs. 9,11,434/- is due and payable by the 
appellants towards the supply of the consignment of oats. 
 
11. The impugned order passed by the High Court is a fine specimen of total non- 
application of mind. Although the complaint was filed for the offence punishable 
under Sections 406, 420 and 120B respectively of the IPC yet the Additional 
Chief Judicial Magistrate thought fit to take cognizance and issue process only 
for the offence of criminal breach of trust as defined under Section 405 of the IPC 
and made punishable under Section 406 of the IPC. 
 
12. We are of the view that even if the entire case of the complainant is accepted as 
true no offence worth the name is disclosed. 
 
13. This Court has time and again reminded that summoning of an accused in a 
criminal case is a serious matter. Criminal law cannot be set into motion as a 
matter of course. It is not that the complainant has to bring only two witnesses to 
support his allegations in the complaint to have the criminal law set into motion. 
The order of the Magistrate summoning the accused must reflect that he has 
applied his mind to the facts of the case and the law applicable thereto. He has to 
examine the nature of allegations made in the complaint and the evidence both 

oral and documentary in support thereof. It is not that the Magistrate is a silent 
spectator at the time of recording of preliminary evidence before summoning of 
the accused. The Magistrate has to carefully scrutinise the evidence brought on 
record and may even himself put questions to the complainant and his witnesses 
to elicit answers to find out the truthfulness of the allegations or otherwise and 
then examine if any offence is prima facie committed by all or any of the accused. 
[See: Pepsi Foods Ltd. v. Special Judicial Magistrate: (1998) ] 
 
14. Where a jurisdiction is exercised on a complaint petition filed in terms of Section 
156(3) or Section 200 of the CrPC, the Magistrate is required to apply his mind. 
The Penal Code does not contain any provision for attaching vicarious liability 
on the part of the appellant Nos. 2 and 3 respectively herein who are none other 
than office bearers of the appellant No. 1 Company. When the appellant No. 1 is 
the Company and it is alleged that the company has committed the offence then 
there is no question of attributing vicarious liability to the office bearers of the 
Company so far as the offence of cheating or criminal breach of trust is concerned. 
The office bearers could be arrayed as accused only if direct allegations are 
levelled against them. In other words, the complainant has to demonstrate that he 
has been cheated on account of criminal breach of trust or cheating or deception 
practiced by the office bearers. The Magistrate failed to pose unto himself the 
correct question viz. as to whether the complaint petition, even if given face value 
and taken to be correct in its entirety, would lead to the conclusion that the 

appellant Nos. 2 and 3 herein were personally liable for any offence. The 
appellant No. 1 is a body corporate. Vicarious liability of the office bearers would 
arise provided any provision exists in that behalf in the statute. Statutes 
indisputably must contain provision fixing such vicarious liabilities. Even for the 
said purpose, it is obligatory on the part of the complainant to make requisite 
allegations which would attract the provisions constituting vicarious liability. 
 
15. In Legal Remembrancer, West Bengal v. Abani Kumar Banerji reported in AIR 
1950 Cal 437, a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court speaking through 
Justice K.C. Das Gupta (as he then was) held that a magistrate is not bound to 
take cognizance of an offence merely because a complaint is filed before him. He 
is required to carefully apply his mind to the contents of the complaint before 
taking cognizance of any offence alleged therein. The relevant observations read 
as under: - 
“… As I read s. 190 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and 
the subsequent sections, it seems to me to be clear that a 
magistrate is not bound to take cognizance of an offence, 
merely because a petition of complaint is filed before him. Mr. 
Mukherji's argument is that a magistrate cannot possibly take 
any action with regard to a petition of complaint, without 
applying his mind to it, and taking cognizance of the offence 
mentioned in the complaint necessarily takes place, when the 
magistrate's mind is applied to the petition. Consequently Mr. 
Mukherji argues, whenever a magistrate takes the action, say, 
of issuing search warrant or asking the police to enquire and 
to investigate, he has taken cognizance of the case. In my 
judgment, this is putting a wrong connotation on the words 
“taking cognizance”. What is “taking cognizance” has not 
been defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure, and I have 
no desire now to attempt to define it. It seems to me clear, 

however, that before it can be said that any magistrate has 
taken cognizance of any offence under s. 190(1)(a) of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, he must not only have applied his mind 
to the contents of the petition, but he must have done so for the 
purpose of proceeding in a particular way as indicated in the 
subsequent provisions of this Chapter,—proceeding under s. 
200, and thereafter sending it for enquiry and report under s. 
202. When the magistrate applies his mind not for the purpose 
of proceeding under the subsequent sections of this Chapter, 
but for taking action of some other kind, e.g., ordering 
investigation under s. 156(3), or issuing a search warrant for 
the purpose of the investigation, he cannot be said to have 
taken cognizance of the offence. My conclusion, therefore, is 
that the learned magistrate is wrong in thinking that the Chief 
Presidency Magistrate was bound to take cognizance of the 
case as soon as the petition of complaint was filed.” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 

16. The aforesaid observation of the Calcutta High Court was referred to and relied 
upon with approval by this Court in its decision in R.R. Chari v. State of U.P. reported in AIR 1951 SC 207. 

17. In Tilak Nagar Industries Ltd. & Ors. v. State of A.P. reported in (2011), this Court held that the power under Section 156(3) of the CrPC can be 
exercised by a magistrate even before he takes cognizance provided the complaint 
discloses the commission of cognizable offences and if the complaint does not 
disclose commission of cognizable offences, such an order of the magistrate 
directing investigation is liable to be quashed. The relevant observations read as 
under: - 
“11. After considering the rival submissions, we are of the 
view that the contentions of Mr Luthra are correct in view of 
Section 155(2) of the Code as explained in Bhajan Lal [1992 
Supp (1) SCC 335: 1992 SCC (Cri) 426]. We are of the 

opinion that the statutory safeguard which is given under 
Section 155(2) of the Code must be strictly followed, since they 
are conceived in public interest and as a guarantee against 
frivolous and vexatious investigation. 
 
12. The order of the Magistrate dated 21-6-2010 does not 
disclose that he has taken cognizance. However, power under 
Section 156(3) can be exercised by the Magistrate even before 
he takes cognizance provided the complaint discloses the 
commission of cognizable offence. Since in the instant case the 
complaint does not do so, the order of the Magistrate stated 
above cannot be sustained in law and is accordingly 
quashed.” 
 
18. The aforesaid decision was in context with the power of the Magistrate to order 
police investigation under Section 156(3) of the CrPC. What is sought to be 
conveyed in the said decision is that when the Magistrate orders police 
investigation under Section 156(3) of the CrPC he does not take cognizance upon 
the complaint. It is only upon receipt of the police report that the Magistrate may 
take cognizance. If at the stage of pre-cognizance, the Magistrate is expected to 
be careful or to put it in other words, the Magistrate is obliged to look into the 
complaint threadbare so as to reach to a prima facie conclusion whether the 
offence is disclosed or not, then he is expected to be more careful when he is 
actually taking cognizance upon a private complaint and ordering issue of 
process. 
 
19. The aforesaid aspect could be said to have been completely lost sight of by the 
High Court, while rejecting the application filed by the appellant herein under 
Section 482 of the CrPC, seeking quashing of the summoning order. 

20. In Mehmood Ul Rehman v. Khazir Mohammad Tunda reported in (2015), this Court held thus: — 
 
“22… The satisfaction on the ground for proceeding would 
mean that the facts alleged in the complaint would constitute 
an offence, and when considered along with the statements 
recorded, would, prima facie, make the accused answerable 
before the court…In other words, the Magistrate is not to act 
as a post office in taking cognizance of each and every 
complaint filed before him and issue process as a matter of 
course. There must be sufficient indication in the order passed 
by the Magistrate that he is satisfied that the allegations in the 
complaint constitute an offence and when considered along 
with the statements recorded and the result of inquiry or 
report of investigation under Section 202 of CrPC, if any, the 
accused is answerable before the criminal court, there is 
ground 
for 
proceeding 
against 
the 
accused 
under 
Section 204 of CrPC, by issuing process for appearance. 
Application of mind is best demonstrated by disclosure of 
mind on the satisfaction…To be called to appear before 
criminal court as an accused is serious matter affecting one's 
dignity, self respect and image in society. Hence, the process 
of criminal court shall not be made a weapon of harassment.” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
21. The Principle of law discernible from the aforesaid decision is that issuance of 
summons is a serious matter and, therefore, should not be done mechanically and 
it should be done only upon satisfaction on the ground for proceeding further in 
the matter against a person concerned based on the materials collected during the 
inquiry. 
 
22. In the aforesaid circumstances, the next question to be considered is whether a 
summons issued by a Magistrate can be interfered with in exercise of the power 

under Section 482, CrPC. In the decisions in Bhushan Kumar v. State (NCT of 
Delhi) reported in (2012) and Pepsi Foods Ltd. (supra), this Court 
held that a petition filed under Section 482, CrPC, for quashing an order 
summoning the accused is maintainable. There cannot be any doubt that once it 
is held that sine qua non for exercise of the power to issue summons is the 
subjective satisfaction “on the ground for proceeding further” while exercising 
the power to consider the legality of a summons issued by a Magistrate, certainly 
it is the duty of the Court to look into the question as to whether the learned 
Magistrate had applied his mind to form an opinion as to the existence of 
sufficient ground for proceeding further and in that regard to issue summons to 
face the trial for the offence concerned. In this context, we think it appropriate to 
state that one should understand that ‘taking cognizance’, empowered under 
Section 190, CrPC, and ‘issuing process’, empowered under Section 204, CrPC, 
are different and distinct. [See the decision in Sunil Bharti Mittal v. C.B.I.: 
(2015) ]. 
 
23. In Sunil Bharti Mittal (supra), this Court interpreted the expression “sufficient 
grounds for proceeding” and held that there should be sufficiency of materials 
against the accused concerned before proceeding under Section 204 of 
the CrPC. It was held thus: — 
“53. However, the words “sufficient ground for proceeding” 
appearing in Section 204 are of immense importance. It is 
these words which amply suggest that an opinion is to be 

formed only after due application of mind that there is 
sufficient basis for proceeding against the said accused and 
formation of such an opinion is to be stated in the order itself. 
The order is liable to be set aside if no reason is given therein 
while coming to the conclusion that there is prima facie case 
against the accused, though the order need not contain 
detailed reasons. A fortiori, the order would be bad in law if 
the reason given turns out to be ex facie incorrect.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 
 
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN CRIMINAL BREACH OF TRUST AND 
CHEATING 
24. This Court in its decision in S.W. Palanitkar & Ors. v. State of Bihar & Anr. reported in (2002) expounded the difference in the ingredients 
required for constituting an of offence of criminal breach of trust (Section 406 
IPC) viz-a-viz the offence of cheating (Section 420). The relevant observations 
read as under: - 
“9. 
The ingredients in order to constitute a criminal breach 
of trust are: (i) entrusting a person with property or with any 
dominion over property, (ii) that person entrusted (a) 
dishonestly misappropriating or converting that property to 
his own use; or (b) dishonestly using or disposing of that 
property or wilfully suffering any other person so to do in 
violation (i) of any direction of law prescribing the mode in 
which such trust is to be discharged, (ii) of any legal contract 
made, touching the discharge of such trust. 
10. 
The ingredients of an offence of cheating are: (i) there 
should be fraudulent or dishonest inducement of a person by 
deceiving him, (ii)(a) the person so deceived should be 
induced to deliver any property to any person, or to consent 
that any person shall retain any property; or (b) the person so 
deceived should be intentionally induced to do or omit to do 
anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so 
deceived; and (iii) in cases covered by (ii)(b), the act of 

omission should be one which causes or is likely to cause 
damage or harm to the person induced in body, mind, 
reputation or property.” 
 
25. What can be discerned from the above is that the offences of criminal breach of 
trust (Section 406 IPC) and cheating (Section 420 IPC) have specific ingredients. 
 
In order to constitute a criminal breach of trust (Section 406 IPC): - 
1) There must be entrustment with person for property or dominion over the 
property, and 
2) The person entrusted: - 
a) dishonestly misappropriated or converted property to his own use, or 
b) dishonestly used or disposed of the property or willfully suffers any other 
person so to do in violation of: 
i. any direction of law prescribing the method in which the trust is 
discharged; or 
ii. legal contract touching the discharge of trust (see: S.W.P. 
Palanitkar (supra). 
 
Similarly, in respect of an offence under Section 420 IPC, the essential 
ingredients are: - 
1) deception of any person, either by making a false or misleading 
representation or by other action or by omission; 
2) fraudulently or dishonestly inducing any person to deliver any 
property, or 
3) the consent that any persons shall retain any property and finally 
intentionally inducing that person to do or omit to do anything which 
he would not do or omit (see: Harmanpreet Singh Ahluwalia v. State 
of Punjab, (2009): (2009) Cr.L.J. 3462 (SC)) 

26. Further, in both the aforesaid sections, mens rea i.e. intention to defraud or the 
dishonest intention must be present, and in the case of cheating it must be there 
from the very beginning or inception. 
 
27. In our view, the plain reading of the complaint fails to spell out any of the 
aforesaid ingredients noted above. We may only say, with a view to clear a serious 
misconception of law in the mind of the police as well as the courts below, that if 
it is a case of the complainant that offence of criminal breach of trust as defined 
under Section 405 of IPC, punishable under Section 406 of IPC, is committed by 
the accused, then in the same breath it cannot be said that the accused has also 
committed the offence of cheating as defined and explained in Section 415 of the 
IPC, punishable under Section 420 of the IPC. 
 
28. Every act of breach of trust may not result in a penal offence of criminal breach 
of trust unless there is evidence of manipulating act of fraudulent 
misappropriation. An act of breach of trust involves a civil wrong in respect of 
which the person may seek his remedy for damages in civil courts but, any breach 
of trust with a mens rea, gives rise to a criminal prosecution as well. It has been 
held in Hari Prasad Chamaria v. Bishun Kumar Surekha & Ors., reported 
in (1973) as under: 
“4. 
We have heard Mr. Maheshwari on behalf of the 
appellant and are of the opinion that no case has been made 
out against the respondents under Section 420 Penal Code, 
1860. For the purpose of the present appeal, we would assume 
that the various allegations of fact which have been made in 

the complaint by the appellant are correct. Even after making 
that allowance, we find that the complaint does not disclose 
the commission of any offence on the part of the respondents 
under Section 420 Penal Code, 1860. There is nothing in the 
complaint to show that the respondents had dishonest or 
fraudulent intention at the time the appellant parted with Rs. 
35.000/- There is also nothing to indicate that the respondents 
induced the appellant to pay them Rs. 35,000/- by deceiving 
him. It is further not the case of the appellant that a 
representation was made, the respondents knew the same to 
be false. The fact that the respondents subsequently did not 
abide by their commitment that they would show the appellant 
to be the proprietor of Drang Transport Corporation and 
would also render accounts to him in the month of December 
might create civil liability on the respondents for the offence 
of cheating.” 
 
29. To put it in other words, the case of cheating and dishonest intention starts with 
the very inception of the transaction. But in the case of criminal breach of trust, a 
person who comes into possession of the movable property and receives it legally, 
but illegally retains it or converts it to his own use against the terms of the 
contract, then the question is, in a case like this, whether the retention is with 
dishonest intention or not, whether the retention involves criminal breach of trust 
or only a civil liability would depend upon the facts of each case. 
 
30. The distinction between mere breach of contract and the offence of criminal 
breach of trust and cheating is a fine one. In case of cheating, the intention of the 
accused at the time of inducement should be looked into which may be judged by 
a subsequent conduct, but for this, the subsequent conduct is not the sole test. 
Mere breach of contract cannot give rise to a criminal prosecution for cheating 
unless fraudulent or dishonest intention is shown right from the beginning of the 

transaction i.e. the time when the offence is said to have been committed. 
Therefore, it is this intention, which is the gist of the offence. Whereas, for the 
criminal breach of trust, the property must have been entrusted to the accused or 
he must have dominion over it. The property in respect of which the offence of 
breach of trust has been committed must be either the property of some person 
other than the accused or the beneficial interest in or ownership’ of it must be of 
some other person. The accused must hold that property on trust of such other 
person. Although the offence, i.e. the offence of breach of trust and cheating 
involve dishonest intention, yet they are mutually exclusive and different in basic 
concept. There is a distinction between criminal breach of trust and cheating. For 
cheating, criminal intention is necessary at the time of making a false or 
misleading representation i.e., since inception. In criminal breach of trust, mere 
proof of entrustment is sufficient. Thus, in case of criminal breach of trust, the 
offender is lawfully entrusted with the property, and he dishonestly 
misappropriated the same. Whereas, in case of cheating, the offender fraudulently 
or dishonestly induces a person by deceiving him to deliver any property. In such 
a situation, both the offences cannot co-exist simultaneously. 
 
31. At the most, the court of the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate could have 
issued process for the offence punishable under Section 420 of the IPC i.e. cheating but in any circumstances no case of criminal breach of trust is made out. 
The reason being that indisputably there is no entrustment of any property in the 

case at hand. It is not even the case of the complainant that any property was 
lawfully entrusted to the appellants and that the same has been dishonestly 
misappropriated. The case of the complainant is plain and simple. He says that 
the price of the goods sold by him has not been paid. Once there is a sale, Section 
406 of the IPC goes out of picture. According to the complainant, the invoices 
raised by him were not cleared. No case worth the name of cheating is also made 
out. 
32. Even if the Magistrate would have issued process for the offence punishable 
under Section 420 of the IPC, i.e., cheating the same would have been liable to 
be quashed and set aside, as none of the ingredients to constitute the offence of 
cheating are disclosed from the materials on record. 
 
33. It has been held in State of Gujarat v. Jaswantlal Nathalal reported in (1968), “The term “entrusted” found in Section 405 IPC governs not only the 
words “with the property” immediately following it but also the words “or with 
any dominion over the property” occurring thereafter—see Velji Raghvaji 
Patel v. State of Maharashtra [(1965) ]. Before there can be any 
entrustment there must be a trust meaning thereby an obligation annexed to the 
ownership of property and a confidence reposed in and accepted by the owner or 
declared and accepted by him for the benefit of another or of another and the 
owner. But that does not mean that such an entrustment need conform to all the 
technicalities of the law of trust — see Jaswantrai Manilal Akhaney v. State of 

Bombay. The expression “entrustment” carries with it the 
implication that the person handing over any property or on whose behalf that 
property is handed over to another, continues to be its owner. Further the person 
handing over the property must have confidence in the person taking the property 
so as to create a fiduciary relationship between them. A mere transaction of sale 
cannot amount to an “entrustment””. 
 
34. Similarly, in Central Bureau of Investigation, SPE, SIU(X), New Delhi v. 
Duncans Agro Industries Ltd., Calcutta reported in (1996) this Court 
held that the expression “entrusted with property” used in Section 405 of the 
IPC connotes that the property in respect of which criminal breach of trust can 
be committed must necessarily be the property of some person other than the 
accused or that the beneficial interest in or ownership thereof must be in the other 
person and the offender must hold such property in trust for such other person or 
for his benefit. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“27. In the instant case, a serious dispute has been raised by 
the learned counsel appearing for the respective parties as to 
whether on the face of the allegations, an offence of criminal 
breach of trust is constituted or not. In our view, the 
expression “entrusted with property” or “with any dominion 
over property” has been used in a wide sense in Section 405 
IPC. Such expression includes all cases in which goods are 
entrusted, that is, voluntarily handed over for a specific 
purpose and dishonestly disposed of in violation of law or in 
violation of contract. The expression ‘entrusted’ appearing in 
Section 405 IPC is not necessarily a term of law. It has wide 
and different implications in different contexts. It is, however, 
necessary that the ownership or beneficial interest in the 

ownership of the property entrusted in respect of which 
offence is alleged to have been committed must be in some 
person other than the accused and the latter must hold it on 
account of some person or in some way for his benefit. The 
expression ‘trust’ in Section 405 IPC is a comprehensive 
expression and has been used to denote various kinds of 
relationships like the relationship of trustee and beneficiary, 
bailor and bailee, master and servant, pledger and pledgee. 
When some goods are hypothecated by a person to another 
person, the ownership of the goods still remains with the 
person who has hypothecated such goods. The property in 
respect of which criminal breach of trust can be committed 
must necessarily be the property of some person other than the 
accused or the beneficial interest in or ownership of it must be 
in the other person and the offender must hold such property 
in trust for such other person or for his benefit. In a case of 
pledge, the pledged article belongs to some other person but 
the same is kept in trust by the pledgee. [...]” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
35. The aforesaid exposition of law makes it clear that there should be some 
entrustment of property to the accused wherein the ownership is not transferred 
to the accused. In case of sale of movable property, although the payment may be 
deferred yet the property in the goods passes on delivery as per Sections 20 and 
24 respectively of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930. 
“20. Specific goods in a deliverable state. — Where there is 
an unconditional contract for the sale of specific goods in a 
deliverable state, the property in the goods passes to the buyer 
when the contract is made and it is immaterial whether the time 
of payment of the price or the time of delivery of goods, or both, 
is postponed. xxx 

xxx 

xxx 
 
24. Goods sent on approval or “on sale or return”. — When 
goods are delivered to the buyer on approval or “on sale or 
return” or other similar terms, the property therein passes to 
the buyer— 

(a) when he signifies his approval or acceptance to the seller 
or does any other act adopting the transaction; 
 
(b) if he does not signify his approval or acceptance to the seller 
but retains the goods without giving notice of rejection, then, if 
a time has been fixed for the return of the goods on the 
expiration of such time, and, if no time has been fixed, on the 
expiration of a reasonable time.” 

36. From the aforesaid, there is no manner of any doubt whatsoever that in case of 
sale of goods, the property passes to the purchaser from the seller when the goods 
are delivered. Once the property in the goods passes to the purchaser, it cannot be 
said that the purchaser was entrusted with the property of the seller. Without 
entrustment of property, there cannot be any criminal breach of trust. Thus, 
prosecution of cases on charge of criminal breach of trust, for failure to pay the 
consideration amount in case of sale of goods is flawed to the core. There can be 
civil remedy for the non-payment of the consideration amount, but no criminal 
case will be maintainable for it. [See: Lalit Chaturvedi and Others v. State of 
Uttar Pradesh and Another: & Mideast Integrated 
Steels Ltd. (MESCO Steel Ltd.) and Others v. State of Jharkhand and Another: 
2023 SCC OnLine Jhar 301] 
 
37. The case at hand falls in category No. 1 as laid in Smt. Nagawwa (supra) referred 
to in para 7 of this judgment. 
 
38. If it is the case of the complainant that a particular amount is due and payable to 
him then he should have filed a civil suit for recovery of the amount against the 

appellants herein. But he could not have gone to the court of Additional Chief 
Judicial Magistrate by filing a complaint of cheating and criminal breach of trust. 
 
39. It appears that till this date, the complainant has not filed any civil suit for 
recovery of the amount which according to him is due and payable to him by the 
appellants. He seems to have prima facie lost the period of limitation for filing 
such a civil suit. 
 
40. In such circumstances referred to above, the continuation of the criminal 
proceeding would be nothing but abuse of the process of law. 

FINAL CONCLUSION 
 
41. Before we close this matter, we would like to say something as regards the casual 
approach of the courts below in cases like the one at hand. The Indian Penal Code 
(IPC) was the official Criminal Code in the Republic of India inherited from the 
British India after independence. The IPC came into force in the sub-continent 
during the British rule in 1862. The IPC remained in force for almost a period of 
162 years until it was repealed and replaced by the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 
(“BNS”) in December 2023 which came into effect on 1st July 2024. It is indeed 
very sad to note that even after these many years, the courts have not been able 
to understand the fine distinction between criminal breach of trust and cheating. 

42. When dealing with a private complaint, the law enjoins upon the magistrate a 
duty to meticulously examine the contents of the complaint so as to determine 
whether the offence of cheating or criminal breach of trust as the case may be is 
made out from the averments made in the complaint. The magistrate must 
carefully apply its mind to ascertain whether the allegations, as stated, genuinely 
constitute these specific offences. In contrast, when a case arises from a FIR, this 
responsibility is of the police – to thoroughly ascertain whether the allegations 
levelled by the informant indeed falls under the category of cheating or criminal 
breach of trust. Unfortunately, it has become a common practice for the police 
officers to routinely and mechanically proceed to register an FIR for both the 
offences i.e. criminal breach of trust and cheating on a mere allegation of some 
dishonesty or fraud, without any proper application of mind. 
 
43. It is high time that the police officers across the country are imparted proper 
training in law so as to understand the fine distinction between the offence of 
cheating viz-a-viz criminal breach of trust. Both offences are independent and 
distinct. The two offences cannot coexist simultaneously in the same set of facts. 
They are antithetical to each other. The two provisions of the IPC (now BNS, 
2023) are not twins that they cannot survive without each other. 
 
44. In view of the aforesaid, the appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed. 
 
45. The impugned order passed by the High Court is set aside so also the order passed 

by the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Khurja, Bulandshahar taking 
cognizance upon the complaint. 
 
46. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
47. We direct the Registry to send one copy each of this judgment to the Principal 
Secretary, Ministry of Law & Justice, Union of India and also to the Principal 
Secretary, Home Department, Union of India.... J. 
(J.B. Pardiwala)... J. 
(Manoj Misra) 

New Delhi; 
23rd August, 2024.