IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

OMKAR REALTORS AND DEVELOPERS 
PVT. LTD. Civil Appeal No. 353 
of 2008

VERSUS 

KUSHALRAJ LAND DEVELOPERS 
PVT. LTD. & ANR. 

JUDGMENT 

PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
This is a statutory appeal under Section 67 of the 
Consumer Protection Act, 20191. 
2. 
The challenge in the appeal is to the judgment and order 
dated 23.12.2022 passed by the National Consumer 
Disputes Redressal Commission2 in Consumer Complaint 
No.141 of 2020. NCDRC by the said judgment and order 
has partly allowed the complaint of the respondent and 
 
1 hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’ 
2 in short ‘NCDRC’ 

directed the appellant to refund within 2 months an 
amount of Rs.7,16,41,493/- (Rupees Seven Crore Sixteen 
Lakh Forty One Thousand Four Hundred and Ninety 
Three only) along with delay compensation @ 6% per 
annum from the respective dates of deposits till its 
payment, failing which the rate of interest payable would 
stand increased to 9% per annum. 
3. 
The respondent is a private limited company in the 
business of real estate development. It booked a flat for 
residential use of one of its directors and his family 
members with the appellant on 22.09.2015 in its project 
‘Omkar 1973 Worli’ on payment of booking amount of 
Rs.51,00,000/- 
(Rupees 
Fifty 
One 
Lakh 
only). 
Subsequently, respondent paid part consideration i.e. a 
total of Rs.6,79,97,071/- (Rupees Six Crore Seventy Nine 
Lakh Ninety Seven Thousand and Seventy One only) to 
appellant. 
4. 
Thereafter, the respondent was issued an Allotment 
Letter dated 29.06.2016 with addenda dated 30.06.2016 
whereby Flat No.5001, 50th Floor, Tower-B of the said 
project was allotted to it on a total sale consideration of 

Rs.34,50,00,000/- (Rupees Thirty Four Crore Fifty Lakh 
only). The date of possession was mentioned as latest by 
31.12.2018 in the letter of allotment. 
5. 
The appellant on 08.03.2017 advanced the date of 
possession from 31.12.2018 to the first quarter of 2017. 
On the basis of the part occupancy certificate received by 
appellant on 07.03.2017 from Slum Rehabilitation 
Authority, the respondent was asked to take possession 
of the allotted flat immediately and was directed to pay 
the balance amount of Rs.28,87,80,526/- (Rupees 
Twenty 
Eight 
Crores 
Eighty 
Seven 
Lakhs 
Eighty 
Thousand Five Hundred Twenty Six only) within 30 days. 
6. 
The respondent tried to arrange necessary finance for the 
purpose through financial institutions but failed. The 
respondent, 
through 
the 
correspondence 
with 
the 
financial institutions, came to know that the flat allotted 
to him, is already reserved/allotted to one Mr. Nakul 
Arya. The respondent on 18.03.2017, probably for want 
of arrangement of necessary funds, part occupancy 
certificate and due to the allotment of the said flat to one 
another person, declined to take possession and to pay 

the balance amount as required by the appellant. The 
appellant, thus, cancelled the booking/allotment of the 
respondent vide Termination Letter dated 31.08.2017. 
7. 
The respondent, thus, issued a letter dated 22.09.2017 
seeking refund of the entire amount of Rs.7,16,41,493/- 
(Rupees Seven Crore Sixteen Lakh Forty One Thousand 
Four Hundred and Ninety Three only) along with interest. 
The appellant, instead of refunding the amount, vide 
letter dated 18.11.2017 forfeited the amount deposited by 
the respondent. 
8. 
In the above background, the respondent approached the 
NCDRC complaining about the deficiency in services and 
of adopting unfair trade practices with the prayer to 
refund the entire amount deposited by it with 18% 
interest along with litigation expenses and compensation 
for mental harassment and torture. 
9. 
The appellant contested the complaint by filing its written 
reply alleging that the respondent is not a consumer 
within the purview of Section 2 (7) of the Act. It alleged 
that since respondent is a real estate development 
company and that it had purchased the flat for 

commercial purpose, therefore, the complaint is not 
maintainable. The allotment of the respondent was rightly 
cancelled as despite demand it failed to pay the balance 
sale consideration. The appellant had the right to 
advance the date of delivery of possession and that there 
was no stipulation that the possession would be offered 
to the respondent only on the receipt of full occupancy 
certificate. 
10. Basically, two points arose before the NCDRC for 
adjudication. First, whether the complaint, as filed by the 
respondent, was maintainable inasmuch as respondent 
was alleged not be a ‘consumer’ within the meaning of 
Section 2(7) of the Act. Secondly, whether there was any 
deficiency in service on part of the appellant or whether 
the appellant was justified in terminating the allotment of 
the respondent and forfeiting the deposits. 
11. The 
NCDRC 
allowed 
the 
complaint 
holding 
the 
respondent to be a ‘consumer’ under Section 2 (7) of the 
Act, relying upon the decisions of this Court in Lilavati 
Kirtilal Mehta Medical Trust vs. Unique Shanti 

Developers 
and 
Others3 and 
Crompton 
Greaves 
Limited and Others vs. Daimler Chrysler India Private 
Limited4. In context with the deficiency and unfair trade 
practice, if any, adopted by the appellant, NCDRC opined 
that the appellant had created confusion by double 
allotment of the flat in question. It was first allotted to 
one Nakul Arya on 10.04.2013 and then to the 
respondent on 29/30.06.2016. The controversy with 
regard to the aforesaid double allotment was resolved by 
the rectification deed executed on 17.03.2018. Therefore, 
the NCDRC held that the appellant was not justified in 
cancelling the booking/allotment of the respondent and 
forfeiting the amount deposited by respondent before 
resolving the controversy of double allotment. Thus, it 
was held that there was deficiency in service on the part 
of appellant. 
12. We have heard Shri Vinay Navare, learned senior counsel 
for the appellant and Smt. Malvika Kapila, learned 
counsel for the respondent and have perused the 
 
3 (2020) 

impugned judgment and order of the NCDRC as well as 
the other relevant documents relied upon by the parties. 
13. The first issue regarding the maintainability of the 
complaint of the respondent-claimant on the plea that it 
is not a consumer, is no longer res integra. It is more or 
less covered by the two decisions which have been relied 
upon by the NCDRC. In Lilavati case (supra), the 
Medical Trust that had purchased houses for the nurses 
was held to be a ‘consumer’ under the Act and its action 
in purchasing the houses was not held to be a 
commercial activity. In Crompton Greaves case (supra), 
the services availed for the personal use of the director of 
the company were not held to be for commercial 
purposes. 
14. Section 2 (7) of the Act defines “consumer” to mean any 
person who buys any goods for a consideration but does 
not include a person who obtains such goods for resale or 
for any commercial purpose. Therefore, purchase and 
sale of goods for resale or for commercial purpose is 
excluded 
from 
the 
purview 
of 
the 
definition 
of 
“consumer”. 

15. In a very recent decision of this Court in M/s Daimler 
Chrysler 
India 
Pvt. 
Ltd. vs. 
M/s 
Controls 
& 
Switchgear Company Ltd. & Anr., decided on 09.07.2024 wherein one of us 
(Hon’ble P. Mithal, J.) was a member, this Court after 
considering all earlier decisions on the subject including 
Lilavati Kirtilal Mehta Medical Trust (supra) and 
National Insurance Company Ltd. vs. Harsolia 
Motors and Ors.5 ruled that in sum and substance to 
determine whether the goods purchased by a person 
(which would include a legal entity like a company) were 
for commercial purpose or not within the meaning of the 
Act would depend upon the facts and circumstances of 
each case. However, ordinarily “commercial purpose” is 
understood to include manufacturing/industrial activity 
or 
business-to-business 
transactions 
between 
commercial entities. The purchase of the goods should 
have a close and direct nexus with a profit generating 
activity. If it is found that the dominant purpose behind 
purchasing the goods was for the personal use and 
 
5 (2023) 

consumption of the purchaser and/or the beneficiary, or 
was otherwise not linked with other commercial activities, 
the question whether such a purchase was for the 
purpose of “generating livelihood by means of self-
employment” need not be looked into. In short, the 
dominant intention or the dominant purpose of the 
transaction is to be looked into to find out if it had any 
nexus with some kind of profit generation as part of the 
commercial activities. 
16. In the case at hand, the complainant specifically 
mentions that the flat was being purchased for the 
purpose of residence of one of its Directors and his family 
and that the company is a family owned company. The 
mere fact that the respondent-company is a real estate 
company, it does not mean that the flat was purchased 
by it for commercial purpose or for resale so as to earn 
profits. It is the appellant who is contending that the 
respondent is not a consumer and as such the complaint 
is not maintainable, therefore, the burden lies heavily 
upon it to lead evidence to prove that the respondent in 
purchasing the flat in question is indulging in real estate 

business. There is no evidence on record to show that the 
flat so purchased by the respondent was in any way 
connected with the real estate business rather than for 
personal use of its Director and his family. 
17. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the 
case and the law as has been culled out above, we do not 
find any error or illegality in the finding of the NCDRC 
that the purchase of the aforesaid flat was for personal 
use and not as part of the commercial activity and as 
such the complaint filed by the respondent was 
maintainable. 
18. The second issue is regarding deficiency in service or 
unfair trade practice on part of the appellant in the 
matter of allotment of the flat in question in favour of the 
respondent and in its cancellation resulting in the 
forfeiture of the amount deposited. 
19. Undisputedly, the flat in question was allotted in favour 
of the respondent vide letter dated 29.06.2016 with an 
addendum dated 30.06.2016. The delivery of possession 
was notified by the appellant as latest by 31.12.2018 but 
was advanced to the first quarter of 2017. Thus, in order 

to make finance arrangements, respondent entered into 
negotiation with the finance company whereupon it was 
revealed that the said flat stood already reserved/allotted 
in favour of one Mr. Nakul Arya. The aforesaid fact of 
reservation/allotment of the flat in favour of Mr. Nakul 
Arya is not in dispute. The explanation is that the flat 
allotted to the respondent and Mr. Nakul Arya were 
different but there was confusion with regard to the 
number of the flat allotted to each one of them. This 
confusion with regard to double allotment of the flat 
persisted till it was resolved by the appellant as per the 
deed of rectification dated 17.03.2018. It means that the 
confusion of double allotment of the flat notwithstanding 
some litigation in court prevailed and was finally resolved 
on 17.03.2018. In this view of the matter, the appellant 
could not have insisted for transferring possession of the 
flat and could not have terminated the allotment of the 
respondents vide its letter dated 31.08.2017 i.e. prior to 
the resolution dated 17.03.2018. At the same time, the 
appellant instead of refunding the amount deposited by 
the respondents, forfeited the same vide letter dated 

18.11.2017. Since the very cancellation/ termination of 
the allotment of the respondents in the facts and 
circumstances of the case is not justified, consequently 
the forfeiture is also bad in law. The NCDRC upon 
consideration of the above facts and circumstances, 
irrespective of the fact that the appellant may have the 
power to advance the date of delivery of possession of the 
flat allotted or offer possession on the basis of part 
occupancy certificate, rightly held that the appellant was 
guilty of adopting unfair trade practice and since there 
was double allotment of the flat, there was deficiency in 
service. 
20. In the light of the above discussion, we agree with the 
NCDRC that the complaint of the respondents was 
maintainable and that since the services rendered by the 
appellant were held to be deficient. It has thus rightly 
issued directions to refund the forfeited amount of 
Rs. 7,16,41,493/- along with the delay compensation @ 
6% per annum from the date of deposit till refund within 
two months, failing which the interest would be payable 
@ 9% per annum. 

21. The 
appellant 
is 
directed 
to 
refund 
a 
sum 
of 
Rs. 3,00,00,000/- (Rupees Three Crore only) out of the 
total amount, as directed to be refunded, within a period 
of two weeks from today and the balance be refunded on 
or before 31st December, 2024 either in lump sum or in 
piecemeal, failing which it will be open for the Collector 
concerned to recover the entire amount as arrears of land 
revenue. 
22. The present appeal thus lacks merit and is dismissed 
with no order as to costs....………………………….. J. 
(PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)...……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL)