IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

RAJA NAYKAR 

VERSUS 
 
STATE OF CHHATTISGARH 

JUDGMENT 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 

1. 
This appeal challenges the judgement and order dated 22nd 
July, 2015, passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of 
Chhattisgarh, Bilaspur in CRA No. 223 of 2012, thereby 
dismissing the appeal filed by the Appellant, namely, Raja 
Naykar (Accused No. 1) and confirming the judgment and order 
of conviction and sentence awarded to him by the Court of 
Additional Sessions Judge, Durg (Chhattisgarh) (hereinafter 
referred to as “Trial Judge”) in Sessions Trial No. 14 of 2010 on 
23rd November, 2011. 
2. 
Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present appeal are 
as under: 

2.1 On 21st October, 2009, the half-burnt body of Shiva alias 
Sanwar (hereinafter referred to as ‘deceased’) was found 
behind Baba Balak Nath temple near Shastri Nagar ground. 
Based on the information given by one, Pramod Kumar 
(P.W.3), merg intimation Ex. P-33 was registered against 
unknown persons. 
2.2 The prosecution case, in a nutshell, is that Mohan – the 
husband of Accused No. 2 and brother of the Appellant was 
killed by the deceased; and as its offshoot, on 21st October, 
2009 at about 12.00 a.m., the Appellant committed the 
murder of the deceased by causing 24 stab wounds on his 
body. He then wrapped the body in a blanket with the help 
of other accused persons, took it behind the Baba Balak 
Nath temple near Shastri Nagar ground where the half-
burnt body of the deceased was found in the following 
afternoon. Postmortem examination of the body of the 
deceased was conducted on 23rd October, 2009 by Dr. 
Ullhas Gonnade (P.W.11) who observed as many as 24 
injuries on the deceased. According to P.W.11, after 
commission of murder, the body of the deceased was burnt 
and his death was homicidal in nature. It was further the 

case of the prosecution that an electricity bill in the name 
of one, Alakh Verma was found from the body of the 
deceased, on the basis of which the police proceeded with 
further investigation. In pursuance of the disclosure 
statements of the accused persons, seizure was effected and 
the police concluded that the deceased was murdered by 
the Appellant and that the body was then taken to the Baba 
Balak Nath temple with the help of the other accused 
persons where an attempt was made to burn the body. 
2.3 At the conclusion of the investigation, a charge-sheet came 
to be filed in the Court of Judicial Magistrate First Class, 
Durg. Since the case was exclusively triable by the Sessions 
Court, the same came to be committed to the Sessions 
Judge. 
2.4 The accused persons were examined under Section 313 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (“Cr.P.C”) wherein 
they pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. The 
prosecution examined 18 witnesses to bring home the guilt 
of the accused. 
2.5 At the conclusion of trial, the Trial Judge found that the 
prosecution had succeeded in proving that the Appellant 

had committed the murder of the deceased. The 
prosecution further proved that the accused persons 
committed criminal conspiracy to destroy the evidence, and 
threw the body of the deceased after burning the same 
behind the Baba Balak Nath temple. The prosecution also 
proved that accused no. 2 helped in throwing the body of 
the deceased and destroying evidence by way of cleaning 
the blood stains etc. of the deceased. Thus, the Trial Judge 
convicted the Appellant for offences punishable under 
Sections 302 and 201 read with 120B of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (“IPC” for short) and was awarded a maximum 
sentence of life imprisonment; whereas Accused Nos. 2 to 4 
were convicted for offences punishable under Sections 201 
read with 120B of IPC and were sentenced to undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for five years and fine of Rs.1,000/-. 
2.6 Being aggrieved thereby, the Appellant and other accused 
persons preferred appeals before the High Court through 
CRA No. 223 of 2012 and CRA No. 38 of 2012 respectively. 
The High Court by the common impugned judgement, 
although allowed the appeal filed by the accused nos. 2 to 
4; however, it dismissed the appeal filed by the present 

Appellant and affirmed the order of conviction and sentence 
awarded to the him by the Trial Judge. 
2.7 Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal. 
3. 
We have heard Shri Sameer Shrivastava, learned counsel 
for the appellant-Raja Naykar and Shri Sumeer Sodhi, learned 
counsel for the respondent-State of Chhattisgarh. 
4. 
Shri Sameer Shrivastava submitted that both the Trial 
Judge as well as the High Court have grossly erred in convicting 
the appellant. It is submitted that there is no evidence at all 
which establishes the guilt of the appellant beyond reasonable 
doubt. It is submitted that the finding of guilt of the appellant 
as recorded by the Trial Judge is based on conjectures and 
surmises and, therefore, not sustainable in law. Learned counsel 
further submitted that, from the evidence of the father and 
brother of the deceased, it would reveal that the dead body of the 
deceased has not been identified and the prosecution has failed 
to prove that the dead body found in the garbage was that of 
Shiva. 
5. 
On the contrary, Shri Sumeer Sodhi submitted that both 
the Trial Judge and the High Court, upon correct appreciation of 
evidence, have found the accused-appellant guilty of the charges 

levelled against him. It is submitted that, as per the FSL report, 
human blood was present on the dagger which was recovered at 
the instance of the present appellant. It is further submitted that 
the recoveries made on the basis of the Memorandum under 
Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (hereinafter referred 
to as “the Evidence Act”) would establish the guilt of the accused-
appellant beyond reasonable doubt. He, therefore, submits that 
no interference would be warranted with the impugned judgment 
in the facts and circumstances of the present case. 
6. 
With the assistance of the learned counsel for the parties, 
we have scrutinized the evidence on record. 
7. 
Undoubtedly, the prosecution case rests on circumstantial 
evidence. The law with regard to conviction on the basis of 
circumstantial evidence has very well been crystalized in the 
judgment of this Court in the case of Sharad Birdhichand 
Sarda vs. State of Maharashtra1, wherein this Court held 
thus: 
“152. Before discussing the cases relied upon by 
the High Court we would like to cite a few 
decisions on the nature, character and essential 
proof required in a criminal case which rests on 
circumstantial 
evidence 
alone. 
The 
most 
fundamental and basic decision of this Court 
 
1 (1984) =1984 INSC 121 

is Hanumant v. State of Madhya Pradesh [(1952): AIR 1952 SC 343:: 
1953 Cri LJ 129]. This case has been uniformly 
followed and applied by this Court in a large 
number 
of 
later 
decisions 
up-to-date, 
for 
instance, the cases of Tufail (Alias) Simmi v. State 
of Uttar Pradesh [(1969): 1970 SCC 

55] 
and Ramgopal v. State 
of 
Maharashtra [(1972): AIR 1972 SC 
656]. It may be useful to extract what Mahajan, 
J. has laid down in Hanumant case [(1952): AIR 1952 SC 343:: 1953 Cri 
LJ 129]: 
“It is well to remember that in cases where 
the evidence is of a circumstantial nature, the 
circumstances from which the conclusion of 
guilt is to be drawn should in the first instance 
be fully established, and all the facts so 
established should be consistent only with the 
hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. Again, 
the circumstances should be of a conclusive 
nature and tendency and they should be such 
as to exclude every hypothesis but the one 
proposed to be proved. In other words, there 
must be a chain of evidence so far complete as 
not to leave any reasonable ground for a 
conclusion consistent with the innocence of 
the accused and it must be such as to show 
that within all human probability the act must 
have been done by the accused.” 
 
153. A close analysis of this decision would show 
that the following conditions must be fulfilled 
before a case against an accused can be said to 
be fully established: 
(1) the circumstances from which the 
conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be 
fully established. 

It may be noted here that this Court indicated 
that the circumstances concerned “must or 
should” and not “may be” established. There is 
not only a grammatical but a legal distinction 
between “may be proved” and “must be or should 
be proved” as was held by this Court in Shivaji 
Sahabrao Bobade v. State of Maharashtra [(1973): 1973 SCC (Cri) 1033: 1973 Crl LJ 
1783] where the observations were made: [SCC 
para 19, p. 807: SCC (Cri) p. 1047] 
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that the 
accused must be and not merely may be guilty 
before a court can convict and the mental 
distance between ‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long 
and divides vague conjectures from sure 
conclusions.” 
(2) the facts so established should be 
consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt 
of the accused, that is to say, they should not 
be explainable on any other hypothesis except 
that the accused is guilty, 
(3) the circumstances should be of a 
conclusive nature and tendency, 
(4) they should exclude every possible 
hypothesis except the one to be proved, and 
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so 
complete as not to leave any reasonable 
ground for the conclusion consistent with the 
innocence of the accused and must show that 
in all human probability the act must have 
been done by the accused. 
 
154. These five golden principles, if we may say 
so, constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a 
case based on circumstantial evidence. 
 
8. 
It can thus clearly be seen that it is necessary for the 

prosecution that the circumstances from which the conclusion 
of the guilt is to be drawn should be fully established. The Court 
holds that it is a primary principle that the accused ‘must be’ 
and not merely ‘may be’ proved guilty before a court can convict 
the accused. It has been held that there is not only a 
grammatical but a legal distinction between ‘may be proved’ and 
‘must be or should be proved’. It has been held that the facts so 
established should be consistent only with the guilt of the 
accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on any 
other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty. It has further 
been held that the circumstances should be such that they 
exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved. It 
has been held that there must be a chain of evidence so complete 
as not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion 
consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show that 
in all human probabilities the act must have been done by the 
accused. 
9. 
It is settled law that the suspicion, however strong it may 
be, cannot take the place of proof beyond reasonable doubt. An 
accused cannot be convicted on the ground of suspicion, no 
matter how strong it is. An accused is presumed to be innocent 

unless proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. 
10. In the light of these guiding principles, we will have to 
examine the present case. 
11. On a perusal of the judgment of the Trial Judge as well of 
the High Court, it would reveal that the main circumstance on 
which the High Court and the Trial Judge found the appellant 
guilty of the crime is the recovery of various articles at his 
instance. They have further found that the pieces of blanket 
recovered from the place of incident and the place where the dead 
body was subsequently taken for being burnt, were found to be 
identical/similar. The High Court has observed that specific 
questions were put to the appellant in his examination under 
Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter 
referred to as “Cr.P.C.”) regarding recovery of various articles at 
his instance and also regarding the FSL report, but he has failed 
to give an explanation with regard thereto. 
12. The motive attributed to the appellant by the prosecution is 
that the appellant was under an impression that the deceased 
Shiva had caused the murder of his elder brother Mohan. It is 
the prosecution case that, on the date of the offence, deceased 
Shiva was working in a hotel owned by the sister-in-law of the 

appellant. The appellant gave money to the deceased to buy 
liquor. They both had consumed liquor. After having dinner, his 
sister-in-law, her daughter along with the baby went to bed in 
the middle-room of the house. He slept on the cot. He asked 
Shiva to sleep on the spread bed on the floor. It is the 
prosecution case that, at about 10.30 p.m., the appellant gave 
several blows to Shiva with a dagger. Thereafter, he wrapped the 
dead body of Shiva in a blanket and a homemade mattress and 
called his friend Chandan Sao. Thereafter, they broke the lock 
of the rickshaw parked near Chawni Chowk and took the 
rickshaw to the house from Chawni Chowk for disposing off the 
dead body. Thereafter, the appellant along with other accused 
persons lifted the dead body of the deceased and placed the same 
on the rickshaw. The rickshaw was then taken to the garbage 
dumping ground where he threw the dead body. Thereafter, he 
concealed the dagger in the garbage scattered inside the 
boundary wall. Following which, he again went to the place 
where he had thrown the dead body and burnt the clothes 
wrapped around the dead body and came back to his sister-in-
law’s house. 
13. The aforesaid story is narrated in the Memorandum of the 

appellant under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. However, as held 
by the Privy Council in the locus classicus case of Pulukuri 
Kotayya and others v. King-Emperor2, only such statement 
which leads to recovery of incriminating material from a place 
solely and exclusively within the knowledge of the maker thereof 
would be admissible in evidence. 
14. Undisputedly, the dead body was found much prior to the 
recording of the Memorandum of the appellant under Section 27 
of the Evidence Act. Therefore, only that part of the statement 
which leads to recovery of the dagger and the rickshaw would be 
relevant. 
15. The Property Seizure Memo would show that the dagger was 
seized from a place accessible to one and all. According to the 
prosecution, the incident took place on 21st October, 2009 and 
the recovery was made on 25th October, 2009. 
16. As per the FSL report, the blood stains found on the dagger 
were of human blood. However, the FSL report does not show 
that the blood found on the dagger was of the blood group of the 
deceased. Apart from that, even the serological report is not 
available. 
 
2 1946 SCC OnLine 47=AIR 1947 PC 67 

17. Insofar as the recovery of rickshaw is concerned, it is again 
from an open place accessible to one and all. It is difficult to 
believe that the owner of the rickshaw would remain silent when 
his rickshaw was missing for 3-4 days. As such, the said 
recovery would also not be relevant. 
18. Another circumstance relied on by the Trial Judge is with 
regard to recovery of blood-stained clothes on a Memorandum of 
the appellant. The said clothes were recovered from the house of 
the appellant’s sister-in-law. The alleged incident is of 21st 
October 2009, whereas the recovery was made on 25th October, 
2009. It is difficult to believe that a person committing the crime 
would keep the clothes in the house of his sister-in-law for four 
days. 
19. It can thus be seen that, the only circumstance that may be 
of some assistance to the prosecution case is the recovery of 
dagger at the instance of the present appellant. However, as 
already stated hereinabove, the said recovery is also from an 
open place accessible to one and all. In any case, the blood found 
on the dagger does not match with the blood group of the 
deceased. In the case of Mustkeem alias Sirajudeen v. State 

of Rajasthan3, this Court held that sole circumstance of 
recovery of blood-stained weapon cannot form the basis of 
conviction unless the same was connected with the murder of 
the deceased by the accused. Thus, we find that only on the 
basis of sole circumstance of recovery of blood-stained weapon, 
it cannot be said that the prosecution has discharged its burden 
of proving the case beyond reasonable doubt. 
20. As already discussed hereinabove, merely on the basis of 
suspicion, conviction would not be tenable. It is the duty of the 
prosecution to prove beyond all reasonable doubt that it is only 
the accused and the accused alone who has committed the 
crime. We find that the prosecution has utterly failed to do so. 
21. Insofar as the finding of the High Court that the appellant 
has failed to give any explanation in his statement under Section 
313 Cr. P.C. is concerned, we find that the High Court has failed 
to appreciate the basic principle that it is only after the 
prosecution discharges its duty of proving the case beyond all 
reasonable doubt that the false explanation or non-explanation 
of the accused could be taken into consideration. In any case, 
as held by this Court in the case of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda 
 
 SC 2769=2011 INSC 487 

(supra), in a case based on circumstantial evidence, the non-
explanation or false explanation of the accused under Section 
313 Cr.P.C. cannot be used as an additional link to complete the 
chain of circumstances. It can only be used to fortify the 
conclusion of guilt already arrived at on the basis of other proven 
circumstances. 
22. In the result, the appeal is allowed. The impugned 
judgment and order dated 22nd July, 2015, passed by the 
Division Bench of the High Court of Chhattisgarh, Bilaspur in 
CRA No. 223 of 2012 is quashed and set aside. The appellant is 
directed to be released forthwith, if not required in any other 
case....J 
(B.R. GAVAI)...J 
(SANDEEP MEHTA) 
 
NEW DELHI; 

JANUARY 24, 2024