IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
[ SLP(] 

KALVAKUNTLA KAVITHA 
 
VERSUS 
 
DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT 

WITH 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
[ SLP(] 

JUDGMENT 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
These appeals challenge the judgment and order dated 
01.07.2024 passed by the learned Single Judge of the High 
Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Bail Application Nos.1675 and 
1739 of 2024, vide which the learned Single Judge has 
refused to grant bail to the appellant herein. 
3. 
Though the matter has been argued at length by Shri 
Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior Counsel along with Shri D.S. 
Naidu and Shri Vikram Chaudhri, learned Senior Counsel 

appearing on behalf of the appellant, and Shri S.V. Raju, 
learned Additional Solicitor General of India (for short, ‘ASG’) 
for the respondent(s), at length; learned ASG has suggested 
that this Court should avoid elaborate discussions on the 
merits, inasmuch as any observations may prejudice the 
rights of either of the parties at the trial. 
4. 
We appreciate the fairness of the learned ASG in 
suggesting the Court not to record the detailed elaborations 
on the merits of the case. It has been a consistent view of 
this Court that the Courts should avoid elaborate discussion 
at the stage of considering application for bail. We would 
therefore avoid any discussion on the merits of the present 
case inasmuch as the same may prejudice the rights of either 
of the parties at the trial. 
5. 
Shri Rohatgi, learned Senior Counsel submits that there 
is no material on record so as to implicate the appellant 
herein with the offences charged with. In any case, he 
submits that insofar as the appeal SLP(Crl.) 
No.10778 of 2024 is concerned, the complaint has been filed 
by the prosecution and insofar as the appeal 
SLP(Crl.) No.10785 of 2024 is concerned, the charge-sheet 

has already been filed. It is submitted that since the 
investigation is complete, further custody of the appellant 
would not be required. 
6. 
Shri Rohatgi, relying on the judgment of this Court in 
the 
case 
of 
Manish 
Sisodia 
v. 
Directorate 
of 
Enforcement1, submits that inasmuch as both the said case 
and the present case arise out of the same set of facts and so 
in the present case also there are about 493 witnesses to be 
examined and the documents to be considered are in the 
range of about 50,000 pages. He further submits that no 
proceeds of crime have been recovered from the appellant. 
Shri Rohatgi further submits that the appellant is a woman 
and is therefore entitled to special treatment under proviso to 
Section 45(1) of the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 
2002 (for short, ‘PMLA’). 
7. 
Shri S.V. Raju, learned ASG vehemently opposed these 
appeals. He submits that the statements of various witnesses 
as well as co-accused would clearly show that the present 
appellant was a kingpin in arranging the deal between the 
co-accused-Arvind Kejriwal and the south lobby. He submits 
 
1: 

that the statements of the witnesses clearly show that the 
proceeds of the crime have passed through, or at least at her 
instance. Learned ASG further submits that not only the 
statements recorded under Section 50 of the PMLA but also 
the statements recorded under Section 164 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 before the learned Magistrate 
would clearly implicate the present appellant in the trial. 
8. 
Learned ASG further submits that the learned Trial 
Judge has rightly refused to grant the benefit of the proviso 
to Section 45(1) of the PMLA on the ground that the 
appellant is a woman, inasmuch as she has indulged herself 
into tampering with the evidence and influencing the 
witnesses. He submits that the appellant has formatted her 
mobile set in order to destroy the evidence which was against 
her. 
9. 
Learned ASG further submits that the sequence as to in 
what manner the accused Arun Pillai has retracted his 
statement would clearly show that it is the present appellant, 
who has a role to play. He submits that though the statement 
of Arun Pillai under Section 50 of the PMLA was recorded on 
10.11.2022 after a period of more than three months, he has 

retracted the statement on 09.03.2023. He further submits 
that it is relevant to note that the first summons were issued 
to the present appellant on 07.03.2023 i.e., two days prior to 
the day Arun Pillai retracted his statement. He therefore 
submits that the Court will have to draw an inference that 
the appellant is indulging in influencing the witnesses. 
10. On perusal of the record, we find that in CBI case 
charge-sheet has been filed and in ED case complaint has 
been filed. As such, the custody of the appellant herein is 
not necessary for the purpose of investigation. 
11. The appellant has been behind the bars for the last five 
months. As observed by us in the case of Manish Sisodia 
(supra), taking into consideration that there are about 493 
witnesses to be examined and the documents to be 
considered are in the range of about 50,000 pages, the 
likelihood of the trial being concluded in near future is 
impossible. 
12. Relying on the various pronouncements of this Court, 
we had observed in the case of Manish Sisodia (supra) that 
the prolonged incarceration before being pronounced guilty of 
an offence should not be permitted to become punishment 

without trial. 
13. We had also reiterated the well-established principle 
that “bail is the rule and refusal is an exception”. We had 
further observed that the fundamental right of liberty 
provided under Article 21 of the Constitution is superior to 
the statutory restrictions. 
14. We are further of the view that the proviso to Section 
45(1) of the PMLA would entitle a woman for special 
treatment while her prayer for bail is being considered. 
15. The said proviso to Section 45(1) of the PMLA reads 
thus:- 
“Provided that a person, who, is under the age of 
sixteen years, or is a woman or is sick or infirm, or 
is accused either on his own or along with other co-
accused of money-laundering a sum of less than 
one crore rupees, may be released on bail, if the 
special court so directs:” 
 
16. A perusal of the above proviso would thus reveal that 
the proviso permits certain category of accused including 
woman to be released on bail, without the twin requirement 
under Section 45 of the PMLA to be satisfied. No doubt that, 
as argued by the learned ASG, in a given case the accused 
even if a woman may not be automatically entitled to benefit 
of the said proviso and it would all depend upon the facts 

and circumstances of each case. 
17. However, when a statute specifically provides a special 
treatment for a certain category of accused, while denying 
such a benefit, the Court will be required to give specific 
reasons as to why such a benefit is to be denied. 
18. The order of the learned Single Judge, which denies the 
special treatment to the present appellant makes for an 
interesting reading. The learned Judge observed thus:- 
“65. As mentioned in the contents of the application 
itself, the applicant Smt. K. Kavitha, is a member of 
the 
Telangana 
Legislative 
Council 
from 
the 
Nizamabad Local Bodies Constituency and has held 
significant political positions, including Member of 
Parliament (MP) for Nizamabad formerly. During 
her tenure in the Lok Sabha, she served on several 
committees. She had initiated a 'Free Meal Initiative' 
in her constituency, providing meals at state 
hospitals and during the pandemic. She is also the 
founder of the Telangana Jagruti Skill Centre, 
offering vocational training to youth, and as per her 
pleadings has been involved in educating poor 
children in the Nalgonda district since 2006. It is 
claimed in the pleadings that she is a prominent 
figure in the Telangana statehood movement. She 
holds a Bachelor's degree in Engineering and a 
Master's degree in Sciences. She has also served as 
the National Commissioner of Bharat Scouts and 
Guides 
since 

amongst 
many 
other 
achievements mentioned in the pleadings. 
66. It is heartening to note that the applicant Smt. 
K. Kavitha, is a highly qualified and well-
accomplished person, having made significant 
contributions to politics and social work as enlisted 
by her in her pleadings. The same were not disputed 

by the investigating agencies. Her educational 
qualification and the activities, she has enlisted for 
the betterment of society in the State of Telangana 
are essentially, one side of herself and is impressive. 
However, 
while 
deciding 
the 
present 
bail 
applications, though this Court may appreciate 
these accomplishments, it cannot lose sight of 
serious allegations levelled by the prosecution and 
the evidences collected during the course of 
investigation and presented before this Court, which 
prima facie reveal her role in the offence in 
question. 
67. Furthermore, as far as benefit of proviso to 
Section 45 is concerned, when it is the case of 
applicant herself that she is a well educated and 
accomplished 
woman, 
who 
has 
remained 
Member of Parliament, Member of Legislative 
Council, etc., this Court is bound to keep in 
mind the observations of the Hon'ble Apex Court 
in case of Saumya Chaurasia (supra). The material 
collected by the Directorate of Enforcement, which 
has been discussed in the preceding paragraphs 
has pointed out that the applicant herein was one of 
the chief conspirators in the entire conspiracy 
relating to formulation and implementation of new 
Excise Policy of Delhi. In fact, some other accused 
persons were working on behalf of the applicant and 
as per her instructions, as noted in the preceding 
discussion. 
68. Thus, Smt. K. Kavitha cannot be equated to 
a vulnerable woman who may have been misused 
to commit an offence, which is the class of 
women for whom the proviso to Section 45 of 
PMLA has been incorporated, as held by the 
Hon'ble Apex Court in case of Saumya Chaurasia 
(supra). Accordingly, this Court is of the 
considered opinion that Smt. K. Kavitha is not 
entitled to the benefit of proviso to Section 45 
of PMLA.” 
[emphasis supplied] 

19. Day in and day out it is argued before us on behalf of 
the prosecution that merely because an accused has a 
special status in terms of he/she being a Member of 
Parliament or a Member of Legislative Assembly or a Minister 
or a Chief Minister, etc., they should not be given a special 
treatment and should be treated equally as any other 
accused. 
20. However, the learned Single Judge in the present case, 
while denying the benefit of the proviso to Section 45(1) of the 
PMLA, comes to a “heartening conclusion” that the appellant 
is highly qualified and a well-accomplished person. The 
learned Single Judge further observed that the appellant has 
made significant contributions to politics and social work. 
The learned Single Judge further observed that while 
deciding her bail application, the Court may appreciate her 
accomplishment, however, it cannot lose sight of the serious 
allegations levelled by the prosecution and the evidence 
collected during the course of the investigation and presented 
before the Court. 
21. The learned Single Judge thereafter proceeds to observe 
that the present appellant cannot be equated to a “vulnerable 

woman”. 
22. We find that the learned Single Judge erroneously 
observed that the proviso to Section 45(1) of the PMLA is 
applicable only to a “vulnerable woman”. 
23. We further find that the learned Single Judge totally 
misapplied the ratio laid down by this Court in the case of 
Saumya Chaurasia v. Directorate of Enforcement2. 
24. A perusal of the judgment of this Court in the case of 
Saumya Chaurasia (supra) would show that this Court has 
observed that the Courts need to be more sensitive and 
sympathetic towards the category of persons included in the 
first proviso to Section 45 of the PMLA and similar provisions 
in the other Acts. The Court observes that the persons of 
tender age and women who are likely to be more vulnerable 
may sometimes be misused by unscrupulous elements and 
made scapegoats for committing such crime. 
25. No doubt that this Court observes that nowadays the 
educated and well-placed women in the society engage 
themselves in commercial ventures and enterprises and 
advertently or inadvertently engage themselves in the illegal 
 
2 (2024): 2023 INSC 1073 

activities. The Court therefore puts a caution that the Courts, 
while deciding such matters, should exercise the discretion 
judiciously using their prudence. 
26. This Court in the case of Saumya Chaurasia (supra), 
while paraphrasing proviso to Section 45(1) of the PMLA 
stated in paragraph 23 as follows: 
“23. ….. No doubt the courts need to be more 
sensitive and sympathetic towards the category of 
persons included in the first proviso to Section 45 
and similar provisions in the other Acts, as the 
persons of tender age and women who are likely to 
be more vulnerable, may sometimes be misused by 
the unscrupulous elements …….” 
 
27. This Court, in the carefully couched paragraph 
extracted above used the phrase “persons of tender age and 
woman who are likely to be more vulnerable, may sometimes 
be misused by the unscrupulous elements”. This is vastly 
different from saying that the proviso to Section 45(1) of the 
PMLA applies only to “vulnerable woman”. Further, this 
Court in the case of Saumya Chaurasia (supra) does not 
say that merely because a woman is highly educated or 
sophisticated or a Member of Parliament or a Member of 
Legislative Assembly, she is not entitled to the benefit of the 
proviso to Section 45(1) of the PMLA. 

28. We, therefore, find that the learned Single Judge of the 
High Court has totally misdirected herself while denying the 
benefit of the proviso to Section 45(1) of the PMLA. 
29. In the result, we allow these appeals, in the following 
terms:- 

The impugned judgment and order dated 01.07.2024 
passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in Bail Application Nos.1675 
and 1739 of 2024 are quashed and set aside; 

The appellant is directed to be released forthwith on 
bail in connection with Complaint Case No.31 of 
2022 ECIR/HIUII/14/2022 dated 
22.08.2022, P.S. HIU, Directorate of Enforcement 
and RC-0032022A0053 dated 17.08.2022, P.S. CBI, 
ACB, on furnishing bail bonds in the sum of 
Rs.10,00,000/- in each of the cases; 
(iii) The appellant shall not make any attempt to tamper 
with the evidence or influence the witnesses; 

The appellant shall deposit her passport with the 
learned Trial Judge; and 

The appellant shall regularly attend the Trial Court 
and cooperate with the expeditious disposal of the 
trial. 
30. Though we have not observed anything on the merits of 
the matter, any observation in this judgment would not 
prejudice the trial. 
31. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.