IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 
OF 2024 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 13484-13488 of 2019) 
 
K. NIRMALA & ORS.. 
 
VERSUS 
 
CANARA BANK & ANR. 
 ….RESPONDENT(S) 
WITH 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 
OF 2024 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 19877 of 2019) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 
 OF 2024 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 23500-23501 of 2019) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 
 OF 2024 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 13453 of 2019) 

JUDGMENT 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Heard. 
2. 
Leave granted. 

3. 
This batch of appeals, which involves identical questions of fact 
and law, arises from the judgments delivered by the Division Bench 
of the High Court of Karnataka, as listed in the table below. Given 
the similarities, the appeals have been heard together and are being 
decided collectively. 
SLP No(s). 
Writ 
Appeal 
No(s). 
Date of 
Impugned 
Judgement 
Concerned 
Respondents/ 
Employer 
Community 
(Scheduled 
Caste/Scheduled 
Tribe) 
Special 
Leave 
Petition(C) 
No. 13484-
13488 of 

Writ Appeal 
No. 189-
193 of 2019 
24th April, 

The Canara 
Bank of India 
Kotegara (SC) 
Special 
Leave 
Petition(C) 
No. 19877 of 

Writ Appeal 
No. 2253 of 
2018 (S-R) 
3rd July, 2019 The Oriental 
Insurance Co. 
Ltd. 
Kuruba (ST) 
Special 
Leave 
Petition(C) 
No. 23500-
23501 of 

Writ Appeal 
No. 3666 of 
2016(S-
DIS) c/w 
Writ Appeal 
No. 3483 of 

3rd July, 2019 The Hindustan 
Aeronautics Ltd. 
Kuruba (ST) 

Special 
Leave 
Petition(C) 
No. 13453 of 

Writ Appeal 
No. 316 of 

24th April, 

The Canara 
Bank of India 
Kotegara (SC) 
 
Civil Appeals SLP (C) No(s). 13484-13488 of 2019 shall 
be treated as the lead matter. The outcome of these appeals shall 
govern all the connected matters. 
4. 
The common thread that runs through these matters is as to 
whether a person who joined the services of a Nationalized 
Bank/Government of India undertaking based on a certificate that 
identified 
him/her 
as 
belonging 
to 
a 
Scheduled 
Caste(‘SC’)/Scheduled Tribe(‘ST’) in the State of Karnataka, pursuant 
to the State Government's notifications, would be entitled to retain 
the position after the caste/tribe has been de-scheduled. The 
situation has arisen on account of the State of Karnataka re-
designating some castes under the list of SC/ST, inspite of the fact 
that this jurisdiction is exclusively conferred upon the Parliament by 
virtue of the scheme under Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution 
of India. 

5. 
In brief, the individual details of the appellants in the lead 
matter are detailed below: - 
S. No. 
Name of the Appellant 
herein 
Date of Issuance 
of Caste 
Certificate 
Date of Joining 
Service 
1. 
K. Nirmala/Appellant No. 

6th February, 

26th December, 

2. 
K.V. Shankar/Appellant 
No. 2 
17th March, 1978 
20th July, 1981 
3. 
D.K. Prabhakar/Appellant 
No. 3 
17th March, 1978 
24th March, 1981 
4. 
S. Suresh/Appellant No. 4 2nd March, 1981 
23rd March, 1981 
5. 
Muktha S. Rao/Appellant 
No. 5 
30th November, 

30th November, 

6. 
As evident from the table above, appellant Nos. 1 to 5 in Civil 
Appeals (C) Nos. 13484-13488 of 2019 were employed by the 
Canara Bank(hereinafter referred to as 'respondent No.1-bank') in 
the Scheduled Castes Category based on Caste Certificates, certifying 
that they belonged to the 'Kotegara' community, a synonymous caste 
which was made equivalent to the caste called ‘Kotegar Matri’ 
(included in the Scheduled Castes list) by a Government circular 
dated 21st November, 1977 issued by the State of Karnataka. It is 

undisputed that the appellants duly obtained these Caste Certificates 
in accordance with the prevailing Government circular. 
7. 
A Constitution Bench of this Court in State of Maharashtra 
v. Milind and Others1, held that the State Government has no 
authority to amend or modify the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes list published under Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution 
of India. A caste can only be classified as a Scheduled Caste or a 
Scheduled Tribe or a Socially and Educationally Backward Caste 
when the Presidential Order is issued to that effect in exercise of the 
powers prescribed under Articles 341, 342, and 342A of the 
Constitution of India respectively. In Milind(supra), this Court held 
as below: - 
“15. Thus, it is clear that States have no power to amend 
Presidential Orders. Consequently, a party in power or the 
Government of the day in a State is relieved from the 
pressure or burden of tinkering with the Presidential Orders 
either to gain popularity or secure votes. Number of persons 
in order to gain advantage in securing admissions in educational 
institutions and employment in State services have been 
claiming as belonging to either Scheduled Castes or Scheduled 
Tribes depriving genuine and needy persons belonging to 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes covered by the 
Presidential Orders, defeating and frustrating to a large extent 
the very object of protective discrimination given to such people 
based on their educational and social backwardness. Courts 
cannot and should not expand jurisdiction to deal with the 
question as to whether a particular caste, sub-caste; a group 
 
1 (2001) 

or part of tribe or sub-tribe is included in any one of the 
entries mentioned in the Presidential Orders issued under 
Articles 341 and 342 particularly so when in clause (2) of the 
said article, it is expressly stated that the said Orders cannot 
be amended or varied except by law made by Parliament. The 
power to include or exclude, amend or alter Presidential 
Order is expressly and exclusively conferred on and vested 
with Parliament and that too by making a law in that regard. 
The President had the benefit of consulting the States through 
Governors of States which had the means and machinery to find 
out and recommend as to whether a particular caste or tribe was 
to be included in the Presidential Order. If the said Orders are to 
be amended, it is Parliament that is in a better position to know 
having the means and machinery unlike courts as to why a 
particular caste or tribe is to be included or excluded by law to 
be made by Parliament. Allowing the State Governments or 
courts or other authorities or Tribunals to hold inquiry as to 
whether a particular caste or tribe should be considered as one 
included in the schedule of the Presidential Order, when it is not 
so specifically included, may lead to problems. In order to gain 
advantage of reservations for the purpose of Article 15(4) or 16(4) 
several persons have been coming forward claiming to be covered 
by Presidential Orders issued under Articles 341 and 342. This 
apart, when no other authority other than Parliament, that too 
by law alone can amend the Presidential Orders, neither the 
State Governments nor the courts nor Tribunals nor any 
authority can assume jurisdiction to hold inquiry and take 
evidence to declare that a caste or a tribe or part of or a group 
within a caste or tribe is included in Presidential Orders in one 
entry or the other although they are not expressly and 
specifically included. A court cannot alter or amend the said 
Presidential Orders for the very good reason that it has no 
power to do so within the meaning, content and scope of 
Articles 341 and 342. It is not possible to hold that either 
any inquiry is permissible or any evidence can be let in, in 
relation to a particular caste or tribe to say whether it is 
included within Presidential Orders when it is not so 
expressly included. 

 (emphasis supplied) 

8. 
Pursuant to the judgment in the case of Milind(supra), the 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs(Banking 

Division), Government of India in consultation with the Ministry of 
Welfare vide letter dated 12th March 1987, declared the State of 
Karnataka circulars which included the ‘Kotegara’ caste in the list of 
Scheduled Castes in the State of Karnataka to be non-est. The letter 
addressed to the Chairman & Managing Director of the concerned 
authorities is reproduced herein below:- 
“...Persons belonging to Kotegara, Kote-Kshatriya are not entitled 
to get benefits as scheduled castes in Karnataka. These communities 
have never been(sic) treated as scheduled castes in Karnataka. The 
State Government have no power to make any amendment in the 
existing lists of lists, of SCs/STs can be done only through an Act of 
Parliament in view of Articles 341(2) and 342(2) of the constitution. 
In view of this, the orders issued by the Govt. of Karnataka to this 
effect does not have any validity. 
 
In view of the position explained above, persons belonging to 
Kotegara and Kote-Kshatriya who have been appointed against the 
vacancy reserved for scheduled castes cannot be treated as 
scheduled castes even at the time of their initial appointment 
because these community have never been treated as synonymous 
of Kotegar-Matri(sic) by the Government of India which is in the list 
of SSC in Karnataka. It is infact, entirely the responsible of employer 
Department to have the matter verified through the State 
Government, before accepting the claim of the candidates who have 
been appointed against the reserved posts.” 
 
9. 
The Government of Karnataka issued a circular dated 11th 
March, 2002 providing protection to individuals employed in State 
services who had obtained Caste Certificates based on a synonymous 
caste under the Government circulars, issued by the State. These 
individuals were to be treated as having been appointed under the 

General Merit(GM) category, effective from 11th March, 2002. The said 
circular also provided that such candidates would not be eligible for 
future promotions or any other benefits as SCs/STs, although they 
could claim benefits under the respective Backward Classes to which 
they belonged. Although the ‘Kotegara’ community was not included 
in this circular, a subsequent circular dated 29th March, 2003 was 
issued by the Government of Karnataka, extending the benefits of the 
circular dated 11th March, 2002 to individuals belonging to the 
Kotegara, Kotekshathriya, Koteyava, Koteyar, Ramakshathriya, 
Sherugara, and Sarvegara communities, who had obtained Caste 
Certificates in accordance with the earlier Government circulars. 
10. It is also undisputed that the Caste Certificates held by the 
appellants were cancelled by the Competent Authority, namely the 
District Caste Verification Committee, and this decision was 
communicated to their respective employers. Subsequently, criminal 
proceedings were initiated against some of the appellants at the 
concerned police station; however, these proceedings were quashed 
by the High Court while exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(hereinafter referred to as 
'CrPC'). 

11. Respondent No. 2 i.e., Additional Director General of Police, 
Directorate of Civil Rights Enforcement Cell, intimated respondent 
No.1-bank to terminate the services of the appellants on the ground 
that they had secured employment based on fake Caste Certificates. 
In turn, respondent No.1-bank issued notices to the appellants 
calling upon them to show cause as to why their services should not 
be terminated. The appellants challenged the aforesaid notices by 
filing writ petitions before the High Court of Karnataka which came 
to be rejected. 
12. Being aggrieved by the dismissal of their writ petitions, the 
appellants preferred intra-Court writ appeals before the learned 
Division Bench of the High Court against the order of the learned 
Single Judge. The Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the 
intra-Court appeals. 
13. This batch of appeals by special leave has been preferred to 
assail the decisions of the learned Division Bench of the High Court 
of Karnataka, rejecting the writ appeals as indicated in the table 
above. 

Submissions on behalf of the appellants: - 
14. Learned counsel representing the appellants, vehemently and 
fervently contended that the very foundation of the case as presented 
by respondent No. 1-bank and the other employers, that the Caste 
Certificates held by the appellants are false/fake, is misplaced. They 
contended that the Caste Certificates were validly issued by the 
Competent Authority, affirming/certifying that the appellants 
belonged to the Scheduled Caste as their caste had been included in 
the Scheduled Castes list by virtue of the notifications/circulars 
issued by the Government of Karnataka. They further submitted that 
the effect of the cancellation of these Caste Certificates pursuant to 
the judgment in Milind(supra) would only deprive the appellants 
from claiming any additional/future service benefits including 
promotion etc. based on their reserved category status. None of the 
appellants had ever misrepresented themselves before the authorities 
regarding their caste and the contentious Caste Certificates were 
issued after following the due process of law, and thus the same 
cannot be questioned as false or fake Certificates. 
15. Learned 
counsel 
further 
submitted 
that 
following 
the 
Government circulars dated 11th March, 2002 and 29th March, 2003 

issued by the Government of Karnataka, the Ministry of 
Finance(Department 
of 
Financial 
Services)(Welfare 
Section), 
Government of India had also issued a letter dated 17th August, 2005, 
to the Chairman and Managing Director, State Bank of Mysore with 
the following directions: - 
“2. In para 2 of this Ministry's letter No.4(4)/2002-SCT(B) dated 
30th April, 2003, it has been suggested that where the caste 
certificate 
is 
cancelled 
by 
the 
State 
Government 
after 
consideration of the matter by the Security Committee consisting 
of 3 members and where the concerned employee was given a 
chance to present his case before the Committee, no further 
disciplinary proceedings need be taken and the employee's 
services can be terminated forthwith. 
 
3. It has, inter alia, been stated in your letter under reference that 
based on the Government of Karnataka's Order dated 29 March 
2003, several employees whose caste certificates are no longer 
valid, are seeking their appointment to be considered in general 
category and withdrawal of pending cases against them to 
permitting them to surrender their original caste certificates to the 
competent authority for cancellation. 
 
4. In this regard, it is clarified that where the scheduled caste has 
been de-scheduled/de-notified after appointment in the Bank, the 
concerned employee may be treated as a general category 
employee in the post based roster and the disciplinary case, if any 
pending against him/her may be withdrawn by permitting 
him/her to surrender the original caste certificate to the 
competent authority for cancellation.” 

Placing reliance on the letter dated 17th August, 2005, learned 
counsel submitted that the above communication clearly provides 
that when a Scheduled Caste has been de-scheduled or de-notified 
after an employee(s) appointment in the bank, such employee(s) may 

be reclassified as General category employee(s) in the post-based 
roster. Any pending disciplinary cases against the employee(s) should 
be withdrawn, requiring them to surrender the original Caste 
Certificate to the Competent Authority for cancellation. 
16. Learned counsel contended that since the Ministry of Finance, 
Government of India, had also endorsed the views expressed in the 
circulars dated 11th March, 2002 and 29th March, 2003 issued by the 
Government of Karnataka, the learned Division Bench of the High 
Court fell in error while denying relief to the appellants and in 
refusing to protect their services by granting them the benefits of 
these circulars. He also asserted that the subsequent communication 
via Office Memorandum issued by the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment on 8th July, 2013 relied upon by the respondents 
cannot be read and employed to the detriment of the appellants 
because the same does not have retrospective application. 
17. Learned counsel further submitted that the Division Bench of 
the Karnataka High Court erred in denying relief to the appellants by 
relying upon the judgment in the case of Chairman and Managing 
Director Food Corporation of India and Others v. Jagadish 

Balaram Bahira and Others2 because the ratio of the said 
judgment is based on the interpretation of the “Maharashtra 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, De-notified Tribes (Vimukta 
Jatis), Nomadic Tribes, Other Backward Classes, and Special 
Backward Category (Regulation of Issuance and Verification of) Caste 
Certificate Act, 2000”, which was a special enactment specific to the 
State of Maharashtra. No such enactment exists in the State of 
Karnataka, which, in contrast, had issued circulars dated 11th 
March, 2002 and 29th March, 2003, protecting those individuals who 
had obtained Caste Certificates on the basis of pre-existing circulars 
issued by the State by referring to the synonymous castes. 
18. On these grounds, learned counsel for the appellants implored 
the Court to accept the appeals; set aside the impugned orders; and 
command the respondents to protect the services of the appellants. 
Submissions on behalf of the respondents:- 
19. E-converso, learned counsel representing the respondents, 
vehemently and fervently opposed the contentions advanced on 
behalf of the appellants. They urged that the appellants had 
 
2 (2017) 

procured employment against the reserved category seats based on 
false Caste Certificates and thus, they are not entitled to protect their 
services. It was submitted that the Government circulars dated 11th 
March, 2002 and 29th March, 2003 issued by the Government of 
Karnataka provided protection only to the individuals employed in 
the State services and thus, the said circulars could not have enured 
to the benefit of individuals akin to the appellants who procured 
employment with the Central Government/Government of India 
Undertakings/Autonomous Institutions over which the Government 
of India has deep and pervasive control. 
20. Learned counsel for the respondents stressed upon the Office 
Memorandum dated 8th July, 2013 issued by the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment, Government of India referring to the 
Government of Karnataka circular dated 11th March, 2002 and urged 
that the synonymous castes, Kotegara, Kotekshathriya, Koteyava, 
Koteyar, Ramakshathriya, Sherugara, and Sarvegara, etc. are not 
mentioned in the Scheduled Castes list of the State of Karnataka and 
therefore, the members of these synonymous castes i.e., the 
appellants herein cannot claim the benefits of the Scheduled Caste 
category even in the State of Karnataka. 

21. Learned counsel submitted that the controversy at hand is 
squarely covered by the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court 
in the case of Milind(supra), wherein it has been laid down beyond 
the pale of doubt that the States have no power to amend the 
Presidential Orders issued under Article 341 of the Constitution of 
India. The power to include or exclude, amend or alter the 
Presidential Order is expressly and exclusively conferred on and 
vested with the Parliament, and that too by making law in this regard, 
and thus, the appellants were rightly denied relief by the Division 
Bench of the Karnataka High Court. 
22. Learned counsel representing the respondent No.1-bank, urged 
that the appellants are not entitled to claim protection of their 
services which they procured against the reserved seats on the basis 
of false or fake Caste Certificates. 
23. Learned counsel representing the other respondents-employers 
adopted the above submissions and implored the Court to dismiss 
the appeals and affirm the judgments rendered by the High Court. 
24. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions 
advanced at the bar and have gone through the impugned judgments 
and the material placed on record. 

Discussion and Conclusion: - 
25. At the outset, it is to be noted that there is no dispute over the 
fact that the appellants obtained their Caste Certificates(under the 
Scheduled Castes category) by following the due process of law. When 
these Caste Certificates were issued, the synonymous caste, as of the 
appellants had been included in the list of Scheduled Castes by virtue 
of the circular issued by the Government of Karnataka, albeit by 
exercising powers that were not vested in the State. 
26. As held by the Constitution Bench in Milind(supra), any 
inclusion or exclusion in or from the list of Scheduled Castes can 
only be made through an Act of Parliament under Articles 341 and 
342 of the Constitution of India. As a corollary thereto, neither the 
State Government nor the Courts have the authority to modify the 
list of Scheduled Castes as promulgated by the Presidential order 
under the above Articles. 
27. For this precise reason, pursuant to the judgment in 
Milind(supra), the Government of Karnataka took the only 
permissible decision to de-schedule the castes to which the 
appellants herein belonged. However, considering the fact that the 
Caste Certificates issued to the appellants under the previous 

inclusions made by the State Government to the Scheduled Castes 
list, albeit under a legal misconception was not obtained through 
misrepresentation or fraud, the State Government took the pragmatic 
decision to protect the employment of those individuals who had been 
benefited by these Caste Certificates obtained prior to issuance of the 
Government circulars dated 11th March, 2002 and 29th March, 2003. 
There is no dispute on the fact that each of the appellants herein fall 
within this category. These Government circulars clearly stipulate 
that individuals who secured employment based on the Caste 
Certificates 
issued 
under 
the 
erroneous 
Government 
circulars/orders would no longer be entitled to claim future benefits 
under such certificates and would henceforth be treated as General 
Merit category candidates for all practical purposes. 
28. The Ministry of Finance, Government of India, while referring to 
the Government of Karnataka's circular dated 29th March 2003, 
clarified and recommended that in cases where a Scheduled Caste 
employee(s) has been de-scheduled after an appointment in the 
Bank, the concerned employee(s) may be treated under the General 
Merit category, and any disciplinary cases pending against him/her 

should be withdrawn, and such employee(s) would have to surrender 
the original Caste certificate to the Competent Authority. 
29. There cannot be any two views on the proposition that with the 
issuance of the Government of Karnataka’s circulars dated 11th 
March, 2002 and 29th March, 2003, the Scheduled Caste Certificates 
held by the appellants herein stood automatically revoked and they 
were brought under the unreserved category with effect from 12th 
March, 1987. 
30. In the case of Milind(supra), this Court was dealing with the 
issue regarding the State’s power to amend the Presidential Order. It 
was held that the State has no jurisdiction to tinker with the 
Presential Orders issued under Article 341 of the Constitution of 
India. It was not even urged by the learned counsel for the appellants 
that the certificates held by the appellants based on the erroneous 
list of inclusion issued by the State Government were valid or should 
be protected. Their only prayer was to protect the services of the 
appellants while conceding that their Caste Certificates would be 
deemed invalid and that they would not be entitled to any future 
benefits under the reserved category. 

31. Even in the case of Milind(supra), while concluding the 
judgment, this Court saved the services of the respondents therein 
in the following manner:- 
“38. Respondent 1 joined the medical course for the year 1985-
86. Almost 15 years have passed by now. We are told he has 
already completed the course and may be he is practising as a 
doctor. In this view and at this length of time it is for nobody's 
benefit to annul his admission. Huge amount is spent on each 
candidate for completion of medical course. No doubt, one 
Scheduled Tribe candidate was deprived of joining medical course 
by the admission given to Respondent 1. If any action is taken 
against Respondent 1, it may lead to depriving the service of a 
doctor to the society on whom public money has already been 
spent. In these circumstances, this judgment shall not affect the 
degree obtained by him and his practising as a doctor. But we 
make it clear that he cannot claim to belong to the Scheduled Tribe 
covered by the Scheduled Tribes Order. In other words, he cannot 
take advantage of the Scheduled Tribes Order any further or for 
any other constitutional purpose. Having regard to the passage 
of time, in the given circumstances, including interim orders 
passed by this Court in SLP (C) No. 16372 of 1985 and other 
related matters, we make it clear that the admissions and 
appointments that have become final, shall remain unaffected 
by this judgment.” 

(emphasis added) 
 
32. The circulars dated 11th March, 2002 and 29th March, 2003 
were issued by the Government of Karnataka whereby, protection 
was extended to the persons who had taken advantage of the Caste 
Certificates issued prior to issuance of the letter dated 12th March, 
1987, 
by 
the 
Ministry 
of Finance, 
Government 
of 
India. 
Subsequently, the Ministry of Finance, Government of India vide 
office memorandum dated 17th August, 2005 also ratified this 

decision of the State, and extended the protection granted by the 
Government of Karnataka to the employees of the respondent No.1-
bank. 
33. On a close scrutiny of the Office Memorandum dated 8th July, 
2013, which was heavily relied upon by the learned counsel for the 
respondents, it transpires that the concerned authority in para 3 of 
the Office Memorandum referred only to the Government circular 
dated 11th March, 2002 issued by the Government of Karnataka for 
excluding certain castes from the umbrella of protection. It states 
that “the Government Notification dated 11th March 2002 related to 
Parivara, Talwar, Maleru, Kuruba, Besta, and Koli communities, 
whose members had obtained Scheduled Tribe certificates. In the said 
order there is no mention of Kotegara, Kotekshathriya, Koteyava, 
Koteyar, Ramakshathriya, Sherugara, and Sarvegara, etc castes.” 
34. Apparently thus, the above Office Memorandum was issued in 
ignorance of the Government of Karnataka’s circular dated 29th 
March 2003, which further extended the protection granted by the 
earlier Government circular dated 11th March, 2002 to the 
communities including Kotegara, Kotekshathriya, Koteyava, Koteyar, 
Ramakshathriya, Sherugara, and Sarvegara as well. This 

Government circular seems to have completely escaped the notice of 
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Government of 
India while issuing the Office Memorandum dated 8th July, 2013. 
Clearly thus, the Office Memorandum suffers from the vice of non-
consideration of a vital document being the circular dated 29th 
March, 2003 issued by the Government of Karnataka. Hence, we 
have no hesitation in holding that the Office Memorandum dated 8th 
July, 2013, cannot supersede the communication dated 17th August, 
2005 issued by the Ministry of Finance and the same cannot be read 
to the prejudice of the appellants. 
35. In wake of the discussion made above, we conclude that the 
appellants are entitled to protection of their services by virtue of the 
Government circular dated 29th March, 2003 issued by the 
Government of Karnataka as ratified by communication dated 17th 
August, 2005 issued by the Ministry of Finance. The circular dated 
29th March, 2003 issued by the Government of Karnataka specifically 
extended protection to various castes, including those which were 
excluded in the earlier Government circular dated 11th March, 2002. 
This subsequent circular covered the castes such as Kotegara, 
Kotekshathriya, Koteyava, Koteyar, Ramakshathriya, Sherugara, 

and Sarvegara, thus, ensuring that individuals of these castes, 
holding Scheduled Castes Certificates issued prior to de-scheduling, 
would be entitled to claim protection of their services albeit as 
unreserved candidates for all future purposes. Additionally, the 
communication issued by the Ministry of Finance dated 17th August, 
2005 reinforced the protective umbrella to the concerned bank 
employees and also saved them from departmental and criminal 
action. 
36. There is an additional feature in Civil Appeals (C) Nos. 
23500-23501 of 2019, that must be highlighted. The appellant, in 
the said appeals namely Smt. Hemavathy, contends that she secured 
8th rank in the Bachelor of Engineering course with a specialization 
in Industrial Production from Mysore University in 1995. It was 
argued on her behalf that regardless of the Caste Certificate, the 
appellant would have secured a job at Hindustan Aeronautics 
Limited(hereinafter being referred to as ‘HAL’) based on her merit in 
engineering degree and that the show cause notice was issued as 
women employees are not welcome in the institution(HAL). This 
significant contention raised by the appellant has not been 

adequately traversed by the respondent-HAL in their counter 
affidavit. 
37. Consequently, we hold that the proposed action of the 
respondent banks/undertakings in issuing notice(s) to the appellants 
to show cause as to why their services may not be terminated cannot 
be sustained and are hereby quashed. 
38. As a result, the impugned judgments rendered by the Division 
Bench do not stand to scrutiny, and hence, the same are quashed 
and set aside. 
39. The appeals are accordingly allowed in these terms. No costs. 
40. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

 (HIMA KOHLI).………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
 
New Delhi; 
August 28, 2024