IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

[ @ 
 
 ]
MANIK MADHUKAR SARVE & ORS.
 … APPELLANTSCRIMINAL APPEAL NO.3573 OF 202

VERSUS

VITTHAL DAMUJI MEHER & ORS.
 …RESPONDENTS
JUDGMENT
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
Leave granted.
2. 
The present appeal arises from the final judgment and order dated
13.10.20211 (hereinafter referred to as the “Impugned Order”), passed by
1 Operative portion pronounced in Open Court on 13.10.2021, however the detailed Order was uploaded on
the High Court’s official website on 30.10.2021. a learned Single Judge of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay,
Nagpur Bench (hereinafter referred to as the “High Court”) in Criminal
Application (BA) No.867/2021, whereby and whereunder respondent
no.1 was released on bail in connection with Crime No.217/2019
registered with Police Station Kotwali, Nagpur for offences punishable
under Sections 409, 420, 467, 468, 471 and 120-B of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the “IPC”) and Section 3 of the
Maharashtra Protection of Interest of Depositors (in Financial
Establishments) Act, 1999 (hereinafter referred to as the “MPID Act”). Be
it noted, we have dismissed connected petitions vide common Order
dated 07.05.2024 in S.L.P. (Crl.) Nos.3946/2022 and 3938/2022. On
even date, judgment was reserved in the instant appeal.
BRIEF FACTS:
3.
 The case of the prosecution is that one accused viz. Khemchand
Meharkure is the President of Jai Shriram Urban Credit Co-operative
Society Limited (hereinafter referred to as the “Society”) and he, in
connivance with the co-accused, misappropriated an amount of
₹79,54,26,963/- (Rupees Seventy Nine Crores Fifty Four Lakhs Twenty
Six Thousand Nine Hundred and Sixty Three). Also, it is projected in the
charge-sheet that statements of 798 depositors further revealed that their

deposits aggregating ₹29,06,18,748/- (Rupees Twenty Nine Crores Six
Lakhs Eighteen Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty Eight) were not
returned and the amount was misappropriated. The appellants herein are
some of the depositors, who purportedly fell victim to the Society. The
financial irregularities have been categorized by the prosecution under
twenty-three different heads. 
4. 
It is the further case of the prosecution that the respondent no.1 is
a co-conspirator and a close friend of the alleged mastermind,
Khemchand Meharkure. Respondent No.1 deposited an amount of
₹2,38,39,071/- (Rupees Two Crores Thirty Eight Lakhs Thirty Nine
Thousand and Seventy One) with the Society in his name and in the
names of his family members. As stated in the chargesheet, the
respondent no.1 was paid an amount of ₹9,69,28,500/- (Rupees Nine
Crores Sixty Nine Lakhs Twenty Eight Thousand Five Hundred) which
was withdrawn from the Society and paid to him as financial assistance,
upon the directions of the alleged mastermind, Khemchand Meharkure. It
is further alleged that the respondent no.1 purchased five immovable
properties for approximately ₹10,00,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Crores) in the
name of Khemchand Meharkure.

5.
During investigation, respondent no.1 was arrested on 28.04.2021.
The High Court vide the Impugned Order has released him on bail noting
that the material on record is not sufficient to establish his complicity.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPELLANTS: 
6. 
Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the High Court
erred in not appreciating the role of the respondent no.1/accused as
stated in the charge-sheet and record of the case. It is submitted that the
respondent no.1 and his family members were the ones to whom the
amount was given by the Society's office-bearers. Respondent No.1 is
the one who majorly benefitted from the scam, therefore, the High Court
ought not to have released the respondent no.1.
7. 
It was submitted that as per the charge-sheet, amount worth
₹79,54,26,963/- (Rupees Seventy Nine Crores Fifty Four Lakhs Twenty
Six Thousand Nine Hundred and Sixty Three) has been illegally disposed
of by the perpetrators of the crime. Such huge amount was siphoned off
by indulging in irregularities and illegal activities. Our attention was drawn
towards the Forensic Audit Report wherein it has been revealed that the
President of the Society colluded with the respondent no.1/accused and
relatives of
 respondent no.1/accused invested an amount of

₹2,38,39,071/- (Rupees Two Crores Thirty Eight Lakhs Thirty Nine
Thousand and Seventy One) against which he was given financial
assistance of ₹9,69,28,500/- (Rupees Nine Crores Sixty Nine Lakhs
Twenty Eight Thousand and Five Hundred), which amount was not
refunded. 
8. 
Learned counsel further pointed out that the impugned order did
not take into consideration the statements of the Society’s staff recorded
during investigation. It was advanced that the High Court ought to have
appreciated that the chances of the respondent no.1, as also the other
co-accused enlarged on bail, influencing material witnesses such as the
Society’s staff etc. cannot be ruled out. Therefore, it was submitted that
this was a fit case, where bail granted by the High Court ought to be
cancelled by this Court.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF 
 
 RESPONDENTS NO. 2 AND 3/
STATE:
9. 
Learned counsel for the State/official respondents adopted the
arguments of the appellants and prayed for cancellation of the bail
granted to the respondent no.1. Learned counsel drew our attention to
the statements of the clerks employed with the Society. A perusal of the

statement of one Prashant Savai would show that he worked as a Clerk
with the Society since 2006 to 2014. He stated that the respondent no.1
in the year, 2013 deposited ₹2,38,00,000/- (Rupees Two Crores Thirty
Eight Lakhs) with the Society. He received ₹3,25,000/- (Rupees Three
Lakhs Twenty Five Thousand) as interest from the Society. The same
was paid to the respondent no.1 by way of cash. No entry was recorded
in the cashbook and/or other books of accounts maintained by the
Society. But a note-sheet was prepared by the Society. He further stated
that an amount of ₹3,50,00,000/- (Rupees Three Crores Fifty Lakhs) was
paid to the respondent no.1 by a witness. He also stated that he
prepared receipts of the payment handed over to the respondent no.1 by
way of cash. The Society also prepared a note-sheet in which an amount
of ₹9,69,00,000/- (Nine Crores Sixty Nine Lakhs) is shown as having
been paid to the respondent no.1.
10.
 It was submitted that the statement of one Anil Nagdeve would
show that he prepared vouchers and also the Fixed Deposit and made
necessary entries in the cash-book; however, no such entries are
reflected in the books of accounts of the Society. Another witness, Arun
Kathane has specifically stated that the respondent no.1 used to visit the
Society and was in constant touch with the President.

11.
 It was submitted that the Bank Statements of the respondent no.1
came to be seized from the Vidarbh Konkan Gramin Bank. Entries of
₹37,50,000/- (Rupees Thirty Seven Lakhs and Fifty Thousand) and
₹5,00,000/- (Rupees Five Lakhs) are shown as credited in the account of
the respondent no.1. As per the Forensic Audit Report, the said figure
matches with the saving account. According to the Forensic Audit Report,
cash deposit of the amount of ₹45,28,500/- (Rupees Forty Five Lakhs
Twenty Eight Thousand and Five Hundred) is also shown in the name of
the respondent no. 1. An amount of ₹85,75,150/- (Rupees Eighty Five
Lakhs Seventy Five Thousand One Hundred and Fifty) and ₹32,90,850/-
(Rupees Thirty Two Lakhs Ninety Thousand Eight Hundred and Fifty) is
also shown in the name of the wife of the respondent no.1. It is further
noted during investigation that the said amount is not reflected for the
purposes of income-tax. Similarly, respondent no.1 and the Society’s
President executed Sale Deed(s) and purchased various properties in
cash. It is averred that later on, they applied for correction in the Sale
Deed by making modification that the amount was inadvertently shown to
be paid in cash but in fact the payment(s) is/were made through
cheque(s).

12. 
It was submitted that a money trail has been unearthed between
the respondent no.1 and the Society. Therefore, it was prayed that the
privilege of bail granted to him by the High Court be cancelled.
SUBMISSIONS BY RESPONDENT NO.1/ACCUSED:
13. 
At the outset, learned counsel for the respondent no.1 submitted
that the said respondent is innocent and not involved in the alleged
crime. It was stated that he has been falsely implicated by the police. It
was submitted that there is absolutely no evidence to incriminate
Respondent No.1 in the subject-case. Therefore, in any event, on the
basis of the allegations made, no case at all, as alleged vide Crime
No.217/2019 is made out against respondent no.1.
14. 
It was submitted that there is no substantial material on record,
except disclosure statements of witnesses in police custody, to prove any
kind of agreement
 between
 respondent 
no.1 
and 
the main
accused/President of the Society. It was pointed out that the main
accused, referred to as the President/Chairman of the Society in the
charge-sheet, has been released on bail by the High Court vide order
dated 22.08.2022. Referring to this order, it was urged that the High
Court had raised doubts on the existence of material evidence relating to

criminal conspiracy and held that “considering the number of witnesses
and voluminous charge sheet there is no point in keeping the applicant in
jail for an uncertain period.”
15.
 It was submitted that the alleged loan has never been transferred
to the respondent no.1. There is no electronic evidence, except mere
statements of the three witnesses. Learned counsel advanced that these
statements could not be treated as gospel truth. It has not been proved
that respondent no.1 was the beneficiary of the alleged scam. Moreover,
there is no worthwhile evidence to suggest that respondent no.1/his
family purchased the properties to the tune of the alleged loan amount or
used the alleged loan amount to purchase any properties. Even
according to the Forensic Audit Report, respondent no.1, including his
family cumulatively, had received no more than a ₹1,28,00,000/-
(Rupees One crore Twenty Eight Lakh) loan. Consequently, there are
contradictions regarding alleged receipt of the loan amount in question.
16. 
It was further submitted that the authenticity of the aforesaid
Forensic Audit
 Report is also under challenge as the
handwriting/specimen of the respondent no.1 has been sent for forensic
examination, report whereof is still awaited. Further, it was submitted that

respondent no.1 was never associated in the affairs of the Society and
had never held any position in the Society.
17. 
Lastly, it was submitted that respondent no.1 is a senior citizen and
has complicated age-related medical issues, for which he is undergoing
treatment due to the severity of the condition(s). Hence, it is submitted
that there are no chances of his absconding. It was stated that
investigation is complete and charge-sheet has been filed much prior in
time to the grant of bail. Stating that no prejudice has been caused to the
smooth running of the trial so as to invoke the intervention of this Court, it
was prayed that the instant appeal be dismissed.
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
18.
 Having given our anxious thought to the controversy, we find that
the exercise of discretion by the learned Single Judge in the impugned
order under Section 439(1)2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
2 “439. Special powers of High Court or Court of Session regarding bail.—(1) A High Court or Court of
Session may direct—
(a) that any person accused of an offence and in custody be released on bail, and if the offence is
of the nature specified in sub-section (3) of Section 437, may impose any condition which it considers ne-
cessary for the purposes mentioned in that sub-section;
(b) that any condition imposed by a Magistrate when releasing any person on bail be set aside or
modified:
Provided that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting bail to a person who is
accused of an offence which is triable exclusively by the Court of Session or which, though not so triable, is
punishable with imprisonment for life, give notice of the application for bail to the Public Prosecutor un-
less it is, for reasons to be recorded in writing, of opinion that it is not practicable to give such notice:

(hereinafter referred to as the “Code”), granting bail to the respondent
no.1 cannot be sustained.
19. 
Courts while granting bail are required to consider relevant factors
such as nature of the accusation, role ascribed to the accused
concerned, possibilities/chances of tampering with the evidence and/or
witnesses, antecedents, flight risk et al. Speaking through Hima Kohli, J.,
the present coram in Ajwar v Waseem,,
apropos relevant parameters for granting bail, observed:
“26. While considering as to whether bail ought to be
granted in a matter involving a serious criminal offence,
the Court must consider relevant factors like the nature
of the accusations made against the accused, the
manner in which the crime is alleged to have been
committed, the gravity of the offence, the role attributed
to the accused, the criminal antecedents of the
accused, the probability of tampering of the witnesses
and repeating the offence, if the accused are released
on bail, the likelihood of the accused being unavailable
in the event bail is granted, the possibility of obstructing
the proceedings and evading the courts of justice and
the overall desirability of releasing the accused on bail.
(Refer: Chaman Lal v. State of U.P.3; Kalyan Chandra
Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav (supra)4;
Masroor v. State of Uttar Pradesh5; Prasanta Kumar
Sarkar v. Ashis Chatterjee6; Neeru Yadav v. State of
Provided further that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting bail to a person
who is accused of an offence triable under sub-section (3) of Section 376 or Section 376-AB or Section
376-DA or Section 376-DB of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), give notice of the application for bail to
the Public Prosecutor within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the notice of such applica-
tion.”
3 (2004).
4 (2004).
5 (2009).
6 (2010).

Uttar Pradesh7; Anil Kumar Yadav v. State (NCT of
Delhi)8; Mahipal v. Rajesh Kumar olia (supra)9.
27. It is equally well settled that bail once granted,
ought not to be cancelled in a mechanical manner.
However, an unreasoned or perverse order of bail is
always open to interference by the superior Court. If
there are serious allegations against the accused, even
if he has not misused the bail granted to him, such an
order can be cancelled by the same Court that has
granted the bail. Bail can also be revoked by a superior
Court if it transpires that the courts below have ignored
the relevant material available on record or not looked
into the gravity of the offence or the impact on the
society resulting in such an order. In P v. State of
Madhya Pradesh (supra)10 decided by a three judges
bench of this Court [authored by one of us (Hima Kohli,
J)] has spelt out the considerations that must weigh
with the Court for interfering in an order granting bail to
an accused under Section 439(1)of the CrPC in the
following words:
“24. As can be discerned from the above
decisions, for cancelling bail once granted, the
court must consider whether any supervening
circumstances have arisen or the conduct of the
accused post grant of bail demonstrates that it is
no longer conducive to a fair trial to permit him to
retain his freedom by enjoying the concession of
bail during trial 
[Dolat Ram v. State of
Haryana, (1995): 1995 SCC (Cri)
237]. To put it differently,
 in ordinary
circumstances, this Court would be loathe to
interfere with an order passed by the court below
granting bail but if such an order is found to be
illegal or perverse or premised on material that is 
7 (2014).
8 (2018).
9 (2020).
10 (2022). irrelevant, then such an order is susceptible to
scrutiny and interference by the appellate court.””
(emphasis supplied)
20. In State of Haryana v Dharamraj, 2023 SCC OnLine 1085,
speaking through one of us (Ahsanuddin Amanullah, J.), the Court, while
setting aside an order of the Punjab and Haryana High Court granting
(anticipatory) bail, discussed and reasoned:
“7. A foray, albeit brief, into relevant precedents is
warranted. This Court considered the factors to guide
grant of bail in
 
 Ram Govind Upadhyay
 
 v. Sudarshan
Singh,
 
 (2002) and
 
 Kalyan Chandra
Sarkar
 
 v. Rajesh Ranjan,
 
 (2004).
In
 Prasanta Kumar Sarkar
 
 v. Ashis Chatterjee,, the relevant principles were restated thus:
‘9. … It is trite that this Court does not, normally,
interfere with an order passed by the High Court
granting or rejecting bail to the accused. However,
it is equally incumbent upon the High Court to
exercise its discretion judiciously, cautiously and
strictly in compliance with the basic principles laid
down in a plethora of decisions of this Court on
the point. It is well settled that, among other
circumstances, the factors to be borne in mind
while considering an application for bail are:
(i) whether there is any prima facie or
reasonable ground to believe that the
accused had committed the offence;
(ii) nature and gravity of the accusation;
(iii) severity of the punishment in the event of
conviction;

(iv) danger of the accused absconding or
fleeing, if released on bail;
(v) character, behaviour, means, position and
standing of the accused;
(vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(vii) reasonable apprehension of the
witnesses being influenced; and
(viii) danger, of course, of justice being
thwarted by grant of bail.’
8. In
 Mahipal
 
 v. Rajesh Kumar alias Polia,
 
 (2020), this Court opined as under:
‘16. The considerations that guide the power of an
appellate court in assessing the correctness of an
order granting bail stand on a different footing
from an assessment of an application for the
cancellation of bail. The correctness of an order
granting bail is tested on the anvil of whether
there was an improper or arbitrary exercise of the
discretion in the grant of bail. The test is whether
the order granting bail is perverse, illegal or
unjustified. On the other hand, an application for
cancellation of bail is generally examined on the
anvil of the existence of supervening
circumstances or violations of the conditions of
bail by a person to whom bail has been granted.
…’
9. In
 Bhagwan Singh
 
 v. Dilip Kumar eepu epak,
 
 2023 INSC 761, this Court, in view of
 
 Dolat
Ram
 
 v. State
 
of
 
Haryana,;
 
 Kashmira Singh
 
 v. Duman Singh,

 and
 
 X v. State of Telangana,
 
 (2018),
held as follows:
‘13. It is also required to be borne in mind that
when a prayer is made for the cancellation of

grant of bail cogent and overwhelming
circumstances must be present and bail once
granted cannot be cancelled in a mechanical
manner without considering whether any
supervening circumstances have rendered it in
conducing to allow fair trial. This proposition
draws support from the Judgment of this Court
in Daulat Ram
 
 v. State of Haryana,
 
 (1995), Kashmira Singh
 
 v. Duman Singh

 and
 
 XXX
 
 v. State of Telangana.’
10. In
 XXX
 
 v. Union Territory of Andaman & Nicobar
Islands,
 
 2023 INSC 767, this Court noted that the
principles in
 
 Prasanta Kumar Sarkar
 
 (supra) stood
reiterated in
 
 Jagjeet Singh v.
 
 Ashish Mishra,
 
 (2022).
11. The contours of anticipatory bail have been
elaborately dealt with by 5-Judge Benches
in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of Punjab, (1980) and Sushila Aggarwal v. State (NCT of
Delhi), (2020). Siddharam Satlingappa
Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra, (2011) is
worthy of mention in this context, despite its partial
overruling in Sushila Aggarwal (supra).
 We are
cognizant that liberty is not to be interfered with easily.
More so, when an order of pre-arrest bail already
stands granted by the High Court.
12. Yet, much like bail, the grant of anticipatory bail is
to be exercised with judicial discretion. The factors
illustrated by this Court through its pronouncements
are illustrative, and not exhaustive. Undoubtedly, the
fate of each case turns on its own facts and merits.”
(emphasis supplied)

21. In Ajwar (supra), this Court also examined the considerations for
setting aside bail orders in terms below:
“28. The considerations that weigh with the appellate
Court for setting aside the bail order on an application
being moved by the aggrieved party include any
supervening circumstances that may have occurred
after granting relief to the accused, the conduct of the
accused while on bail, any attempt on the part of the
accused to procrastinate, resulting in delaying the trial,
any instance of threats being extended to the
witnesses while on bail, any attempt on the part of the
accused to tamper with the evidence in any manner.
We may add that this list is only illustrative and not
exhaustive. However, the court must be cautious that
at the stage of granting bail, only a
 
 prima facie
 
 case
needs to be examined and detailed reasons relating to
the merits of the case that may cause prejudice to the
accused, ought to be avoided. Suffice it is to state that
the bail order should reveal the factors that have been
considered by the Court for granting relief to the
accused.
29. In Jagjeet Singh (supra)11, a three-Judges bench
of this Court, has observed that the power to grant bail
under Section

 Cr. P.C. is of wide amplitude and
the High Court or a Sessions Court, as the case may
be, is bestowed with considerable discretion while
deciding an application for bail. But this discretion is
not unfettered. The order passed must reflect due
application of judicial mind following well established
principles of law. In ordinary course, courts would be
slow to interfere with the order where bail has been
granted by the courts below. But if it is found that such
an order is illegal or perverse or based upon utterly
irrelevant material, the appellate Court would be well
within its power to set aside and cancel the bail. (Also
11 (2022). refer: Puran v. Ram Bilas12; Narendra K. Amin
(Dr.) v. State of Gujarat13)”
(emphasis supplied)
22. The learned Single Judge, in the impugned order, has simply
proceeded on the premise that there were only allegations made by
some persons against the respondent no.1 and he was not a member of
the Society which had committed such financial irregularities. Moreover,
we find that the learned Single Judge, whilst noting that “no positive
finding need be recorded on the sufficiency of the said material to
establish conspiracy, which issue will be addressed by the trial Court,
after the evidence is adduced”, has without any basis thought it fit to
record that in his “prima facie opinion, it is extremely debatable whether
such material is sufficient to establish conspiracy.”
23. 
The impugned order goes on to state that respondent no.1 was not
involved in the affairs of the Society nor was he responsible for the
irregularities alleged. At the present stage, where the charge-sheet
stands filed, it emerges that there is some material indicative of the
involvement of respondent no.1 in the withdrawal of ₹9,00,00,000/-
(Rupees Nine Crores), based on the records and cash-book entries and
12 (2001).
13 (2008). other book of accounts though he had invested amounts only to the tune
of about ₹2,38,00,000/- (Rupees Two Crores Thirty Eight Lakhs). Even
the Forensic Audit Report exhibits material to this effect.
24. 
We bear in mind the submission that respondent no.1 was a close
associate of the President of the Society with regular business/other
dealings between the two. Investigation also indicates that out of the
monies withdrawn from the Society’s account by the respondent no.1,
investments were later made in property in the name of his relatives.
Further, the High Court has completely lost sight of the fact that the
deposits in/to the Society were made by people having meagre earnings
without anything else to fall back upon. Tentatively speaking, it seems
that the President of the Society systematically siphoned off these funds,
with the aid of other office-bearers as also through respondent no.1. We
consciously refrain from elaborately discussing/detailing the evidence or
our views thereon following the dicta in Niranjan Singh v Prabhakar
Rajaram Kharote, (1980); Vilas Pandurang Pawar v State
of Maharashtra, (2012) and Atulbhai Vithalbhai Bhanderi
v State of Gujarat,.
25. 
In cases where the allegations coupled with the materials brought
on record by the investigation and in the nature of economic offence

affecting a large number of people reveal the active role of the accused
seeking anticipatory or regular bail, it would be fit for the Court granting
such bail to impose appropriately strict and additional conditions. In the
present case, even that has not been done as the High Court has
imposed usual conditions simpliciter:
“8. The applicant be released on bail in connection
with Crime 217/2019, registered with Police Station
Kotwali, Nagpur, for offences punishable under
sections 409, 420, 467, 478, 471, 120-B of Indian
Penal Code, Section 3 of the Maharashtra Protection
of Interest of Depositors (in Financial Establishments)
Act, on executing PR bond of Rs. 16,000/- (Rupees
Sixteen Thousand) with one solvent surety of the like
amount. 
9. The applicant shall attend Economic Offences
Wing, Nagpur as and when required by the
Investigating Officer. 
10. The applicant shall not, directly or indirectly, make
any attempt to influence the witnesses or otherwise
tamper with the evidence. 
11. The applicant shall not leave the country without
the permission of the trial Court.”
(emphasis supplied)
26. 
The High Court, we have no hesitation in saying so, erred in law.
Ergo, for reasons recorded above and upon circumspect consideration of
the attendant facts and circumstances, we hold that the discretion

exercised by the learned Single Judge of the High Court to grant bail to
the respondent no.1 was not in tune with the principles that
conventionally govern exercise of such power, a plurality of which stand
enunciated in the case-law supra. Moreover, though respondent no.1 had
already suffered incarceration for a period of about six months at the time
when bail was granted, yet in view of the nature of the alleged offence,
his release on bail can seriously lead to dissipation of the properties
where investments have allegedly been made out of Society funds. At
the end of the day, the interests of the victims of the scam have also to
be factored in.
27.
Accordingly, the appeal succeeds. The impugned order stands set
aside. Respondent No.1 is directed to surrender within a period of three
weeks from today, failing which the trial Court shall proceed in
accordance with law. We clarify that the observations made hereinabove
are limited to the aspect of testing the legality of the impugned order.
They shall not be treated as definitive/conclusive regarding respondent
no.1 or any other accused. The trial Court in seisin shall proceed
uninfluenced and in accordance with law. Given the peculiar
circumstances, where bail is being cancelled after a period of almost 3
years, it is deemed appropriate to grant liberty to the respondent no.1 to

apply for bail at a later period or in the event of a change in
circumstances. Needless to state, such application, if and when
preferred, shall be considered on its own merits, without being prejudiced
by the instant judgment. The authorities concerned are directed to render
appropriate care and assistance as regards the medical condition of the
respondent no.1...…………………...…..J.
 [HIMA KOHLI]..…………………...…..J.
[AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
NEW DELHI
AUGUST 28, 2024