IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
( S.L.P (C) NO.10546 OF 2019) 

U.P. STATE ROAD TRANSPORT 
CORPORATION & ORS. 

VERSUS 

BRIJESH KUMAR & ANR. 

JUDGMENT 

 PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
Under challenge in this appeal by the Uttar Pradesh State 
Road 
Transport 
Corporation1 
is 
the 
order 
dated 
12.09.2018 passed by the Division Bench of the 
Allahabad High Court in Letters Patent Appeal arising 
from a writ petition filed by the respondent wherein the 
learned Single Judge vide judgment and order dated 
 
1 In short ‘UPSRTC’ 

12.01.2018 allowed the writ petition of the respondent 
after 
setting 
aside 
the 
order 
dated 
30.01.2016 
terminating the services of the respondent passed by the 
Assistant Regional Manager, Mathura, UPSRTC. 
3. 
The father of the respondent Bal Krishna was a regular 
conductor working with the appellant (UPSRTC) who died 
on 18.10.2003 while in service. At that time, the 
respondent was a minor. His mother moved an 
application for his compassionate appointment but in 
vain. The respondent attained the age of majority i.e. 18 
years on 10.07.2008. He acquired the educational 
qualification of high school and intermediate. His mother, 
therefore, 
again 
moved 
an 
application 
seeking 
compassionate appointment for him under the Uttar 
Pradesh Recruitment of Dependants of Government 
Servants Dying in Harness Rules, 19742. 
4. 
There was no response to the above applications filed by 
the mother of the respondent. However, subsequently 
vide letter dated 19.10.2012, the appellant (UPSRTC) 
informed the respondent that in connection with his 
 
2 Hereinafter referred to as ‘Dying in Harness Rules’ 

application 
for 
compassionate 
appointment, 
the 
corporation has decided to appoint him on preferential 
basis as a contract conductor. Accordingly, he was 
requested to report to the office and to deposit a security 
amount of Rs.10,000/-. It appears that in pursuance 
thereof the respondent submitted the security deposit 
and entered into an agreement with the appellant 
(UPSRTC) on 12.12.2012 to function as a contract 
conductor. The respondent, thus, joined as contract 
conductor. 
5. 
During his service as contract conductor, he was found 
guilty of carrying three passengers without ticket on two 
occasions and on one occasion was found carrying 
500 kg of extra luggage without booking. His services 
were thus terminated on 30.01.2016 on the ground of 
misconduct. 
6. 
The respondent challenged the order dated 30.01.2016 
terminating his services alleging that he was appointed 
on compassionate basis and, therefore, was a permanent 
employee whose services could not have been determined 
without holding a disciplinary inquiry. 

7. 
The writ petition challenging the termination order was 
allowed by the learned Single Judge vide judgment and 
order dated 12.01.2018 and the same was upheld by the 
Division bench by the order impugned herein dated 
12.09.2018. The High Court concurrently held that the 
appointment of the respondent was on compassionate 
basis and as such he was a permanent employee whose 
services could not have been terminated on account of 
any misconduct without holding a disciplinary inquiry. 
8. 
In the above background, the appellant (UPSRTC) has 
come up in the present appeal. 
9. 
Heard Smt. Garima Prashad, learned senior counsel for 
the appellant and Shri Sudhir Kumar Saxena, learned 
senior counsel for the respondent. 
10. The submission of Smt. Garima Prashad, learned senior 
counsel for the appellant (UPSRTC), is that the 
respondent was never appointed on compassionate basis 
under the Dying in Harness Rules. His appointment was 
on contractual basis, independent of the Dying in 
Harness 
Rules. 
Since 
his 
appointment 
was 
on 

contractual 
basis, 
his 
services 
have 
rightly 
been 
determined on the alleged misconduct. 
11. Shri Sudhir Kumar Saxena, learned senior counsel for 
the respondent, on the other hand defended the orders of 
the High Court contending that the compassionate 
appointments are always of permanent nature and the 
services of such employees cannot be terminated without 
holding a disciplinary inquiry. Therefore, the High Court 
has not committed any error of law in setting aside the 
termination order and holding that the services of the 
respondent are of permanent nature. 
12. There is no dispute to the legal proposition that any 
appointment made on compassionate basis is in the 
nature of a permanent appointment and is not liable to 
be treated as temporary or contractual. However, the fact 
remains whether in the instant case, the appointment of 
the respondent is under the Dying in Harness Rules or is 
independent of it on contractual basis. 
13. Undisputedly, the father of the respondent died on 
18.10.2003 while working as a regular conductor with 
the appellant (UPSRTC). The mother of the respondent 

had applied for his compassionate appointment but no 
such appointment was offered to him as he was a minor 
at that time. Even upon his attaining the age of majority 
on 10.07.2008, the respondent was never offered any 
compassionate appointment. 
14. The record reveals that instead of offering compassionate 
appointment to the respondent under the Dying in 
Harness Rules, the respondent was extended the benefit 
of the policy decision dated 09.08.2012 taken in the 188th 
meeting of the Board of Directors of the appellant 
(UPSRTC). The said policy envisages to offer preferential 
treatment in the matter of appointment on contractual 
basis to the dependents of the deceased employees. The 
scheme nowhere provides for compassionate appointment 
to the dependents. Accordingly, appellant (UPSRTC) vide 
letter dated 19.10.2012 offered contractual appointment 
to respondent as conductor pursuant to his application 
for compassionate appointment. He was called upon in 
the office of the appellant (UPSRTC) with the relevant 
documents and to deposit a security amount of 
Rs.10,000/-. The respondent duly accepted the said offer 

and in response thereof submitted the security deposit 
and entered into a written agreement on 12.12.2012 
accepting the contractual appointment as conductor. 
15. A plain reading of the policy decision as contained in 
letter dated 31.08.2012, the letter of offer dated 
19.10.2012 and the agreement dated 12.12.2012, it is 
crystal clear that the respondent was appointed as a 
contract conductor on preferential basis being the son of 
the deceased employee. He was not appointed on 
compassionate basis. There is no reference of any 
compassionate appointment in any document. 
16. The mere fact that the respondent was appointed on 
contract 
basis 
pursuant 
to 
the 
application 
for 
compassionate 
appointment 
would 
not 
make 
his 
appointment to be one under Dying in Harness Rules. 
17. There appears to be no document on record to prove that 
the appointment of the respondent was on compassionate 
basis so as to treat him as a permanent employee of the 
appellant (UPSRTC). Despite repeated queries, no specific 
material was shown from the side of the respondent to 
establish that the respondent in fact was appointed on 

compassionate basis. The respondent had accepted the 
offer of contractual employment with his open eyes and 
had even signed the agreement to that effect which is not 
disputed. Thus, his appointment was simply on contract 
basis and cannot be treated as permanent. 
18. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we are 
of the opinion that the learned Single Judge and the 
Division Bench manifestly erred in law in holding that the 
respondent was appointed under Dying in Harness Rules. 
The High Court, erroneously on complete misreading of 
the material on record, held that the appointment of the 
respondent to be on compassionate basis and that he is 
liable to be treated as a permanent employee. The High 
Court has erred factually in treating the appointment of 
the respondent under the Dying in Harness Rules, 
though, it is not so. 
19. The services of the respondent have been determined 
solely on the ground of misconduct as alleged but 
without holding any regular inquiry or affording any 
opportunity of hearing to him. The termination order has 
been passed on the basis of some report which probably 

was not even supplied to the respondent. No show cause 
notice appears to have been issued to the respondent. 
Therefore, the order of termination of his services, even if 
on contractual basis, has been passed on account of 
alleged misconduct without following the Principles of 
Natural Justice. The termination order is apparently 
stigmatic in nature which could not have been passed 
without following the Principles of Natural Justice. 
20. In the light of the above facts and discussion, we are of 
the opinion that the order dated 30.01.2016 terminating 
the services of the respondent is bad in law and cannot 
be sustained. It has rightly been set aside though on a 
different ground that the respondent is a permanent 
employee having been appointed on compassionate basis. 
The appointment of the respondent, in fact, is a 
contractual appointment entitling him to continue as 
such in service and to claim regularization if so advised 
in accordance with law. 
21. The judgments and orders of the High Court dated 
12.01.2018 and 12.09.2018 are set aside to the extent 
they hold the appointment to be on compassionate basis 

under the Dying in Harness Rules and that of a 
permanent nature but quashing of the termination order 
is maintained. 
22. The appeal is partly allowed as above....………………………….. J. 
(PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)...……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL) 
NEW DELHI; 
 AUGUST 28, 2024