1|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO………………. OF 2024 

MULAKALA MALLESHWARA RAO & ANR...APPELLANT(S) 
 
Versus 
 
STATE OF TELANGANA & ANR...RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 

SANJAY KAROL, J. 
 
Leave Granted. 
 
2. 
The present appeal is directed against an order of the High Court for 
the State of Telangana at Hyderabad dated 22nd December, 2022 passed 
in, whereby the High Court refused 
to quash proceedings C.C.No.1369 of 2022 on the file of 
XXVIth Metropolitan Magistrate, Cyberabad at Hayathnagar, under 

2|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 
 
Section 406 of the Indian Penal Code, 18601 and Section 6 of the Dowry 
Prohibition Act, 1961. 
3. 
Brief facts giving rise to the present appeal are as follows: 
3.1 The complaint, which set in motion the Criminal Law, was at 
the instance of one Padala Veerabhadra Rao (Respondent No.2 
referred to as the complainant herein), who filed the same against 
the former in-laws of his elder daughter, namely, Padala Sujana 
Sheela Kumar (referred to as the daughter) for not returning the 
ornaments (gold) which he had given at the time of her marriage 
with their son. The marriage was solemnized on 22nd December, 
1999. 
3.2 Undisputably, the marriage was unsuccessful and after a 
period of approximately 16 years, the complainant’s daughter on 
14th August, 2015 filed for divorce in the United States of America. 
The decree of divorce was granted by mutual consent by the Circuit 
Court of St. Louis County, Missouri, on 3rd February, 2016. At that 
time, all possessions, material and financial, were settled between 
the parties by way of the Separation Agreement. Hence, all issues 
 matrimony stood closed as the daughter got remarried 
in the U.S.A. in May, 2018. 
 
1 ‘IPC’ for brevity 

3|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 
 
3.3 Much thereafter, the complainant lodged FIR No.32 of 2021 
dated 15th January, 2021, under Section 406 IPC pertaining to the 
return of the jewellery which he had given to his daughter at the 
time of her marriage as ‘stridhan’, but entrusted it to her-in laws 
(present-appellants) 
3.4 It is necessary to record the complainant’s version of events. 
At the time of getting his daughter married in the year 1999, he had 
given 40 Kasula gold and other articles. Thereafter, the newly 
married couple migrated to the U.S.A where the complainant’s 
daughter was continually tortured, due to which the complainant’s 
wife was severely disturbed and eventually passed away on 6th June, 
2008. His daughter and son-in-law got their divorce in the year 
2016, after 16 years of marriage. Such articles given to his daughter 
during the marriage were entrusted at that time to the in-laws i.e., 
the appellant Nos.1 and 2. 
3.5 Whereafter, the complainant’s daughter got remarried in the 
year 2018 for which purpose the complainant had travelled to the 
U.S.A. Upon returning therefrom, allegedly he made requests to 
the former in-laws of his daughter (appellants herein) to return the 
articles entrusted to them. Such requests remained unheeded with 
the articles yet to be recovered. 

4|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 
 
3.6 In the course of investigation, notice dated 16th June, 2022, 
under Section 41(a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19732 was 
sent to Mulakala Malleshwara Rao (Appellant No.1, the father-in-
law of the complainant’s daughter). He denied all allegations and 
contended that the complaint has been filed with an intent to cause 
harassment. 
3.7 Upon completion of the investigation, the final report under 
Section 173 Cr.P.C. was filed under the Sections noted above. 
3.8 The appellant No.1, aggrieved thereby filed a petition for 
quashing of the charges, under Section 482 Cr.P.C. 
4. 
The High Court found the allegations made in the charge-sheet, 
prima facie to be triable. As such, the prayer to exercise such powers was 
rejected. 
5. 
In the above context, the short point for consideration is whether the 
father i.e., the complainant herein, had any locus to file the First 
Information Report which has led to the present proceedings keeping in 
view that the same was affected by delay and laches, thereby expressly 
being non-maintainable? Contingent to the answer to this question would 
be, whether the High Court was correct in refusing to exercise its inherent 
power in quashing the proceedings under the Cr.P.C. 
 
2 ‘Cr.P.C.’ for brevity 

5|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 
 
6. 
The sum and substance of the present dispute lie in the father’s right 
over the gifts, i.e.,‘stridhan’ given by him to his daughter at the time of 
marriage. The generally accepted rule, which has been judicially 
recognized, is that the woman exercises an absolute right over the 
property. We may refer to Pratibha Rani v. Suraj Kumar,3 wherein a 
Bench of three Judges observed: 
“6. To the same effect is Maine's Treatise on Hindu Law at p.728. 
The characteristics of Saudayika have also been spelt out by Mulla's 
Hindu Law at p. 168 (Section 113) which gives a complete list of the 
stridhan property of a woman both before and during coverture, 
which may be extracted thus: 
 
“113. Manu enumerates six kinds of stridhana: 
 
1. Gifs made before the nuptial fire, explained by Katyayana to mean 
gifts made at the time of marriage before the fire which is the witness 
of the nuptial (adhyagni). 
 
2. Gifts made at the bridal procession, that is, says Katyayana, while 
the bride is being led from the residence of her parents to that of her 
husband (adhyavanhanika). 
 
3. Gifts made in token of love, that is, says Katyayana, those made 
through affection by her father-in-law and mother-in-law (pritidatta), 
and those made at the time of her making obeisance at the feet of 
elders (pada-vandanika). 
 
4. Gifts made by father. 
 
5. Gifts made by mother. 
 
6. Gifts made by a brother. 
 
7. It is, therefore, manifest that the position of stridhan of a Hindu 
married woman's property during coverture is absolutely clear and 
unambiguous; she is the absolute owner of such property and can 
deal with it in any manner she likes — she may spend the whole of 
it or give it away at her own pleasure by gift or will without any 
reference to her husband. Ordinarily, the husband has no right or 
 
3 (1985) 

6|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 
 
interest in it with the sole exception that in times of extreme distress, 
as in famine, illness or the like, the husband can utilise it but he is 
morally bound to restore it or its value when he is able to do so. It 
may be further noted that this right is purely personal to the husband 
and the property so received by him in marriage cannot be proceeded 
against even in execution of a decree for debt.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
The position of the wife or woman being the sole authority in respect 
of ‘stridhan’ stands emphatically stated in Rashmi Kumar v. Mahesh 
Kumar Bhada4 in the following terms: 
“9. A woman's power of disposal, independent of her husband's 
control, is not confined to saudayika but extends to other properties 
as well. Devala says: ‘A woman's maintenance (vritti), ornaments, 
perquisites (sulka), gains (labha), are her stridhana. She herself has 
the exclusive right to enjoy it. Her husband has no right to use it 
except 
in 
distress….’ 
In 
N.R. 
Raghavachariar's Hindu 
Law — Principles and Precedents (8th Edn.), edited by Prof. S. 
Venkataraman, one of the renowned Professors of Hindu Law, at 
para 468 deals with ‘Definition of Stridhana’. In para 469 dealing 
with ‘Sources of acquisition’ it is stated that the sources of 
acquisition of property in a woman's possession are: gifts before 
marriage, wedding gifts, gifts subsequent to marriage, etc. Para 470 
deals with ‘Gifts to a maiden’. Para 471 deals with ‘Wedding gifts’ 
and it is stated therein that properties gifted at the time of marriage 
to the bride, whether by relations or strangers, either Adhiyagni or 
Adhyavahanika, are the bride's stridhana. In para 481 at p. 426, it is 
stated that ornaments presented to the bride by her husband or father 
constitute her stridhana property. In para 487 dealing with ‘powers 
during coverture’ it is stated that saudayika meaning the gift of 
affectionate kindred, includes both Yautaka or gifts received at the 
time of marriage as well as its negative Ayautaka. In respect of such 
property, whether given by gift or will she is the absolute owner and 
can deal with it in any way she likes. She may spend, sell or give it 
away at her own pleasure. 
 
10. It is thus clear that the properties gifted to her before the 
marriage, at the time of marriage or at the time of giving farewell or 
thereafter are her stridhana properties. It is her absolute property 
with all rights to dispose at her own pleasure. He has no control over 
her stridhana property. Husband may use it during the time of his 
distress but nonetheless he has a moral obligation to restore the same 
or its value to his wife. Therefore, stridhana property does not 
become a joint property of the wife and the husband and the husband 
 
4 (1997) 

7|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 
 
has no title or independent dominion over the property as owner 
thereof.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
Pratibha Rani (supra) stands followed recently in Maya 
Gopinathan v. Anoop S.B.5. 
Noticeably, the position of law has remained consistent throughout 
since 1985, till date, regarding the sole authority of the woman in respect 
of her ‘stridhan’ as has also been held recently in Mala Kar v. State of 
Uttarakhand 6, wherein a decree of divorce stood passed inter se the 
parties on 18th October 2014, and FIR was filed on 6th April 2015, the 
appellant’s request for the respondent to pay a sum of Rs.10 Lakhs in full 
and final settlement of all claims, including ‘stridhan’ was accepted, and 
the former husband was directed to pay such amount. 
7. 
As evidenced from the above, the jurisprudence as has been 
developed by this Court is unequivocal with respect to the singular right 
of the female (wife or former wife) as the case may be, being the sole 
owner of ‘stridhan’. It has been held that a husband has no right, and it 
has to then be necessarily concluded that a father too, has no right when 
the daughter is alive, well, and entirely capable of making decisions such 
as pursuing the cause of the recovery of her ‘stridhan’. 

8|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 
 
8. 
We also notice Section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 which 
talks about a Hindu female being the absolute owner of property. It reads: 
“14. Property of a female Hindu to be her absolute property.—
(1) Any property possessed by a female Hindu, whether acquired 
before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be held by her 
as full owner thereof and not as a limited owner. 
Explanation.—In this sub-section, “property” includes both 
movable and immovable property acquired by a female Hindu by 
inheritance or devise, or at a partition, or in lieu of maintenance or 
arrears of maintenance, or by gift from any person, whether a relative 
or not, before, at or after her marriage, or by her own skill or 
exertion, or by purchase or by prescription, or in any other manner 
whatsoever, 
and 
also 
any 
such 
property 
held 
by 
her 
as stridhana immediately before the commencement of this Act. …” 
 
(Emphasis Supplied) 
 
9. 
It is undisputed that action was initiated for securing possession of 
the articles and ornaments after a passage of more than 20 years since the 
date of marriage and five years after the settlement of all marital issues at 
the time of divorce and that too, not by the former wife, i.e., the 
complainant’s daughter, but by the complainant himself. This coupled 
with the fact that there is no authorization on the part of the complainant’s 
daughter in his favour to initiate proceedings for recovery of ‘stridhan’ 
exclusively belonging to her, beckons the question on the basis of which 
the complainant has initiated the present proceedings. 
10. We find that the law provides for a situation where a woman may, in 
law, grant a person of her choosing the authority to do any act which she 
may herself execute. Section 5 of the Power of Attorney Act, 1882, 
provides as under:- 

9|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 
 
“5. Power-of-attorney of married women.—A married woman, of 
full age, shall, by virtue of this Act, have power, as if she were 
unmarried, by a non-testamentary instrument, to appoint an attorney 
on her behalf, for the purpose of executing any non testamentary 
instrument or doing any other act which she might herself execute or 
do; and the provisions of this Act, relating to instruments creating 
powers-of-attorney shall apply thereto. 
This section applies only to instruments executed after this Act 
comes into force.” 

It cannot be disputed that no such power of attorney, within the 
meaning of this Act, stood executed by the complainant’s daughter, in 
favour of her father, respondent No.2. 
11. At this stage, it would be apposite to refer to the grounds under which 
the exercise of the power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been held to be 
justified. The locus classicus on this issue is State of Haryana v. Bhajan 
Lal7 which considers Madhavrao Jiwajirao Scindia v. Sambhajirao 
Chandrojirao Angre,8 and has been subsequently referred to and relied 
upon in Neeharika Infrastructure v. State of Maharashtra9; and 
Peethambaran v. State of Kerala10. The factors to be considered are well 
enumerated requiring no reiteration here. 
12. In particular, the second factor enumerated in Bhajan Lal (supra) is 
that the FIR or any other document enclosed therewith does not disclose 
a cognizable offence; and the seventh factor, which stipulates that where 
 
7 (1992) Supp. 1 335 
8 (1988) 
9 (2021) 

10|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 
 
a criminal proceeding is initiated with manifest mala fides, ulterior 
motives or with a view to spite, are important in the present facts. 
13. As noted above, the FIR was registered under Section 406 IPC which 
prescribes a punishment for a criminal breach of trust. Section 405 defines 
the said offence and provides for the ingredients that are required to be 
fulfilled for the offence to be made out. 
This Court in Prof. R.K. Vijayasarathy & Anr. v. Sudha Seetharam 
& Anr.11 identified the ingredients required for a charge under Section 
406 to be justified: 
“13. A careful reading of Section 405 shows that the ingredients of 
a criminal breach of trust are as follows: 
 
13.1. A person should have been entrusted with property, or 
entrusted with dominion over property; 
 
13.2. That person should dishonestly misappropriate or convert to 
their own use that property, or dishonestly use or dispose of that 
property or wilfully suffer any other person to do so; and 
 
13.3. That such misappropriation, conversion, use or disposal should 
be in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which 
such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract which the 
person has made, touching the discharge of such trust.” 

14. In view of the facts of this case, the very first ingredient itself is not 
made out, for there is no iota of proof on record to show that the 
complainant had entrusted the ‘stridhan’ of his daughter to the appellants 
which allegedly was illegally kept by them. 
 
11 (2019) 

11|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 
 
That apart, the second ingredient, i.e., the dishonest misappropriation 
or conversion for own use, also stands unfulfilled, for there is nothing on 
record to substantiate that the complainant’s daughter's former in-laws 
converted the ‘stridhan’ allegedly kept in their custody, for their own use, 
more so, when the parties in matrimony had never ever raised ‘stridhan’ 
as an issue either in the subsistence of the marriage or thereafter, 
especially during the time of settlement of all issues. 
 
15. Another ground on which the charge fails is that, apart from a 
statement of the complainant that the ‘stridhan’ is with the former in-laws 
of his daughter, there is nothing on record to substantiate the factum of 
possession actually being with the appellants. In Bobbili Ramakrishna 
Raja Yadad & Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh12, this Court has held that 
giving dowry and traditional presents at the time of the wedding does not 
raise a presumption that such articles are thereby entrusted to the parents-
in-law so as to attract the ingredients of Section 6 of the Dowry 
Prohibition Act, 1961. 
16. As such, insofar as Section 406 IPC is concerned, the instant case 
would fall under the second factor enumerated in Bhajan Lal (supra), 
where no cognizable offence is visible on the face of the record. 
Furthermore, the action being initiated more than 5 years after the divorce 
 
12 (2016) 

12|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 
 
of the complainant’s daughter and also 3 years after her second marriage 
had taken place, demonstrates the same to be hopelessly belated in time. 
17. We may further observe that the object of criminal proceedings is to 
bring a wrongdoer to justice, and it is not a means to get revenge or seek 
a vendetta against persons with whom the complainant may have a 
grudge. The principle in law that delay in filing the FIR has to be 
satisfactorily explained and does not need any reiteration. In the present 
case, the record is entirely silent on that aspect. It is also to be noted, in 
the FIR the authorities are requested to take action against the appellant 
for not returning the gifts given by the complainant to his daughter at the 
time of the marriage, however, in the charge-sheet such a complaint turns 
into a demand of dowry and being pressured into incurring expenses for 
marriage related functions. The question that is to be answered is that 
when the point of genesis is separate and distinct, how does the end result 
turn into something that is entirely foreign to the point of genesis? 
18. An additional aspect is to be taken note of. The FIR, which 
culminated in the present proceedings, was lodged in 2021, whereas the 
matrimonial relations between the complainant’s daughter and her former 
husband ended in 2015. She subsequently got remarried in 2018. Then, 
on what grounds does the complaint file the subject FIR in the year 2021, 

13|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 
 
is entirely unexplained. It has been observed in Kishan Singh (Dead) 
through LRs. v. Gurpal Singh & Ors.13 that: 
“…. Chagrined and frustrated litigants should not be permitted to 
give vent by cheaply invoking the jurisdiction of the criminal Court. 
The Court proceedings ought not to be permitted to degenerate into 
a weapon of harassment or prosecution. In such a case, where an FIR 
is lodged clearly with a view to spite the other party because of a 
private and personal grudge and to enmesh the other party in long 
and arduous criminal proceedings, the court may take a view that it 
amounts to an abuse of the process of law in the facts and 
circumstances of that case”. 

Kishan Singh (supra) was recently referred to and followed in 
Rohtash & Anr. v. State of Haryana.14 
19. That apart, these proceedings have been initiated in the face of the 
Separation Agreement entered into by the parties to the marriage at the 
time of dissolution, that too, as already recorded supra without any 
express authorization by the daughter of the complainant. It categorically 
records as under: 
“3. … 
e. Personal Belongings, Furniture & Household Goods: 
The parties have agreed upon a division of their furniture, 
furnishings, household goods, appliances, equipment, silverware, 
china, glassware, books, works of art and other household and 
personal property items presently held by one or both of the parties. 
Each party hereby relinquishes all right, title and interest in and to 
all household goods, furniture and personal properties awarded to 
the other party.” 

13 (2010) 
14 (2019) 

14|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 

Clause 6 of the Separation Agreement is of import in the present 
controversy: 
 “6. RELEASES 
Each of the parties hereto does hereby release and discharge the other 
from any and all other claims, causes of action whether at law or in 
equity, dower, both in real and personal property, both under the 
statutes and common law, and all other charges of every kind, 
character or nature which either of the parties does now or might 
have against the other arising in any manner whatsoever, except as 
are herein specifically reserved to the parties, or as may be derived 
by either party to effectuate and maintain the terms of this 
Agreement.” 
 
Further, clause 8 of the Separation Agreement records the full 
division of the property between the parties in the following terms: 
“8. FULL DIVISION OF PROPERTY 
The parties represent to the Court that this Agreement fully disposes 
and divides all the marital property of the parties and that there is no 
further property which this Court must divide. Further, the parties 
represent and warrant that they have each disclosed to the other all 
of their respective property interests in their respective Statement of 
Property filed in this cause.” 
 
20. In view of the above, we also hold that the charge under Section 6 of 
the Dowry Prohibition Act, is not made out and therefore, fails. 
Consequently, the only conclusion that can be drawn is that the 
proceedings initiated by the complainant (CC No.1369/2022) against the 
present appellants have to be quashed and set aside. Any action 
commenced as a result thereof is bad in law. The questions raised in this 
appeal are answered accordingly. 

15|SLP(CRL.)NO.3981/2023 
 
21. The appeal is allowed in the above terms. The impugned judgment 
dated 22nd December 2022 in 
between the self-same parties, the complaint stands quashed and set aside. 
Pending applications, if any, are also disposed of. 

………………………………………J. 
(J. K. MAHESHWARI) 

………………………………………J. 
(SANJAY KAROL) 
 
Dated: August 29, 2024; 
Place: New Delhi.