IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

[.L.P. (] 
 
N.M. THEERTHEGOWDA 
 
 … APPELLANT(S) 

Versus 

Y.M. ASHOK KUMAR AND OTHERS 
 … RESPONDENT(S) 

J U D G E M E N T 
 
S.V.N. BHATTI, J. 
1. Leave granted. 
2. The appellant filed O.S. No. 610 of 2015 for specific performance of 
the agreement for sale dated 04.11.1996, stated to have been executed 
by the respondents. The appellant also prayed to set aside the sale 
deed dated 13.08.2003, which the first and second respondents 
executed in favour of the third respondent. The appellant claims 
possession of suit schedule property as part performance under the 
agreement of sale dated 04.11.1996. An agreement of sale coupled with 
possession is deemed to be a conveyance warranting payment of ad 

valorem stamp duty. Admittedly, the suit agreement is written on stamp 
papers worth Rs.200/-. Article 5(e)(i) of the Schedule of the Act, read 
with amended Stamp Act No. 8 of 1995, prescribes the duty as payable 
on a conveyance. The appellant has not produced the original 
agreement in O.S. No. 610 of 2015. The explanation offered by him is 
that the agreement is filed in a connected matter between the parties. 
From the order dated 14.08.2015, it appears that the appellant 
expressed readiness to pay duty and penalty on the certified copy of the 
agreement of sale dated 04.11.1996, now filed along with the plaint. The 
trial court, by order dated 14.08.2015, held as follows: 
“In respect of penalty on deficit stamp duty is concerned in 
reported rulings; 
 
ILR 2013 KAR 2099 (DB) – Degambar Warty and others – V/s. 
District Registrar, Bangalore Urban District and another. 
 Wherein in the above said rulings it is held; 
 
“No discretion is granted to the Court to impose 
a lesser penalty. A power is vested in Civil Court 
to impound the document.” 

In view of the above said settled law, the Civil Court has no 
discretion to impose lesser penalty below ten times. The proper 
stamp duty payable on the agreement of sale dated 04-11-1996. 
The ten times penalty on deficit stamp duty comes to 
Rs.14,38,000/- Plus deficit stamp duty of Rs.1,43,800/-, in all the 
plaintiff has to pay deficit stamp duty and penalty of 
Rs.15,81,800/- on the unregistered agreement of sale dated 04-
11-1996. 

ORDER 
 
The plaintiff is directed to pay duty and penalty totally 
Rs.15,81,800/-. 

The office is directed to collect the duty and penalty as stated 
above. Thereafter, as per Sec.37 of the Karnataka Stamp Act, 
send an authenticated copy of the unregistered agreement of 
sale dated 04-11-1996 to the concerned District Registrar, 
together with Certificate and the amount collected as a duty and 
penalty.” 
 
3. The appellant filed, assailing the trial 
court’s order dated 14.08.2015. The appellant argued that the deficit 
stamp duty should alone be collected at the time of the passing of the 
judgment and decree, and the levy of penalty is illegal and erroneous. 
The High Court, through the order impugned in the appeal, rejected. 
4. The instant Civil Appeal has been heard with Civil Appeal Nos. 
10039-40 of 2024 (.L.P. (C) No. 7249-50 of 2022). After perusing 
the record, we are of the view that the circumstances in which the 
decision to pay stamp duty and penalty is rendered are different from 
the tagged civil appeals. Advocate for the appellant contends that the 
document should have been sent to the District Registrar to determine 
deficit stamp duty and penalty under Section 39 of the Act, instead of 
the court deciding under Section 34 of the Stamp Act. The argument is 
untenable to the facts and circumstances of this case. 

5. In Civil Appeal Nos. 10039-40 of 2024 (.L.P. (C) Nos. 
7249-50 of 2022), the steps under Chapter IV of the Act have been 
summarised in paragraph 21 of the Judgement, and reads thus – 
“21.1. 
Section 33 of the Act is titled examination and impounding of 
instruments. The object of the provision is to disable persons from 
withdrawing the instruments produced by them on being told that proper 
stamp duty and penalty should be paid. 
21.1.1. 
The person who intend to rely on an insufficiently/improperly 
stamped instrument has option to submit to the scope of Section 34 of the 
Act, pay duty and penalty. The party also has the option to directly move 
an application under Section 39 of the Act before the District Registrar, 
and have the deficit stamp duty and the penalty as may be imposed 
collected. In either of the cases, after the deficit stamp duty and the 
penalty are paid, the impounding effected under Section 35 of the Act is 
released and the instrument available to the party for relying as evidence. 
In the event, a party prefers to have the document sent to the deputy 
commissioner for collecting the deficit stamp duty and penalty, the 
Court/Every Person has no option except to send the document to the 
District Registrar. The caveat to the above is that, before the Court/Every 
Person exercises the jurisdiction under Section 34 of the Act, the option 
must be exercised by a party. 
21.2. 
Section 34 of the Act is titled instruments not duly stamped 
inadmissible in evidence. This provision bars the admission of an 
instrument in evidence unless adequate stamp duty and the penalty are 
paid. Every person so authorised to collect deficit stamp duty and penalty 
has no discretion except to levy and collect ten-times the penalty of deficit 
stamp duty. 
21.3. 
Section 35 of the Act is titled admission of instrument where not 
to be questioned. Section 35 prohibits questioning the admission of an 
insufficiently stamped instrument in evidence. 
21.4. 
Section 37 of the Act is titled instruments impounded, how dealt 
with. This Section arises when the party pays the deficit duty and penalty, 
the Court is to impound the instrument under Section 33 of the Act and 
has to forward the instrument to the Deputy Commissioner/District 
Registrar. Sub-section (2) of Section 37 of the Act deals with cases not 
falling under Section 34 and 36, and the person impounding an instrument 
shall send it in original to the Deputy Commissioner. This includes the 
exigencies set out in paragraph 21.1.1. 
21.5. 
Being a regulatory and remedial statute, a party who follows the 
regulation, and pays the stamp duty and penalty, as per Sections 34 or 
39 of the Act, the legal objection emanating from Section 33 of the Act 
alone is effaced and the document is admitted in evidence. In other 

words, the objection under the Stamp Act is no more available to a 
contesting party. 
21.6. 
Section 39 of the Act is titled deputy commissioner’s power to 
stamp instruments impounded. This Section provides the procedure to be 
followed by the Deputy Commissioner/District Registrar while stamping 
instruments that are impounded under Section 33 of the Act. As per 
Section 39(1)(b) of the Act, the penalty may extend to ten-times the stamp 
duty payable; however, ten times is the farthest limit which is meant only 
for very extreme situations. Therefore, the Deputy Commissioner/District 
Registrar has discretion to levy and collect commensurate penalty. 
21.7. 
The above steps followed and completed by paying/depositing 
the deficit duty and penalty would result in the instrument becoming 
compliant with the checklist of the Act. The finality is subject to the just 
exceptions envisaged by the Act addressing different contingencies. 
21.8. 
The scheme does not prohibit a party to a document to first 
invoke directly the jurisdiction of the District Registrar and present the 
instrument before Court/Every Person after complying with the 
requirement of duty and penalty. In such an event, the available objection 
under Sections 33 or 34 of the Act is erased beforehand. The quantum of 
penalty is primarily between the authority/court and the opposing party 
has little role to discharge. 
 
6. Having regard to the detailed consideration, the twin points on the 
collection of deficit stamp duty and the penalty are substantially covered. 
Before applying the said summary to the case on hand, the 
circumstances of the case are adverted to. 
7. In the accompanying Civil Appeals, by referring to Section 37(2), we 
have held as follows: 
“23. 
Hence, for the above reasons, the direction to 
pay ten times the penalty of the deficit stamp duty 
warrants to be interfered with and accordingly is set 
aside. The trial court is directed to send the agreement 
of sale dated 29.06.1999 to the District Registrar to 
determine the deficit stamp duty and penalty payable. 
Upon receipt of the compliance certificate from the 
District Registrar, without reference to an objection 

under the Act, the suit document is received in 
evidence. All objections available to the respondents 
except the above are left open for consideration.” 
 
8. In the present case, the appellant wanted the suit agreement to be 
admitted in evidence at the interlocutory stage. The suit was filed on 
12.08.2015. On 14.08.2015, the case was posted before the court, and 
the counsel for the appellant in the trial court agreed to pay 
proper/sufficient stamp duty and penalty on the certified copy of the 
agreement to sale. In other words, the appellant invited the court to 
decide under Section 34(1) of the Act. 
9. Being so, when the trial court imposed ten times penalty on the 
deficit stamp duty, the appellant argued in the High Court that he would 
pay the stamp duty when the decree of specific performance was 
granted. In our considered view, the case of appellant is covered by 
Section 34 of the Act, and rightly ten-times penalty is imposed. Further, 
the appellant having invited the court, as noted above, cannot now 
express the willingness to exercise the option under Section 37(2) of the 
Act. On the contrary, Section 37(1) of the Act would apply in the present 
case. 

10. The High Court, through the impugned order, while relying on the 
ratio in Gangappa and another v. Fakkirappa1 and Digambar Warty 
and others v. District Registrar, Bangalore Urban District and 
another2, has rightly rejected the prayer of the appellant. 
11. For the above reasons, we do not see any ground warranting 
interference in the order impugned. 
12. The Appeal fails and is accordingly dismissed. There is no order as 
to cost...……………………J. 
(HRISHIKESH ROY) 

…………………….J. 
 (S.V.N BHATTI) 

1 (2019). 
2 ILR 2013 KAR 2099.