IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) Nos………………………….of 2024 
 DIARY No. 17948 OF 2024 
 
NAVIN KUMAR & ORS. 

…PETITIONERS 
Versus 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS. ETC. 

…RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 

WITH 
 
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO(s). OF 2024 
( DIARY NO.20149 OF 2024) 
 
WITH 
 
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO(s). OF 2024 
( DIARY NO.20848 OF 2024) 
 
WITH 

WITH 
 
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO(s). OF 2024 
( DIARY NO.36283 OF 2024) 
 
WITH 
 
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO(s). OF 2024 
( DIARY NO.37276 OF 2024) 

ORDER 
 
1. In Devesh Sharma v. Union of India1 (delivered on 
11.08.2023), there was before us a challenge to the judgement 
of the Rajasthan High Court dated 25.11.2021 where it was 
held that for appointment of primary school teachers (i.e., 
teachers of Class I to Class V), the essential qualification is 
D.El.Ed. (i.e., Diploma in Elementary Education) and not B.Ed. 
(i.e., Bachelor in Education), and B.Ed. qualified candidates 
were held to be disqualified. 
2. Before the Rajasthan High Court, the National Council for 
Teachers Education (hereinafter referred to as “NCTE”) 
notification dated 28.06.2018, by which B.Ed. qualified 
candidates were held eligible was, inter alia, under challenge. 
In our judgment dated 11.08.2023, we have upheld the 
Division Bench order of Rajasthan High Court and affirmed the 
findings that the essential qualification for appointment as 
primary school teachers is Diploma in Elementary Education 
and not B.Ed. Consequently, the NCTE notification dated 
28.06.2018 and the regulations made therein, by which B.Ed 
was made a qualification, were quashed and set aside. 
 
1 2023 INSC 704 

3. The above judgment of Devesh Sharma (supra) was delivered 
on 
11.08.2023 
and 
thereafter 
review 
applications, 
clarifications, etc. kept coming up, mainly from such 
candidates who were having B.Ed. qualification and were 
selected and appointed by different States in the recent 
selection process for primary school teachers. We had heard 
all such applicants at length and clarified that such B.Ed. qualified candidates who were selected and appointed prior to 
our decision in Devesh Sharma (supra) i.e. prior to 
11.08.2023, shall not be disturbed as there was a special 
equity in their favour. Therefore, our judgement would be 
prospective in nature, and will not disturb the appointments 
of such candidates who had already been appointed prior to 
the judgment in Devesh Sharma (supra) i.e. prior to 
11.08.2023. This is what was clarified in our order dated 
08.04.2024: 
As it appears that a large number of candidates with 
B.Ed. degree had already been appointed on the 
basis 
of 
eligibility 
criteria 
specified 
by 
the 
educational authorities, we do not think it to be 
equitable to effect their removal. We, accordingly 
hold that the judgment delivered by this Bench on 
11th August, 2023 shall have prospective operation. 
But prospective operation of this judgment shall be 
only for those candidates who were appointed 
without any qualification or conditions imposed by 
any Court of Law to the effect that their appointment 

would be subject to final outcome of the case which 
might have had been instituted by them and such 
candidates were in regular employment without any 
disqualification and were appointed in pursuance of 
a notice of advertisement where B.Ed. was 
stipulated to be valid qualification. Services of only 
such candidates shall not be disturbed because of 
this judgment. We make it clear that this benefit is 
only for the candidates who were appointed prior to 
the date our judgment was delivered, on 11th 
August, 2023. Mere selection of such candidates or 
their participation in the process will not entitle 
them for a benefit under our present order. 
… 
We also make it clear that the directions contained 
in this order shall not be confined to the applicant 
state only and shall cover all cases which may be 
pending in different judicial fora in any State or 
Union territory on the same point of law. 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
After our clarifications, on 08.04.2024, there should not have 
remained any doubts, yet clarification and review applications, 
kept coming up in one form or the other which were all 
dismissed. Now, in the present batch of petitions, the same 
question has again come up before this Court, this time arising 
out of a judgment of Chhattisgarh High Court, which has only 
been passed following our order in Devesh Sharma (supra). 
4. The High Court in its judgment dated 02.04.2024 declared all 
such candidates, having B.Ed. qualification to be ineligible and 
disqualified for selection to the post of primary school 

teachers, following the decision of this Court in Devesh 
Sharma (supra). 
5. Admittedly in the present case, the appointment orders in 
favour of the B.Ed candidates were issued in September 2023 
by the State of Chhattisgarh, that is after the date of our 
judgement in Devesh Sharma (supra) which was delivered on 
11.08.2023. We have already held in our order dated 
08.04.2024 that such candidates cannot be given any relief. 
6. Before the Chhattisgarh High Court, petitions were filed by 
candidates holding Diploma in Elementary Education, 
challenging the eligibility of B.Ed. candidates on the grounds 
that they were not entitled to be appointed as primary school 
teachers. In their defence the B.Ed. candidates had argued 
that B.Ed. is one of the qualifications for appointment of 
elementary school teachers under the applicable Rules i.e., 
Chhattisgarh School Education Services (Educational and 
Administrative Cadre) Recruitment and Promotion Rules, 2019 
(“2019 Rules”), and thus, they have the necessary 
qualification. 
7. All the same, apprised of the order of this Court in Devesh 
Sharma (supra), the Division Bench of Chhattisgarh High 
Court had passed an interim order on 21.08.2023 whereby the 

recruitment process was directed to be kept in abeyance as 
regards B.Ed. candidates. This is what was said: 
Considering the arguments advanced by learned 
counsel for the parties and also considering the law 
laid down by the Apex Court on the issue in question 
passed in (Devesh 
Sharma Vs. Union of India & Others decided on 
11.08.2023), the further recruitment process with 
regard to the candidates having B.Ed. qualification 
for the post of Assistant Teachers shall be kept in 
abeyance with immediate effect and further no final 
decision would be taken by the respondents in 
respect of such candidates till the next date of 
hearing. 
 
8. This interim order of High Court was then challenged by B.Ed. candidates before this Court, where a Division Bench of this 
Court passed the following order dated 29.08.2023: 
In the meantime, taking into consideration that the 
recruitment process which was in progress, is now 
interrupted 
by 
the 
ad-interim 
order 
dated 
21.08.2023 and the aspect ultimately to be 
considered by the High Court is with regard to the 
manner in which the judgment in C.A. No. 5068 of 
2023 passed by this Court is to be construed, at this 
stage interrupting the recruitment process would 
not be justified. 
 
Therefore, to the said extent, we hereby stay the 
order dated 21.08.2023 passed by the High Court 
and clarify that the recruitment process, which was 
in progress prior to the date of the said interim order 
passed by the High Court, shall continue and the 
appointments, if any, made thereunder will however 
remain subject to result of the consideration to be 
made by the High Court in W.P.S No. 5788 of 2023. 

The selected candidates shall be informed of the 
same by the Appointing Authority concerned. 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
9. The above order of this Court has clarified that the selection 
and appointment of B.Ed. candidates would be subject to the 
final decision of the High Court in the writ petition. Later, 
when they were given appointments, their Appointment Order 
also clearly states that this appointment is subject to the 
decision of Chhattisgarh High Court in the pending writ 
petition. Ultimately, the petitions filed by the Diploma holders 
(in Elementary Education) were allowed vide the impugned 
judgement and the logical consequence of this is that the 
service of teachers, with B.Ed. qualification, are liable to be 
terminated. In the present batch of petitions, we have before 
us 
these 
teachers 
with 
B.Ed. qualification 
whose 
appointments have been quashed. The State of Chhattisgarh 
is also before us challenging the impugned judgement and 
order dated 02.04.2024 of the High Court. 
10. One of the arguments of the learned senior counsel (Mr. 
Shrivastava) for the petitioners before this Court is that this 
Court in Devesh Sharma (supra) had opened a small window 
for B.Ed. candidates who were called for selection as B.Ed. was 

one of the qualifications in the 2019 Rules as also in the 
notification of NCTE and till it was set aside such candidates 
cannot be called as ineligible. All we had said in Devesh 
Sharma (supra) was that since the law, making B.Ed. as 
qualification, was not struck down by any Court (as was the 
position in Rajasthan when recruitment to the post of teachers 
were taking place in 2019) such candidates ought to have been 
called at least. This is exactly what was said: 
“Having made the above determination we, all the 
same, are also of the considered opinion that the 
State of Rajasthan was clearly in error in not 
calling for applications from B.Ed. qualified 
candidates, for the reasons that till that time 
when such an advertisement was issued by the 
Rajasthan Government, B.Ed. candidates were 
included as eligible candidates as per the 
statutory notification of NCTE, which was 
binding on the Rajasthan Government, till it was 
declared illegal or unconstitutional by the Court.” 
 
As we know when recruitment to the post of teachers was being 
made in Rajasthan, B.Ed. was a qualification for teachers as 
per the NCTE notification. The above observation made by us 
was only to affirm the findings of the Rajasthan High Court 
which had although held that B.Ed. was not a valid 
“qualification” for primary teachers, yet cautioned that the 
Government could not have ignored the notification of the 

NCTE till it was declared illegal by a Competent Court. That 
was all. In Chhattisgarh, this was not the case. B.Ed. qualified candidates were called by the State in the selection 
process, yet as they were held to be non-qualified by a 
judgment of this Court, which is the law now and by logic has 
to be implemented, they were rightly held to be disqualified. 
How does our observations in Devesh Sharma (supra) help 
the petitioners, we simply fail to understand. This argument is 
totally misconceived. B.Ed. is not a qualification for a teacher 
in a Primary School. Moreover, this aspect has already been 
clarified in the order dated 08.04.2024, where only such 
candidates have been saved who were selected and appointed 
prior to our order dated 11.08.2023 in Devesh Sharma 
(supra). Since the petitioners in the present case were 
appointed post 11.08.2023 and their appointments were also 
subjected to the final outcome of the pending writ petition 
before High Court, they cannot get any benefit. The completion 
of the selection process prior to 11.08.2023 is not material. 
What is important is the date of appointment which is certainly 
after the cut-off date. They will stand disqualified, as they do 
not have the essential qualification for appointment as primary 
school teachers. 

11. We have also gone through the 2019 Rules of Chhattisgarh. 
In Rule 8 (II), the qualification of an Assistant Teacher reads as 
under: - 
“Rule 

(II): 
Educational 
qualifications 
and 
experience – The candidate must possess the 
educational qualifications and experience as prescribed 
for the service as shown in column (5) of Schedule III. 
For Preliminary education, the prescribed qualification 
will be applicable as per provisions of the Right to Free 
and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.” 
 
Column 5 of Schedule III provides that the minimum 
educational qualifications required for the post of teachers 
shall be as per Annexure I of the Rules. This Annexure 
prescribes the minimum qualification for Assistant Teacher as 
follows: 
“a) Senior Secondary (or its equivalent) with at least 
50% marks and 2-year Diploma in Elementary 
Education by whatever name known) 
OR 
Senior Secondary (or its equivalent) with at least 
45% marks and 2-year Diploma in Elementary 
Education (by whatever name known) in accordance 
with the NCTE (Recognition Norms and Procedure) 
Regulations, 2002 
OR 
Senior Secondary (or its equivalent) with at least 
50% marks and 4-year Bachelor of Elementary 
Education (B.EL.Ed.) 
OR 
Senior Secondary (or its equivalent) with at least 
5o% marks and 2-year Diploma in Education 
(Special Education) 
OR 

Graduation and 2-year Diploma in Elementary 
Education (by whatever name known) 
OR 
Graduation with at least 50% marks and B.Ed. qualification 
(graduate 
from 
the 
institution 
recognised from NCTE) shall also be eligible for 
appointment as teacher for classes 1 to 5. Provided 
he / she undergoes, after appointment, a NCTE 
recognised 
6-month 
special 
programme 
in 
Elementary Education. 
And 
(b) Passed the Teacher Eligibility Test (TET), to be 
conducted by the appropriate Government, in 
accordance with the guidelines framed by NCTE for 
this purpose.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
The entire reliance of the petitioner is on the above provisions. 
We have already seen that Rule 8(II) while prescribing the 
qualifications of Assistant Teacher makes a reference to the 
qualifications as given under the Right to Education Act, 2009. 
Not only this, the aforesaid provision placing B.Ed. as a 
qualification is again subsequent to the Notification of NCTE 
dated 28.06.2018, which has already been quashed and set 
aside by our judgement in Devesh Sharma (supra). Therefore, 
by implication, qualification given in the Chhattisgarh Rules to 
the extent it makes B.Ed. a qualification also cannot be 
implemented, following the law laid down in Devesh Sharma 
(supra). 

12. In fact, we have been shown today an order of NCTE dated 
04.09.2023 whereby the judgement in Devesh Sharma 
(supra) was communicated to Chief Secretaries of all State 
Governments for further appropriate action. In spite of this, 
appointments were given to B.Ed. candidates which was illegal 
and has now rightly been quashed, by the Chhattisgarh High 
Court. 
13. In view of the above, we see no reason to interfere with the 
impugned judgement passed by the Chhattisgarh High Court. 
14. Accordingly, all the Special Leave Petitions are hereby 
dismissed. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
 
….…...……………………………J. 
 (SUDHANSHU DHULIA) 

……...……………………………J. 
 (PANKAJ MITHAL) 

New Delhi 
August 28, 2024