A.No.2351 of 2011 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Krishan 

…..Appellant 
 
Versus 
 
State of Haryana 
 …..Respondent 

JUDGMENT 
 
Abhay S. Oka, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
 
1. 
The appellant is accused no.2, who, along with 
accused no.1 – Mahesh, was convicted for the 
offences punishable under Section 302 of the Indian 
Penal Code (for short ‘IPC’) and Section 25 of the 
Arms Act. The appellant and the co-accused were 
ordered to undergo life imprisonment for the offence 
punishable under Section 302 of the IPC. The 
conviction and sentence of the appellant have been 
confirmed by the High Court by the impugned 
judgment. 

A.No.2351 of 2011 

2. 
It is a case of the murder of Pawan and Ajju 
Chaudhary. According to the prosecution case, on 
03rd of January 2004, the deceased Pawan went to 
Rohini to meet his ailing sister Sushila. Dharmender 
(PW-2) is the complainant. Dharmender is the 
brother of the deceased Pawan. According to 
Dharmender, the deceased Pawan had fallen into 
bad company and cases of dacoity and theft were 
registered against him. He stated that on 04th 
January 2004, he enquired with his sister, who told 
him that the deceased Pawan had returned after 
meeting her. According to Dharmender, around 
09:00 a.m. on 05th January 2004, he was informed 
by someone that his brother Pawan had been shot 
dead. Thereafter, the bodies of both the deceased 
were found by the police. 
3. 
The prosecution examined a total of 20 
witnesses. The prosecution relied upon the evidence 
of PW-1 – Mukesh and PW-3 – Vijender as they were 
allegedly the eyewitnesses. Dharmender (PW-2) was 
also examined. The other two material witnesses are 
PW-15 Sub-inspector Desh Raj and PW-20 DSP 
Puran Chand. At the relevant time, PW-20 was the 
Investigating Officer. Both the witnesses are 
relevant on the issue of recovery of the weapon of the 
offence at the appellant's instance, as there are no 

A.No.2351 of 2011 

independent witnesses to the recovery. According to 
the case of the prosecution, the report of the ballistic 
expert showed that the bullets recovered from the 
body of the deceased Pawan were fired from the 
country-made pistol, which was recovered at the 
instance of the appellant. 
SUBMISSIONS 
4. 
Shri 
Gaurav 
Agrawal, 
learned 
counsel 
appointed as amicus curiae submitted that the case 
of the prosecution is not based on circumstantial 
evidence but on the eye-witness account of witnesses 
PW-1 and PW-3. He submitted that neither of the 
eyewitnesses supported the prosecution and both 
were declared hostile. He urged that in the absence 
of any independent witness, the recovery of the 
alleged weapon at the instance of the appellant 
cannot be relied upon. Moreover, the recovery is 
from an open place accessible to all, and that also 
happened more than one month after the date of the 
incident. He pointed out that PW-2 – Dharmender 
had deposed that as deceased Pawan was on inimical 
terms with one Naresh Yadav, he suspected that 
Pawan and Ajju Chaudhary must have been either 
murdered by Naresh Yadav or by someone at his 
instance. By pointing out the testimony of PW-20, 
he submitted that no investigation was carried out 

A.No.2351 of 2011 

about the involvement of Naresh Yadav, who was the 
first suspect. He would, therefore, submit that the 
prosecution has failed to prove the case beyond a 
reasonable doubt. 
5. 
Ms. Bina Madhavan, the learned counsel 
appearing for the State of Haryana, submitted that 
the recovery of the weapon of assault had been 
proved to have been made at the instance of the 
appellant. The report of the expert establishes that 
the bullet found on the dead body of deceased Pawan 
could have been fired from the weapon recovered at 
the instance of the appellant. She placed reliance on 
the following decisions: 

John Pandian etc. v. State1 

Golakonda Venkateswara Rao v. State of 
A.P.2 
(iii) State of Punjab v. Jagir Singh & Ors.3 

State, Govt. of NCT of Delhi v. Sunil & 
Anr.4 

Pawan Kumar onu Mittal etc. v. State 
of U.P. & Anr. etc.5 

Suresh Chandra Bahri etc. v. State of 
Bihar6 
 
1 (2010) 
2 (2003) 
3 (1974) 
4 (2001) 
5 (2015 
6 1995 Supp. (1) SCC 80 

A.No.2351 of 2011 

She relied upon the decisions in support of her 
contention that conviction can be based on the 
disclosure and recovery of a weapon at the instance 
of the accused. 
OUR VIEW 
6. 
We have carefully considered the submissions 
made across the bar. We have perused the evidence 
of the material prosecution witnesses with the 
assistance of the learned counsel appearing for the 
appellant. At the outset, it must be noted here that 
the prosecution case is not based on circumstantial 
evidence. It is specifically based on the evidence of 
the alleged eye-witnesses, i.e., PW-1 and PW-3. 
Apart from the eyewitnesses, the prosecution relied 
upon the recovery of the alleged weapon of offence at 
the instance of the appellant and the fact that the 
appellant disclosed the place where he had thrown 
the dead bodies. 
7. 
As neither PW-1 nor PW-3 supported the 
prosecution, what remains to be considered is only 
the evidence of alleged recovery at the instance of the 
appellant. According to the prosecution case, the 
offence occurred after the evening of 04th January 
2004 and before 09:00 a.m. on 05th January 2004. 
According to the versions of PW-15 and PW-20, the 

A.No.2351 of 2011 

appellant allegedly made a disclosure statement on 
09th February 2004. According to both the 
witnesses, the appellant disclosed that he had kept 
a country-made pistol along with two cartridges 
wrapped in a polythene bag in front of the Plaza 
building. Though PW-15 deposed that the appellant 
disclosed that the country-made pistol, along with 
two cartridges wrapped in a polythene bag, was kept 
underneath the earth in the eastern corner of the 
open space, PW-20 did not specifically depose that 
the appellant disclosed that the articles were kept 
underneath the ground. PW-15 described how the 
appellant took the police to the park in front of the 
Plaza Building. He did not state that the recovery 
was made after digging the earth. He stated that the 
appellant led the police to the eastern corner of the 
park and showed the country-made pistol of 315 
bore along with two cartridges. Even PW-20, in his 
examination-in-chief, did not disclose that recovery 
was made after digging. Though Memorandum 
Panchnama of recovery recorded that the weapon 
was recovered after digging, both PW-15 and PW-20 
have not deposed to that effect. Though both the 
police witnesses initially stated that no independent 
witnesses were available, PW-20 stated in his cross-
examination that there were public witnesses 

A.No.2351 of 2011 

available who were not found interested. 
8. 
More than one factor renders the prosecution 
theory regarding recovery very suspicious and 
doubtful. The first factor is that the recovery was 
allegedly made one month and four days after the 
occurrence. Secondly, the recovery was made from 
open space in a garden. Thus, the place was easily 
accessible to many. Thirdly, neither PW-15 nor PW-
20 have stated that the weapon and cartridges were 
buried underground and were recovered only after 
digging. Lastly, though independent witnesses were 
available, they were not made witnesses to the 
Panchnama made pursuant to the alleged statement 
made by the appellant. As the recovery of the weapon 
at the appellant's instance cannot be believed, the 
decisions relied upon by the learned counsel for the 
respondent are not significant at all. She relied upon 
the decisions which hold that in certain cases, a 
conviction can be based on the recovery of the 
weapon of offence at the instance of the accused. 
9. 
According to the prosecution case, on 09th 
February 2004, the appellant led the police party to 
a place where he had thrown the dead bodies. 
However, dead bodies were already recovered on 05th 
January 2004. Therefore, the place from which dead 

A.No.2351 of 2011 

bodies were recovered was known to the police long 
before 09th of February 2004. Consequently, it 
cannot be said that there was a discovery by the 
appellant of the place where dead bodies were kept. 
Therefore, that part of the statement of the accused, 
which records that he would show the place where 
he had thrown the dead bodies, is not admissible in 
evidence under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872. 
10. 
PW-2 – Dharmender, the complainant and real 
brother of deceased Pawan, deposed that he 
suspected the involvement of one Naresh Yadav in 
the offence. PW-20, in his cross-examination, 
admitted that he did not make any investigation 
whether there was any enmity between the said 
Naresh and the deceased. He admitted that one 
Mukesh was a personal friend of the deceased 
Pawan. He pleaded ignorance about the correctness 
of the suggestion that Mukesh had murdered 
Naresh. The police have not investigated the role 
played by the said Naresh Yadav, who, according to 
PW-2, the brother of the deceased, was on inimical 
terms with the deceased. When, according to the 
family of the deceased, Naresh Yadav was the 
suspect, police ought to have investigated the role 
played by Naresh Yadav. There is yet another critical 

A.No.2351 of 2011 

aspect of the case. PW-15 and PW-20 have not 
stated in their examination-in-chief how they 
became aware that PW-1 and PW-3 were the 
eyewitnesses. 
11. 
For all the aforesaid reasons, the evidence of 
recovery of the weapon at the instance of the 
appellant cannot be accepted as reliable. Moreover, 
the findings we have recorded above create a serious 
doubt about the truthfulness of the prosecution 
case. Therefore, in any case, the benefit of the doubt 
must be extended to the appellant. It can also be 
said that once the evidence of recovery is disbelieved, 
it was a case of no evidence as the eyewitnesses did 
not support the prosecution. 
12. 
Accordingly, the appeal must succeed. The 
impugned judgment and order dated 02nd May 2011 
in passed by the 
High Court of Punjab and Haryana and the judgment 
and order dated 19th September 2007 in Sessions 
Case No.13 of 2004 passed by the Additional 
Sessions Judge, Gurgaon are hereby quashed and 
set aside insofar as the appellant Krishan is 
concerned, and he stands acquitted of the offences 
alleged against him. We direct that the appellant 
shall be immediately set at liberty unless his custody 

A.No.2351 of 2011 

is required in connection with any other case. 
13. 
Appeal is accordingly allowed. 

……………………………J. 

[ABHAY S. OKA]...…………………………J. 

[UJJAL BHUYAN] 
New Delhi 
January 25, 2024.