IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10193_ 
 
 OF 2024
(Arising out of SLP (C) No.29899 OF 2017)
ISHWAR (SINCE DECEASED) 
THR. LRS & ORS.
          …APPELLANTSCIVIL APPEAL NO 10193 OF 2024

VERSUS

BHIM SINGH & ANR.
    
  …RESPONDENTS
JUDGMENT
MANOJ
 
  MISRA, J.
1. 
Leave granted.    
2. 
This appeal impugns an order of the High Court of
Punjab   and   Haryana   at   Chandigarh1  dated   11.01.2017
1 High Court

passed   in,   whereby   the
revision preferred by the appellant(s) against the order of
the Civil Judge (Senior Division), Kaithal2 dated 03.11.2016
was dismissed. 
FACTUAL MATRIX
3.
A suit for specific performance was instituted by the
respondents against the appellant(s) (which would include
their   predecessor   in   interest)   for   enforcement   of   an
agreement to sell dated 18.05.2005. In the plaint, inter alia,
it was alleged that the appellant(s) had agreed to sell the
property in dispute at a total consideration of Rs.18 lacs,
out of which Rs.9.77 lacs was paid in advance, yet, despite
service   of   notice   requesting   execution   of   sale   deed,   the
appellants failed to execute the same. 
4.
The trial court (i.e., the Court of Additional Civil
Judge (Senior Division), Kaithal), vide judgment and decree
dated 28.02.2011,  decreed the suit in part whereunder the
appellant(s) were directed to refund the earnest money with
interest, etc. 
2 Execution Court

5.
Aggrieved   by   rejection   of   the   prayer   for   specific
performance   of   the   agreement,   the   respondents   went   in
appeal. The appellate court (i.e., the Court of Additional
District Judge, Kaithal (for short ADJ)) allowed the appeal
vide judgment and decree dated 12.01.2012 and accepted
the prayer for specific performance of the agreement. While
doing so, it directed the appellants herein to execute the
sale deed in favour of the respondents herein on payment of
balance sale consideration within a period of two months
from the date of the decree, failing which, liberty was given
to   the   decree   holder(s)   to   get   the   sale   deed   executed
through Court. 
6.
On 20.03.2012, the respondents (i.e. decree holders)
filed   an   execution   application   before   the   Court   of   first
instance (i.e., the trial court) praying thus:
“It is therefore, prayed that the sale deed as
per   the   decree   passed   in   Civil   Appeal   No.53   of
2011 may kindly be got executed and registered in
favour of the decree holders by the appointment of
the local commissioner and possession may kindly
be   got  delivered  to   the   decree   holder   and   the
balance sale price may kindly be got deposited in
the Court for payment to the J.Ds and cost for the
suit and the appeal and this execution may also be
got recovered from the J.Ds.”

7.
While   the   application   for   execution   of   the   decree
was pending, the appellant(s) (i.e., the judgment debtor(s))
challenged   the   appellate   court   decree   by   filing   Second
Appeal No.3730 of 2012 before the High Court, which came
to be dismissed on 07.11.2013. 
8.
Upon   dismissal   of   the   Second   Appeal,   the
respondents (i.e., decree­holders) filed an application before
the Execution Court on 24.03.2014 seeking permission to
deposit the balance consideration in Court. Opposing this
prayer of the decree holder, in the execution proceeding
itself, the appellant(s) (i.e. the judgment­debtors) submitted
an application under Section 283 of the Specific Relief Act,
3 28. Rescission in certain circumstances of contracts for the sale or lease of
immovable property, the specific performance of which has been decreed.—
(1) Where in any suit a decree for specific performance of a contract for the sale or
lease of immovable property has been made and the purchaser or lessee does not, within
the period allowed by the decree or such further period as the court may allow, pay the
purchase money or other sum which the court has ordered him to pay, the vendor or lessor
may apply in the same suit in which the decree is made, to have the contract rescinded and
on such application the court may, by order, rescind the contract either so far as regards the
party in default or altogether, as the justice of the case may require. 
(2) Where a contract is rescinded under sub-section (1), the court—
(a) shall direct the purchaser or the lessee, if he has obtained possession of
the property under the contract, to restore such possession to the vendor or
lessor, and 
(b) may direct payment to the vendor or lessor of all the rents and profits
which have accrued in respect of the property from the date on which possession
was so obtained by the purchaser or lessee until restoration of possession to the
vendor or lessor, and, if the justice of the case so requires, the refund of any sum
paid by the vendee or the lessee as earnest money or deposit in connection with
the contract. 
(3) If the purchase or lessee pays the purchase money or other sum which he is
ordered to pay under the decree within the period referred to in sub-section (1), the court
may, on application made in the same suit, award the purchaser or lessee such further relief
as he may be entitled to, including in appropriate cases all or any of the following reliefs,
namely:— 

1963 (in short “the 1963 Act”) to rescind the contract on
the ground that decree­holder(s) had failed to make deposit
within two months, as directed by the first appellate court. 
9. 
        The   Execution   Court,   however,  rejected   the
application of the judgment­debtor(s) for rescission of the
contract vide order dated 03.11.2016 and, simultaneously,
permitted   the   decree­holder(s)   to   make   deposit   of   the
balance consideration. 
10.
     Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the Execution
Court, the appellant(s) (i.e., the judgment­debtors) filed a
Civil  Revision  before   the  High  Court,   which   came   to be
dismissed by the impugned order.
11.
We have heard Shri Subhasish Bhowmick for the
appellant(s); Mr. Devendra Singh for the respondents; and
have perused the materials on record.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT(S)
(a) the execution of a proper conveyance or lease by the vendor or lessor;
(b) the delivery of possession, or partition and separate possession, of the
property on the execution of such conveyance or lease. 
(4) No separate suit in respect of any relief which may be claimed under this section
shall lie at the instance of a vendor, purchaser, lessor or lessee, as the case may be.
(5) The costs of any proceedings under this section shall be in the discretion of the
court.

12.
The learned counsel for the appellants submitted:

The   Execution   Court   held   no   jurisdiction   to
extend   the   time   for   depositing   the   balance
consideration   as   the   decree   under   execution   was
passed by the appellate court.

The   decree   was   executable   on   payment   of
balance sale consideration within two months. No
application for extension of time to make deposit
was made within the aforesaid period, therefore the
Court had no power to extend the time for deposit. 

The Execution Court committed grave error in
extending the time to make deposit of the balance
amount   after   four   years   of   the   appellate   court’s
decree, when, otherwise, it was to be paid within
two months from the date of the decree. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENTS
13.
 Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondents
submitted:

The   execution   application   was   filed   in   the
same Court where the original suit was instituted,
therefore, the Court had jurisdiction to extend the
time to make deposit;

The decree under execution did not specifically
fix the mode of payment and there was no direction
to   deposit   the   balance   consideration   in   Court,
therefore, except to file for execution of the decree
and   seek   permission   of   the   Court   to   deposit   the
balance consideration, there was no other method
by which decree holder could have paid the balance
amount, more so, when the judgment debtor was
not interested in abiding by the decree;

The judgment – debtor(s) were offered balance
consideration   within   time,   and   the   execution
application was also filed within time, but, instead
of executing the sale deed, the judgment– debtor(s)
chose   to   prefer   a   second   appeal   before   the   High
Court. Not only that, after the second appeal was
dismissed,   the   judgment­debtor(s)   preferred   a
Special   Leave   Petition   (in   short   SLP)   before   this

Court, which, too,  was dismissed on 07.11.2016.
Thus,   it   is   clear   that   the   decree­holders   were
throughout ready and willing to perform their part
under the contract / decree whereas the judgment­
debtor(s)   avoided   execution   of   the   sale   deed.   In
these circumstances and having regard to the facts
of the case, the Execution Court was justified in
allowing the application for extension of time and
rejecting   the   application   for   rescission   of   the
contract.
ISSUES
14.
Having noticed the rival contentions, in our view,
the following issues arise for our consideration:

Whether the Execution Court had jurisdiction
to deal with the application(s) for (a) recission of
contract  and (b)  extension of  time  to  deposit the
balance sale consideration? 

If   Execution   Court   had   the   jurisdiction,
whether   those   applications   ought   to   have   been
decided as one in the suit (i.e., original side)?  If yes,
then,   whether,   in   the   facts   of   the   case,   on   that

ground   alone,   the   impugned   order   warrants
interference in exercise of jurisdiction under Article
136 of the Constitution of India?
ANALYSIS
A.
The Execution Court had jurisdiction
15.
A bare reading of Section 28(1) of the 1963 Act gives
an impression that the power to extend time to deposit, or
to rescind the contract on failure of deposit, vests in the
Court which passed the decree in as much as the words
used in Section 28 (1) are: 
“The vendor or lessor may apply in the same suit
in which the decree is made, to have the contract
rescinded and on such application the court may,
by   order,   rescind   the   contract   either   so   far   as
regards the party in default or altogether, as the
justice of the case may require.”  
16.
In  Ramankutty   Guptan   Vs.   Avara4,  this   Court
answered   two   questions.   One,   whether   an   application
under Section 28 of the 1963 Act is maintainable in the
Court of first instance when the decree has been passed by
the appellate court. Second, whether the Execution Court
4 (1994) 

in   which   the   original   suit   was   filed   can   entertain   an
application under Section 28 of the 1963 Act.  After taking
note of the provisions of Section 375 of the CPC, this Court
held:
“8. …………..Therefore, it is clear that the decree of
the appellate court would be construed to be the
decree passed by the court of first instance. It is
settled law that an appeal is a continuation of the
suit.   Therefore,   when   a   decree   for   specific
performance has been dismissed by the trial court,
but decreed by the appellate court, it should be
construed to be in the same suit. When the decree
specifies   the   time   for   performance   of   the
conditions of the decree, on its failure to deposit
the money, Section 28(1) itself gives power to the
court to extend the time on such terms as the
Court may allow to pay the purchase money or
other  sum  which  the court has  ordered him  to
pay. 
In
 K.   Kalpana   Saraswathi   Vs.   P.S.S.
Somasundaram Chettiar6, this Court held that on
an oral prayer made by the counsel for the plaintiff
for   permission   to   deposit   the   entire   amount   as
directed by the trial court this Court directed the
appellant to deposit the amount within six months
from  that   date   together   with  interest   and   other
conditions mentioned therein.  An application for
extension   of   time   for   payment   of   balance
consideration may be filed even in the court of first
instance or in the appellate court in the same suit
5 37. Definition of the court which passed a decree – The expression “Court which
passed a decree”, or words to that effect, shall, in relation to the execution of decrees,
unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, be deemed to include-
(a) Where the decree to be executed has been passed in the exercise of appellate
jurisdiction, the Court of first instance, and 
(b) Where the court of first instance has ceased to exist or to have jurisdiction to
execute it, the Court which, if the suit wherein the decree was passed was instituted at the
time of making the application for the execution of the decree, would have jurisdiction to try
such suit. 
6 (1980) 

as the decree of the trial court stands merged with
that of the appellate court which decree is under
execution. It is to be seen that the procedure is the
handmaid   for   justice   and   unless   the   procedure
touches   upon   jurisdictional   issue,   it   should   be
moulded   to   subserve   substantial   justice.
Therefore,   technicalities   would   not   stand   in   the
way to subserve substantive justice. Take a case
where the decree is transferred for execution to a
transferee   executing   court,   then   certainly   the
transferee   court   is   not   the   original   court   and
execution court is not the “same court” within the
meaning of Section 28 of the Act. But when an
application has been made in the court in which
the  original  suit   was  filed   and   the   execution   is
being   proceeded   with,   then   certainly   an
application under Section 28 is maintainable in
the same Court.” 
(Emphasis supplied)
17.
Following the view taken in  Ramankutty Guptan
(Supra),  in  V.S.   Palanichamy   Chettiar   Firm   Vs.   C.
Alagappan and Anr.7 this Court held:
“16.
In view of the decision of this Court in
Ramankutty Guptan
 
  case when the trial court and
the executing court are the same, the executing
court can entertain the application for extension of
time though the application is to be treated as one
filed in the same suit.  On the same analogy, the
vendor judgment­debtor can also seek rescission
of   the   contract   of   sale   or   take   up   this   plea   in
defence   to   bar   the   execution   of   the   decree.
………….”
(Emphasis supplied)
7 (1999) 

18.  Having   regard   to   the   aforesaid   decisions,   in   our
view, the expression “may apply in the same suit in which
the decree is made” as used in Section 28 of the 1963 Act
must be accorded an expansive meaning so as to include
the court of first instance even though the decree under
execution is passed by the appellate court. This is so,
because the decree is in the same suit and, according to
Section 37 of the CPC, the expression “the court which
passed a decree”, or words to that effect, in relation to
the   execution   of   decrees,   unless   there   is   anything
repugnant in the subject or context, would include: 
(a) the court of first instance even though the
decree to be executed has been passed in the
exercise of appellate jurisdiction; and 
(b) where the court of first instance has ceased
to exist, or to have jurisdiction to execute it,
the Court which, if the suit wherein the decree
was   passed   was   instituted   at   the   time   of
making the application for the execution of the
decree,   would   have   jurisdiction   to   try   such
suit. 
Thus, an application under Section 28 of the 1963 Act,
either for recission of contract or for extension of time,
can be entertained and decided by the Execution Court

provided it is the Court which passed the decree in terms
of Section 37 of the CPC. 
19.
In the instant case, the Court of first instance (i.e.,
where   the   civil   suit   was   instituted)   was   the   Court   of
Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division), Kaithal, as would
appear   from   the   decree­sheet   placed   on   record   as
Annexure P­1. The execution application was also filed
before   the   Court   of   Additional   Civil   Judge   (Senior
Division), Kaithal, as would appear from Annexure P­2.
Paragraph No.1 of the impugned order indicates that the
order dated 03.11.2016 by which the application under
Section 28 was disposed of was passed by the Court of
Civil Judge (Senior Division), Kaithal.  Thus, by virtue of
Section 37 of the CPC, the Execution Court being the
Court of first instance with reference to the suit in which
the decree was passed had jurisdiction to deal with the
application   under   Section   28   of   the   1963   Act.     We,
therefore, reject the objection as regards jurisdiction of
the   Execution   Court   to   deal   with   the   application   for
extension   of   time   /   rescission   of   the   contract   under
Section 28 (1) of the 1963 Act. Issue (i) is decided in the
aforesaid terms.

B.
Execution   Court   ought   to   have   decided   the
Application under Section 28 of the 1963 Act as an
application in the Suit
20.
The next question which falls for our consideration
is whether the application under Section 28 of the 1963
Act ought to have been dealt with as an application on
the original side (i.e., as an application in the suit) or on
the execution side (i.e., as an application in the execution
proceedings). This issue is no longer res integra as it has
been answered by this  Court in  Ramankutty Guptan
(Supra) in the following terms:
“9.
The question then emerges is whether
it should be on the original side or execution side.
Section indicates that it should be “in the same
suit”.  It would obviously mean in the suit itself
and not in the execution proceedings. It is equally
settled   law   that   after   passing   the   decree   for
specific performance, the Court does not cease to
have any jurisdiction. The Court retains control
over   the   decree   even   after   the   decree   has   been
passed.  It was open to the Court to exercise the
power  under  Section 28(1) of the Act  either  for
extension of time or for rescinding the contract as
claimed for.  Since the execution application has
been filed in the same court in which the original
suit was filed, namely, the court of first instance,
instead of treating the application on the execution
side, it should have as well been numbered as an
interlocutory application on the original side and
disposed of according to law. In this view, we feel
that the judgment of the Bombay High Court laid
down  the  law   correctly   and   that   of  the  Andhra

Pradesh High Court is not correct. The High Court,
therefore, is not right in dismissing the application
treating   it   to   be   on   execution   side,   instead   of
transferring it on the original side for dealing with
it according to law.”
(Emphasis supplied)
 
21.
The   above   view   was   followed   in 
Sanjay
Shivshankar Chitkote Vs. Bhanudas Dadarao Bokade
(Died)   through   L.Rs.8  wherein,   upon   finding   that  the
applications   under   Section   28   were   dealt   with   on   the
execution   side,   this   Court   set   aside   the   order   of   the
execution court and directed that the applications shall
be transferred to the file of the civil suit so that they
could be numbered as an application in the suit. 
22.
  The law is, therefore, settled that an application
seeking   rescission   of   contract,   or   extension   of   time,
under Section 28 (1) of the 1963 Act, must be decided as
an application in the original suit wherein the decree was
passed even though the suit has been disposed of. As a
sequitur, even if the Execution Court is the Court of first
instance with reference to the suit wherein the decree
under   execution   was   passed,   it   must   transfer   the
application filed under Section 28 to the file of the suit

before dealing with it. Issue (ii) is partly decided in the
aforesaid terms. 
 
C.  Not a Fit Case for Interference Under Article136 of
the Constitution
23.
Now,   the   question   which   survives   for   our
consideration is whether, in the facts of the case, the
order   impugned   is   liable   to   be   interfered   with   only
because the Court which passed the order dealt with the
application on the execution side and not on the original
side (i.e., as an application in the suit).
24.
Before we examine facts relevant to the issue, we
must reiterate that the jurisdiction of this Court under
Article   136   of   the   Constitution   is   a   discretionary
jurisdiction to advance the cause of justice. The Court
does not exercise its jurisdiction under Article 136 only
because it is lawful to do so9.   For the purpose of doing
complete   justice   to   the   parties,   the   Court   may   not
interfere with the order even if it suffers from some legal
error. Not only that, the Court may deny relief to a party
having   regard   to   its   conduct   and   may,   in   a   given
99 See C.K. Prahalada v. State of Karnataka, (2008) 

situation, mould the relief to do complete justice to the
parties10. 
25.
  In  Chanda v. Rattni11, this Court held that the
power to rescind the contract under Section 28 of the
1963 Act is discretionary in nature and is to do complete
justice to the parties. The Court does not cease to have
the power to extend the time even though the decree may
have directed that payment of balance price is to be made
by   a   certain   date.  While   exercising   discretion   in   this
regard, the Court is required to take into account facts of
the   case   so   as   to   ascertain   whether   the   default   was
intentional or not.  If there is a bona fide reason for the
delay/ default, such as where there appears no fault on
the part of the decree holder, the Court may refuse to
rescind the contract and may extend the time for deposit
of the defaulted amount. 
 
26.
We shall now consider whether the impugned order
does substantial justice to the parties. For this end, it
would be apposite to have a close look at the facts of the
case   as   it   would   help   us   in   determining   whether
discretion to extend the time for depositing the balance
1010 See Lajpat Rai Mehta v. Govt. of Punjab (Deptt. of Irrigation & Power), (2009) 
1111 (2007) 

consideration was justifiably exercised in favour of the
decree holder. 
27.
In the instant case, the agreement, of which specific
performance was sought, is of the year 2005.   The suit
for specific performance was filed in the year 2006.  The
trial court partly decreed the suit, inter alia,  for refund of
the   earnest   money   in   the   year   2011.   The   plaintiff(s)
(respondents herein) being aggrieved by rejection of their
prayer for specific performance of the agreement, filed an
appeal   before   the   appellate   court.   The   appellate   court
allowed   the   appeal   on   12.1.2012   and   directed   the
defendants (appellants herein) to execute the sale deed
on payment of balance consideration within two months
from the date of the appellate court order, failing which
the plaintiff(s) were entitled to get the sale deed executed
through Court.   Notably, the mode of payment of the
balance consideration was not specified in the decree and
there was no direction upon the plaintiff(s) to deposit the
balance consideration in Court. Further, the decree did
not spell out consequences of non­payment within the
stipulated period. Rather, right was given to the decree
holder to get the sale deed executed through Court if it
was not executed upon payment within two months. As

the mode of payment was not specified in the decree,
what course the decree holder could have adopted in case
the   judgment­debtor   refused   to   abide   by   the   decree
becomes   a   relevant   consideration   for   the   purposes   of
exercise of discretion in one way or the other.
28.
In the instant case, admittedly, the decree attained
finality upon dismissal of second appeal on 7.11.2013,
and, finally, SLP on 7.11.2016. In between, pursuant to
the  order of  the Execution Court dated 3.11.2016, as
claimed by the respondents in their written submission,
the   balance   sale   consideration   was   deposited   on
13.11.2016.     Before   that,   the   decree­holder(s)   had
promptly filed for execution  of the  decree immediately
after expiry of 60 days from the date of the appellate
court  decree.     Not   only   that,   as   no   specific   mode  for
payment/   deposit   of   the   balance   consideration   was
provided for in the decree, the decree holder(s) sought a
direction from the Court to permit them to deposit the
amount in Court so as to get the decree executed through
its   intervention.   This   application,   however,   remained
pending as challenge to the decree was being considered
by higher courts. In the meantime, as soon as the Second
Appeal  was  dismissed,  the   decree­holder(s)  applied for

fresh  permission  to  deposit the  balance   consideration.
Ultimately,   when   permission   was   granted   by   the
Execution Court, the deposit was made, as noted above.
In   these   circumstances,   the   decree   holder(s)   had   all
throughout displayed their intention to pay the balance
consideration   and   there   appears   no   intentional   or
deliberate fault on their part so as to deprive them of the
fruits of the decree.  
29.
The   contention   of   the   learned   counsel   for   the
appellant(s)   that   there   was   no   proper   prayer   for
condonation of delay in making the deposit of the balance
consideration, or that there was no proper application for
extension   of   time   to   make   deposit,   is   unworthy   of
acceptance. Because, in the execution application itself,
which was promptly filed after expiry of 60 days from the
date of the appellate court decree, the decree holder had
sought permission to make deposit. Not only that, the
application   filed   after   dismissal   of   second   appeal   also
sought permission to make deposit. The prayer to extend
the time to make deposit was therefore implicit in the
prayer to permit the decree holder to make deposit of the
balance   consideration.   In   this   view   of   the   matter,   we
reject the submission of the appellants that as there was

no   proper   application   for   extension   of   time   to   make
deposit,   the   Court   held   no   jurisdiction   to   extend   the
same. 
30.
In   light   of   the   discussion   above   and   on   an
overall assessment of the facts, we are of the considered
view   that   the   respondents   had   all   throughout   shown
their   intention   to   pay   the   balance   consideration   for
execution   of   the   sale   deed   whereas   the   appellants
appeared interested only in challenging the decree before
higher Courts. In these circumstances, taking note of all
the events, the Execution Court justifiably exercised its
discretion in favour of the decree­holder(s) by allowing
them to deposit the balance consideration.  In our view,
therefore, substantial justice has been done to the parties
and if we interfere with the impugned order only on the
technical ground that the application was not dealt with
as   one   on   the   original   side,   grave   injustice   would   be
caused   to   the   decree   holder(s).   More   so,   when   the
judgment­debtor(s) themselves applied to the Execution
Court for rescinding the contract under Section 28(1) of
the  1963  Act,  and  raised no such jurisdictional issue
either   before   the   Execution   Court   or   the   High   Court.
Therefore, in our view, no interference with the impugned

order   is   called   for   in   exercise   of   our   discretionary
jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution.  
31.
  For the reasons above, the appeal is dismissed.
Interim order, if any, stands discharged.   Parties to bear
their own costs.  
32.
 Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.
 
……………………………….. J.
(J. B. PARDIWALA)
……………………………….. J.
(MANOJ MISRA)
          NEW DELHI;
          September 03, 2024. 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

( SLP (C) No.29899 of 2017)
Ishwar (Since deceased) Thr. Lrs & Ors.... Appellants

VERSUS

Bhim Singh & Anr.... Respondents
ORDER

On being Mentioned, the Appeal is taken on Board.

We have been informed that there is some typographical error in paragraph 11 of
the judgment in respect of recording the name of the counsel appearing for the
respective parties.

In view thereof, in place of “We have heard Shri Subhasish Bhowmick for the
appellant(s); Mr. Devendra Singh for the respondents; and have perused the
materials on record.” paragraph 11 shall be read as “We have heard learned
counsel for the parties and have perused the materials on record.”

Paragraph 11 of the Judgment dated September 03, 2024 shall be corrected and
read accordingly.
…...…...…...………………...…..J.
[J B Pardiwala]
 
…...…...…...………………...…..J.
[Manoj Misra]
 
New Delhi; 
September 04, 2024
GKA

ITEM NO.801 COURT NO.10 SECTION IV
 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A
 RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Civil Appeal No(s). 10193/2024
ISHWAR (SINCE DECEASED) THR. LRS & ORS. Appellant(s)
 VERSUS
BHIM SINGH & ANR. Respondent(s)
Date: 04-09-2024 This appeal was called on for hearing today.
CORAM: Justice J.B. PARDIWALA
 Justice MANOJ MISRA
For Appellant(s)
Mr. Subhasish Bhowmick, AOR
 
For Respondent(s) 
Mr. Sanchar Anand, Adv.
Mr. Devendra Singh, AOR
 
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
 ORDER

On being Mentioned, the Appeal is taken on Board.

We have been informed that there is some typographical error in paragraph 11 of
the judgment in respect of recording the name of the counsel appearing for the
respective parties.

In view thereof, in place of “We have heard Shri Subhasish Bhowmick for the
appellant(s); Mr. Devendra Singh for the respondents; and have perused the
materials on record.” paragraph 11 shall be read as “We have heard learned
counsel for the parties and have perused the materials on record.”

Paragraph 11 of the Judgment dated September 03, 2024 shall be corrected and
read accordingly.
 (GULSHAN KUMAR ARORA) (SAROJ KUMARI GAUR)
 AR-CUM-PS
ASSISTANT REGISTRAR

(Signed order is placed on the file)