IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

KERALA AGRICULTURAL 
UNIVERSITY & ANR. 
 
 …PETITIONER(S) 

VERSUS 

T.P. MURALI & ANR. 

JUDGMENT 

 PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
Heard Shri R. Basant, senior counsel for the petitioner 
and Shri Gaurav Agrawal, senior counsel for the 
respondent. 
2. 
Kerala Agricultural University has preferred this Special 
Leave Petition challenging the judgment and order dated 
26.08.2022 passed by the Division Bench of the High 
Court of Kerala in, T.P. Murali 
vs. Kerala Agricultural University. The Division Bench 

after setting aside the judgment dated 21.12.2021 passed 
in, quashed the order 
dated 30.07.2021 passed by the Vice Chancellor of the 
university terminating the services of the respondent T.P. 
Murali. 
3. 
The Division Bench in allowing the writ appeal, though 
quashed the termination order passed against the 
respondent but refused to direct for his reinstatement as 
he had attained the age of superannuation during the 
pendency of litigation. Thus, it only directed the university 
to decide and disburse the pensionary benefits to the 
respondent to which he may be entitled as per the relevant 
statues and rules. 
4. 
The respondent T.P. Murali had joined the Kerala 
Agricultural 
University 
as 
Assistant 
Professor 
on 
24.03.1988. After having worked for about 11 years, he 
took a long Leave Without Allowance1 of 20 years from 
05.09.1999 to 04.09.2019 in four blocks of five years each 
to 
take 
up 
employment 
in 
Community 
College, 
Pennsylvania, USA. 
 
1 In short ‘LWA’ 

5. 
The respondent failed to resume his duties on the expiry 
of the LWA on 04.09.2019 as he was in USA at that time 
and was allegedly suffering from serious ailments. It is 
alleged that he had expressed his intention to rejoin duty 
via e-mail but still did not rejoin, allegedly for reasons of 
his health and, thereafter, due to intervening COVID-19. 
He could only return to India by the first Vande Bharat 
flight in July, 2020 and requested for rejoining but was not 
allowed, rather he was handed over the Memo of Charge 
dated 15.07.2020 stating that he had remained on 
unauthorized absence w.e.f. 05.09.2019 and has thus 
committed statutory violation leading to misconduct. A 
formal departmental inquiry was initiated after the reply of 
the respondent to the show cause notice/charge memo 
was not found to be satisfactory. The Inquiry Committee of 
three 
members 
vide 
Exh.P17 
concluded 
that 
the 
respondent violated the LWA conditions by not joining the 
duty before the completion of 20 years period of LWA. Upon 
consideration of the above Inquiry Report, the Vice 
Chancellor vide order dated 30.07.2021 and in exercise of 
its delegated power as per the resolution of the Executive 

Council 
dated 
23.01.2021 
allegedly 
following 
the 
procedure prescribed under the rules, terminated the 
services of the respondent w.e.f. 05.09.2019. 
6. 
The respondent challenged the aforesaid termination order 
by invoking the writ jurisdiction of the High Court but the 
said writ petition was dismissed vide judgment and order 
dated 21.12.2021. The learned Single Judge recorded that 
the respondent violated the statutory rules by not 
resuming his duties immediately upon the expiry of leave 
period. His explanation regarding his illness and 
intervening COVID-19 was not acceptable, therefore his 
overstay on leave was not liable to be condoned. The 
respondent failed to place on record if he had drawn salary 
for the period of overstay of leave from his employer in 
USA. 
7. 
The aforesaid judgment and order of the learned Single 
Judge on writ appeal by the respondent has been set aside 
by the Division Bench on the ground that the university 
has not followed the procedure prescribed under the rules 
for holding the disciplinary inquiry and that the 

respondent was genuinely and bona fidely forbidden from 
resuming his duties in time. 
8. 
We have carefully examined the impugned judgment and 
order of the Division Bench as well as the other material 
papers. On the admitted position, respondent had 
proceeded on a long leave of 20 years from 05.09.1999 to 
04.09.2019 and had not resumed his duties immediately 
on the expiry of the above leave period. The aforesaid leave 
period was not liable to be extended in any manner under 
the rules. In a situation like this, the rules provide for the 
termination of the services of the employee after following 
the procedure prescribed under the rules. 
9. 
The relevant service rules are the Kerala Civil Services 
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960 and the 
Kerala Service Rules and its appendix which permits a 
maximum of 20 years of LWA vide Rule 24A read with 
Clause 6 of Appendix XIIA concerning grant of LWA. The 
aforesaid Rules further provide that immediately on the 
expiry of the leave, if the incumbent fails to join, his 
services shall be terminated after following the procedure 

laid down in the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, 
Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960. 
10. Rule 15 of the said rules provides for the procedure for 
imposition of major penalties including termination. It 
inter 
alia 
provides 
that 
before 
holding 
a 
departmental/regular disciplinary inquiry, the delinquent 
would be given a show cause notice as to why a 
departmental inquiry may not be held against him on the 
charges levelled and it is only after recording of the prima 
facie satisfaction that a departmental inquiry is necessary, 
the matter could be referred for holding a regular 
disciplinary inquiry. 
11. Rule 24A and Clause 6 of Appendix XIIA of Kerala Service 
Rules and Rule 15 of the Kerala Civil Services 
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960 are 
reproduced hereinbelow: 
“24A. Notwithstanding anything contained in 
these rules, if an Officer who availed himself 
of leave without allowances to take up 
employment abroad or within the country or 
for joining spouse for a total period of twenty 
years, whether continuously or in broken 
periods, does not return to duty immediately 
on the expiry of the leave, his service shall be 
terminated after following the procedure laid 
down 
in 
the 
Kerala 
Civil 
Services 

(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 
1960.” 

xxx xxx xxx 

“Appendix XIIA- RULES FOR THE GRANT OF 
LEAVE WITHOUT ALLOWANCES FOR TAKING UP 
EMPLOYMENT ABROAD OR WITHIN INDIA 
 
The following rules shall regulate the grant of leave 
without allowances to officers for 
taking up 
employment abroad or within India. These rules shall 
not apply in cases of employment in the service of any 
Public Sector Undertaking, Aided Schools and Private 
Colleges or self financing Colleges within the State or 
anybody incorporated or not, which is wholly or 
substantially owned, controlled or aided by any State 
Government or the Government of India. 
 
1. … 
2. … 
3. … 
4. … 
5. … 
6. The maximum period of leave that may be sanctioned 
to an officer during his entire service shall be limited to 
20 years and such leave shall not extent beyond twelve 
months before their date of superannuation. If the officer 
who has availed himself of the leave without allowances 
for a total period of 20 years whether continuously or in 
broken periods, does not return to duty immediately on 
the expiry of the leave, his service shall be terminated 
after following the procedure in Kerala Civil Services 
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960. This 
condition shall be incorporated in every order 
sanctioning such leave.” 

xxx xxx xxx 

“Rule 15 of the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, 
Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960 
 
15. Procedure for imposing major penalties.- 
(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Public 
Servants' (Inquiry) Act, 1850 (Central Act XXXVII of 
1850), and the Public Servants' (Inquires) Act, 1122 
(Act XI of 1122), no order imposing on a Government 
servant any of the penalties specified in items (v) to (ix) 
of rule 11 (1) shall be passed except after an inquiry held 
as far as may be, in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(2) (a) Whenever a complaint is received, or on 
consideration of the report of an investigation, or for 
other reasons, the disciplinary authority or the 
appointing authority or any other authority empowered 
by Government in this behalf is satisfied that there is a 
prima facie case for taking action against a Government 
Servant, such authority shall frame definite charge or 
charges which shall be communicated to the 
Government servant together with a statement of the 
allegations on which each charge is based and of any 
other circumstances which it is proposed to take into 
consideration in passing orders on the case. The accused 
Government Servant shall be required to submit within 
a reasonable time to be specified in that behalf a written 
statement of his defence and also to state whether he 
desires to be heard in person. The Government servant 
may on his request be permitted to peruse or take 
extracts from the records pertaining to the case for the 
purpose of preparing his written statement; provided 
that the disciplinary or other authority referred to above 
may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse him 
such access, if in its opinion such records are not strictly 
relevant to the case or it is not desirable in the public 
interest to allow such access. After the written statement 
is received or if no such statement is received within the 
time allowed, the authority referred to above may, if it 
is satisfied that a formal enquiry should be held into the 
conduct of the Government servant, forward the record 
of the case to the authority or officer referred to in clause 
(b) and order that a formal enquiry may be conducted.” 

12. A plain reading of Rule 15(2)(a) of the Kerala Civil Services 
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960, which is 
applicable for imposing major penalties specifically lays 
down that the disciplinary authority or the appointing 
authority 
or 
any 
other 
authority, 
empowered 
by 
Government in this behalf before holding a regular 
disciplinary inquiry, must record its satisfaction that there 
is a prima facie case for taking action against the 
delinquent employee so as to hold a formal inquiry against 
him. In other words, the aforesaid rule in explicit terms 
provides for recording a prima facie satisfaction for holding 
a disciplinary inquiry against any delinquent employee. 
13. In the instant case, no material at any stage has been 
brought on record to establish that any such satisfaction 
was recorded before appointing an inquiry committee and 
passing of the order of termination by the Vice Chancellor 
on the basis of the inquiry report. It is for this reason that 
the Division Bench has allowed the writ petition after 
setting aside the order of the learned Single Judge. We do 
not find any flaw with the reasoning adopted by the 

Division Bench and as such do not deem it necessary to 
interfere with the judgment and order impugned herein. 
14. It is a cardinal principle of law that if a statute provides for 
doing a thing in a particular manner than it should be 
done in that fashion only and not otherwise. Therefore, 
recording of satisfaction before holding a departmental 
inquiry was mandatory. 
15. It may be pertinent to mention here that the respondent 
had expressed his intention to resume his duties on the 
expiry of the leave period, which he could not do on 
account of unprecedented circumstances of his bad health 
and restriction on travel due to COVID-19. The bona fides 
of the respondent in this regard stand fortified by his 
e-mails and the medical papers on record. 
16. In the above facts and circumstances, we do not find any 
merit in the petition and do not deem it necessary to 
exercise our discretionary jurisdiction under Article 136 of 
the Constitution. 

17. The Special Leave Petition is accordingly dismissed with 
observations as above....………………………….. J. 
(PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)...……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
SEPTEMBER 04, 2024