Criminal Appeal(Crl.) No(s). 16641 of 2023 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 

 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

 ( SLP(Crl.) No(s). 16641 of 2023) 

AJITSINH CHEHUJI RATHOD 
 
 ….APPELLANT(S) 

 VERSUS 

STATE OF GUJARAT & ANR....RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The instant appeal by special leave filed at the behest of the 
appellant accused calls into question the order dated 25th October, 
2023 passed by the High Court of Gujarat rejecting the Criminal 
Misc. Application No. 17933 of 2023 preferred by the appellant 
under Section 482 read with Section 391 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973(hereinafter being referred to as ‘CrPC’). 
3. 
The appellant was prosecuted for the offence punishable 
under 
Section 

of 
the 
Negotiable 
Instruments 
Act, 
1881(hereinafter being referred to as ‘NI Act’) before the learned 

Criminal Appeal(Crl.) No(s). 16641 of 2023 

trial Court with an allegation that the cheque to the tune of Rs. 10 
lakhs issued by the appellant in favour of the complainant Shri 
Mahadevsinh Cahndaasinh Champavat upon being presented in 
the bank was dishonoured “for insufficient funds and account 
dormant”. 
4. 
During the course of trial, the appellant preferred an 
application dated 13th June, 2019 before learned trial Court with 
a prayer to send the cheque to the handwriting expert for 
comparison of the handwriting as well as signature appearing 
thereon with a plea that his signatures had been forged on the 
cheque in question. The learned trial Court rejected the 
application vide order dated 13th June, 2019 itself observing that 
the application was aimed at delaying the trial. The learned trial 
Court further observed that the matter was at the stage of defence 
and the accused could lead evidence to prove his claim pertaining 
to mismatch of signatures. 
5. 
The order dated 13th June, 2019 passed by learned trial Court 
was not challenged any further and thus the same attained 
finality. The trial Court, proceeded to convict the accused 
appellant vide judgment dated 7th November, 2019. 

Criminal Appeal(Crl.) No(s). 16641 of 2023 

6. 
The appellant preferred an appeal before the Principal 
Sessions Judge, Gandhinagar and during pendency thereof, he 
filed an application under Section 391 CrPC for taking additional 
evidence at appellate stage and seeking a direction to obtain the 
opinion of the handwriting expert after comparing the admitted 
signature of the accused appellant and the signature as appearing 
on the disputed cheque. Another prayer made in the said 
application was that the concerned officer from the Post Office 
should be summoned so as to prove the defence theory that the 
notice under Section 138 of NI Act was never received by the 
accused appellant. 
7. 
Such application preferred by the appellant was rejected by 
the learned Principal Sessions Judge, Gandhinagar vide detailed 
order dated 25th July, 2023, which was carried by the appellant to 
the High Court by filing the captioned Criminal Misc. Application 
No. 17933/2023 which came to be dismissed by order dated 25th 
October, 2023 which is under challenge in this appeal. 
8. 
We have considered the submissions advanced by learned 
counsel for the appellant and have gone through the impugned 
order and the material placed on record. 

Criminal Appeal(Crl.) No(s). 16641 of 2023 

9. 
At the outset, we may note that the law is well-settled by a 
catena of judgments rendered by this Court that power to record 
additional evidence under Section 391 CrPC should only be 
exercised when the party making such request was prevented from 
presenting the evidence in the trial despite due diligence being 
exercised or that the facts giving rise to such prayer came to light 
at a later stage during pendency of the appeal and that non-
recording of such evidence may lead to failure of justice. 
10. It is apposite to mention that the learned first appellate 
Court, i.e., the Principal Sessions Judge, Gandhinagar had taken 
note of the fact that during the trial, the appellant examined the 
witness of the Bank of Baroda in support of his defence but not a 
single question was put to the said witness regarding genuineness 
or otherwise of the signatures as appearing on the cheque in 
question. 
11. Furthermore, as per the cheque return memo of the Bank 
dated 26th February, 2018, the reason for the cheque being 
returned unpaid is clearly recorded as “funds insufficient and 
account dormant”. 
12. There is a specific column no. 10 in the said written memo 
which reads as follows:- 

Criminal Appeal(Crl.) No(s). 16641 of 2023 

“Bank of Baroda 

(HEAD OFFICE MANDVI, BARODA) 
 26.02.2018 
Cheque No. 503273 for Rs. 10,00,000/- returned unpaid for 
reason No. 22 3093010008596 
1-9 …. 

Drawer’s signature differs from specimen recorded with 
us. 
11-22….” 

Manifestly, the cheque was not returned unpaid for the 
reason that the signature thereupon differed from the specimen 
signature recorded with the bank. 
13. Section 118 of the NI Act has a bearing upon the controversy 
and is thus, reproduced hereinbelow:- 
“118. Presumptions as to negotiable instruments.—Until the 
contrary is proved, the following presumptions shall be made: 
(a) of consideration: that every negotiable instrument 
was made or drawn for consideration, and that every 
such instrument, when it has been accepted, indorsed, 
negotiated or transferred, was accepted, indorsed, 
negotiated or transferred for consideration; 
(b) as to date: that every negotiable instrument bearing 
a date was made or drawn on such date; 
(c) as to time of acceptance: that every accepted bill of 
exchange was accepted within a reasonable time after 
its date and before its maturity; 
(d) as to time of transfer: that every transfer of a 
negotiable instrument was made before its maturity; 
(e) as to order of indorsements: that the indorsements 
appearing upon a negotiable instrument were made in 
the order in which they appear thereon; 
(f) as to stamps: that a lost promissory note, bill of 
exchange or cheque was duly stamped; 

Criminal Appeal(Crl.) No(s). 16641 of 2023 

(g) that holder is a holder in due course: that the 
holder of a negotiable instrument is a holder in due 
course: 
Provided that, where the instrument has been obtained from its 
lawful owner, or from any person in lawful custody thereof, by 
means of an offence or fraud, or has been obtained from the maker 
or acceptor thereof by means of an offence or fraud or for unlawful 
consideration, the burden of proving that the holder is a holder in 
due course lies upon him.” 
 
14. Section 118 sub-clause (e) of the NI Act provides a clear 
presumption regarding indorsements made on the negotiable 
instrument being in order in which they appear thereupon. Thus, 
the presumption of the indorsements on the cheque being genuine 
operates in favour of the holder in due course of the cheque in 
question which would be the complainant herein. In case, the 
accused intends to rebut such presumption, he would be required 
to lead evidence to this effect. 
15. Certified copy of a document issued by a Bank is itself 
admissible under the Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891 without 
any formal proof thereof. Hence, in an appropriate case, the 
certified copy of the specimen signature maintained by the Bank 
can be procured with a request to the Court to compare the same 
with the signature appearing on the cheque by exercising powers 
under Section 73 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 

Criminal Appeal(Crl.) No(s). 16641 of 2023 

16. Thus, we are of the view that if at all, the appellant was 
desirous of proving that the signatures as appearing on the cheque 
issued from his account were not genuine, then he could have 
procured a certified copy of his specimen signatures from the Bank 
and a request could have been made to summon the concerned 
Bank official in defence for giving evidence regarding the 
genuineness or otherwise of the signature on the cheque. 
17. However, despite having opportunity, the accused appellant 
did not put any question to the bank official examined in defence 
for establishing his plea of purported mismatch of signature on the 
cheque in question and hence, we are of the firm opinion that the 
appellate Court was not required to come to the aid and assistance 
of the appellant for collecting defence evidence at his behest. The 
presumptions under the NI Act albeit rebuttable operate in favour 
of the complainant. Hence, it is for the accused to rebut such 
presumptions by leading appropriate defence evidence and the 
Court cannot be expected to assist the accused to collect evidence 
on his behalf. 
18. The appellant had sought for comparison of the signature as 
appearing on the cheque through the handwriting expert by filing 
an application before the trial Court which rejected the same vide 

Criminal Appeal(Crl.) No(s). 16641 of 2023 

order dated 13th June, 2019. The said order was never challenged 
and had thus attained finality. 
19. So far as the allegation of the accused appellant that he did 
not receive the notice under Section 138 of the NI Act is concerned, 
it would be for the appellate Court while deciding the appeal to 
examine such issue based on the evidence available on record and 
thus, there was no requirement for the appellate Court to have 
exercised power under Section 391 CrPC for summoning the 
official from the Post Office and had rightly rejected the application 
under Section 391 CrPC. 
20. As an upshot of the above discussion, we find no infirmity in 
the impugned orders warranting interference. The appeal lacks 
merit and is dismissed as such. 
21. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………..………………………………J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

……….……………………………….J. 

(SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
January 29, 2024.