IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL No(s). 2221-2222 OF 2023 

ABHISHEK BANERJEE & ANR. 

 VERSUS 
 
DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT 

JUDGMENT 
 
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J. 
1. Both these Appeals are the Common Impugned Order 
dated 11.03.2022 passed by the High Court of Delhi in W.P (Crl.) No. 
1808 of 2021 and Crl. M.C. No. 2442 of 2021, filed by the Appellants 
(Original Petitioners), whereby the High Court has dismissed the same. 
2. The was filed by the Appellants - 
Abhishek Banerjee and Rujira Banerjee seeking quashing of the 
Summons dated 10.09.2021 issued to them by the Respondent – ED 
under Section 50 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 
(hereinafter referred to as the “PMLA”), and seeking further direction 

against the Respondent not to issue any Summons under Section 50 of 
the said Act to the Appellants for their appearance in New Delhi, rather 
than their hometown/ place of domicile i.e. Kolkata. The Crl. M.C. No. 
2442 of 2021 was filed by the Appellant - Rujira Banerjee seeking 
quashing of the Complaint dated 13.09.2021 filed by the respondent-ED 
against her for the offence under Section 174 of India Penal Code (IPC), 
and for quashing the Order dated 18.09.2021 passed by the Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate (CMM), Patiala House, New Delhi taking 
cognizance of the complaint, as also the Order dated 30.09.2021 
summoning her, passed by the said Court. 
3. The facts in the nutshell are that an FIR/R.C. bearing No. 
RC0102020A0022 came to be registered by the CBI, ACB, Kolkata on 
27.11.2020 for the offences under Section 120B and 409 of IPC and 
Section 13(2) r/w 13(1)(a) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 
(hereinafter referred to as the “PC Act”), in respect of alleged illegal 
excavation and theft of Coal taking place in the leasehold areas of 
Eastern Coalfields Limited (ECL) by one Anup Majee alias Lala with the 
active connivance of certain employees of ECL. Based on the said FIR, 
on 28.11.2020, an ECIR bearing No. 17/HIU/2020 came to be registered 
by the Respondent at their Head Investigative Unit situated at New 
Delhi. 

4. During the course of investigation of the FIR in respect of theft of Coal 
and illegal excavation being done by the criminal elements in the 
leasehold area of ECL, a large number of vehicles/ equipments used in 
the illegal coal mining and its transportation were seized. It was also 
found that the said case involved money laundering to the tune of Rs. 
1300 Crores. According to the Respondent – ED one of the accused 
Vikas Mishra was arrested on 16.03.2021 and another accused 
Inspector Ashok Mishra of Bankura Police Station was arrested on 
03.04.2021, who had become part of illegal Coal mafia and had helped 
in laundering several hundred crores of rupees. It was also found during 
the course of investigation that Inspector Ashok Kumar Mishra had 
allegedly received Rs.168 crores in just 109 days from the co-accused 
Anup Majee, to be delivered to his political bosses including co-accused 
Vinay Mishra. The said Rs.168 crores were allegedly transferred 
through vouchers to Delhi and Overseas. 
5. On 22.07.2021, the Respondent issued Summons to the Appellant No.1 
under Section 50 of PMLA seeking his personal appearance on 
03.08.2021 in New Delhi with the documents sought for. Again on 
04.08.2021, another Summons were issued to the Appellant No.1 
seeking the same documents as sought in Summons dated 22.07.2021 
for remaining present on 12.08.2021 in New Delhi. The Appellant No.2 

was also issued Summons on 04.08.2021 under Section 50 of PMLA for 
her personal appearance in New Delhi on 13.08.2021 along with the 
documents/records stated in the said Summons. Both the Appellants did 
not remain present as directed and furnished their respective replies on 
12.08.2021 seeking time to comply with the said Summons. The 
Respondent again issued Summons on 18.08.2021 requiring the 
Appellant No.1 to remain present in New Delhi on 06.09.2021 and 
Appellant No.2 to remain present in New Delhi on 01.09.2021. The 
Appellant No.2 replied to the Summons dated 18.08.2021 requesting 
the Respondent to examine her at Kolkata as there was a functional 
office of the Respondent in Kolkata and the alleged cause of action had 
arisen in West Bengal. The Appellant No.1 in due compliance to the 
Summons dated 18.08.2021 appeared before the Respondent – ED on 
06.09.2021 at New Delhi, however he was again issued Summons on 
the same day seeking his personal appearance along with the 
documents in New Delhi on 08.09.2021. The Appellant No.1 did not 
appear before the respondent however, submitted a reply on 
08.09.2021 requesting for four weeks’ time to collect and collate the 
documents sought. The Appellant No.1 was further served with another 
Summons dated 10.09.2021 seeking his appearance in New Delhi on 
21.09.2021. The said summons came to be challenged by the 
appellants by filing the W.P. (Crl.) No.1808/2021 before the High Court. 

6. On 13.09.2021, the Respondent filed a Complaint against the Appellant 
No.2 in the Court of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Patiala House, New 
Delhi under Section 190 (1)(a) r/w Section 200 Cr.P.C. r/w Section 63(4) 
PMLA, alleging the commission of the offence under Section 174 of IPC 
for non-compliance of the Summons dated 04.08.2021 and 18.08.2021. 
The said Court vide the Order dated 18.09.2021 took cognizance of the 
impugned offence and issued Summons to the Appellant No.2 for her 
personal appearance on 30.09.2021. The Appellant No.2 on 30.09.2021 
appeared virtually and sought exemption from personal appearance. 
The Learned CMM passed an Order allowing the exemption application 
for that day only, and directed the Appellant No.2 to remain personally 
present before the Court on 12.10.2021. The said complaint filed by the 
respondent and the said orders passed by the CMM Court came to be 
challenged by the Appellant Rujira by filing the Crl. M.C No. 2442 of 
2021 before the High Court. 
7. As stated earlier, both the W.P. (Crl.) No.1808/2021 and Crl. M.C. 
No.2442/2021 came to be dismissed by the High Court vide the 
impugned order. 
8. The Learned Senior Counsel Mr. Kapil Sibal, appearing for the Appellant 
No.1 – Abhishek Banerjee made lengthy submissions, the crux of which 
may be stated as under: - 

i. 
Section 50 of the PMLA merely indicates the substantive power of 
ED to summon but does not provide the procedure for exercise of 
such power. ii. 
The procedure relating to territoriality of investigation, or power to 
summon sick, or infirm/ women/ children and record their 
statements has not been provided under Section 50 PMLA, as it is 
provided under Section 160 and 161 Cr.P.C. iii. Power without guidance for manner in which it is to be exercised 
could not be said to be fair, just and reasonable procedure 
established by law under Article 21 of the Constitution. iv. A combined reading of Section 4(2) Cr.P.C. and Section 65 PMLA 
would show that the application of the Code is not barred as long 
as the provisions of the Code are consistent with the PMLA. v. 
 The Judgment of this Court in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary and 
Others vs. Union of India and Others1 has not dealt with the issue 
of procedure for summoning under Section 50 of the PMLA. vi. The Cr.P.C. provides that the existence of the territorial nexus to the 
commission of a crime is a jurisdictional threshold for the exercise 
of powers of investigation by a police officer. However, the 
Respondent – ED has not demonstrated as to how it could be 
 
1 (2022) SCC OnLine SC 929 

prejudiced by calling the Appellant No.1 to its office in Kolkata 
where the ED has the Zonal Office. vii. The Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance has issued 
administrative instructions consistent with Section 51 of PMLA that 
demarcate the specific territorial jurisdiction of various Zonal 
Offices of the ED. The said instructions must be strictly complied 
with by the ED in consonance with Article 21 of the Constitution of 
India. viii. The Appellant No.1 is a permanent resident of Kolkata and being 
Member of Parliament has a residence in Delhi, which however 
does not alter his permanent residence at Kolkata. ix. Section 91 of Cr.P.C. only deals with summons for production of 
documents, whereas the summons issued to the Appellant No.1 
under PMLA are for personal appearance before the Respondent 
at New Delhi is nothing but an abuse of process of law. 
9. In addition to the above submissions, Learned Senior Counsel Mr. 
Abhishek Manu Singhvi along with Learned Senior Counsel Mr. Gopal 
Sankaranarayanan appearing for the Appellant No.2 broadly made 
following submissions: - 
i. 
The Appellant No.2 has been summoned to appear in New Delhi 
despite she being a home maker and a mother of two children. The 
ED has created Zonal Offices and has an office at Kolkata. 

Therefore, summoning the Appellant No.2 in Delhi is illegal and 
reeks mala fide. ii. 
The Appellant No.2 is neither an accused in the predicate offence 
nor in the money laundering offence. iii. Protection of woman provided under Section 160 of Cr.P.C would 
be applicable to the PMLA also. iv. Section 65 of PMLA makes provisions of Cr.P.C. applicable in so 
far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of PMLA with 
regard to arrest, search and seizure, attachment, confiscation, 
investigation, prosecution and all other proceedings under the said 
Act. Therefore, in the absence of any specific procedure for 
summoning of witnesses the Cr.P.C. will apply. v. 
Article 21 of the Constitution provides that a person’s life and liberty 
can be curtailed by State only in accordance with the procedure 
established by law, and therefore the procedure for Summons 
curtailing the right of the Appellant No.2 to life and liberty must be 
just and reasonable. 
10. The Learned Senior Counsel, Mr. S.V. Raju also made elaborate 
submissions on behalf of the Respondent – ED which may be 
summarized as under: - 
i. 
Section 91 Cr.P.C. neither encompasses any territorial jurisdictional 
limit nor does it contain any proviso for women, minors or elderly 

akin to Section 160 Cr.P.C. A police officer has to resort to Section 
91 Cr.P.C. to mandate the provision of any document. Hence, 
Section 91 Cr.P.C. cannot be equated with the powers under 
Section 50 of PMLA. ii. 
Section 160 Cr.P.C. applies to a Police Officer who is making an 
investigation under Chapter XII of Cr.P.C., whereas the process 
envisaged by Section 50 of PMLA is in the nature of an inquiry and 
is not an Investigation in the strict sense of the term as held in case 
of Vijay Madanlal (supra). iii. ED has the power to summon any person whose attendance is 
considered necessary whether to give evidence or to produce any 
record as contemplated in Section 50 of the PMLA. A statement 
made under Section 50 is admissible in evidence, whereas the 
statement made under Section 161 is inadmissible as provided 
under Section 162 Cr.P.C. iv. There are stark inconsistencies between Section 50 PMLA and 
Section 160 Cr.P.C., and therefore Section 160 Cr.P.C would not 
apply to the proceedings under Section 50 of PMLA. v. 
The procedure to exercise power under Section 50 PMLA is laid 
down in the Rules called the Prevention of Money Laundering 
(Forms, Search and Seizure or Freezing and the Manner of 
Forwarding the Reasons and Material to the Adjudicating Authority, 

Impounding and Custody of Records and the Period of Retention) 
Rules, 2005. vi. The Appellant No.1 had attempted to mislead the Court by 
suppressing the fact that he had residence in New Delhi also. vii. The statement made under Section 50 of PMLA would not infringe 
any fundamental right of the person contained in Article 20(3) 
inasmuch as the person making the statement is not an accused at 
the time when the statement under Section 50 is recorded. viii. As regards territorial jurisdiction, it is submitted in the alternative 
that as per the case of ED, the proceeds of crime to the tune of 
Rs.168 Crores were transferred through vouchers to Delhi and 
Overseas, and therefore, there was adequate nexus with the 
territory of Delhi with the alleged offence. Even a prosecution 
complaint could have been filed in Delhi, which would be consistent 
with the law laid down by this Court in Rana Ayyub vs. Directorate 
of Enforcement2. ix. The Regional Offices created in the Directorate of Enforcement are 
for administrative convenience and do not in any manner limit the 
 
2 (2023) 

scope of enquiry of those concerned offices or officers, if the 
offence of money laundering spreads over multiple States. x. 
Section 5 r/w Section 4 (2) of Cr.P.C. itself contemplates that 
nothing contained in the Code of 1973 would apply or affect any 
special law in force regulating the manner of place of investigation, 
inquiring into or dealing with such special offences. xi. There was no illegality in summoning the Appellant No.2 to New 
Delhi, as according to the ED the proceeds of crime had travel to 
New Delhi, which would be the area in which part of the offence has 
been allegedly committed. xii. Section 50 of PMLA is gender neutral as it does not make any 
distinction between a man and a woman. The Court cannot carve 
out an exception in favour of women in Section 50, when there is 
none. Whenever the legislature felt the need to carve out an 
exception in favour of women, it has done so as evident from the 
proviso to Section 45 of PMLA. Therefore, there cannot be any 
presumption that a casus omissus exists in Section 50. 
11. For the sake of convenience, let us refer to some of the provisions of 
Cr.P.C and PMLA, relevant for the purpose of deciding these Appeals, 
as also relied upon by the learned counsels for the parties. 

Relevant Provisions of Cr.P.C.: 
4. Trial of offences under the Indian Penal Code and other 
laws. — 
(1) All offences under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall 
be investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with 
according to the provisions hereinafter contained. 
 (2) All offences under any other law shall be investigated, 
inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with according to the 
same provisions, but subject to any enactment for the time being 
in force regulating the manner or place of investigating, inquiring 
into, trying or otherwise dealing with such offences. 
5. Saving. —Nothing contained in this Code shall, in the absence 
of a specific provision to the contrary, affect any special or local 
law for the time being in force, or any special jurisdiction or power 
conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by any 
other law for the time being in force. 
91. Summons to produce document or other thing. — 
(1) Whenever any Court or any officer in charge of a police station 
considers that the production of any document or other thing is 
necessary or desirable for the purposes of any investigation, 
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code by or before 
such Court or officer, such Court may issue a summons, or such 
officer a written order, to the person in whose possession or 
power such document or thing is believed to be, requiring him to 
attend and produce it, or to produce it, at the time and place 
stated in the summons or order. 
(2) Any person required under this section merely to produce a 
document or other thing shall be deemed to have complied with 
the requisition if he causes such document or thing to be 
produced instead of attending personally to produce the same. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed— 
(a) to affect sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872 (1 of 1872), or the Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891 (13 
of 1891), or 
(b) to apply to a letter, postcard, telegram or other document or 
any parcel or thing in the custody of the postal or telegraph 
authority. 

160. Police officer’s power to require attendance of 
witnesses. — 
(1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter 
may, by order in writing, require the attendance before himself of 
any person being within the limits of his own or any adjoining 
station who, from the information given or otherwise, appears to 
be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case; and 
such person shall attend as so required: 
Provided that no male person [under the age of fifteen years or 
above the age of sixty-five years or a woman or a mentally or 
physically disabled person] shall be required to attend at any 
place other than the place in which such male person or woman 
resides. 
(2) The State Government may, by rules made in this behalf, 
provide for the payment by the police officer of the reasonable 
expenses of every person, attending under sub-section (1) at any 
place other than his residence.” 
 
Relevant Provisions of PMLA: 
50. Powers of authorities regarding summons, production of 
documents and to give evidence, etc.— (1) The Director shall, 
for the purposes of section 13, have the same powers as are 
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 
of 1908) while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, 
namely: — 
(a) discovery and inspection; 
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any officer 
of a banking company or a financial institution or a company, and 
examining him on oath; 
(c) compelling the production of records; 
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(e) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses and 
documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(2) The Director, Additional Director, Joint Director, Deputy 
Director or Assistant Director shall have power to summon any 
person whose attendance he considers necessary whether to 
give evidence or to produce any records during the course of any 
investigation or proceeding under this Act. 

(3) All the persons so summoned shall be bound to attend in 
person or through authorised agents, as such officer may direct, 
and shall be bound to state the truth upon any subject respecting 
which they are examined or make statements, and produce such 
documents as may be required. 
(4) Every proceeding under sub-sections (2) and (3) shall be 
deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 
193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
(5) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the Central 
Government, any officer referred to in sub-section (2) may 
impound and retain in his custody for such period, as he thinks 
fit, any records produced before him in any proceedings under 
this Act: Provided that an Assistant Director or a Deputy Director 
shall not— 
(a) impound any records without recording his reasons for so 
doing; or 
(b) retain in his custody any such records for a period exceeding 
three months, without obtaining the previous approval of the 
Director. 
51. Jurisdiction of Authorities. — 
(1) The authorities shall exercise all or any of the powers and 
perform all or any of the functions conferred on, or, assigned, as 
the case may be, to such authorities by or under this Act or the 
rules framed thereunder in accordance with such directions as 
the Central Government may issue for the exercise of powers 
and performance of the functions by all or any of the authorities. 
(2) In issuing the directions or orders referred to in sub-section 
(1), the Central Government may have regard to any one or more 
of the following criteria, namely: — 
(a) territorial area; 
(b) classes of persons; 
(c) classes of cases; and 
(d) any other criterion specified by the Central Government in this 
behalf 
63. Punishment for false information or failure to give 
information, etc.— 
(I) Any person wilfully and maliciously giving false information 
and so causing an arrest or a search to be made under this Act 
shall on conviction be liable for imprisonment for a term which 

may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees or both. 
(2) If any person,— 
(a) being legally bound to state the truth of any matter relating to 
an offence under section 3, refuses to answer any question put 
to him by an authority in the exercise of its powers under this Act; 
or 
(b) refuses to sign any statement made by him in the course of 
any proceedings under this Act, which an authority may legally 
require to sign; or 
(c) to whom a summon is issued under section 50 either to attend 
to give evidence or produce books of account or other documents 
at a certain place and time, omits to attend or produce books of 
account or documents at the place or time, 
 he shall pay, by way of penalty, a sum which shall not be less 
than five hundred rupees but which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees for each such default or failure. 
(3) No order under this section shall be passed by an authority 
referred to in sub-section (2) unless the person on whom the 
penalty is proposed to be imposed is given an opportunity of 
being heard in the matter by such authority. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (c) of sub-
section (2), a person who intentionally disobeys any direction 
issued under section 50 shall also be liable to be proceeded 
against under section 174 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
65. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to apply. —The 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) 
shall apply, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, to arrest, search and seizure, attachment, 
confiscation investigation, prosecution and all other proceedings 
under this Act. 
71. Act to have overriding effect. —The provisions of this Act 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained in any other law for the time being in force. 
 
12. In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-Section (1) read with clause 
(a), clause (m), clause (n), clause (o), clause (pp) and clause (w) of sub-
section (2) of Section 73 of the PMLA, 2002, the Central Government 

has also framed the Rules called “the Prevention of Money-Laundering 
(Forms, Search and Seizure or Freezing and the Manner of Forwarding 
the Reasons and Material to the Adjudicating Authority, Impounding and 
Custody of Records and the Period of Retention) Rules, 2005”. As per 
Rule 11 of the said Rules, the Summoning Officer, while exercising the 
powers under sub-section (2) and (3) of Section 50 of the PMLA, has to 
issue Summons in Form V, appended to the said Rules. Rule 11 of the 
said Rules reads as under: - 
“Rule 11: - Forms of records. - The Summoning Officer shall, 
while exercising powers under sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 
50 of the Act, issue summons in Form V appended to these 
rules.” 

13. At the outset, it may be noted that as well settled by now, the provisions 
of PMLA are not only to investigate into the offence of money laundering 
but more importantly to prevent money laundering and to provide for 
confiscation of property derived from or involved in money laundering 
and the matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. As held by 
the Three-Judge Bench in Vijay Madanlal (supra), the PMLA is a self-
contained Code and the dispensations envisaged thereunder, must 
prevail in terms of Section 71 thereof, which predicates that the 
provisions of the Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, which includes provisions of the Cr.P.C. The Section 65 of the Act 

predicates that the provisions of the Cr.P.C. shall apply insofar as they 
are not inconsistent with the provisions of the PMLA in respect of arrest, 
search and seizure, attachment, confiscation, investigation, prosecution 
and all other proceedings under the Act. It is pertinent to note that 
Section 4(2) of the Code states that all offences under any other law 
shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with 
according to the same provisions but subject to any enactment for the 
time being in force regulating the manner or place of investigating, 
inquiring into, trying or otherwise dealing with such offences. Further, 
Section 5 of the Code states that nothing contain in the Code shall, in 
absence of specific provision to the contrary, affect any special or local 
law for the time being in force, or any special jurisdiction or power 
conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by any other law 
for the time being in force. Thus, having regard to the conjoint reading 
of Section 71 and Section 65 of the PMLA as also Section 4(2) and 
Section 5 of the Code, there remains no shadow of doubt that the 
provisions of PMLA will have the effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, including the provisions of the Cr.P.C. 
14. Though, it was sought to be vehemently submitted by the learned 
counsels for the appellants that the sweep of Section 160 of Cr.P.C. would extend to summoning any person irrespective of whether that 

person is an accused of that offence or a mere witness, the said 
submission deserves to be discarded outrightly in view of the specific 
observations made by the three-Judge Bench in Vijay Madanlal, to the 
effect that the provisions of Chapter XII of the Code (under which 
Section 160 falls) do not apply in all respects to deal with information 
derived relating to the commission of money laundering offence much 
less investigation thereof. The precise observations made by the Court 
in Vijay Madanlal, while considering the issue, whether an ECIR could 
be equated with an FIR under the 1973 Code or not, are reproduced as 
under: - 
“456…. Considering the scheme of the 2002 Act, though the 
offence of money-laundering is otherwise regarded as 
cognizable offence (cognizance whereof can be taken only by the 
authorities referred to in Section 48 of this Act and not by 
jurisdictional police) and punishable under Section 4 of the 2002 
Act, special complaint procedure is prescribed by law. This 
procedure overrides the procedure prescribed under 1973 Code 
to deal with other offences (other than money-laundering 
offences) in the matter of registration of offence and 
inquiry/investigation thereof. This special procedure must prevail 
in terms of Section 71 of the 2002 Act and also keeping in mind 
Section 65 of the same Act. In other words, the offence of money-
laundering cannot be registered by the jurisdictional police who 
is governed by the regime under Chapter XII of the 1973 Code. 
The provisions of Chapter XII of the 1973 Code do not apply in 
all respects to deal with information derived relating to 
commission 
of 
money-laundering 
offence 
much 
less 
investigation thereof. The dispensation regarding prevention of 
money-laundering, attachment of proceeds of crime and 
inquiry/investigation of offence of money laundering upto filing of 
the complaint in respect of offence under Section 3 of the 2002 
Act is fully governed by the provisions of the 2002 Act itself. To 
wit, regarding survey, searches, seizures, issuing summons, 
recording of statements of concerned persons and calling upon 
production of documents, inquiry/investigation, arrest of persons 
involved in the offence of money-laundering including bail and 

attachment, confiscation and vesting of property being proceeds 
of crime. Indeed, after arrest, the manner of dealing with such 
offender involved in offence of money-laundering would then be 
governed by the provisions of the 1973 Code - as there are no 
inconsistent provisions in the 2002 Act in regard to production of 
the arrested person before the jurisdictional Magistrate within 
twenty-four hours and also filing of the complaint before the 
Special Court within the statutory period prescribed in the 1973 
Code for filing of police report, if not released on bail before expiry 
thereof.” 
 
15. In view of the above, it is abundantly clear that the dispensation 
regarding Prevention of Money Laundering, Attachment of Proceeds of 
Crime, and Inquiry/Investigation of offence of Money Laundering 
including issuing summons, recording of statements, calling upon 
persons for production of documents etc. upto filing of the Complaint in 
respect of offence under Section 3 of PMLA is fully governed by the 
provisions of the said Act itself. The jurisdictional police who is governed 
by the regime of Chapter XII of the Code, can not register the offence of 
money laundering, nor can investigate into it, in view of the special 
procedure prescribed under the PMLA with regard to the registration of 
offence and inquiry/investigation thereof, and that the special procedure 
must prevail in terms of Section 71 of the PMLA. 
16. Apart from the fact that Section 50 is a gender neutral, as it does not 
make any distinction between a man and a woman, there are glaring 
inconsistencies between the provisions contained in Section 50 of 
PMLA and Section 160/161 of Cr.P.C. The Chapter XII of Cr.P.C. pertains to the “Information to the Police and their Powers to 
Investigate”. Section 160 which falls under Chapter XII empowers the 
Police Officer making an investigation under the said Chapter to require 
any person to attend within the limits of his own or adjoining station who, 
from the information given or otherwise appears to be acquainted with 
the facts and circumstances of the case, whereas, the process 
envisaged by Section 50 of the PMLA is in the nature of an inquiry 
against the proceeds of crime and is not “Investigation” in strict sense 
of the term for initiating prosecution; and the Authorities referred to in 
Section 48 of PMLA are not the Police Officers as held in Vijay 
Madanlal. It has been specifically laid down in the said decision that the 
statements recorded by the Authorities under Section 50 of PMLA are 
not hit by Article 20(3) or Article 21 of the Constitution, rather such 
statements recorded by the authority in the course of inquiry are 
deemed to be the Judicial proceedings in terms of Section 50(4), and 
are admissible in evidence, whereas the statements made by any 
person to a Police Officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter 
XII of the Code could not be used for any purpose, except for the 
purpose stated in the proviso to Section 162 of the Code. In view of such 
glaring inconsistencies between Section 50 PMLA and Section 160/161 
Cr.P.C, the provisions of Section 50 PMLA would prevail in terms of 
Section 71 read with Section 65 thereof. 

17. So far as the procedure to be followed by the Summoning Officer while 
exercising the powers under sub-section (2) and (3) of Section 50 of the 
PMLA is concerned, it is pertinent to note that Rule 11 of the said Rules 
2005, requires the Summoning Officer to follow the procedure as 
prescribed therein, i.e., to issue Summons in Form V appended to the 
said Rules. The said prescribed Form V requires Summoning Officer to 
mention not only the Name, Designation and Address of the Summoning 
Officer but also the details of the persons summoned as also the 
documents sought therein. The foot note of Form V also mentions that 
the proceedings shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the 
meaning of Section 193 and Section 228 of the IPC, and if the person 
summoned fails to give evidence as mentioned in the Schedule, he 
would be liable to penal proceedings under the Act. Thus, there being 
specific procedure prescribed under the Statutory Rules of 2005 for 
summoning the person under sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 50 of 
the Act, the same would prevail over any other procedure prescribed 
under the Code, particularly the procedure contemplated in Section 
160/161, as also the procedure for production of documents 
contemplated in Section 91 of the Code, in view of the overriding effect 
given to the PMLA over the other Acts including the Cr.P.C. under 
Section 71 r/w Section 65 of the PMLA. 

18. The submission made on behalf of Learned Counsels for the Appellants 
that the conferment of power upon the Authority under Section 50 of 
PMLA excluding the procedural safeguards would be contrary to the 
standard of “procedure established by law” under Article 21 of the 
Constitution, is also thoroughly misconceived. The validity of Section 50 
was sought to be challenged in Vijay Madanlal on the ground of being 
violative of Article 20(3) and Article 21 of the Constitution and the Court 
upholding the validity observed as under: - 
“425. Indeed, sub-section (2) of Section 50 enables the Director, 
Additional Director, Joint Director, Deputy Director or Assistant 
Director to issue summon to any person whose attendance he 
considers necessary for giving evidence or to produce any 
records during the course of any investigation or proceeding 
under this Act. We have already highlighted the width of 
expression “proceeding” in the earlier part of this judgment and 
held that it applies to proceeding before the Adjudicating 
Authority or the Special Court, as the case may be. Nevertheless, 
sub-section (2) empowers the authorised officials to issue 
summon to any person. We fail to understand as to how Article 
20(3) would come into play in respect of process of recording 
statement pursuant to such summon which is only for the 
purpose of collecting information or evidence in respect of 
proceeding under this Act. Indeed, the person so summoned, is 
bound to attend in person or through authorised agent and to 
state truth upon any subject concerning which he is being 
examined or is expected to make statement and produce 
documents as may be required by virtue of sub-section (3) of 
Section 50 of the 2002 Act…. 
 
426 to 430….. 
 
431. In the context of the 2002 Act, it must be remembered that 
the summon is issued by the Authority under Section 50 in 
connection with the inquiry regarding proceeds of crime which 
may have been attached and pending adjudication before the 
Adjudicating Authority. In respect of such action, the designated 
officials have been empowered to summon any person for 
collection of information and evidence to be presented before the 
Adjudicating Authority. It is not necessarily for initiating a 

prosecution against the noticee as such. The power entrusted to 
the designated officials under this Act, though couched as 
investigation in real sense, is to undertake inquiry to ascertain 
relevant facts to facilitate initiation of or pursuing with an action 
regarding proceeds of crime, if the situation so warrants and for 
being presented before the Adjudicating Authority. It is a different 
matter that the information and evidence so collated during the 
inquiry made, may disclose commission of offence of money-
laundering and the involvement of the person, who has been 
summoned for making disclosures pursuant to the summons 
issued by the Authority. At this stage, there would be no formal 
document indicative of likelihood of involvement of such person 
as an accused of offence of money laundering. If the statement 
made by him reveals the offence of money -laundering or the 
existence of proceeds of crime, that becomes actionable under 
the Act itself. To put it differently, at the stage of recording of 
statement for the purpose of inquiring into the relevant facts in 
connection with the property being proceeds of crime is, in that 
sense, not an investigation for prosecution as such; and in any 
case, there would be no formal accusation against the noticee. 
Such summons can be issued even to witnesses in the inquiry 
so conducted by the authorised officials. However, after further 
inquiry on the basis of other material and evidence, the 
involvement of such person (noticee) is revealed, the authorised 
officials can certainly proceed against him for his acts of 
commission or omission. In such a situation, at the stage of issue 
of summons, the person cannot claim protection under Article 
20(3) of the Constitution. However, if his/her statement is 
recorded after a formal arrest by the ED official, the 
consequences of Article 20 (3) or Section 25 of the Evidence Act 
may come into play to urge that the same being in the nature of 
confession, shall not be proved against him. Further, it would not 
preclude the prosecution from proceeding against such a person 
including for consequences under Section 63 of the 2002 Act on 
the basis of other tangible material to indicate the falsity of his 
claim. That would be a matter of rule of evidence.” 

19. The above ratio laid down in Vijay Madanlal clinches the contentions 
raised by the learned counsels for the appellants with regard to the 
provisions of Section 50 being violative of Article 20(3) or Article 21 of 
the Constitution, and we need not further elaborate the same, nor do we 
need to deal with the decisions of this Court on the said issue which 

have already been dealt with in Vijay Madanlal. Suffice it to say that 
Section 50 enables the authorized Authority to issue summon to any 
person whose attendance he considers necessary for giving evidence 
or to produce any records during the course of the proceedings under 
the Act, and that the persons so summoned is bound to attend in person 
or through authorized agent, and to state truth upon the subject 
concerning which he is being examined or is expected to make 
statement and produce documents as may be required by virtue of sub-
section (3) of Section 50. At the stage of issue of summons, the person 
cannot claim protection under Article 20(3) of the Constitution, the same 
being not “testimonial compulsion”. At the stage of recording of 
statement of a person for the purpose of inquiring into the relevant facts 
in connection with the property being proceeds of crime, is not an 
investigation for prosecution as such. The summons can be issued even 
to witnesses in the inquiry so conducted by the authorized officers. The 
consequences of Article 20(3) of the Constitution or Section 25 of the 
Evidence Act may come into play only if the involvement of such person 
(noticee) is revealed and his or her statements is recorded after a formal 
arrest by the ED official. In our opinion, the learned counsels for the 
appellants have sought to reagitate the issues which have already been 
settled in Vijay Madanlal. 

20. Much reliance has been placed by the Learned Counsels for the 
Appellants on the Annual Report of Ministry of Finance, GOI, which 
according to them has stated about the Organizational Structure of 
Directorate of Enforcement, demarcating the territorial jurisdiction of 
various Zonal Office of the ED. According to them, such instructions by 
the Department of Revenue are for exercise of powers of investigation 
by the ED as mandated by Section 51 PMLA and therefore must be 
strictly complied with. The said submission also being fallacious cannot 
be accepted. Apart from the fact that the document relied upon is an 
Annual Report by the Ministry of Finance, showing the Organizational 
Structure of the ED, the same could not be construed as the directions 
issued by the Central Government for the purpose of exercise of powers 
and performance of the functions by the Authorities as contemplated in 
Section 51 of the said Act. As stated in the said Report, the said Offices 
of the Directorate of Enforcement all over India are set up to ensure that 
the Money Laundering offences are investigated in an effective manner 
and they act as deterrence for the potential offenders of the Money 
Launderers. Pertinently, the Headquarters Investigation Unit (HIU) has 
not been restricted to any territorial jurisdiction in the said Organizational 
Structure. The present ECIR bearing ECIR/17/HIU/2020 is recorded at 
the HIU. Further, as per the specific case of the ED in the complaint, 
filed against the accused persons before the Special Court, PMLA, 

Rouse Avenue Courts, New Delhi, Rs.168 Crores were allegedly 
received by the Inspector Ashok Kumar Mishra from the co-accused 
Anup Majee to be delivered to his political bosses, and the said Rs. 168 
Crores were transferred through vouchers to Delhi and Overseas, which 
clearly established adequate nexus of the offence and the offenders with 
the territory of Delhi. We therefore do not find any illegality in the 
summons issued by the respondent-ED summoning the Appellants to 
its Office at Delhi, which also has the territorial jurisdiction, a part of the 
offence having been allegedly committed by the accused persons as 
alleged in the complaint. It is also not disputed that the Appellant No.1 
being a Member of Parliament has also an official residence at Delhi. 
21. In that view of the matter, we do not find any substance in the challenge 
made by the Appellants to the Summons issued to the Appellants under 
Section 50 of the PMLA. As contemplated in the sub-section (3) of 
Section 50, all the persons summoned are bound to attend in person or 
through authorized agents as the officer may direct and are bound to 
state the truth upon any subject respecting which they are examined or 
make statements, and to produce the documents as may be required. 
As per sub-section (4) thereof every proceeding under sub-sections (2) 
and (3) is deemed to be a Judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
Section 193 and Section 228 of the IPC. As per sub-section (4) of 
Section 63, a person who intentionally disobeys any direction issued 

under Section 50 is liable to be proceeded against under Section 174 of 
the IPC. 
22. As transpiring from the Status Report submitted by the Deputy Director, 
Directorate of Enforcement, New Delhi, pursuant to the Order passed 
by this Court on 18.07.2024, the Appellant No.2 – Rujira Banerjee had 
not appeared and not produced the documents as required vide the 
Summons dated 04.08.2021 and 18.08.2021. The ED therefore had 
filed the Complaint in the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Patiala 
House Courts, New Delhi against her under Section 63 PMLA r/w 
Section 174 IPC. It is also pertinent to note that though the Appellant 
No.2 by filing the Crl. M.C. No. 2442 of 2021 before the High Court had 
challenged the Order dated 18.09.2021 passed by the said Court taking 
cognizance of the said Complaint and the Order dated 30.09.2021 
summoning her before the Court, she has not even bothered to produce 
the said Orders before this Court in the instant Appeals. Since the said 
Complaint is pending before the concerned Court of Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, we do not express any opinion on the merits of the said 
Complaint. Suffice it to say that we do not find any illegality in the said 
orders passed by the concerned court and that the said complaint shall 
be proceeded further by the said Court in accordance with law. 

23. For the reasons stated above, both the Appeals being devoid of merits 
are dismissed...…………………………………J.
 
 [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 
 
 ……………..……………………. J. 
 [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 
 
NEW DELHI 
09.09.2024