IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

Ashok Kumar Sharma & Ors 

… Petitioners 
 
Versus 
 
Union of India 

… Respondent 

JUDGMENT 

The petition, invoking Article 32 of the Constitution, has been instituted by former civil 
servants, scholars, activists and experts in fields such as International Relations, 
Human Rights and Policy Analysis. 

The petition seeks directions to the Union Government to cancel existing 
licences/permissions and to halt the grant of new licences to companies in India for 
the export of arms and military equipment to Israel during the ongoing conflict in 
Gaza. These companies, as the petitioners describe, include a Public Sector 
Enterprise in the Ministry of Defence and private companies which have allegedly 
been granted licenses after October 2023. The petitioners claim a violation of 
India’s international law obligations and of Articles 14, 21 and 51(c) of the 
Constitution. 

Supporting the submissions of the petitioners, Mr Prashant Bhushan, counsel has 
relied on the rulings of the International Court of Justice allegedly into the conduct 
of Israel in Palestinian territories. The submission is that India is bound by international 

treaties which disallow the supply of military weapons to states who have engaged 
in war crimes/genocide. 

In other words, the submission is that the continuation of the export licences would 
constitute action complicit against the Genocide Convention and other 
international obligations which India has assumed. 

The fundamental objection to the maintainability of a petition of the nature that is 
before the Court lies in the fact that the authority and jurisdiction in relation to the 
conduct of foreign affairs is vested with the Union Government under Article 73 of 
the Constitution. Apart from Article 73, the provisions of Article 253 of the 
Constitution stipulate that Parliament has the power to make any law for the whole 
or any part of the territory of India for implementing any treaty, agreement or 
convention with any other country or countries or any decision made at any 
international conference, association or other body. 

There is a presumption that international law is a part and parcel of the law of the 
nation unless the application of a principle of international law is excluded expressly 
or by necessary implication by the competent legislature. However, the basic issue 
which falls for consideration in the present proceedings is whether the Court under 
Article 32 can issue a writ to the Union Government to cancel existing licences and 
halt the issuance of new licences for the export of arms and military equipments to 
Israel. We are affirmatively of the view that the answer to this question must be in 
the negative for more than one reason. 

First any grant of relief in the present proceedings is presaged on the submission of 
the petitioners in regard to the conduct of an independent sovereign nation 
namely, Israel in the conduct of its operations in Gaza. The sovereign nation of Israel 
is not and cannot be made amenable to the jurisdiction of this Court. Hence, for 

this Court to consider the grant of the reliefs as sought, it would inevitably become 
necessary to enter a finding in regard to the allegations which have been leveled 
by the petitioners against the State of Israel. Absent jurisdiction over a sovereign 
State, It would be impermissible for this Court to entertain the grant of reliefs of this 
nature. 

The second aspect of the matter which requires to be noticed is that the petition 
seeks a cancellation of the existing licences and prohibition on the issuance of new 
licences for the export of arms and military equipments by Indian companies. Some 
of these licenses may be governed by contracts with international entities, including 
within the State of Israel. The grant of injunctive relief by this Court would necessarily 
implicate a judicial direction for breach of international contracts and agreements. 
The fall out of such breaches cannot be appropriately assessed by this Court and 
would lay open Indian companies which have firm commitments to proceedings for 
damages which may affect their own financial viability. 

Third, the statutory provisions of our law confer sufficient power on the Union 
Government if it decides to act in such cases. For instance, prohibitions can be 
imposed by the Union of India under the Foreign Trade (Regulation and 
Development Act) as well as under the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962. 
Whether in a given case, any such action is warranted is a matter which has to be 
decided by the Union Government bearing in mind economic, geo-political and 
other interests of the nation in the conduct of international relations. In taking an 
appropriate 
decision, 
the 
Government 
bears 
into 
account 
all 
relevant 
considerations including the commitments of the nation at the international level. 

The danger in the Court taking over this function is precisely that it would be led into 
issuing injunctive reliefs without a full and comprehensive analysis or backdrop of 
the likely consequences of any such action. The self-imposed restraint on Courts 

entering into areas of foreign policy is, thus, grounded in sound rationale which has 
been applied across time. 

For the above reasons, we have come to the conclusion that the reliefs which have 
been sought in these proceedings are not amenable to the exercise of judicial 
remedies under Article 32 of the Constitution. 

We clarify that the observations which have been made in the earlier part of this 
judgment are not intended to reflect any opinion by this Court either in the conduct 
of foreign policy by the Government of India, or for that matter, by any sovereign 
nation which is not subject to the jurisdiction of this Court. 

The Writ Petition shall accordingly stand dismissed for the above reasons. 

Pending 
applications, 
if 
any, 
including 
the 
application 
for 
intervention/ 
impleadment stand disposed of. 
 
…...…...…...………………...…CJI. 
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 

…...…...…...………………...…..J. 
[J B Pardiwala] 

…...…...…...………………...…..J. 
[Manoj Misra] 

New Delhi; 
September 09, 2024 
GKA