Criminal Appeal (Crl.) No(s). 6367 of 2023 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 

 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

 ( SLP(Crl.) No(s). 6367 of 2023) 

DASHRATH SAHU 

 ….APPELLANT(S) 

 VERSUS 

STATE OF CHHATTISGARH 
 
 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 

1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The accused appellant has assailed the order dated 21st 
March, 2023 passed by the High Court of Chhattisgarh, Bilaspur 
in whereby the joint application 
filed by the appellant and the complainant of the case under 
Section 320 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(hereinafter being 
referred to as ‘CrPC’) was disallowed to the extent of the offence 
punishable under Section 3(1)(xi) of the Scheduled Castes and 

Criminal Appeal (Crl.) No(s). 6367 of 2023 

Scheduled Tribes(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989(hereinafter 
being referred to as the ‘SC/ST Act’). 
3. 
Vide judgment dated 30th September, 2002 passed by Special 
Judge, 
Scheduled 
Castes/Scheduled 
Tribes(Prevention 
of 
Atrocities) Act, 1989 Bilaspur, C.G. in Special Sessions Trial No. 
115/2001, the accused appellant was convicted for offences 
punishable under Sections 451, 354 of Indian Penal Code, 
1860(hereinafter being referred to as ‘IPC’) and Section 3(1)(xi) of 
the SC/ST Act. He was sentenced to undergo simple 
imprisonment of one year and fine. 
4. 
The accused appellant challenged the said judgment by filing 
 in the High Court of Chhattisgarh. 
During the pendency of the appeal before the High Court, the 
accused appellant and the prosecutrix/complainant seem to have 
amicably settled their differences and accordingly a joint 
application under Section 320 CrPC, supported by affidavits of the 
accused appellant and the prosecutrix/complainant, came to be 
filed which was partly allowed by the High Court by the impugned 
order dated 21st March, 2023. The High Court accepted the 
compromise application to the extent of the offences punishable 
under Sections 354 and 451 IPC and acquitted the accused 

Criminal Appeal (Crl.) No(s). 6367 of 2023 

appellant of the said charges. However, the application was 
rejected qua the offence punishable under Section 3(1)(xi) of the 
SC/ST Act holding that the same is not compoundable and the 
minimum sentence provided for such offence is six months. 
Accordingly, the application under Section 320 CrPC was rejected 
qua the offence under SC/ST Act and the simple imprisonment of 
one year awarded to the accused appellant on that count was 
reduced to six months. 
5. 
Being aggrieved of the order dated 21st March, 2023, the 
accused appellant has preferred the instant appeal. During the 
pendency of the appeal, the appellant was released on bail vide 
order dated 9th June, 2023 passed by this Court. 
6. 
The short point arising for consideration of this Court is as to 
whether the conviction of the appellant for the offence punishable 
under Section 3(1)(xi) of the SC/ST Act and the rejection of the 
application under Section 320 CrPC was justified and lawful. 
7. 
Section 3(1)(xi) of the SC/ST Act reads as below:- 
“3. Punishments for offences of atrocities.—(1) Whoever, not 
being a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe,— 
(i)-(x)….. 
(xi) assaults or uses force to any woman belonging to a Scheduled 
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe with intent to dishonour or outrage 
her modesty; 

Criminal Appeal (Crl.) No(s). 6367 of 2023 

… 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than six months but which may extend to five years and 
with fine.” 
 
8. 
A plain reading of the section makes it clear that the offence 
of outraging the modesty should be committed with the intention 
that the victim belonged to the Scheduled Caste category. 
9. 
We have gone through the FIR and the sworn testimony of 
the prosecutrix/complainant as extracted in the judgments of the 
High Court as well as that of the trial Court. The case as projected 
in the FIR and the sworn testimony of the prosecutrix would reveal 
that the prosecutrix/complainant was engaged for doing 
household jobs in the house of the accused appellant who tried to 
outrage her modesty while the prosecutrix/complainant was doing 
the household chores. Apparently thus, even from the highest 
allegations of the prosecutrix, the offending act was not committed 
by the accused with the intention that he was doing so upon a 
person belonging to the Scheduled Caste. This issue was dealt 
with by this Court in the case of Masumsha Hasanasha 
Musalman Vs. State of Maharashtra1 wherein it was held as 
below:- 
 
1 2000(3) SCC 557 

Criminal Appeal (Crl.) No(s). 6367 of 2023 

“9. Section 3(2)(v) of the Act provides that whoever, not being a 
member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, commits 
any offence under the Penal Code, 1860 punishable with 
imprisonment for a term of ten years or more against a person 
or property on the ground that such person is a member of a 
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or such property belongs 
to such member, shall be punishable with imprisonment for life 
and with fine. In the present case, there is no evidence at all to 
the effect that the appellant committed the offence alleged 
against him on the ground that the deceased is a member of a 
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe. To attract the provisions 
of Section 3(2)(v) of the Act, the sine qua non is that the victim 
should be a person who belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a 
Scheduled Tribe and that the offence under the Penal Code, 
1860 is committed against him on the basis that such a 
person belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe. 
In the absence of such ingredients, no offence under Section 
3(2)(v) of the Act arises. In that view of the matter, we think, 
both the trial court and the High Court missed the essence of 
this aspect. In these circumstances, the conviction under the 
aforesaid provision by the trial court as well as by the High 
Court ought to be set aside.” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 
10. In the said judgment, this Court dealt with a case involving 
offence under Section 3(2)(v) of the SC/ST Act. The language of 
Section 3(1)(xi) of the SC/ST Act is pari materia as the same also 
provides that the offence must be committed upon a person 
belonging to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes with the 
intention that it was being done on the ground of caste. 
11. Considered in light of the above factual and legal position, we 
are of the opinion that the conviction of the accused appellant for 
the offence under Section 3(1)(xi) of the SC/ST Act was otherwise 
also not sustainable on merits. Hence, the conviction of the 

Criminal Appeal (Crl.) No(s). 6367 of 2023 

accused appellant as recorded by the trial Court and upheld by the 
High Court for the offence under Section 3(1)(xi) of the SC/ST Act 
is hereby set aside and quashed. The appellant is acquitted of the 
charge under Section 3(1)(xi) of the SC/ST Act. The appellant is 
on bail. His bail bonds are discharged. 
12. The appeal is allowed accordingly. 
13. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………..………………………………J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

………………………………………..J. 

(PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 

……….……………………………….J. 

(SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
January 29, 2024.