IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

COX & KINGS LTD. 

 …PETITIONER 
 
 VERSUS 
 
SAP INDIA PVT. LTD. & ANR. 

 …RESPONDENTS 

JUDGMENT 

J. B. PARDIWALA, J.: 
1. Cox & Kings Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as the “petitioner”) has filed the 
present petition in terms of Section 11(6) read with Section 11(12)(a) of 
the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short “the Act, 1996”), 
seeking appointment of an arbitrator for the adjudication of disputes and 
claims in terms of clause 15.7 of the Services General Terms and 
Conditions Agreement dated 30.10.2015 entered into between the 
Petitioner and SAP India Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as the 
“respondent no. 1”) 
 
A. FACTUAL MATRIX 
 
2. The petitioner is a company registered under the Companies Act, 1956 and 
is engaged in the business of providing tourism packages and hospitality 
services to its customers. 
 
3. Respondent no. 1 is also a company registered under the Companies Act, 
1956 and is engaged in the business of providing business software 
solution services. It is a wholly-owned subsidiary of SAP SE GMBH 
(Germany) (hereinafter referred to as the “respondent no. 2”), a company 
incorporated under the laws of Germany. 

4. The petitioner and respondent no. 1 entered into a SAP Software End User 
License Agreement & SAP Enterprise Support Schedule (for short 
“License Agreement”) on 14.12.2010 under which the petitioner was 
made a licensee of certain Enterprise Resource Planning (“ERP”) software 
developed and owned by the respondents. The License Agreement is a 
mandatory pre-requisite for all customers of the respondents who intend to 
enter into any software agreement with the respondents. 
 
5. It is the case of the petitioner that while it was developing its own software 
for e-commerce operations in 2015, it was approached by respondent no. 1 
who recommended their ‘Hybris Solution’ (hereinafter referred to as the 
“SAP Hybris Software”) for use by the petitioner. It is the case of the 
petitioner that respondent no. 1 had, at the relevant point in time, 
represented that the SAP Hybris Software would be suitable and 90% 
compatible to the requirements of the petitioner. It was further represented 
that the customisation of the balance 10% would take about 10 months 
from the date of execution of an agreement and that the customisation of 
the SAP Hybris Software would take lesser time than the time the petitioner 
may take in developing its own technological solution. 

6. The transaction for the purchase, customisation and use of the SAP Hybris 
Software was divided into three separate agreements entered into between 
the petitioner and respondent no. 1: 
i. 
First, Software License and Support Agreement Software Order 
Form no. 3 (for short “Order Form no. 3”) dated 30.10.2015 for 
the purchase of SAP Hybris Software License by the petitioner. ii. 
Second, the Services General Terms and Conditions Agreement (for 
short “GTC agreement”) dated 30.10.2015 containing the terms 
and conditions governing the implementation of the SAP Hybris 
Software. iii. 
Third, SAP Global Service and Support Agreement, Order Form no. 
1 dated 16.11.2015 (for short “Order Form no. 1”) which was 
executed pursuant to the signing of the GTC agreement and 
contained the terms of payment between the parties for the services 
being rendered. 
 
7. It is the case of the petitioner that as it had already entered into the License 
Agreement with respondent no. 1 in 2010, it was not required to do so again 
for the purpose of purchasing the SAP Hybris Software. The GTC 
agreement, Order Form no. 3 and Order Form no. 1 were all executed 
pursuant to the License Agreement. The said three agreements are ancillary 

to the License Agreement and have a similar underlying commercial 
purpose. 
 
8. It is pertinent to note that in terms of Clause 15.7 of the GTC agreement, 
in the event of any dispute, the parties agreed to resolve their disputes 
through arbitration. Clause 15.7 of GTC agreement reads as under: 
“15.7 Dispute Resolution: In the event of any dispute or 
difference the subject matter of this Agreement, 
the Parties shall undertake to resolve such disputes amicably. 
If disputes and differences cannot be settled amicably then 
such disputes shall be referred to bench of three arbitrators, 
where each party will nominate one arbitrator and the two 
arbitrators shall appoint a third arbitrator. Arbitration award 
shall be binding on both parties. The arbitration shall be held 
in Mumbai and each party will bear the expenses of their 
appointed arbitrator. The expense of the third arbitrator shall 
be shared by the parties. The arbitration process will be 
governed by the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996.” 
 
9. Certain issues arose between the parties regarding the timely completion 
and implementation of the SAP Hybris Software. After several queries 
from the petitioner, respondent no. 1 vide e-mail dated 24.04.2016, 
informed about certain challenges in the execution of the SAP Hybris 
Software project. Thereafter, a series of emails were exchanged between 
respondent no. 1 and the petitioner regarding the completion of the project. 

10. Subsequently, as there was no response from respondent no. 1 to the e-
mails sent by the petitioner, the latter, vide e-mail dated 31.08.2016 
contacted respondent no. 2, i.e., the German parent company of respondent 
no. 1 and apprised them of the issues being faced by the petitioner in the 
execution and delivery of the SAP Hybris Software. Respondent no. 2 was 
informed of the various shortcomings in the execution of the project and 
the negative ramifications being caused to the petitioner’s business as a 
result thereof. In response to the concerns raised by the petitioner, 
respondent no. 2, vide e-mail dated 01.09.2016, assured to provide a 
framework for resolution of the challenges and completion of the project. 
 
11. Respondent no. 2 vide email dated 07.10.2016 assured the petitioner that 
it would monitor the execution of the project and requested the petitioner 
for an opportunity to agree on the revised plan and delivery. As per the 
minutes of the meeting dated 14.11.2016, one of the suggestions given by 
respondent no. 2 as part of the revised proposal for the execution of the 
project was that a substantial part of the project work would be outsourced 
to the more experienced global team, and one representative of respondent 
no. 2 would overlook the progress of the project at the execution level. 

12. Unable to resolve the issues, the contract for the SAP Hybris Software 
project ultimately came to be rescinded on 15.11.2016. In response to this, 
respondent no. 2, vide e-mail dated 23.11.2016, requested the petitioner for 
one last opportunity to complete the project, which the petitioner declined 
vide email dated 24.11.2016. 
 
13. Respondent no. 2, vide email dated 09.12.2016 sent to the petitioner, 
communicated that there were shortcomings at the petitioner’s end as well 
and the respondents could not be said to be solely responsible for the 
collapse of the SAP Hybris Software project. 
 
14. Despite several correspondences and meetings, the matter could not be 
settled amicably between the parties. On 29.10.2017, respondent no. 1 
issued a notice invoking arbitration under Clause 15.7 of the GTC 
agreement for the alleged wrongful termination of the contract between the 
parties and non-payment of Rs. 17 Crore. Upon failure of the petitioner to 
nominate an arbitrator in response to the aforesaid notice, a Section 11(6) 
petition was instituted by respondent no. 1 before the Bombay High Court. 
The said petition came to be allowed vide order dated 30.11.2018 and an 
arbitral tribunal was constituted to adjudicate the disputes between the 

parties. The petitioner filed its Statement of Defence and counterclaims on 
31.07.2019 for an amount of Rs. 45,99,71,098/-. 
 
15. It may not be out of place to state at this stage that respondent no. 2 was 
not made a party to the aforesaid arbitration proceedings. In the course of 
the said proceedings, the petitioner filed an application under Section 16 of 
the Act, 1996 before the arbitral tribunal, contending that the four 
agreements entered into between the parties were part of a composite 
transaction and for this reason the agreements should be made a part of a 
singular proceeding. 
 
16. During the pendency of the aforesaid application, on 22.10.2019, the 
NCLT, Mumbai admitted an application filed under Section 7 of the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (for short “the Insolvency Code”) 
against the petitioner and appointed an Interim Resolution Professional. 
Vide Public Announcement dated 25.10.2019, the Interim Resolution 
Professional ordered for the commencement of the Corporate Insolvency 
Resolution Process (‘CIRP’). On 05.11.2019, the NCLT passed an order 
adjourning the arbitration proceedings sine die due to initiation of the 
CIRP. 

17. Meanwhile, upon seeking permission of the Interim Resolution 
Professional, the petitioner sent a fresh notice to the respondents on 
07.11.2019 invoking arbitration under Clause 15.7 of the GTC agreement. 
Pertinently, the petitioner arrayed respondent no. 2 in the said arbitration 
notice. The petitioner appointed Dr. Justice Arijit Pasayat, former Judge of 
this Court, as its nominated arbitrator and called upon the respondents to 
appoint their arbitrator for the constitution of the tribunal. However, upon 
failure of the respondents to appoint an arbitrator in terms of the said 
notice, the petitioner has preferred the present petition. 
 
B. 
REFERENCE ORDER 
 
18. This petition was heard by a three-Judge Bench of this Court. By an order 
dated 06.05.2022, Chief Justice N.V Ramana (as he then was) speaking for 
himself and Justice A.S. Bopanna doubted the correctness of the 
application of the Group of Companies doctrine by the Indian courts. Chief 
Justice Ramana criticised the approach of a three-Judge Bench of this Court 
in Chloro Controls India (P) Ltd v. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc 
reported in (2013) which relied upon the phrase “claiming 
through or under” appearing in Section 45 of the Act, 1996 to adopt the 
Group of Companies doctrine. He noted that the subsequent decisions of 

this Court read the doctrine into Sections 8 and 35 of the Act, 1996 without 
adequately examining the interpretation of the phrase “claiming through or 
under” appearing in those provisions. He also observed that economic 
concepts such as tight group structure and single economic unit alone 
cannot be utilized to bind a non-signatory to an arbitration agreement in 
the absence of an express consent. Consequently, he referred the matter to 
the larger bench to seek clarity on the interpretation of the phrase “claiming 
through or under” appearing under Sections 8, 35 and 45 respectively of 
the Act, 1996. The following two questions were formulated by him for 
reference: 
i. 
Whether the phrase “claiming through or under” in Sections 8 and 
11 respectively of the Act, 1996 could be interpreted to include the 
Group of Companies doctrine; and 
ii. 
Whether the Group of Companies doctrine as expounded by Chloro 
Controls (supra) and subsequent judgments is valid in law? 
 
19. Justice Surya Kant, in a separate opinion, observed that the decisions of 
this Court before Chloro Controls (supra) adopted a restrictive approach 
by placing undue emphasis on formal consent. Justice Surya Kant traced 
the evolution of the Group of Companies doctrine to observe that it had 
gained a firm footing in Indian jurisprudence. However, he opined that this 

Court has adopted inconsistent approaches while applying the doctrine in 
India, which needed to be clarified by a larger bench. Accordingly, he 
highlighted the following questions of law for determination by the larger 
Bench: 
i. 
Whether the Group of Companies Doctrine should be read into 
Section 8 of the Act, 1996 or whether it can exist in Indian 
jurisprudence independent of any statutory provision; 
ii. 
Whether the Group of Companies Doctrine should continue to be 
invoked on the basis of the principle of ‘single economic reality’; 
iii. 
Whether the Group of Companies Doctrine should be construed as a 
means of interpreting implied consent or intent to arbitrate between 
the parties; and 
iv. 
Whether the principles of alter ego and/or piercing the corporate veil 
can alone justify pressing the Group of Companies Doctrine into 
operation even in the absence of implied consent? 
 
C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT 
 
20. Mr. Hiroo Advani, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
petitioner, submitted at the outset that the GTC agreement, Order Form no. 
1, Order Form no. 3 and the License Agreement are interlinked and form 

part of a composite transaction. The said four agreements cannot be 
performed in isolation and have to be read coherently for achieving the 
common object underlying the agreements. 
 
21. The counsel submitted that respondent no. 1 is indisputably a fully owned 
subsidiary of respondent no. 2 and the customisation of the SAP Hybris 
Software to meet the requirements of the petitioner was not feasible 
without the aid, execution and performance of respondent no. 2. He 
submitted that for such reason, it could be said that there exists a direct 
commercial relationship between the petitioner and both the respondents. 
 
22. The counsel further submitted that the various emails exchanged between 
the petitioner and respondent no. 2 are indicative of the intention of 
respondent no. 2 to monitor the execution of the SAP Hybris Software 
project and to ensure the compliance of the contractual obligations on 
behalf of respondent no. 1. The counsel adverted to the contents of many 
such emails in support of his contention. 
 
23. The counsel placed reliance on certain clauses of the License Agreement, 
Order Form no. 3 and GTC agreement to submit that although respondent 
no. 2 may not have been a signatory to the agreements, yet it had been 

entrusted with certain liabilities and obligations under the agreements 
entered into between the petitioner and respondent no. 1, thereby making 
it a veritable party to the transaction. 
 
24. In the last, the counsel submitted that as per the decision of the 
Constitution Bench of this Court in Cox and Kings Ltd. v. SAP India Pvt. 
Ltd. & Anr. reported in 2023 INSC 1051 the court at the stage of referral 
is only required to look prima facie into the validity and existence of an 
arbitration agreement and should leave the questions relating to the 
involvement of the non-signatory to the arbitral tribunal. 
 
D. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS 
 
25. Mr. Ritin Rai, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondents made the following submissions which can be broadly divided 
into four categories: 
 
i. 
Contentions and claims sought to be raised by the petitioner are 
pending adjudication before another arbitral tribunal constituted 
under the same dispute resolution clause 

• The same contentions and claims as sought to be advanced in the 
present petition have already been raised and are pending 
adjudication before an arbitral tribunal constituted under the GTC 
Agreement. In the said proceedings, the Bombay High Court 
appointed an arbitrator and the same was affirmed by this Court. 
• The claims of the petitioner pertaining to the GTC agreement read 
with Order Form no. 1 (collectively referred to as the “Service 
Agreement”) are already sub-judice and cannot be permitted to be 
reagitated. The petitioner has already filed its counterclaims for an 
amount of Rs. 45,99,71,098/- before the arbitral tribunal presided 
by Justice Madan B. Lokur (Retd.). 
• Allowing parallel arbitration proceedings emanating from the same 
agreement and transaction would entail a risk of conflicting 
judgments on the same subject matter including the analogous set 
of facts in evidence. As such, the principles of res sub-judice and 
res judicata would be attracted to the second arbitration proceedings 
and consequently the present petition. ii. 
Respondent no. 2 has neither impliedly nor explicitly consented to 
the arbitration agreement between the petitioner and respondent 
no. 1 

• The agreements in question have been executed only between the 
petitioner and respondent no. 1. Respondent no. 2 is not a signatory 
to any of the agreements between the petitioner and respondent no. 
1. 
• Respondent no. 2 has been unnecessarily and disingenuously made 
a party to the present proceedings. Not a single limb of the 
transaction between the petitioner and respondent no. 1 was to be 
performed by or has been performed by respondent no. 2. 
Respondent no. 2 was never part of the negotiation process between 
the petitioner and respondent no. 1. Respondent no. 2 did not by its 
conduct, agree, either impliedly or explicitly, to be bound by the 
terms and conditions of the agreements between respondent no. 1 
and the petitioner. 
• It is preposterous to suggest that by trying to address the concerns 
of a customer of the subsidiary company (who had voluntarily 
reached out), respondent no. 2 would become liable under the 
contracts executed solely between the petitioner and respondent no. 
1. 
• Respondent no. 2 entered the fray only when the petitioner, of its 
own accord, approached it and levelled certain allegations and 

raised issues concerning the SAP Hybris Software project with its 
management in August, 2016. 
• There is nothing on record either in the contractual framework or 
otherwise to indicate that the project was to be performed by 
respondent no. 2. The only communication with respondent no. 2 in 
respect of the SAP Hybris Software project arose after the escalation 
emails in August, 2016 where the petitioner itself requested the 
management of respondent no. 2 company to help with the alleged 
issues plaguing the SAP Hybris Software project. It was neither the 
intention of the petitioner nor that of respondent no. 1 to bind 
respondent no. 2 to the agreements. 
• The references to respondent no. 2 in the License Agreement only 
indicate that respondent no. 1 has obtained a license from 
respondent no. 2. No part of the License Agreement between the 
petitioner and respondent no. 1 was to be performed by respondent 
no. 2 and it is only in such circumstances that the parties chose not 
to make respondent no. 2 a party thereto. The references to 
respondent no. 2 in the License Agreement are standard references 
used by global software licensing companies. These references 
cannot bind a foreign owner of such licenses. Any finding to the 

contrary would completely upset the well-established commercial 
practice in this sector and would set a dangerous precedent. iii. 
Claims raised by the petitioners are beyond the ambit of Clause 
15.7 of the GTC agreement 
• There exists no commonality between the four agreements entered 
into between the petitioner and respondent no. 1. The contention of 
the petitioner that the four agreements form part of a “single 
composite transaction” is incorrect as the License Agreement and 
Order Form no. 3 bear no significance to the implementation of the 
software, which is covered by the Services Agreement comprising 
of the GTC agreement and Order Form no. 1. Implementation is an 
exercise de hors the purchase of the license of the software. 
• The claims raised by the petitioner are beyond the ambit of the 
Services Agreement. As the License Agreement read with Order 
Form no. 3 is distinct and independent from the Services 
Agreement, it naturally follows that the arbitration agreement 
contained under the GTC agreement read with Order Form no. 1 
does not apply to the License Agreement read with Order Form no. 
3. 

• As the arbitration clause under the License Agreement read with 
Order Form no. 3 has not been invoked till date by either of the 
parties, it stands to reason that any alleged claims pertaining to the 
License Agreement read with Order Form no. 3 as mentioned in the 
notice of arbitration are time-barred and cannot be adjudicated 
upon. On this ground alone, the present Petition is liable to be 
dismissed. iv. 
The present petition is not bona fide and the petitioners have 
suppressed material facts from this Court 
• The present proceedings are a belated and misconceived attempt on 
the part of the petitioner to inflate amounts that it claims are due 
from respondent no. 1 and respondent no. 2. This is sought to be 
done by the petitioner to portray and provide a false view of its 
financial position to the creditors and subvert the due process of law 
through colourable actions. The petitioner is indulging in forum-
shopping by once again attempting to appoint an arbitrator under 
the GTC agreement, a right which both the Bombay High Court and 
this Court, in two separate lengthy proceedings, under Sections 11 
and 14 respectively of the Act, 1996, had decisively held to be 
forfeited by the petitioner for all times to come. 

• The petitioner failed to disclose that respondent no. 1 had 
challenged the notice of arbitration before the NCLT, Mumbai. 
 
E. 
SUBMISSIONS 
ON 
BEHALF 
OF THE 
INTERVENOR, 
UNCITRAL NATIONAL COORDINATION COMMITTEE FOR 
INDIA (UNCCI) 
 
26. Mr George Pothan Poothicote and Ms Manisha Singh, the learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the intervenors in I.A. no. 69863 of 2023, made the 
following submissions: 
i. 
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration 
(“model law”) was amended in 2006 to address the concerns about 
the formal requirements necessary for constituting an arbitration 
agreement. The amendment was adopted by the United Nations 
General Assembly vide Resolution 61/33 dated 04.12.2006. Post the 
amendment, Article 7 of the model law provides two options to the 
member states – the first option requires the arbitration agreement to 
be in the form of a clause in a contract or a separate agreement, both 
of which must be in writing; the second option is silent on the 
requirement of a written agreement and thus the contract law 
applicable in a specific jurisdiction remains available for the 

determination of the level of consent necessary for a party to become 
bound by an arbitration agreement allegedly made by reference. 
Section 7 of the Act, 1996 is similar to (but not the same as) the first 
option. ii. 
As per the Constitution Bench decision in Cox and Kings (supra), 
the court, at the referral stage, is not bound to go into the merits of 
the case to decide if the non-signatory is bound by the arbitration 
agreement. On the contrary, the referral court should leave it to the 
arbitral tribunal to decide such an issue. 
 
F. 
ANALYSIS 
 
27. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having 
gone through the materials on record, the short question that falls for our 
consideration is whether the application of the petitioner for the 
appointment of an arbitrator deserves to be allowed. 
 
28. On the scope of powers of the referral court at the stage of Section 11(6), 
it was observed by us in Lombardi Engg. Ltd. v. Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut 
Nigam Ltd. reported in 2023 INSC 976 as follows: 
“26. Taking cognizance of the legislative change, this Court 
in Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd. [Duro 
Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd., (2017): 

(2017) 4 SCC (Civ) 764], noted that post 2015 Amendment, 
the jurisdiction of the Court under Section 11(6) of the 1996 
Act is limited to examining whether an arbitration agreement 
exists between the parties — “nothing more, nothing less.”” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
29. A Constitution Bench of this Court in In Re: Interplay Between 
Arbitration Agreements under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
and the Stamp Act, 1899 reported in 2023 INSC 1066, speaking through 
one of us (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, CJI), considered the scope of judicial 
interference by the referral court in a Section 11 application. A few relevant 
observations made therein are reproduced hereinbelow: 
“81. One of the main objectives behind the enactment of the 
Arbitration Act was to minimise the supervisory role of 
Courts in the arbitral process by confining it only to the 
circumstances stipulated by the legislature. For instance, 
Section 16 of the Arbitration Act provides that the Arbitral 
Tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction “including ruling 
on any objection with respect to the existence or validity of 
the arbitration agreement”. The effect of Section 16, bearing 
in view the principle of minimum judicial interference, is that 
judicial authorities cannot intervene in matters dealing with 
the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal. Although Sections 8 
and 11 allow Courts to refer parties to arbitration or appoint 
arbitrators, Section 5 limits the Courts from dealing with 
substantive objections pertaining to the existence and validity 
of arbitration agreements at the referral or appointment 
stage. A Referral Court at Section 8 or Section 11 stage can 
only enter into a prima facie determination. The legislative 
mandate of prima facie determination ensures that the 
Referral Courts do not trammel the Arbitral Tribunal's 
authority to rule on its own jurisdiction.” 

30. In a recent decision in SBI General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Krish Spinning 
reported in, it was observed by us that the arbitral tribunal 
is the preferred first authority to look into the questions of arbitrability and 
jurisdiction, and the courts at the referral stage should not venture into 
contested questions involving complex facts. A few relevant paragraphs of 
the said decision are extracted hereinbelow: 
“98. What follows from the negative facet of arbitral 
autonomy when applied in the context of Section 16 is that 
the national courts are prohibited from interfering in matters 
pertaining to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal, as 
exclusive jurisdiction on those aspects vests with the arbitral 
tribunal. 
The 
legislative 
mandate 
of 
prima 
facie 
determination at the stage of Sections 8 and 11 respectively 
ensures that the referral courts do not end up venturing into 
what is intended by the legislature to be the exclusive domain 
of the arbitral tribunal. xxx xxx xxx 
114. In view of the observations made by this Court in In Re: 
Interplay (supra), it is clear that the scope of enquiry at the 
stage of appointment of arbitrator is limited to the scrutiny of 
prima facie existence of the arbitration agreement, and 
nothing else. […] 
xxx xxx xxx 
125. We are also of the view that ex-facie frivolity and 
dishonesty in litigation is an aspect which the arbitral 
tribunal is equally, if not more, capable to decide upon the 
appreciation of the evidence adduced by the parties. We say 
so because the arbitral tribunal has the benefit of going 
through all the relevant evidence and pleadings in much more 
detail than the referral court. If the referral court is able to 
see the frivolity in the litigation on the basis of bare minimum 
pleadings, then it would be incorrect to doubt that the arbitral 
tribunal would not be able to arrive at the same inference, 

most likely in the first few hearings itself, with the benefit of 
extensive pleadings and evidentiary material.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
31. Further, on the scope of enquiry at the referral stage for the determination 
of whether a non-signatory can be impleaded as a party in the arbitration 
proceedings, it was observed by the Constitution Bench in Cox and Kings 
(supra) as follows: 
“158. Section 16 of the Arbitration Act enshrines the 
principle of competence-competence in Indian arbitration 
law. The provision empowers the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on 
its own jurisdiction, including any ruling on any objections 
with respect to the existence or validity of arbitration 
agreement. Section 16 is an inclusive provision which 
comprehends all preliminary issues touching upon the 
jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal. [Uttarakhand Purv 
Sainik Kalyan Nigam Ltd. v. Northern Coal Field Ltd., 
(2020): (2020) 1 SCC (Civ) 570] The doctrine of 
competence-competence is intended to minimise judicial 
intervention at the threshold stage. The issue of determining 
parties to an arbitration agreement goes to the very root of 
the jurisdictional competence of the Arbitral Tribunal. xxx xxx xxx 
 
160. In Pravin Electricals (P) Ltd. v. Galaxy Infra & Engg. 
(P) Ltd. [Pravin Electricals (P) Ltd. v. Galaxy Infra & Engg. 
(P) Ltd., (2021): (2021) 3 SCC (Civ) 307], a 
Bench of three Judges of this Court was called upon to decide 
an appeal a petition filed under Section 11(6) 
of the Arbitration Act for appointment of sole arbitrator. The 
issue before the Court was the determination of existence of 
an arbitration agreement on the basis of the documentary 
evidence produced by the parties. This Court prima facie 
opined that there was no conclusive evidence to infer the 

existence of a valid arbitration agreement between the 
parties. Therefore, the issue of existence of a valid arbitration 
agreement was referred to be decided by the Arbitral 
Tribunal after conducting a detailed examination of 
documentary evidence and cross-examination of witnesses. 
161. The above position of law leads us to the inevitable 
conclusion that at the referral stage, the Court only has to 
determine the prima facie existence of an arbitration 
agreement. If the referral court cannot decide the issue, it 
should leave it to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal. The 
referral court should not unnecessarily interfere with 
arbitration proceedings, and rather allow the Arbitral 
Tribunal to exercise its primary jurisdiction. In Shin-Etsu 
Chemical 
Co. 
Ltd. v. Aksh 
Optifibre 
Ltd. [Shin-Etsu 
Chemical Co. Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd., (2005) ], 
this Court observed that there are distinct advantages to 
leaving the final determination on matters pertaining to the 
validity of an arbitration agreement to the Tribunal: (Shin-
Etsu 
Chemical 
Co. case [Shin-Etsu 
Chemical 
Co. 
Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd., (2005) ], SCC p. 267, 
para 74) 
“74. … Even if the Court takes the view that the arbitral 
agreement is not vitiated or that it is not valid, inoperative 
or unenforceable, based upon purely a prima facie view, 
nothing prevents the arbitrator from trying the issue fully 
and rendering a final decision thereupon. If the arbitrator 
finds the agreement valid, there is no problem as the 
arbitration will proceed and the award will be made. 
However, if the arbitrator finds the agreement invalid, 
inoperative or void, this means that the party who wanted 
to proceed for arbitration was given an opportunity of 
proceeding to arbitration, and the arbitrator after fully 
trying the issue has found that there is no scope for 
arbitration.” 
xxx xxx xxx 
164. In case of joinder of non-signatory parties to an 
arbitration agreement, the following two scenarios will 
prominently emerge: first, where a signatory party to an 
arbitration agreement seeks joinder of a non-signatory party 
to the arbitration agreement; and second, where a non-

signatory party itself seeks invocation of an arbitration 
agreement. In both the scenarios, the referral court will be 
required to prima facie rule on the existence of the 
arbitration agreement and whether the non-signatory is a 
veritable party to the arbitration agreement. In view of the 
complexity of such a determination, the referral court should 
leave it for the Arbitral Tribunal to decide whether the non-
signatory party is indeed a party to the arbitration agreement 
on the basis of the factual evidence and application of legal 
doctrine. The Tribunal can delve into the factual, 
circumstantial, and legal aspects of the matter to decide 
whether its jurisdiction extends to the non-signatory party. In 
the process, the Tribunal should comply with the 
requirements of principles of natural justice such as giving 
opportunity to the non-signatory to raise objections with 
regard to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal. This 
interpretation also gives true effect to the doctrine of 
competence-competence 
by 
leaving 
the 
issue 
of 
determination of true parties to an arbitration agreement to 
be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal under Section 16. 
165. In view of the discussion above, we arrive at the 
following conclusions: 
… … … 
(l) At the referral stage, the referral court should leave it for 
the Arbitral Tribunal to decide whether the non-signatory is 
bound by the arbitration agreement […]” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
32. As discussed above, the respondents have raised a number of objections 
against the present petition, however, none of the objections raised question 
or deny the existence of the arbitration agreement under which the 
arbitration has been invoked by the petitioner in the present case. Thus, the 
requirement of prima facie existence of an arbitration agreement, as 
stipulated under Section 11 of the Act, 1996, is satisfied. 

33. Once the arbitral tribunal is constituted, it shall be open for the respondents 
to raise all the available objections in law, and it is only after (and if) the 
preliminary objections are considered and rejected by the tribunal that it 
shall proceed to adjudicate the claims of the petitioner. 
 
34. Further, on the issue of impleadment of respondent no. 2, which is not a 
signatory to the arbitration agreement, elaborate submissions have been 
made on both the sides, placing reliance on terms of the agreements, email 
exchanges, etc. In view of the complexity involved in the determination of 
the question as to whether the respondent no. 2 is a party to the arbitration 
agreement or not, we are of the view that it would be appropriate for the 
arbitral tribunal to take a call on the question after taking into consideration 
the evidence adduced before it by the parties and the application of the 
legal doctrine as elaborated in the decision in Cox and Kings (supra). 
 
35. In view of the aforesaid, the present petition is allowed. We appoint Shri 
Justice Mohit S. Shah, former Chief Justice of the High Court of Judicature 
at Bombay to act as the sole arbitrator. The fees of the arbitrator including 
other modalities shall be fixed in consultation with the parties. 

36. It is made clear that all the rights and contentions of the parties are left 
open for adjudication by the learned arbitrator. 
 
37. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

…………………………………….CJI 
 (Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud) 

………………………………………J. 
(J.B. Pardiwala) 

………………………………………J. 
(Manoj Misra) 
 
New Delhi; 
9th September, 2024