IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

SK. GOLAM LALCHAND 

VERSUS 

NANDU LAL SHAW & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 

PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
Heard Shri Rauf Rahim, learned senior counsel for the 
appellant and Shri Pijush K. Roy, learned senior counsel 
for the respondent No. 1. 
2. 
The dispute in this Civil Appeal is about the property 
measuring more or less 6 Cottahs 1 Chittack and 30 sq. ft. along with 17 rooms (about 4395 sq. ft. which 
comprises of tile sheds/huts) situate at 100/3 Carry 
Road, Howrah. 

3. 
The plaintiff-respondent Nandu Lal claims that he had 
acquired rights in the aforesaid property through his 
father late Salik Ram along with his other brothers and 
that Brij Mohan, his cousin, the son of his uncle late Sita 
Ram, had no exclusive right to sell the property in favour 
of anyone much less to one of the tenants S.K. Golam 
Lalchand, the defendant-appellant. 
4. 
The Title Suit No.212/2006 filed by the plaintiff-
respondent Nandu Lal was dismissed by the court of first 
instance as he failed to prove his possession but in 
appeal the decree was reversed and the suit was decreed 
disbelieving the family settlement and holding that there 
was no partition of the property. The judgment and order 
of the First Appellate Court was affirmed by the High 
Court in Second Appeal. 
5. 
Aggrieved by the judgment and order of the First 
Appellate Court and its affirmation by the High Court 
vide 
judgment 
and 
order 
dated 
06.07.2021, 
the 
defendant-appellant has preferred this appeal. 
6. 
The facts in brief are that the suit property was 
admittedly purchased by the two brothers namely, late 

Sita Ram and late Salik Ram in 1959 from one Sahdori 
Dasi and both of them had equal rights in the said 
property. 
7. 
It is alleged that one of the brothers late Salik Ram gifted 
his share in the suit property to his brother late Sita Ram 
who allegedly became the absolute owner of the entire 
property. The aforesaid late Sita Ram died intestate in 
1975 leaving behind his son Brij Mohan and three 
daughters who appear to have relinquished their rights in 
the suit property in favour of their brother Brij Mohan. It 
is also alleged that the suit property under the family 
settlement was settled in favour of Brij Mohan. 
8. 
On the other hand, plaintiff-respondent Nandu Lal 
alleges that his father late Salik Ram made no gift of his 
share in the suit property in favour of late Sita Ram and 
that there is no family settlement as alleged by the other 
side. Therefore, Brij Mohan, the son of late Sita Ram, had 
no right to transfer the whole of the property in favour of 
one of the tenants, defendant-appellant S.K. Golam 
Lalchand and the sale deed in this regard dated 
19.05.2006 is void. 

9. 
Upon the aforesaid sale of the entire suit property by Brij 
Mohan to defendant-appellant S.K. Golam Lalchand, the 
plaintiff-respondent 
Nandu 
Lal 
filed 
Title 
Suit 
No.212/2006 for declaration and permanent injunction 
claiming 
that 
the defendant-appellant S.K. 
Golam 
Lalchand could not have acquired any right, title and 
interest in the suit property by virtue of any sale deed, if 
any, executed by Brij Mohan and that he has no right to 
dispossess other tenants from the suit property and, 
therefore, he, his men and agents be restrained from 
taking forcible possession of any tenanted portion and 
from causing any disturbance in the possession of the 
plaintiff-respondent Nandu Lal. 
10. The plaintiff-respondent Nandu Lal alleged that the suit 
property was admittedly the joint property of both late 
Sita Ram and his father late Salik Ram. Late Salik Ram 
never made any gift of his share in the suit property in 
favour of late Sita Ram. There was no family settlement 
settling the suit property in favour of Brij Mohan, son of 
late Sita Ram. Since the property has not been 

partitioned, Brij Mohan could not have sold the same in 
entirety. 
11. The suit was contested by the defendant-appellant S.K. 
Golam Lalchand as well as Brij Mohan on the allegation 
that late Salik Ram, sometime in 1960, gifted his share in 
the suit property to late Sita Ram. Thus, late Sita Ram 
became the absolute owner. Upon his death in 1975, the 
property devolved upon his son Brij Mohan and three 
daughters who relinquished their rights in favour of Brij 
Mohan, thus, making Brij Mohan the absolute owner of 
the entire property. The defendant-appellant S.K. Golam 
Lalchand by filing a separate written statement stated 
that he is a bona fide purchaser in good faith of the whole 
property vide registered sale deed dated 19.05.2006 
executed by Brij Mohan. The said sale deed, in 
unequivocal terms, states the manner in which Brij 
Mohan had acquired the property. Therefore, the suit of 
the plaintiff-respondent Nandu Lal is misconceived and 
liable to be dismissed. 
12. On the pleadings and submissions of the parties, the 
moot question which has arisen before us in the appeal is 

whether Brij Mohan, son of late Sita Ram, alone was 
competent to transfer the entire suit property by way of 
sale deed dated 19.05.2006 in favour of defendant-
appellant S.K. Golam Lalchand. 
13. The 
plaintiff-respondent 
Nandu 
Lal, 
in 
order 
to 
substantiate his case, apart from other documents and 
oral evidence, brought on record the original deed of 
purchase of the property of the year 1959 Exh.1 and he 
himself appeared as a witness PW-1 to prove his case. 
The said original sale deed is undoubtedly in the joint 
name of late Salik Ram and late Sita Ram, both of whom 
acquired equal rights in the purchased property. This 
position is otherwise also admitted to the parties. 
14. The defendant-appellant S.K. Golam Lalchand or Brij 
Mohan has not led any evidence to prove the gifting of the 
share by late Salik Ram in favour of late Sita Ram. No gift 
deed in this regard has been produced in evidence. 
Therefore, as a natural consequence, both the brothers 
late Salik Ram and late Sita Ram continued to be the 
joint owners of the property. 

15. On the death of Sita Ram, his share in the suit property 
naturally devolved upon his son Brij Mohan and three 
daughters. No evidence was brought on record to 
establish that the daughters have relinquished/gifted 
their rights in the suit property in favour of their brother 
Brij Mohan. In this way, Brij Mohan had not acquired the 
rights in the property possessed by his sisters. 
16. Even the claim of the defendant-appellant S.K. Golam 
Lalchand or Brij Mohan to the suit property on the basis 
of the family settlement has not been proved. The 
settlement has not been adduced in evidence. Therefore, 
by no stretch of imagination, it can be said that Brij 
Mohan had acquired exclusive right in the entire property 
acquired and possessed by late Salik Ram and late Sita 
Ram by virtue of the sale deed 1959 Exh.1. 
17. Even the Trial Court which had dismissed the suit of the 
plaintiff-respondent Nandu Lal has categorically recorded 
that the suit property was never partitioned as the 
defendant-appellant S.K. Golam Lalchand had not 
produced any cogent material on record to prove the 

partition meaning thereby the property continued to be a 
joint property. 
18. The First Appellate Court also recorded a finding that it is 
beyond pale of controversy that the suit property was 
equally owned by late Salik Ram and late Sita Ram and 
that the property had always remained undivided and 
joint between the co-owners. The family settlement on the 
basis of which partition or settlement is being claimed 
was never produced in evidence and proved. The First 
Appellate Court further recorded that the sisters of Brij 
Mohan have not gifted their share in the property or have 
relinquished their rights in it as no such documentary 
evidence was brought on record. 
19. The above findings of the Trial Court and that of the First 
Appellate Court have not been disturbed by the High 
Court rather the Second Appellate Court has accepted 
the same which clearly demonstrates that the story of 
family settlement, as set up by the defendant-appellant 
S.K. Golam Lalchand and Brij Mohan was totally 
disbelieved by all the three courts. Moreover, it had come 
to the forefront that the property had remained the joint 

property of late Salik Ram and late Sita Ram as the 
gifting of share by late Salik Ram in favour of late Sita 
Ram was not proved. The gifting and the relinquishment 
of shares by the three daughters/sisters in favour of Brij 
Mohan also could not be established. 
20. In this view of the matter, the entire property purchased 
by the two brothers late Salik Ram and late Sita Ram in 
the year 1959 vide Exh.1 continued to be the joint 
property in which both of them had equal rights. On their 
death, the same devolved upon their respective heirs and 
legal representatives including Brij Mohan, his three 
sisters on one side and plaintiff-respondent Nandu Lal, 
his three brothers and five sisters on the other side. 
Thus, Brij Mohan alone was not competent to execute a 
sale of the entire property in favour of the defendant-
appellant S.K. Golam Lalchand, that too without its 
partition by metes and bounds. 
21. Since the suit property has many co-owners including the 
plaintiff-respondent Nandu Lal and Brij Mohan, the 
defendant-appellant S.K. Golam Lalchand could not have 
acquired right, title and interest in the whole of the suit 

property solely on the basis of the sale deed dated 
19.05.2006 executed by Brij Mohan. The said sale deed, 
if at all, in accordance with Section 44 of the Transfer of 
Property Act, 1882 may be a valid document to the extent 
of the share of Brij Mohan in the property and defendant-
appellant S.K. Golam Lalchand is free to take remedies to 
claim appropriate relief either by suit of partition or by 
suit of compensation and damages against Brij Mohan. 
22. The authorities cited on behalf of the defendant-appellant 
S.K. Golam Lalchand are only to the effect that there is 
no illegality on his part in purchasing the share of Brij 
Mohan in the suit property and to that effect the sale in 
his favour is valid. There are no two opinions on the 
above aspect as mentioned earlier but those authorities 
do not help him in any way to enable us to reverse the 
decree passed by the First Appellate Court as affirmed by 
the High Court. 
23. A faint effort was made in the end to contend that the 
plaintiff-respondent Nandu Lal had not asked for any 
relief of cancellation of the sale deed by which the 
property was purchased by the defendant-appellant S.K. 

Golam Lalchand and, therefore, is not entitle to any relief 
in this suit. The argument has been noted only to be 
rejected for the simple reason that Section 31 of the 
Specific Relief Act, 1963 uses the word ‘may’ for getting 
declared the instrument as void which is not imperative 
in every case, more particularly when the person is not a 
party to such an instrument. 
24. The suit property which is undivided is left with the 
co-owners to proceed in accordance with law to get their 
shares determined and demarcated before making a 
transfer. 
25. The point for determination formulated in paragraph 12 
above is accordingly answered and it is held that Brij 
Mohan alone was not competent to transfer the entire 
property without getting his share determined and 
demarcated 
so 
as 
to 
bind 
the 
other 
co-owners. 
Accordingly, 
the 
defendant-appellant 
S.K. 
Golam 
Lalchand has rightly been restrained by the decree of 
injunction in acting in derogation of the propriety rights 
of the co-owners until and unless the partition takes 
place. 

26. In the above facts and circumstances, we do not find any 
merit in this appeal and the same is dismissed upholding 
the judgments and orders of the High Court dated 
06.07.2021 and of the First Appellate Court dated 
07.04.2018. 
27. In the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be 
no orders as to costs....………………………….. J. 
(SUDHANSHU DHULIA)...……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL)