IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

BEENA AND ORS. 

VERSUS 

CHARAN DAS (D) THR. LRS. & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 

PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
What was once a dispute between landlord and tenant for 
the eviction of the tenant from the premises in dispute 
ended into a consent order way back in the year 1979. 
Unfortunately, the said consent order gave rise to a bitter 
civil dispute between the parties, which has now landed 
in this Court after the suit was dismissed by the court of 
first instance which judgment and order was upheld by 
the First Appellate Court. However, the decree so passed 
was reversed by the High Court in Second Appeal. This is 
how the parties are now before this Court. 
2. 
Late Bhawani Parshad alias Bhagati Parshad (now 
represented by his legal representatives) was the landlord 

and late Charan Dass (now represented by his legal 
representatives) was a tenant in the premises consisting 
of a house of two rooms/godown comprised in Khasra 
No.1383 situate in Mohalla Charpat, Church Road, 
Chamba Town. 
3. 
The landlord applied under Section 14 of the Himachal 
Pradesh Urban Rent Control Act, 19711 for the eviction of 
the tenant, late Charan Dass, on the ground that the 
house in question was in a dilapidated condition which 
required demolition and reconstruction. The suit was 
initially contested by the tenant wherein issues were 
framed, out of which two issues were relevant and 
important; as to whether the house in dispute is in a 
dilapidated condition, unfit for habitation and requires 
demolition and reconstruction; and whether the landlord 
requires the said house for his bona fide personal use. 
3A. In the said suit on one of the dates fixed i.e. 05.09.1979, 
the landlord appeared in court and stated that there has 
been a settlement between the parties and the tenant has 
accepted to deposit a sum of Rs.12,500/- before 
 
1 hereinafter referred to as “the Act” 

15.12.1979 in the court. In the event the amount is so 
deposited on or before the aforesaid date, the application 
of the landlord shall be deemed to be dismissed; 
otherwise, on failing to do so, the landlord’s application 
would be deemed to be allowed. The tenant also appeared 
before the court on the said date and accepted the 
settlement. He stated that in case he fails to deposit the 
aforesaid amount on or before the date fixed, he shall 
vacate the house/godown, and in the event of him 
depositing the same, the application of the landlord shall 
be deemed to be dismissed. 
4. 
In terms of the aforesaid settlement, as per the statement 
of both the landlord and tenant, the Court of Rent 
Controller, on the very same day, i.e. 05.09.1979 passed 
an order allowing the application of the landlord 
conditionally; that if the tenant fails to deposit the 
aforesaid sum of Rs.12,500/- in court in the name of the 
landlord on or before 15.12.1979, the application would 
be deemed to be allowed, and the tenant would deliver 
vacant possession of the house immediately, otherwise, if 
the tenant deposits the amount within the stipulated 

period, the application of the landlord would be deemed 
to be dismissed. 
5. 
The tenant, in pursuance of the above consent order 
dated 05.09.1979, deposited a sum of Rs.12,500/- in the 
Chamba Treasury on 06.09.1979, i.e., on the very next 
day. Thus, the application of the landlord under Section 
14 of the Act came to be dismissed in terms of the 
consent order. 
6. 
The landlord, however, challenged the aforesaid order by 
means of Civil Revision No.168/79 before the High Court 
which was dismissed on 07.12.1984, observing that in 
case the landlord was aggrieved by the dismissal of his 
application under Section 14 of the Act, the appropriate 
remedy available to him was to file an appeal under 
Section 21(1)(b) of the Act. 
7. 
It has come on record that the Special Leave Petition of 
the landlord against the above order of the High Court 
also stood dismissed, though, nothing in detail to that 
effect has been brought on record. In short, the consent 
order dated 05.09.1979 between the landlord and the 
tenant became final and conclusive. 

8. 
Despite the fact that there was no eviction order against 
the tenant or any positive direction in his favour, he 
moved an application for the execution of the consent 
order, which came to be allowed by the Rent Controller 
on 28.08.1989, wherein it was directed that the name of 
the tenant be entered as owner in possession of the 
disputed premises by making corrections in the relevant 
records. Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the executing 
court, the landlord preferred a civil revision, contending 
that there could have been no execution of the consent 
order at the behest of the tenant, as his application for 
eviction of the tenant stood dismissed and that the 
executing court could not have ordered for recording the 
name of the tenant as owner in possession of the 
disputed premises. The said civil revision was allowed, 
holding that in the meantime, the building had collapsed 
and nothing remained on the spot which could be 
recorded in the name of the tenant. The court, therefore, 
in the end held that the remedy of the tenant was not by 
way of an execution petition and the order of the Rent 
Controller dated 28.08.1989 was not sustainable in law. 

9. 
After having lost in the execution proceedings in getting 
his name recorded as the owner in possession of the 
disputed premises on the basis of the consent order 
dated 05.09.1979, the tenant filed a suit for permanent 
mandatory injunction, for possession and recovery of 
Rs.2,000/- arraying the landlord as the defendant. The 
said was dismissed with cost by 
the court of first instance vide judgment and order dated 
16.07.1994. The appeal of the tenant also met with the 
same fate. However, in Second Appeal before the High 
Court, the judgment, order and decree passed by the 
court of first instance as affirmed by the First Appellate 
Court was reversed and the suit was decreed holding that 
under the consent order, the tenant had become the 
owner of the suit premises and since he became the 
owner, and had been dispossessed by the landlord, he 
was entitled to a decree of possession. Accordingly, the 
suit was decreed in terms of the prayer made by the 
tenant. 
10. It may be pertinent to note that the building existing on 
the tenanted premises was alleged to be in a dilapidated 

condition when the application under Section 14 of the 
Act was filed by the landlord in the year 1977 and that it 
had collapsed after the consent order was passed during 
the pendency of the revision arising from the order of the 
executing court. It is admitted to the parties that after the 
collapse of the building and its vacation by the tenant, 
altogether a new building has been constructed on the 
premises in question by the landlord. 
11. We have heard Shri Rajesh Gupta, learned counsel for 
the appellants-landlord and Shri Rajesh Srivastava, 
learned counsel for the respondents-tenants. 
12. On the submission of the counsel for the parties, the 
moot question which arises for our consideration is as to 
whether under the consent order dated 05.09.1979 
passed on an application under Section 14 of the Act 
moved by the landlord, the tenant can claim himself to be 
the owner of the property as he has deposited the 
stipulated amount of Rs.12,500/-. 
13. The answer to the above issue depends upon the 
interpretation 
of 
the 
consent 
order 
vis-à-vis 
the 

statements of the landlord and tenant recorded by the 
Rent Controller in passing the aforesaid consent order. 
14. There is no dispute to the fact that there existed a 
relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties 
and that the landlord had filed an application for the 
eviction of the tenant under Section 14 of the Act on the 
ground of dilapidated condition and on bona fide need. 
15. In the said proceedings on 05.09.1979, the statement of 
the 
landlord 
was 
recorded 
which 
is 
reproduced 
hereinbelow: 
“Statement of Shri Bhagati Parshad S/o 
Sh. Duni Chand Resident of Chamba - 
applicant 
with 
counsel 
on 
Solemn 
affirmation. 
Stated that I have settled with respondent. As 
per the settlement respondent will pay me 
Rs.12,500/- before 15.12.1979 as against the 
value of Godown and house in dispute. The 
manner of making such payment shall only be 
one and that is the amount shall have to be 
deposited in Court in my name. 
As per this settlement, my application shall be 
deemed to be allowed in-case the respondent 
fails to deposit the said amount on or before 
15.12.1979; should the said amount be so 
deposited my application shall be deemed to be 
dismissed.” 

16. 
The said statement and the settlement were accepted by 
the tenant on the same date who got his statement 
recorded as under: 
“Statement of Shri Charan Dass son of 
Shri Hans Ram - Respondent with counsel 
on Solemn Affirmation. 
Stated that I the above statement of applicant 
has been heard and, accepted. In case I fail to 
deposit Rs.12,500/- before 15.12.1979 I shall 
vacate the Godown and house in dispute, and 
incase I deposit within time, applicant's 
application shall be deemed to be dismissed.” 

17. A plain reading of the aforesaid two statements clearly 
demonstrates that under the settlement, the tenant had 
agreed to pay a sum of Rs.12,500/-, to be deposited in 
court in the name of the landlord on or before 
15.12.1979, 
treating 
it 
to 
be 
the 
value 
of 
the 
house/godown. It was further agreed that if the amount 
is deposited, the application of the landlord for eviction 
would stand dismissed, and in case the tenant fails to 
make the deposit, as agreed, the application of the 
landlord for eviction would stand allowed. This is also 
clearly implicit from the statement of the tenant who 
accepted the settlement and stated that in case he fails 

to 
deposit 
the 
stipulated 
amount 
on 
or 
before 
15.12.1979, he shall vacate the house/godown and in 
case he deposits the sum within time, the application of 
the landlord shall be deemed to be dismissed. 
18. The aforesaid two statements nowhere provide that the 
amount liable to be deposited by the tenant was a sale 
consideration of the property, though, it may have been 
stated that it is equivalent to the value of the property or 
that the tenant, or on deposit of such an amount, he 
would become the owner of the property. Therefore, on 
the plain reading of the above statements, it cannot be 
said by any stretch of imagination that there was any 
settlement of transfer of the property on the above sale 
consideration. It may also be noted that there is no 
document witnessing the transfer of the property in 
pursuance of the above statements or the consent order. 
19. The Rent Controller in passing the consent order on 
05.09.1979 recorded that the dispute between the 
landlord and tenant had been compromised. According to 
the terms of the compromise contained in the statements 
of the parties, on the payment of Rs.12,500/- by the 

tenant as the price of the house, he was to become the 
owner in possession. This narration of fact that the 
tenant would become the owner in possession in the 
order of the Rent Controller is obviously against the 
record, i.e., the statement of the parties, wherein it has 
nowhere been stipulated that the tenant, on deposit 
would become the owner of the property. However, in the 
end, the Rent Controller himself records that on the price 
of Rs.12,500/- being deposited on or before the 
15.12.1979, the application of the landlord would be 
deemed to have been dismissed and on failure to deposit, 
it shall deem to have been allowed. It means the 
aforesaid consent order was only with regard to 
dismissing and allowing of the application of the landlord 
in the eventuality of depositing of the amount and non-
depositing of the amount by the tenant. The settlement 
recorded in terms of the statements of the parties and 
even the consent order does not in any way provide or 
confer right of ownership upon the tenant, nor it could 
have been done in a proceeding for eviction of the tenant. 
No document, much less a registered instrument, was 

executed between the parties transferring the title of the 
suit premises. In its absence obviously no transfer of title 
can pass from one party to another. In such a 
proceeding, the only option available to the Rent 
Controller was either to order eviction or to dismiss the 
application for eviction as has been done by him. 
20. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we are 
crystal clear in our mind that the High Court had 
patently erred in interpreting the consent order and in 
reversing the well-considered judgments and orders of 
the court of first instance and the First Appellate Court, 
dismissing the suit of the tenant. 
21. Accordingly, the judgment and order of the High Court 
dated 20.04.2011 is set aside and the appeal is allowed 
with costs....………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL)...……………………………….. J. 
(R. MAHADEVAN)