IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

JASEELA SHAJI 

VERSUS 

THE UNION OF INDIA & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 

B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
1. 
The appellant, who is the wife of one Appisseril Kochu 
Mohammed Shaji (Shaji A.K.)1, has approached this Court being 
aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 4th March 2024 
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Kerala at 
Ernakulam in, vide 
which it has dismissed the said habeas corpus petition filed by 
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as “detenu”. 
2 “habeas corpus petition” 

the appellant for production of the detenu, who was detained 
pursuant to the order of detention dated 31st August 20233 
passed under the provisions of the Conservation of Foreign 
Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 19744. 
2. 
By order dated 31st of July 2024, this Court allowed the 
present appeal; quashed and set aside the impugned judgment 
and order of the High Court dated 4th March 2024 in Writ Petition 
( so also the order dated 31st August 
2023 passed by the Joint Secretary (COFEPOSA), COFEPOSA 
Unit, Central Economic Intelligence Bureau, Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of Revenue, Government of India5 to the 
Government of India directing the detention of the detenu and 
the order dated 28th November 2023 passed by the Under 
Secretary, COFEPOSA Wing, Central Economic Intelligence 
Bureau, 
Department 
of 
Revenue, 
Ministry 
of 
Finance, 
Government of India6 confirming the detention order of the 
detenu. We have directed that the detenu be released forthwith, 
 
3 Hereinafter referred to as “detention order” 
4 Hereinafter referred to as “COFEPOSA” 
5 Hereinafter referred to as “Detaining Authority” 
6 Hereinafter referred to as “Central Government” 

if not required in any other case. The reasons for the same are as 
under: 
3. 
Shorn of details, the facts giving rise to the present appeal 
are as under: 
3.1 The detention order dated 31st August 2023 was passed by 
the Detaining Authority under Section 3(1) of the COFEPOSA, 
thereby directing detention of the detenu with a view to prevent 
him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the augmentation 
of foreign exchange in future. 
3.2 The detenu was taken into custody on 2nd September 2023 
and put in detention in Central Prisons, Poojapura, Trivandrum, 
Kerala. 
3.3 The grounds of detention and the relied upon documents 
were served on the detenu on 6th September 2023. 
3.4 A perusal of the grounds of detention served on the detenu 
would reveal that there are 12 grounds on the basis of which the 
detention order dated 31st August 2023 came to be passed. The 
Detaining Authority has relied on the following material for 
arriving at its subjective satisfaction: 
a) Statements of the detenu recorded on 20th June 2023, 

11th July 2023 and 17th July 2023 under Section 37 of 
FEMA; 
b) Statement of Shri Suresh Babu recorded on 7th July 
2023; 
c) WhatsApp chats, voice calls, images recovered from the 
mobile phone as also ‘paper slips’ allegedly recovered 
from the detenu; 
d) Statements of Ms. Preetha Pradeep recorded on 5th July 
2023 and 6th July 2023. 
3.5 In the grounds of detention, the detenu was further 
informed about his right to make representation to the Detaining 
Authority as well as the Chairman, COFEPOSA, Advisory Board, 
High Court of Kerala7 and the Central Government through Jail 
Authorities. 
3.6 Accordingly, the detenu had made representations to the 
concerned Authorities i.e. the Detaining Authority, the Central 
Government and the Advisory Board. It appears that the Jail 
Authorities sent the said representations to the concerned 
 
7 Hereinafter referred to as “Advisory Board” 

Authorities through the ordinary post. However, neither the 
Detaining Authority nor the Central Government received the 
said representations. Insofar as the representation made by the 
detenu to the Advisory Board is concerned, the Advisory Board 
opined that there was sufficient cause for detention of the 
detenu. Hence the Central Government vide order dated 28th 
November 2023 confirmed the detention order and further 
directed that the detenu be detained for a period of one year from 
the date of his detention i.e. from 2nd September 2023. 
3.7 Being aggrieved by the detention of the detenu, the 
appellant herein approached the Kerala High Court by way of 
habeas corpus petition being Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 1271 of 
2023. By the impugned judgment and order dated 4th March 
2024, the said writ petition came to be rejected. 
3.8 Being aggrieved thereby, the appellant has approached this 
Court by way of present Appeal by special leave. 
4. 
We have heard Shri Gaurav Aggarwal, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing for the appellant and Shri Nachiketa Joshi, 
learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent(s). 
5. 
Shri Gaurav Aggarwal, learned Senior Counsel, submits 

that in the present case, the material against the detenu could 
not have led any reasonable person to come to the conclusion 
that there was a case made out against the detenu to detain him. 
The Detaining Authority has not applied his/her mind to the 
material in proper perspective resulting in an unsustainable 
order of preventive detention. The learned Senior Counsel in this 
respect relied on the judgment of this Court in the case of 
Ameena Begum vs. State of Telangana and others.8 
6. 
Shri Gaurav Aggarwal further submits that a perusal of the 
grounds of detention dated 31st August 2023 would clearly show 
that the statements of Ms. Preetha Pradeep were relied upon by 
the Detaining Authority while arriving at its subjective 
satisfaction. He submits that the said statements were 
admittedly not provided to the detenu. It is, therefore, submitted 
that non-supply of the material on which the subjective 
satisfaction was arrived at would affect the right of the detenu 
guaranteed under Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India to 
make an effective representation. It is, therefore, submitted that 
 
8 (2023) 

the detention order is liable to be set aside on the said ground. 
The learned Senior Counsel in this respect has relied on the 
following judgments of this Court in the cases of: 

M. Ahamedkutty vs. Union of India and another9; 

Radhakrishnan Prabhakaran vs. State of T.N. and 
others10; 
(iii) J. Abdul Hakeem vs. State of T.N. and others11 

State of Tamil Nadu and another vs. Abdullah 
Kadher Batcha and another12; and 

Union of India vs. Ranu Bhandari13. 
7. 
 Shri Gaurav Aggarwal further submits that the detenu had 
submitted his representation on 27th September 2023 to the Jail 
Authorities for onward transmission to the Detaining Authority 
and the Central Government. He submits that a perusal of the 
counter affidavit of the respondents would reveal that the Jail 
Authorities sent the representations of the detenu by ordinary 
post, which could not be traced. He submits that, in the counter 
 
9 (1990) 
10 (2000) 
11 (2005) 
12 (2009) 
13 (2008) 

affidavit it is admitted that the said representations dated 27th 
September 2023 were not received by the Detaining Authority 
and the Central Government, but after notice was issued in the 
present matter, records were called for from the Jail Authorities 
and the representations were rejected on 11th June 2024 and 12th 
June 2024 respectively. He submits that the delay in 
transmitting the representations as well as the delay caused in 
deciding the representations would also adversely affect the right 
of the detenu for effective and speedy disposal of the 
representations and on this count also the detention order is 
liable to be set aside. In support of his submission, the learned 
Senior Counsel relied on the following judgments of this Court: 

Tara Chand vs. State of Rajasthan and others14; 

Rattan Singh vs. State of Punjab and others15; 
(iii) Vijay Kumar vs. State of Jammu & Kashmir and 
others16; 

Aslam Ahmed Zahire Ahmed Shaik vs. Union of 
 
14 (1981) 
15 (1981) 
16 (1982) 

India and others17; 

B. Alamelu vs. State of T.N. and others18; 
8. 
Shri Gaurav Aggarwal further submits that a perusal of the 
Memorandum passed by the Central Government rejecting the 
representation of the detenu would show that there was no real 
and proper consideration. He submits that no reasons are 
recorded in the Memorandum and, therefore, it does not reflect 
that there was a real or proper consideration by the Government. 
He, therefore, submits that the impugned order is liable to be 
quashed and set aside. 
9. 
Shri Aggarwal further submits that the High Court has 
erroneously held that the Detaining Authority could have arrived 
at its subjective satisfaction even after the statement of said Ms. 
Preetha Pradeep was eschewed. It is submitted that the 
statement of Ms. Preetha Pradeep was a pertinent material 
which, from the perusal of the detention order would reveal, was 
duly taken into consideration by the Detaining Authority. He, 
therefore, submits that the High Court has erred in holding that 
 
17 (1989) 
18 (1995) 

non-supply of the statements of Ms. Preetha Pradeep to the 
detenu did not vitiate the detention order. The learned Senior 
Counsel, therefore, submits that the impugned judgment and 
order is liable to be quashed and set aside. 
10. Shri Nachiketa Joshi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for 
the respondents, on the contrary, submits that the Detaining 
Authority after taking into consideration the statement of Suresh 
Babu and the exchange of WhatsApp messages between Suresh 
Babu and the detenu has rightly come to a subjective satisfaction 
that the detenu was engaged in illegal transactions by way of 
purchase and sale of illegally collected foreign currencies from 
NRIs and other foreign exchange dealers. He submits that the 
perusal of the material on record would show that the detenu has 
indulged himself in hawala dealings, illegal purchase, sale and 
carriage of foreign currencies. 
11. Shri Nachiketa Joshi further submits that as per the 
provisions contained in Section 8(b) of the COFEPOSA, the case 
of detention of the detenu was referred to the State Advisory 
Board, Kerala High Court. The Advisory Board, after hearing the 
detenu and considering the material, had opined that there were 

sufficient grounds for the detention of the detenu. 
12. The learned Senior Counsel submits that the High Court 
has rightly held that even if the statements of Preethi Pradeep is 
eschewed, the Detaining Authority could have arrived at the 
subjective satisfaction that the detention of the detenu was 
necessary. 
13. The learned Senior Counsel relies on the judgment of this 
Court in the case of Vakil Singh vs. The State of J & K and 
another19 in support of his submission that the grounds must 
contain the pith and substance of primary facts but not 
subsidiary facts or evidential details. 
14. The learned Senior Counsel further submits that in view of 
Section 5A of the COFEPOSA, even if the detention order was not 
sustainable on one ground, if it can be sustained on other 
grounds, the detention order would not be vitiated. In this 
respect, he relies on the judgment of this Court in the case of A. 
Sowkath Ali vs. Union of India and others20. 
15. Shri Nachiketa Joshi further submits that it is not 
 
19 (1975) 
20 (2000) 

necessary to furnish copy of each and every documents to which 
casual or passing reference may be made in the course of 
narration of facts and which are not relied upon by the Detaining 
Authority in making the order of detention. In this respect, he 
relies on the judgment of this Court in the case of L.M.S. Ummu 
Saleema vs. B.B. Gujaral21. 
16. Insofar as the delay in deciding the representation by the 
Detaining Authority and the Central Government is concerned, 
Shri Nachiketa Joshi, learned Senior Counsel submits that 
representations made by the detenu on 27th September 2023 
were never received by the Detaining Authority and the Central 
Government. However, after the notice was issued by this Court 
in the present matter, the record was called from the Jail 
Authorities and they decided the representations on 11th June 
2024 and 12th June 2024 respectively. He, therefore, submits 
that there is no delay in deciding the representations by the 
Detaining Authority or the Central Government. 
CONSIDERATION 
 
21 (1981) 

17. Though the detention order is assailed on several grounds, 
we propose to consider only two grounds, viz., 

As to whether the non-supply of the statements of Ms. 
Preetha Pradeep has affected the right of the detenu to 
make an effective representation under Article 22(5) of 
the Constitution of India. 

As to whether non-receipt of the representation and 
the delay in deciding the representation by the 
Detaining Authority and the Central Government 
would also affect the right of the detenu under Article 
22(5) of the Constitution. 

As to whether the non-supply of the statement of Ms. 
Preetha Pradeep has affected the right of the detenu to 
make an effective representation under Article 22(5) of 
the Constitution of India 
 
18. In the case of M. Ahamedkutty vs. Union of India and 
another (supra), this Court was considering the issue as to 
whether non-supply of the copies of the bail application and the 
bail order vitiated the right of the detenu under Article 22(5) of 
the Constitution of India. After taking the survey of the earlier 
judgments, this Court observed thus: 

“19. The next submission is that of non-supply 
of the bail application and the bail order. This 
Court, as was observed in Mangalbhai Motiram 
Patel v. State of Maharashtra [(1980): 1981 SCC (Cri) 49: (1981) ] has 
‘forged’ certain procedural safeguards for 
citizens 
under 
preventive 
detention. 
The 
constitutional imperatives in Article 22(5) 
are twofold: (1) The detaining authority 
must, as soon as may be, i.e. as soon as 
practicable, 
after 
the 
detention 
communicate to the detenu the grounds on 
which the order of detention has been made, 
and (2) the detaining authority must afford 
the detenu the earliest opportunity of 
making the representation against the 
order of detention. The right is to make an 
effective representation and when some 
documents are referred to or relied on in the 
grounds of detention, without copies of such 
documents, the grounds of detention would 
not be complete. The detenu has, therefore, 
the right to be furnished with the grounds 
of detention along with the documents so 
referred to or relied on. If there is failure or 
even delay in furnishing those documents it 
would amount to denial of the right to make 
an effective representation. This has been 
settled by a long line of decisions: Ramachandra 
A. Kamat v. Union of India [(1980): 

SCC 

414: 

], Frances 
Coralie 
Mullin v. W.C. 
Khambra [(1980): 1980 SCC (Cri) 
419: 

], Ichhu 
Devi 
Choraria v. Union of India [(1980): 
1981 SCC (Cri) 25: (1981) ], Pritam 
Nath Hoon v. Union of India [(1980): 
1981 SCC (Cri) 19: (1981) ], Tushar 
Thakker v. Union of India [(1980): 

SCC 

13], Lallubhai 
Jogibhai 
Patel v. Union of India [(1981): 1981 
SCC (Cri) 463], Kirit Kumar Chaman Lal 
Kundaliya v. Union of India [(1981): 

SCC 

471] 
and Ana 
Carolina 
D'Souza v. Union of India [1981 Supp SCC 53 
(1): 1982 SCC (Cri) 131 (1)]. 
 
20. It is immaterial whether the detenu already 
knew 
about 
their 
contents 
or 
not. 
In Mehrunissa v. State of Maharashtra [(1981): 1981 SCC (Cri) 592] it was held that 
the fact that the detenu was aware of the 
contents of the documents not furnished was 
immaterial and non-furnishing of the copy of 
the seizure list was held to be fatal. To 
appreciate this point one has to bear in mind 
that the detenu is in jail and has no access to 
his own documents. In Mohd. Zakir v. Delhi 
Administration [(1982): 1982 SCC 
(Cri) 695] it was reiterated that it being a 
constitutional imperative for the detaining 
authority to give the documents relied on and 
referred to in the order of detention pari passu 
the grounds of detention, those should be 
furnished at the earliest so that the detenu 
could 
make 
an 
effective 
representation 
immediately 
instead 
of 
waiting 
for 
the 
documents to be supplied with. The question of 
demanding 
the 
documents 
was 
wholly 
irrelevant and the infirmity in that regard was 
violative of constitutional safeguards enshrined 
in Article 22(5).” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
19. It can thus be seen that this Court, in unequivocal terms, 
has held that the constitutional requirements under Article 22(5) 

of the Constitution of India are twofold, viz., (1) the Detaining 
Authority must, as soon as practicable, after the detention 
communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the order of 
detention has been made, and (2) the Detaining Authority must 
afford the detenu the earliest opportunity of making the 
representation against the order of detention. It has further been 
held that the right is to make an effective representation and 
when some documents are referred to or relied on in the grounds 
of detention, without copies of such documents, the grounds of 
detention would not be complete. In unequivocal terms, it has 
been held that the detenu has the right to be furnished with the 
grounds of detention along with the documents so referred to or 
relied on. It has been held that failure or even delay in furnishing 
those documents would amount to denial of the right to make an 
effective representation. 
20. This Court further went on to hold that it is immaterial 
whether the detenu already knew about their contents or not. 
This Court reiterated the position that it being a constitutional 
imperative for the detaining authority to give the documents 
relied on and referred to in the order of detention pari passu the 

grounds of detention. It has been held that there is no question 
of demanding the documents. 
21. The High Court in the impugned judgment and order has 
relied on the judgments of this Court in the cases of Vakil Singh 
vs. State of J. & K. and another (supra) and L.M.S. Ummu 
Saleema vs. B.B. Gujaral (supra). 
22. Insofar as the judgment of this Court in the case of Vakil 
Singh (supra) is concerned, the detention order was challenged 
on the following grounds: 

The impugned order was passed without application 
of mind; 

Neither the grounds of detention nor the confirmation 
thereof were communicated and explained to the 
detenu; 
(iii) The grounds are vague; and 

The order of detention, assuming it was served, was a 
colourable act as the petitioner was already in jail. 
23. It could thus be seen that the said case was not concerned 
with the issue with regard to non-supply of the material which 
was relied on by the Detaining Authority in the grounds of 

detention. As such the said judgment would not be of any 
assistance to the case of the respondents. 
24. Insofar as the reliance on the judgment of this Court in the 
case of L.M.S. Ummu Saleema (supra) is concerned, the High 
Court relied on the following observations of this Court: 
“5. ….It is only failure to furnish copies of such 
documents as were relied upon by the detaining 
authority, making it difficult for the detenu to 
make an effective representation, that amounts 
to a violation of the fundamental rights 
guaranteed by Article 22(5). In our view it is 
unnecessary to furnish copies of documents to 
which casual or passing reference may be made 
in the course of narration of facts and which are 
not relied upon by the detaining authority in 
making the order of detention.” 
 
25. There can be no doubt that it is not necessary to furnish 
copies of each and every document to which a casual or passing 
reference may be made in the narration of facts and which are 
not relied upon by the Detaining Authority in making the order 
of detention. However, failure to furnish copies of such 
document/documents as is/are relied on by the Detaining 
Authority which would deprive the detenu to make an effective 
representation would certainly amount to violation of the 
fundamental right guaranteed under Article 22(5) of the 

Constitution of India. 
26. We may also gainfully refer to the following observations of 
this Court in the case of Radhakrishnan Prabhakaran (supra): 
“8. We may make it clear that there is no legal 
requirement that a copy of every document 
mentioned in the order shall invariably be 
supplied to the detenu. What is important is 
that copies of only such of those documents as 
have been relied on by the detaining authority 
for reaching the satisfaction that preventive 
detention of the detenu is necessary shall be 
supplied to him…” 
 
27. It could thus be seen that though this Court held that a 
copy of every document mentioned in the order is not required to 
be supplied to the detenu, copies of only such of those 
documents as have been relied on by the detaining authority for 
reaching the satisfaction that preventive detention of the detenu 
is necessary are required to be supplied to him. 
28. In the case of J. Abdul Hakeem (supra), the position was 
reiterated by this Court by observing thus: 
“8. …From the aforesaid authorities it is clear 
that the detenu has a right to be supplied with 
the material documents on which reliance is 
placed by the detaining authority for passing 
the detention order but the detention order will 
not be vitiated, if the document although 
referred to in the order is not supplied which is 

not relied upon by the detaining authority for 
forming of its opinion or was made the basis for 
passing the order of detention. The crux of the 
matter lies in whether the detenu's right to 
make a representation against the order of 
detention is hampered by non-supply of the 
particular document.” 
 
29. In the case of Abdullah Kadher Batcha and another 
(supra), again the position was reiterated by this Court thus: 
“7. The court has a duty to see whether the 
non-supply of any document is in any way 
prejudicial to the case of the detenu. The High 
Court has not examined as to how the non-
supply of the documents called for had any 
effect on the detenu and/or whether the non-
supply was prejudicial to the detenu. Merely 
because copies of some documents have 
(sic not) been supplied, they cannot by any 
stretch of imagination be called as relied upon 
documents. While examining whether non-
supply of a document would prejudice a 
detenu, the court has to examine whether the 
detenu would be deprived of making an 
effective representation in the absence of a 
document. Primarily, the copies which form the 
ground for detention are to be supplied and 
non-supply thereof would prejudice the detenu. 
But documents which are merely referred to for 
the purpose of narration of facts in that sense 
cannot be termed to be documents without the 
supply of which the detenu is prejudiced.” 
 
30. This Court reiterated that, primarily, the copies which form 
the ground for detention are to be supplied and non-supply 

thereof would prejudice the detenu. It has been further held that 
the documents which are merely referred to for the purpose of 
narration of facts in that sense cannot be termed to be 
documents without the supply of which the detenu is prejudiced. 
31. In the case of Ranu Bhandari (supra), this Court observed 
thus: 
“25. Keeping in mind the fact that of all human 
rights the right to personal liberty and 
individual freedom is probably the most 
cherished, we can now proceed to examine the 
contention advanced on behalf of the parties in 
the facts and circumstances of this case. But 
before we proceed to do so, it would be apposite 
to reproduce hereinbelow a verse from a song 
which was introduced in the cinematographic 
version 
of 
Joy 
Adamson's 
memorable 
classic Born Free which in a few simple words 
encapsulates the essence of personal liberty and 
individual freedom and runs as follows: 
 
“Born free, as free as the wind blows, 
As free as the grass grows, 
Born free to follow your heart. 
Born free and beauty surrounds you, 
The world still astounds you, 
Each time you look at a star. 
Stay free, with no walls to hide you, 
You're as free as the roving tide, 
So there's no need to hide. 
Born free and life is worth living, 
It's only worth living, if you're born free.” 
 
The aforesaid words aptly describe the 

concept of personal liberty and individual 
freedom which may, however, be curtailed 
by preventive detention laws, which could 
be used to consign an individual to the 
confines of jail without any trial, on the 
basis of the satisfaction arrived at by the 
detaining authority on the basis of material 
placed before him. The courts which are 
empowered to issue prerogative writs have, 
therefore, to be extremely cautious in examining 
the manner in which a detention order is passed 
in respect of an individual so that his right to 
personal liberty and individual freedom is 
not arbitrarily taken away from him even 
temporarily 
without 
following 
the 
procedure prescribed by law. 
 
26. We have indicated hereinbefore that the 
consistent view expressed by this Court in 
matters relating to preventive detention is that 
while issuing an order of detention, the 
detaining authority must be provided with all 
the materials available against the individual 
concerned, both against him and in his favour, 
to enable it to reach a just conclusion that the 
detention of such individual is necessary in the 
interest of the State and the general public. 
 
27. It has also been the consistent view that 
when a detention order is passed all the 
material relied upon by the detaining 
authority in making such an order, must be 
supplied to the detenu to enable him to 
make an effective representation against 
the detention order in compliance with 
Article 22(5) of the Constitution, irrespective 
of whether he had knowledge of the same or 
not. These have been recognised by this Court 
as the minimum safeguards to ensure that 

preventive detention laws, which are an evil 
necessity, do not become instruments of 
oppression in the hands of the authorities 
concerned or to avoid criminal proceedings 
which would entail a proper investigation.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
32. A perusal of the aforesaid judgment would reveal that for 
emphasizing the importance of personal liberty and individual 
freedom, this Court has reproduced Joy Adamson’s memorable 
classic Born Free. This Court observed that though the concept 
of personal liberty and individual freedom can be curtailed by 
preventive detention laws, the Courts have to ensure that the 
right to personal liberty and individual freedom is not arbitrarily 
taken away even temporarily without following the procedure 
prescribed by law. It has been held that when a detention order 
is passed all the material relied upon by the detaining authority 
in making such an order must be supplied to the detenu to 
enable him to make an effective representation. This Court held 
that this is required in order to comply with the mandate of 
Article 22 (5) of the Constitution, irrespective of whether the 
detenu had knowledge of such material or not. 
33. It is thus a settled position that though it may not be 

necessary to furnish copies of each and every document to which 
a casual or passing reference has been made, it is imperative that 
every such document which has been relied on by the Detaining 
Authority and which affects the right of the detenu to make an 
effective representation under Article 22(5) of the Constitution 
has to be supplied to the detenu. 
34. In the light of this legal position, let us examine the 
impugned order. 
35. The grounds on which the detention order dated 31st August 
2023 has been made read thus: 
“The following facts have been brought to 
my attention by the Sponsoring Authority of 
this COFEPOSA proposal i.e. the Directorate 
of Enforcement, Kochi Zonal Unit and I have 
gone through the facts presented by the 
Sponsoring Authority as mentioned below:- 
 
i. 
A search was conducted on 19-06-2023 at 
the residence of Shri Appisseril Kochu 
Muhammed Shaji ayasam Shaji i.e 
you, Appisseril House, Nadakkal PO, 
Erattupetta, Kottayam 686121 from where 
Shri Appisseril Kochu Muhammed Shaji i 
e. you are operating your foreign currency 
exchange business. You stated that you 
were doing trading of fruits to nearby 
areas. During the course of search, 
unaccounted Indian currency amounting 
to Rs 6,70,100/-, unaccounted Gold in the 

form of coins and biscuits weighing 110 35 
Grams 
valued 
at 
Rs.6,08,028.5/-, 
unaccounted Silver weighing 1781 Grams 
in the form of balls and pieces valued to Rs 
136246.5/- totally valuing to the tune of 
Rs 14,14,375/- (Fourteen Lakh Fourteen 
Thousand Three Hundred Seventy Five 
Only) were found and seized under the 
FFMA, 1999. ii. 
During the course of search, statement of 
you i.e. Shri Shaji A K was recorded on 
20.06.2023 under Section 37 of Foreign 
Exchange Management Act, 1999, wherein 
Mr. Shaji A.K. i.e. you have admitted that 
the cash in Indian currencies which was 
seized from your house are unaccounted 
and the paper slips were taken from your 
residence in which you noted the details of 
forex transactions of your work as a carrier 
of foreign currencies; that you were 
working as a commission agent for various 
Foreign Exchange Racketeers and handed 
over 
the 
illegally 
collected 
foreign 
currencies as well as Indian currencies to 
various persons inside and outside Kerala 
mainly 
at 
Chennai; 
that 
you 
were 
collecting foreign currencies from your 
customers and clients without obtaining 
KYC details, licenses and no invoices were 
generated against receipts of foreign 
currency; that you are doing these illegal 
activities on behalf of various Foreign 
Exchange Racketeers; that you were only 
concerned about the commissions which 
you received from such illegal activities; 
that the most part of your income was 
generated out of these illegal transactions 
by way of purchase and sale of illegally 

collected foreign currencies from NRIs and 
other forex dealers mainly from Suresh 
Babu at Kottayam, who was also operating 
the 
unaccounted 
foreign 
currency 
business. iii. 
Further, 
Shri 
Suresh 
Babu 
in 
his 
statement recorded on 07.07.2023 also 
admitted having illegal foreign currency 
dealings with Shri Shaji A.K. i.e. you. 
Furthermore, corroborative evidences in 
respect 
of 
illegal 
foreign 
exchange 
transactions between Shri Suresh Babu 
and Shri Shaji A.K. i.e. you have been 
recovered by way of analysis of WhatsApp 
chat, voice calls and images recovered 
from Shri Shaji A.K.'s i.e. your mobile 
which was seized during search. Shri 
Suresh Babu in his statement recorded on 
07.07.2023 has inter alia stated that after 
fixing the rates through phone call, Shaji 
i.e. you or the person appointed by you will 
come to the office and collect FC with Shri 
Suresh Babu and also give the equivalent 
INR for the currency; that you also 
purchase FC kept by him; usually you 
purchase in month interval and having 
transaction worth of 30 lakhs for the past 
2 years; that within these 2 years you had 
transactions worth of 2 Crores. iv. 
During the Statement of Smt. Preetha 
Pradeep recorded on 05.07.2023, on being 
asked about Shaji or Payasam Shaji, a 
native of Eratupetta, she replied that 
Shaji's person will come to the shop and 
that they will pay him the required 
currency which will be collected from 
Suresh sir's house through Binu; that 

mostly the same person will come; that's 
why she can recognize him; that without 
any doubt, they will pay the cash; that 
Suresh sir will arrange everything; that 
mostly she or Binu will receive the amount 
brought by Shaji; that they collect that 
and later it will be counted; that if any 
shortages are found in the bundle that will 
be informed to Suresh sir, that not only the 
person who goes there with the money but 
many others, who came to return the 
money to their office through Shaji; that it 
is about 20 lakh rupees sent to Shaji and 
Rs 30 lakhs is the maximum amount Shaji 
brought to their office. v. 
Statement 
of 
Preetha 
Pradeep 
was 
recorded on 06.07.2023, wherein she 
replied that M/s Suresh Forex Services Pvt 
Ltd receives INRs minimum 2 times in a 
month 
from 
Mr. 
Shaji; 
that 
each 
transactions contains approximately Rs 
20 Lakhs to 30 Lakhs; that in return to 
that Suresh will give one packet and direct 
her to hand over the same to the 
representative of Mr. Shaji. vi. 
Statement of Shri Shaji A.K. i.e. you were 
recorded on 11.0.7.2023 wherein you, 
inter-alia, stated that you buy foreign 
currencies from foreign currency dealers 
and buy from people who are NRI's in 
Kerala when they come home; that these 
are done without any documents; that you 
mainly purchase foreign currency from 
traders like Suresh of Suresh Forex at 
Kottayam, Native of Parur Shambu, Simon 
from Kottayam, etc.; that you have also 
given currencies to people going abroad 

from Kerala; that mainly you sell currency 
to Khader from Chennai; that the currency 
collected from Kerala will be sent to 
Chennai via Madhurai by bus; that this 
will be given to Khader's shop or you will 
inform Khader that you reached Chennai 
and he will come to the lodge where you 
are staying, or Khader's people will come 
and collect the foreign currency from you 
and give you the equivalent INR; that these 
are also done without any documents; that 
other than Khader, you used to sell to 
Anas; that Khader's firm is at Chennai 
Paris and Burma Bazar, that to date, you 
purchased around Rs 25 crores worth of 
foreign currency from Kerala and sold that 
to Khader, that usually you used to go to 
Chennai; that other than you, your son 
Hyder Shaji, Anas Erattupetta, Siraj 
Erattupetta, etc. are the carries of foreign 
currency to Chennai by bus; that this will 
be given to Khader, that all these are done 
without 
keeping 
any 
accounts 
and 
documents; that the calculations prepared 
for your knowledge will be destroyed after 
the transaction is completed; that was the 
foreign currency transaction you made 
and its calculations; that the first page 
indicates the value of Indian currency 
equivalent to the rate of foreign currency; 
that the second page indicates the details 
of the persons who carry foreign currency 
to Chennai and the quantity of currency 
sent; that those were written on white 
paper and took its images; that 1416 
means your niece Faris, next photo is Anas 
from Erattupetta, both of them will carry 
currency for you to Chennai; that the third 
page indicates the images of Rs 500 notes, 

those are damaged notes, that the next one 
marked us 16-6 means the transaction of 
Rs 9,12,167/- dated 16.06.2023; that the 
next page indicates the transaction done 
by you on 17.6.2023 and the value of INR 
equivalent to the foreign currency trading, 
that the thing written as Faris indicates 
the amount of Rs 24,25,750/- that Faris 
exchanged from Chennai and its value in 
INR, that SR mean the amount of Rs. 15 
lakhs, you paid as per the instructions of 
Suresh Babu of Suresh Forex at Kottayam 
to SANGVI STEEL at Chennai, that this 
amounts you received from the staff 
Preetha at Suresh Forex as per the 
instructions of Suresh Babu; that Hyder 
34 indicates the amount of Rs 34 lakhs 
worth of foreign currency he exchanged 
from Chennai; that this foreign currency 
was given by you; that Siraj 24 means the 
value of the foreign currency exchanged by 
Siraj from Chennai. vii. 
Another statement of you i.e. Shaji A.K. was recorded on 17.07.2023, wherein you, 
inter-alia, stated as under: 
 
Answer 1: I heard the voice calls in above 
said Hash value marked as CD-36. The 
voice in this call which belongs to Suresh 
Babu and myself. The first number in call 
details which was the mobile number of 
Suresh Babu and this number belongs to 
me. 
 
Answer 2: I heard the voice calls in above 
said Hash value marked as CD-37. The 
voice in this call which belongs to Suresh 
Babu and myself. The first number in call 

details which was the mobile number of 
Suresh Babu and this number belongs to 
me. 
 
Answer 3: I heard the voice calls in above 
said Hash value marked as CD-38. The 
voice in this call which belongs to Suresh 
Babu and myself. The first number in call 
details which was the mobile number of 
Suresh Babu and this number belongs to 
me. 
 
Answer 4: I heard the voice calls in above 
said Hash value marked as CD-32. The 
voice in this call which belongs to Suresh 
Babu and myself. The first number in call 
details which was the mobile number of 
Suresh Babu and this number belongs to 
me. 
 
Question 5: To whom you are selling the 
illegal foreign currency received from 
Kerala other than Khader from Chennai 
you 
mentioned 
in 
your 
previous 
statement? 
 
Answer 5: I sell the collected illegal foreign 
currency from Kerala to a person named 
Manikannan from Thrishnapalli in Tamil 
Nadu other the Khader in Chennai. 
 
Question 6: Do you have any authorized 
license or permit or acknowledgement to 
carry foreign currency exchange business? 
 
Answer 6: I don't have any authorized 
license, permit, acknowledgement to carry 
foreign currency exchange business. viii. Further Shri Shaji A.K. ayasam Shaji 
i.e. you have disclosed the names of other 
carriers i.e. (i) Hyder Shaji (your son) (ii) 
Shri Anas from Erattupetta, (iii) Shri Siraj 
from Erattupetta. You further disclosed 
that they used to go Chennai on your 
directions 
with 
unaccounted 
foreign 
currencies where they handed over the 
currency to the Chennai based racketeers 
and in exchange of foreign currency, they 
receive 
Indian 
currency. 
All 
these 
transactions are unaccounted as per your 
admission and the records were disposed 
of once the transactions were completed. 
The entire illegal transactions to the tune 
of Rs 25 Crores were carried out by Shri 
Shaji A.K. ayasam Shaji i.e. you with 
the help of your close relatives and friends. ix. 
Thus, Shri Appisseril Kochu Muhammed 
Shaji ayasam Shaji i.e. you have 
indulged yourself in hawala dealings, 
illegal purchase, sale and carriage of 
foreign currencies. x. 
Chapter 
II 
of 
Foreign 
Exchange 
Management 
Act, 

provides 
for 
"Regulation and Management of Foreign 
Exchange". Section 3 of Foreign Exchange 
Management 
Act, 
1999, 
specifically 
prohibits dealing in foreign exchange 
without the general or special permission 
of the Reserve Bank of India. It reads thus: 
 
"3 Dealing in foreign exchange, etc. Save 
as otherwise provided in this Act, rules or 
regulations made there under, or with the 
general or special permission of the 
Reserve Bank, no person shall-(a) deal in 

or transfer any foreign exchange or foreign 
security to any person not being an 
authorized person; 
 
(b) make any payment to or for the credit 
of any person resident outside India in any 
manner; 

receive 
otherwise 
through 
an 
authorized person, any payment by order 
or on behalf of any person resident outside 
India in any manner. 
 
Explanation- For the purpose of this 
clause, where any person in, or resident 
in, India receives any payment by order or 
on behalf of any person resident outside 
India through any other person (including 
an 
authorized 
person) 
without 
a 
corresponding inward remittance from any 
place outside India, then, such person 
shall be deemed to have received such 
payment otherwise than through an 
authorized person; 
 
(d) enter into any financial transaction in 
India as consideration for or in association 
with acquisition or creation or transfer of 
a right to acquire, any asset outside India 
by any person 
 
Explanation- For the purpose of this 
clause 
"financial 
transaction" 
means 
making any payment to, or for the credit of 
any person, or receiving any payment for, 
by order or on behalf of any person, or 
drawing, issuing or negotiating any bill of 
exchange 
or 
promissory 
note, 
or 
transferring any security or acknowledging 

any debt. 4 Holding of foreign exchange, 
etc. -Save as otherwise provided in this 
Act, no person resident in India shall 
acquire, hold, own, possess or transfer any 
foreign exchange, foreign security or any 
immovable 
property 
situated 
outside 
India." 
 
xi. 
Further, Section 4 of Foreign Exchange 
Management 
Act, 
1999, 
specifically 
provides that no person resident in India 
shall acquire, hold, own or possess or 
transfer any foreign exchange, foreign 
security 
or 
any 
immovable 
property 
situated outside India, except as otherwise 
provided 
under 
the 
Act. 
 
For 
the 
contravention of the Act, rules and 
regulations, penalty is provided under 
Section 13 of the Act. This would mean 
that dealing in foreign exchange de hors 
the 
statutory 
provisions, 
rules 
and 
regulations would be illegal. For violation 
of foreign exchange regulations, penalty 
can believe (sic) and such activity is 
certainly an illegal activity, which is 
prejudicial 
to 
conservation 
or 
augmentation of foreign exchange. xii. 
Shri Appisseril Kochu Muhammed Shaji ayasam Shaji i.e. you have indulged 
yourself in hawala dealings, purchase and 
sale of foreign currencies from retail 
customers without raising any invoice and 
has generated unaccounted income in 
Indian rupees and foreign currencies to 
the tune of Rs 25 crores. Thus, you have 
contravened the Section 3 and Section 4 of 
Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 
and indulged in the act prejudicial to the 

conservation or augmentation of foreign 
exchange. 
 
2. 
In view of the foregoing, I have no 
hesitation in arriving at the conclusion that 
you 
have 
been 
engaging 
yourself 
in 
activities, which have adversely affected 
the augmentation of foreign exchange 
resources of the country. Considering the 
nature and gravity of the activities, your role 
therein and the well-laid out manner in which 
you have been indulging in such prejudicial 
activities, all of which reflect your high 
potentiality and propensity of engaging yourself 
in such prejudicial activities in future, I am 
satisfied that unless detained, you are likely to 
continue to engage in the aforesaid prejudicial 
activities in future also. Therefore, it is 
necessary to detain you under the Conservation 
of 
Foreign 
Exchange 
and 
Prevention 
of 
Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 with a view to 
prevent you in future from acting in any manner 
which is prejudicial to the augmentation of 
foreign exchange.” 
[emphasis supplied] 

36. It could thus be seen that 8 factual aspects have been taken 
into consideration by the Detaining Authority while arriving at 
its subjective satisfaction that the detenu has been engaging 
himself in activities which have adversely affected the 
augmentation of foreign exchange resources of the country. 
37. A perusal of the narration at clauses (iv) and (v) would reveal 

that the said clauses refer to the statements of Preetha Pradeep 
recorded on 5th July 2023 and 6th July 2023. In the said 
statements, she has stated that Shaji’s person will come to the 
shop and that they will pay him the required currency which will 
be collected from Suresh sir’s house through Binu. She has 
further stated that mostly the same person will come; that’s why 
she can recognize him. She has further stated that, without any 
doubt, they will pay the cash and that Suresh sir will arrange 
everything. She has stated that mostly she or Binu will receive 
the amount brought by Shaji. She has further stated that M/s 
Suresh Forex Services Pvt. Ltd. receives INRs minimum 2 times 
in a month from Mr. Shaji and that each transaction contains 
approximately Rs.20 Lakhs to Rs. 30 Lakhs. She further stated 
that in return to that Suresh will give one packet and direct her 
to handover the same to the representative of Mr. Shaji. 
38. It could thus be seen that apart from the above two 
statements of Preetha Pradeep dated 5th July 2023 and 6th July 
2023, the Detaining Authority has taken into consideration one 
statement of Suresh Babu recorded on 7th July 2023; three 
statements of the detenu recorded on 20th June 2023, 11th July 

2023 and 17th July 2023; and two other factual aspects 
respectively. 
39. It could thus also be seen that the said Preetha Pradeep is 
a vital link for transactions between the said Suresh Babu and 
the detenu. It, therefore, cannot be said that the statements of 
Preetha Pradeep are just a casual or a passing reference. On the 
contrary, the said statements, as has been seen from the 
preamble of the grounds of detention as well as the beginning of 
paragraph 2 of the detention order dated 31st August 2023, 
formed the basis for arriving at a subjective satisfaction by the 
Detaining Authority. It is difficult to determine as to whether in 
the absence of the said statements of Preetha Pradeep the 
subjective satisfaction arrived at by the Detaining Authority 
could have been arrived at or not. However, the very recording 
of the factum of the statements of Preetha Pradeep make them a 
relevant aspect taken into consideration by the Detaining 
Authority for arriving at its subjective satisfaction. 
40. Insofar as the reliance placed by the learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for the respondents on the provisions of section 5A of 
the COFEPOSA is concerned, no doubt that if the detention order 

is made on several grounds and if the said order is vitiated on 
one of the grounds and it can be sustained on the other grounds, 
the detention would not be vitiated. However, a distinction will 
have to be drawn between the detention order passed on various 
grounds and the detention order passed on one ground relying 
on various materials. If the detention order is passed on one 
ground taking into consideration 8 factual aspects, the question 
would be as to whether non-supply of the material containing the 
factual aspects relied on by the Detaining Authority would vitiate 
the detention order or not. The question, therefore, for our 
consideration is as to whether though the grounds of detention 
could be severed, whether the materials which have been relied 
on by the Detaining Authority for arriving at its subjective 
satisfaction could also be severed. 
41. No doubt, as has been reiterated time and again by this 
Court, it may not be necessary to supply each and every 
document to which a passing or casual reference is made. 
However, all such material which has been relied on by the 
Detaining Authority while arriving at its subjective satisfaction 
will imperatively have to be supplied to the detenu. 

42. In our view, the documents relied on by the Detaining 
Authority which form the basis of the material facts which have 
been taken into consideration to form a chain of events could not 
be severed and the High Court was not justified in coming to a 
finding that despite eschewing of certain material taken into 
consideration by the Detaining Authority, the detention order 
can be sustained by holding that the Detaining Authority would 
have arrived at such a subjective satisfaction even without such 
material. 
43. In this respect, we may gainfully refer to the following 
observation of this Court in the case of A. Sowkath Ali (supra): 
“27. …Section 5-A applies where the detention 
is based on more than one ground, not where it 
is based on a single ground. Same is also the 
decision of this Court in the unreported decision 
of Prem Prakash v. Union of India [ Crl. A. No. 
170 of 1996 dated 7-10-1996 (see below at p. 
163)] decided on 7-10-1996 relying on K. 
Satyanarayan Subudhi v. Union of India [1991 
Supp (2) SCC 153: 1991 SCC (Cri) 1013]. 
Coming back to the present case we find really 
it is a case of one composite ground. The 
different numbers of the ground of detention 
are only paragraphs narrating the facts 
with the details of the document which is 
being relied on but factually, the detention 
order is based on one ground, which is 
revealed by Ground (1)(xvi) of the grounds of 

detention which we have already quoted 
hereinbefore. Thus on the facts of this case 
Section 5-A has no application in the 
present case”. 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
44. In that view of the matter, we have come to a considered 
conclusion that non-supply of the statements of Preetha Pradeep 
has affected the right of the detenu to make an effective 
representation under Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India 
and as such, the detention is vitiated on the said ground. 

As to whether non-receipt of the representation and the 
delay in deciding the representation by the Detaining 
Authority and the Central Government would also affect 
the right of the detenu under Article 22(5) of the 
Constitution. 
 
45. It is undisputed position that the detenu has submitted his 
representation on 27th September 2023 to the Jail Authorities for 
onward transmission of the same to the Detaining Authority and 
the Central Government. 
46. It will be relevant to refer to certain averments made in the 
counter affidavit filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 and 2, 
which would show that how the representation of the detenu was 
dealt with. 
“The contents of the ground C taken in the 

instant petition are incorrect and denied. It is 
submitted that the office of Director General 
(DG), CEIB never received any representation 
from or on behalf of the detenu/the husband of 
the petitioner. However, after receipt of this 
petition, the office of the jail authorities was 
contacted. The jail authorities informed that 
three 
representations 
dated 
27.09.2023 
addressed to the Joint Secretary (COFEPOSA), 
Director General, CEIB and the Chairman, 
COFEPOSA Advisory Board were submitted by 
the detenu/the husband of the petitioner. The 
jail authorities sent the said representations to 
the concerned authorities through Ordinary 
Post. However, neither the Joint Secretary 
(COFEPOSA) nor the Director General, CEIB 
received the said representations. Since the 
said representations were sent by the ordinary 
post, they cannot be tracked to know where the 
said ordinary posts have stuck. Hence the 
question of non-disposal of the representations 
by the concerned authorities do not arise.” 
 
47. It is thus clear that the detenu had made representations 
on 27th September 2023, addressed to the Detaining Authority, 
Central Government and the Advisory Board. The Jail 
Authorities had merely forwarded the said representations 
through ordinary post. The said representations neither reached 
the Detaining Authority nor the Central Government. The 
perusal of the statements made in the counter affidavit would 
clearly show that since the said representations were sent by 

ordinary post, they also could not be tracked. It is further stated 
in the counter affidavit that after the notice was issued by this 
Court in the present matter, the ground with regard to non-
disposal of the representations of the detenu came to the notice 
of the concerned Authorities. As such, the representations were 
sought from the Jail Authorities through email. After receiving 
the same from the Jail Authorities, the same were placed before 
the concerned authorities, which were rejected on 11th June 
2024 and 12th June 2024 respectively. It is further averred in 
the counter affidavit that the Memoranda dated 12th June 2024 
to that effect were sent to the detenu/the husband of the 
appellant. 
48. It is thus clear that the representations dated 27th 
September 2023 of the detenu was rejected by the Detaining 
Authority and the Central Government on 11th June 2024 and 
12th June 2024 respectively i.e. after a period of almost 9 months 
from the date of making the same. 
49. In this respect, it will be apposite to refer to the observation 
of this Court in the case of Tara Chand vs. State of Rajasthan 

and others22 wherein this Court was considering the delay of 
one month and five days in communicating the representation of 
the detenu from the jail to the detaining authority. This Court 
observed that: 
 
“9. In spite of these evasive answers contained 
in para 21, it is clear that the representation 
dated February 23, 1980 of the detenu made by 
him through the jail authorities reached the 
detaining authority only on March 27, 1980. It 
was substantially in the same terms as the 
representation 
addressed 
to 
the 
Central 
Government for revocation of the detention 
under Section 11. This delay of one month 
and 
five 
days 
in 
communicating 
the 
representation of the detenu from the jail to 
the detaining authority demonstrates the 
gross negligence and extreme callousness 
with which the representation made by the 
detenu was dealt with by the respondents or 
their agents. Even after this huge delay, the 
representation was sent to the Collector for 
comments, and no intimation has been sent to 
the detenu about the fate of his representation 
dated February 23, 1980, addressed to the 
detaining authority. In fact, as it appears from 
the counter, the detaining authority refused to 
consider the same merely because the detenu 
had requested that this representation be 
forwarded to the Advisory Board, also. The 
mere fact that the meeting of the Advisory 
Board had been held earlier was not a valid 
excuse for the detaining authority in not 
 
22 (1981) 

considering 
the 
representation 
of 
the 
detenu at all. 
 
10. It is well settled that in case of 
preventive detention of a citizen, Article 
22(5) of the Constitution enjoins that the 
obligation of the appropriate Government or 
of the detaining authority to afford the 
detenu the earliest opportunity to make a 
representation 
and 
to 
consider 
that 
representation speedily is distinct from the 
Government's obligation to constitute a 
Board 
and 
to 
communicate 
the 
representation, amongst other materials, to 
the Board to enable it to form its opinion and 
to obtain such opinion. In the instant case, 
there 
has 
been 
a 
breach 
of 
these 
constitutional imperatives.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
50. This Court in unequivocal terms held that the delay of one 
month and five days in communicating the representation of the 
detenu from the jail to the detaining authority demonstrates the 
gross negligence and extreme callousness with which the 
representation made by the detenu was dealt with by the 
respondents or their agents. It has been further held that Article 
22(5) of the Constitution enjoins that the obligation of the 
appropriate Government or of the detaining authority to afford 
the detenu the earliest opportunity to make a representation and 
to consider that representation speedily is distinct from the 

Government's obligation to constitute a Board and to 
communicate the representation, amongst other materials, to the 
Board to enable it to form its opinion and to obtain such opinion. 
51. It is thus clear that merely because the Advisory Board 
opined that the order of detention was sustainable, it does not 
absolve the agents of the Detaining Authority/the Central 
Government to immediately forward the representation to the 
Competent Authority and the Detaining Authority or the Central 
Government to consider and decide such a representation 
speedily. 
52. In the case of Rattan Singh vs. State of Punjab and 
others (supra), this Court found that the representation of the 
detenu made to the State Government was decided expeditiously. 
However, insofar as the said representation made to the Central 
Government is concerned, either it was not forwarded or 
someone tripped somewhere. The inevitable result was that the 
detenu was deprived of a valuable right to defend and assert his 
fundamental right to personal liberty. Chief Justice Y.V. 
Chandrachud, speaking for the Bench, observed thus: 
“4. There is no difficulty insofar as the 

representation to the Government of Punjab is 
concerned. But the unfortunate lapse on the 
part of the authorities is that they overlooked 
totally the representation made by the detenu to 
the Central Government. The representations to 
the 
State 
Government 
and 
the 
Central 
Government 
were 
made 
by 
the 
detenu 
simultaneously 
through 
the 
Jail 
Superintendent. The Superintendent should 
either have forwarded the representations 
separately to the Governments concerned or 
else he should have forwarded them to the State 
Government with a request for the onward 
transmission of the other representation to the 
Central 
Government. 
Someone 
tripped 
somewhere and the representation addressed to 
the Central Government was apparently never 
forwarded to it, with the inevitable result that 
the detenu has been unaccountably deprived of 
a valuable right to defend and assert his 
fundamental right to personal liberty. Maybe 
that the detenu is a smuggler whose tribe (and 
how their numbers increase) deserves no 
sympathy since its activities have paralysed the 
Indian economy. But the laws of preventive 
detention afford only a modicum of safeguards 
to persons detained under them and if freedom 
and liberty are to have any meaning in our 
democratic set-up, it is essential that at least 
those safeguards are not denied to the detenus. 
Section 11(1) of COFEPOSA confers upon the 
Central Government the power to revoke an 
order of detention even if it is made by the State 
Government or its officer. That power, in order 
to be real and effective, must imply the right in 
a detenu to make a representation to the 
Central Government against the order of 
detention. The failure in this case on the part 
either of the Jail Superintendent or the State 

Government 
to 
forward 
the 
detenu's 
representation to the Central Government has 
deprived the detenu of the valuable right to have 
his detention revoked by that Government. The 
continued detention of the detenu must 
therefore be held illegal and the detenu set free. 
 
5. In Tara Chand v. State of Rajasthan [(1980): 1980 SCC (Cri) 441] it was held by 
this Court that even an inordinate delay on the 
part of the Central Government in consideration 
of the representation of a detenu would be in 
violation of Article 22(5) of the Constitution, 
thereby 
rendering 
the 
detention 
unconstitutional. 
In Shyam 
Ambalal 
Siroya v. Union of India [(1980): 
1980 SCC (Cri) 447] this Court held that when 
a properly addressed representation is made by 
the detenu to the Central Government for 
revocation of the order of detention, a statutory 
duty is cast upon the Central Government 
under Section 11, COFEPOSA to apply its mind 
and either revoke the order of detention or 
dismiss the petition and that a petition for 
revocation of an order of detention should be 
disposed of with reasonable expedition. Since 
the representation was left unattended for four 
months, the continued detention of the detenu 
was held illegal. In our case, the representation 
to the Central Government was not forwarded to 
it at all.” 
 
53. This Court observed that, maybe the detenu was a smuggler 
whose tribe (and how their numbers increase) deserved no 
sympathy since its activities had paralysed the Indian economy, 
but the laws of preventive detention afforded only a modicum of 

safeguards to persons detained under them. It has been 
observed that it was essential that at least those safeguards are 
not denied to the detenus. This Court observed that the failure 
in that case either on the part of the Jail Superintendent or the 
State Government to forward the detenu's representation to the 
Central Government had deprived the detenu of the valuable 
right to have his detention revoked by that Government. 
54. Relying on the earlier judgments, this Court held that since 
the representation was left unattended for four months, the 
continued detention of the detenu was illegal. 
55. In the case of Vijay Kumar vs. State of Jammu & 
Kashmir and others (supra), this Court observed thus: 
“13. ….There are two time-lags which may be 
noticed. Representation admittedly handed in to 
the Superintendent of Jail on July 29, 1981, at 
Jammu reached Srinagar, the summer capital 
of the State on August 12, 1981, which shows a 
time-lag of 14 days. The second time-lag is, from 
our point of view, more glaring. Even though the 
concerned office was made aware of the fact by 
the wireless message of the Superintendent of 
Jail, Jammu, dated July 29, 1981, that a 
representation of the detenu has been sent by 
post, the first query about its non-receipt came 
as per the wireless message dated August 6, 
1981. That can be overlooked, but it has one 
important message. The concerned office was 

aware of the fact that a representation has 
already been made and a duplicate was sent for. 
With the background of this knowledge trace 
the movement of the representation from the 
date of its admitted receipt being August 12, 
1981. If the representation was received on 
August 12, 1981, and the same office disposed 
it of on August 31, 1981, there has been a time-
lag of 19 days and the explanation in that behalf 
in the affidavit of Shri Salathia is far from 
convincing. In our opinion, in the facts of this 
case this delay, apart from being inordinate, is 
not explained on any convincing grounds.” 
 
56. This Court found that the delay of 14 days in transmitting 
the representation from Jammu to Srinagar and 19 days in 
deciding the same vitiated the detention order. 
57. In the case of Aslam Ahmed Zahire Ahmed Shaik vs. 
Union of India and others (supra), this Court was again 
considering a similar factual scenario. The detenu had handed 
over the representation to the Superintendent of Central Prison 
on 16th June 1988, who callously ignored it and left the same 
unattended for a period of seven days and forwarded the same to 
the Government on 22nd June 1988. This Court surveyed the 
earlier decisions and observed thus: 
“5. This Court in Sk. Abdul Karim v. State of 
W.B. [(1969) ] held: (SCC p. 439, para 
8) 

“The right of representation under 
Article 
22(5) 
is 
a 
valuable 
constitutional right and is not a mere 
formality.” 
 
6. This 
view 
was 
reiterated 
in Rashid 
Sk. v. State of W.B. [(1973): 1973 
SCC 

376] 
while 
dealing 
with 
the 
constitutional 
requirement 
of 
expeditious 
consideration of the petitioner's representation 
by the Government as spelt out from Article 
22(5) of the Constitution observing thus: (SCC 
p. 478, para 4) 
 
“The 
ultimate 
objective 
of 
this 
provision can only be the most 
speedy 
consideration 
of 
his 
representation by the authorities 
concerned, 
for, 
without 
its 
expeditious consideration with a 
sense of urgency the basic purpose of 
affording 
earliest 
opportunity 
of 
making the representation is likely to 
be defeated. This right to represent 
and to have the representation 
considered at the earliest flows from 
the constitutional guarantee of the 
right to personal liberty — the right 
which is highly cherished in our 
Republic and its protection against 
arbitrary and unlawful invasion.” 
 
7. It is neither possible nor advisable to lay 
down any rigid period of time uniformly 
applicable to all cases within which period the 
representation of detenu has to be disposed of 
with 
reasonable 
expedition 
but 
it 
must 
necessarily 
depend 
on 
the 
facts 
and 

circumstances of each case. The expression 
“reasonable expedition” is explained in Sabir 
Ahmed v. Union of India [(1980): 
1980 SCC (Cri) 675] as follows: (SCC p. 299, 
para 12) 
“What is ‘reasonable expedition’ is a 
question 
depending 
on 
the 
circumstances of the particular case. 
No hard and fast rule as to the 
measure of reasonable time can be 
laid down. But it certainly does not 
cover the delay due to negligence, 
callous 
inaction, 
avoidable 
red-
tapism 
and 
unduly 
protracted 
procrastination.” 
 
8. See also Vijay Kumar v. State of J&K [(1982): 

SCC 

348] 
and Raisuddin v. State of U.P. [(1983): 1984 SCC (Cri) 16]. 
 
9. Thus when it is emphasised and re-
emphasised by a series of decisions of this Court 
that a representation should be considered with 
reasonable expedition, it is imperative on the 
part of every authority, whether in merely 
transmitting or dealing with it, to discharge that 
obligation with all reasonable promptness and 
diligence without giving room for any complaint 
of remissness, indifference or avoidable delay 
because the delay, caused by slackness on the 
part of any authority, will ultimately result in 
the delay of the disposal of the representation 
which in turn may invalidate the order of 
detention as having infringed the mandate of 
Article 22(5) of the Constitution. 
 
10. A contention similar to one pressed before 
us was examined by this Court in Vijay Kumar 

case [(1982): 1982 SCC (Cri) 348] 
wherein the facts were that the representation 
of the detenu therein dated 29-7-1981 was 
forwarded 
to 
Government 
by 
the 
Superintendent of Jail on the same day by post 
followed by a wireless message, but according to 
the Government, the representation was not 
received by them. Thereafter, a duplicate copy 
was sent by the Jail Superintendent on being 
requested and the same was received by the 
Government on 12-8-1981. Considering the 
time lag of 14 days in the given circumstances 
of that case, this Court though overlooked the 
same and allowed the writ petition on the 
subsequent time lag, made the following 
observation: (SCC pp. 49-50, para 12) 
“The jail authority is merely a 
communicating channel because the 
representation has to reach the 
Government which enjoys the power 
of revoking the detention order. The 
intermediary authorities who are 
communicating authorities have also 
to 
move 
with 
an 
amount 
of 
promptitude so that the statutory 
guarantee 
of 
affording 
earliest 
opportunity 
of 
making 
the 
representation 
and 
the 
same 
reaching 
the 
Government 
is 
translated 
into 
action. 
The 
corresponding obligation of the State 
to consider the representation cannot 
be whittled down by merely saying 
that much time was lost in the 
transit. If the Government enacts a 
law like the present Act empowering 
certain authorities to make the 
detention 
order 
and 
also 
simultaneously makes a statutory 

provision of affording the earliest 
opportunity to the detenu to make his 
representation against his detention, 
to the Government and not the 
detaining authority, of necessity the 
State Government must gear up its 
own machinery to see that in these 
cases the representation reaches the 
Government as quickly as possible 
and it is considered by the authorities 
with 
equal 
promptitude. 
Any 
slackness in this behalf not properly 
explained would be denial of the 
protection conferred by the statute 
and would result in invalidation of 
the order.” 
 
11. Reverting to the instant case, we hold that 
the 
above 
observation 
in Vijay 
Kumar 
case [(1982): 1982 SCC (Cri) 348] will 
squarely be applicable to the facts herein. 
Indisputably the Superintendent of Central 
Prison of Bombay to whom the representation 
was handed over by the detenu on 16-6-1988 
for mere onward transmission to the Central 
Government has callously ignored and kept it in 
cold storage unattended for a period of seven 
days, and as a result of that, the representation 
reached the Government eleven days after it was 
handed over to the Jail Superintendent. Why 
the representation was retained by the Jail 
Superintendent has not at all been explained in 
spite of the fact that this Court has permitted 
the respondent to explain the delay in this 
appeal, if not before the High Court. 
 
12. In our view, the supine indifference, 
slackness and callous attitude on the part of the 
Jail Superintendent who had unreasonably 

delayed in transmitting the representation as an 
intermediary, had ultimately caused undue 
delay in the disposal of the appellant's 
representation by the Government which 
received the representation eleven days after it 
was handed over to the Jail Superintendent by 
the detenu. This avoidable and unexplained 
delay has resulted in rendering the continued 
detention 
of 
the 
appellant 
illegal 
and 
constitutionally impermissible.” 
 
58. It could thus be seen that this Court in unequivocal terms 
held that the intermediary authorities who are communicating 
authorities are also required to move with an amount of 
promptitude so that the statutory guarantee of affording earliest 
opportunity of making the representation and the same reaching 
the Government is translated into action. This Court expressed 
the need of the State Government to gear up its own machinery 
to see that in these cases the representation reaches the 
Government as quickly as possible and it is considered by the 
authorities with equal promptitude. It has been held that any 
slackness in this behalf not properly explained would be denial 
of the protection conferred by the statute and would result in 
invalidation of the order. 
59. The position of law as laid down in the case of Aslam 

Ahmed Zahire Ahmed Shaik (supra) was reiterated by a bench 
of 3 learned Judges of this Court in the case of B. Alamelu vs. 
State of T.N. and others (supra). 
60. In the present case, it is an admitted position that though 
the detenu had made a representation on 27th September 2023 
to the Jail Authorities for onward transmission of the same to the 
Detaining Authority and the Central Government, it is merely 
stated in the counter affidavit that the Jail Authorities informed 
that the representations dated 27th September 2023 were 
submitted by the detenu. The Jail Authorities had sent the said 
representations to the concerned authorities through ordinary 
post. It is stated that however, neither the Detaining Authority 
nor the Central Government received the said representations. It 
is further stated that the said representations were sent by the 
ordinary post and since the said representations were sent by 
ordinary post, they could not be tracked to know where the said 
ordinary posts have stuck. It is further averred that only after a 
notice was issued in the present matter, the said representations 
were sought from the Jail Authorities and the same came to be 
rejected on 11th June 2024 and 12th June 2024 respectively. 

61. Memoranda dated 12th June 2024 further show that the 
Director General, CEIB being the Central Government received 
the representation of the detenu through Superintendent, 
Central Prison & Correctional Home, TVPM-12 vide his letter 
dated 11th May 2024 and the representation was received by the 
Detaining Authority through email on 22nd May 2024. However, 
there is no mention in the counter affidavit as to when the said 
representations were in fact received by the Central Government 
and the Detaining Authority. Presumably, if it is held that the 
representation would have been received by the Central 
Government within 2 or 3 days from the date of dispatch thereof 
that will bring the date of receipt on 14/15th May 2024. 
62. Even if it is presumed that the said representations were 
received on 15th May 2024 and 22nd May 2024 respectively, even 
then there is a delay of about 27 days in deciding the said 
representation by the Central Government and 20 days by the 
Detaining Authority. 
63. No explanation as to what caused such a delay in deciding 
the said representations of the detenu is offered in the counter 
affidavit. 

64. Firstly, we find that the Superintendent of the Central 
Prison & Correctional Home has acted in a thoroughly callous 
and casual manner. In spite of there being catena of judgments 
by this Court that it is the duty of the transmitting authorities to 
transmit the representation of the detenu promptly and it is the 
corresponding duty of the concerned authorities to consider the 
said representation and to decide it swiftly, the same has been 
followed only in breach in the present matter. 
65. In the present case, it has been casually stated that though 
the Jail Authorities had informed that the representations of the 
detenu were sent through ordinary post, the same were neither 
received by the Detaining Authority nor the Central Government. 
We deprecate the practice of the Prison Authorities in dealing 
with the valuable right of the detenu in such a casual manner. 
66. In spite of this Court clearly observing in the case of Vijay 
Kumar (supra) that the State Government must gear up its own 
machinery to ensure that the representation is transmitted 
quickly; it reaches the Central Government as quickly as possible 
and is decided expeditiously. In the present case, the law laid 
down by this Court has been given a go-bye. 

67. The Jail Authorities ought to have ensured that the 
representation of the detenu reaches the concerned Authorities 
at the earliest. In the present era of technological advancement, 
the Jail Authorities could have very well sent the copies of the 
representation to the Detaining/Appropriate Authority either by 
email or at least a physical copy could have been sent by Speed 
Post (acknowledgment due) so that there could have been some 
evidence of the said being sent to the competent authority and 
could have been tracked. 
68. We are of the considered view that merely because there has 
been a casual or callous and, in fact, negligent approach on the 
part of the Jail Authorities in ensuring that the representation of 
the detenu is communicated at the earliest, the valuable right 
available to the detenu to have his representation decided 
expeditiously cannot be denied. 
69. As already discussed herein above, there has been a delay 
of almost about 9 months in deciding the representations made 
by the detenu. Even otherwise, from the Memoranda dated 12th 
June 2024, as already discussed herein above, there would be at 
least 27/20 days’ delay on the part of the Central Government 

and the Detaining Authority in deciding the representation of the 
detenu after it reached them subsequent to the filing of the 
present appeal. 
70. We may only reiterate what has been laid down in the earlier 
judgments of this Court that the Prison Authorities should 
ensure that the representations are sent to the Competent 
Authorities immediately after the receipt thereof. In the present 
era of technological development, the said representation can be 
sent through email within a day. It is further needless to reiterate 
that the Competent Authority should decide such representation 
with utmost expedition so that the valuable right guaranteed to 
the detenu under Article 22(5) of the Constitution is not denied. 
In the matters pertaining to personal liberty of the citizens, the 
Authorities are enjoined with a constitutional obligation to decide 
the representation with utmost expedition. Each day’s delay 
matters in such a case. 
71. In the present matter, we find that on account of casual, 
callous and negligent approach of the Prison Authorities, the 
representation of the detenu could not reach to the Detaining 
Authority and the Central Government within a reasonable 

period. There has been about 9 months’ delay in deciding the 
representation. Even otherwise, accepting the stand of the 
respondents as made in the counter affidavit, there has been a 
delay of 27/20 days on the part of the Central Government and 
the Detaining Authority in deciding the representation when it 
was called from the Prison Authorities after notice was issued in 
the present matter. We further find that the detention order is 
liable to be quashed and set aside on this ground also. 
72. In the result, we pass the following order: 

The appeal is allowed; 

The judgment and order of the High Court dated 4th 
March 2024 in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 1271 of 
2023 is quashed and set aside. 
(iii) The order dated 31st August 2023 passed by the Joint 
Secretary (COFEPOSA) to the Government of India 
directing the detention of the detenu is quashed and 
set aside. 

The order dated 28th November 2023 passed by the 
Under Secretary, Government of India confirming the 
detention order of the detenu – Appisseril Kochu 

Mohammed Shaji (Shaji A.K.) is quashed and set 
aside. 

The detenu is directed to be released forthwith, if not 
required in any other case....J 
(B.R. GAVAI)...J 
(PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)...J 
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)