IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 258-259 OF 2021 

PUNE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION 
 
VERSUS 
 
SUS ROAD BANER VIKAS MANCH 
AND OTHERS 

WITH 

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 265-266 OF 2021 

JUDGMENT 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 

1. 
These Civil Appeals challenge the judgment and order 
dated 27th October 2020 passed by the National Green 
Tribunal, 
Principal 
Bench, 
New 
Delhi1 
in 
Original 
Application2 No. 210 of 20203 wherein the Tribunal disposed 
of the OA preferred by the Sus Road Baner Vikas Manch, 
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘Tribunal’. 
2 Hereinafter referred to as OA 
3 Earlier OA No. 34 of 2019 (WZ). Initially the OA was preferred before the 
Tribunal, Western Zone, and was subsequently transferred to the Principal 
Bench, New Delhi. 

Respondent No. 1 herein, by directing the Pune Municipal 
Corporation4 to close the Garbage Processing Plant5 operated 
by Noble Exchange Environment Solution Pune LLP6, at 
Baner, Pune and to shift the same to an alternate location in 
terms of the guidelines issued by the Central Pollution 
Control Board7, within 4 months from the date of the order. 
Having directed the closure of the GPP, the Tribunal further 
granted liberty to the Maharashtra Pollution Control Board8 
to recover environmental compensation on the basis of 
‘polluter pays’ principle from the GPP for the entirety of the 
period during which the environmental norms were violated 
by the GPP. Seeking a review of the aforesaid order, the 
respondent-Concessionaire, 
the 
operator 
of 
the 
aforementioned GPP, filed a Review Application being No. 49 
of 2020 which came to be dismissed by the Tribunal vide 
order dated 22nd December 2020. The said order is also 
under challenge in these present appeals. 
2. 
We have two Civil Appeals before us. The first set of 
Civil Appeals being CA Nos. 258-259 of 2021 have been filed 
 
4 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘appellant-Corporation’. 
5 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘GPP’. 
6 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘respondent-Concessionaire’. 
7 Hereinafter referred to as the “CPCB”. 
8 Hereinafter referred to as the “MPCB”. by the Pune Municipal Corporation. The second set of Civil 
Appeals being CA Nos. 265-66 of 2021 have been filed by 
Noble Exchange Environment Solution Pune LLP. For the 
sake of clarity and to avoid confusion, the parties will be 
referred to according to their positions in the first set of civil 
appeals. 
3. 
The facts which give rise to the present appeals are as 
under: 
3.1. Upon the municipal limits of the appellant-Corporation 
being extended to include Baner Balewadi, a Development 
Plan was drawn up in 2002 wherein land situated at Survey 
No. 48/2/1 in Baner Balewadi, Pune was reserved for the 
purpose of a GPP. In 2004, a public hearing was conducted 
for the purpose of drawing up a new development plan, 
subsequent to which, the Planning Committee of the 
appellant-Corporation submitted its report on 30th December 
2004 to the General Body of the appellant-Corporation 
earmarking the aforesaid land for a GPP in the Draft 
Development Plan of 2005. The said Plan was submitted to 
the Government of Maharashtra on 29th November 2005 

whereafter the Plan came to be sanctioned by the State 
Government vide Notification dated 18th September, 2008. 
3.2. In the interregnum, while the aforesaid Plan was 
pending approval, in 2005, permission was sought for 
constructing a residential building being Tarai Heights at a 
site which was approximately 100 metres away from the 
earmarked land in Survey No. 48/2/1 and subsequently, in 
2008, permission was sought for constructing another 
residential building being 52 Green Woods at a site which 
was approximately 140 metres away from the aforesaid 
earmarked land. In said fashion, over the years, permission 
for construction of similar such residential projects were 
sought in and around the earmarked portion of land. The 
last such permission was sought in 2019 for the construction 
of a residential building being Platinum 9. 
3.3. Subsequent to the Development Plan of 2005 being 
sanctioned, the appellant-Corporation and the respondent-
Concessionaire, Respondent No. 7 in the first appeal, entered 
into a Concession Agreement on 30th March 2015 for setting 
up an Organic Waste Processing Plant at the land situated at 
Survey No. 48/2/1. The purpose of the Concession 

Agreement was to set up an operational waste-processing 
facility where pre-segregated, non-compacted organic waste 
received from the appellant-Corporation would be crushed 
into a slurry, after removing any non-biodegradable material, 
and the said slurry would be transported to a facility in 
Talegaon where raw biogas would be generated from the 
slurry. The Concession Agreement was for a period of 30 
years. 
3.4. Subsequently, in compliance of the notification dated 
14th August 2006, for the setting up of GPP, the respondent-
Concessionaire sought Environment Clearance from the 
State Level Environment Impact Assessment Authority9 on 
13th August 2015. Thereafter, pursuant to a public hearing 
the 
SEIAA 
granted 
Environment 
Clearance 
to 
the 
respondent-Concessionaire for establishment of Organic 
Waste Management Plant on 1st February 2016. The 
Environment Clearance accorded was to be valid for a period 
of 7 years. 
3.5. In the meanwhile, on 2nd December 2015, the MPCB, 
Respondent No. 2 herein, granted authorization to the 
 
9 Hereinafter referred to as ‘SEIAA’. respondent-Concessionaire to set up and operate a solid 
waste processing/disposal plant in accordance with the 
Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 
200010. The said authorization was valid till 31st December 
2016. 
3.6. The 
authorization 
granted 
by 
the 
MPCB 
was 
subsequently renewed on two occasions. On 4th May 2017, 
the MPCB further granted authorization to the appellant-
Corporation 
to 
set 
up 
and 
operate 
waste 
processing/recycling/treatment/disposal facilities at various 
sites, 48 in total, including at the concerned site i.e. Survey 
No. 48/2/1, at Baner, Pune. The said authorization was to 
be valid till 31st December 2021. The authorization was 
renewed once again on 3rd August 2022 and the same is valid 
up till 31st July 2027. 
3.7. In 2019, Respondent No.1-Sus Road Baner Vikas 
Manch, a registered Trust that had been established to 
protect the interests of the citizens residing at the Sus Road 
and Baner areas in Pune, preferred an OA being No. 34 of 
2019 before the National Green Tribunal, Western Zone, 
 
10 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘2000 Rules’. seeking to restrain the respondent-Concessionaire from 
operating the aforementioned GPP at Survey No. 48/2/1 at 
Baner, Pune since the same had been established without 
following the procedure prescribed by law. 
3.8. Deeming it appropriate to verify the factual details set 
out in the OA, the Tribunal vide its order dated 5th 
September 2019 constituted an expert committee comprising 
of the CPCB and the MPCB to inspect the GPP and the area 
in question, and to submit a report within a month. 
3.9. In compliance of the aforesaid order, the CPCB and the 
MPCB conducted a joint inspection of the GPP and area in 
question. Subsequently, a report was submitted before the 
Tribunal wherein the joint inspection team had made several 
observations about the operational capacity of the GPP, its 
authorization status and certain procedural shortcomings. 
3.10. 
Based on the Joint Inspection Report, the Tribunal 
vide the first impugned order dated 27th October 2020 held 
that the GPP was in violation of the right to clean 
environment of the inhabitants and was against the statutory 
norms. In that view of the matter, the Tribunal disposed of 
the OA in the aforementioned terms. While directing a shut-

down of the plant, the Tribunal further directed that the site 
in question might be used for the purpose of developing a 
bio-diversity park, for which purpose the site had been 
originally designated. The Tribunal further constituted a 
Joint Committee comprising of the CPCB, the MPCB, District 
Magistrate of Pune and the Municipal Corporation of Pune to 
monitor the subsequent course of action in light of the 
aforesaid decision. 
3.11. 
Aggrieved thereby, the respondent-Concessionaire 
filed a Review Application before the Tribunal being Review 
Application No. 49 of 2020 which came to be dismissed vide 
second impugned order dated 22nd December 2020. 
3.12. 
Being aggrieved thereby, the present statutory 
appeals have been filed under Section 22 of the National 
Green Tribunal Act, 201011. 
4. 
We have heard Shri A.N.S. Nadkarni, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant in CA Nos. 258-
259 of 2021, Shri K. Parameshwar, learned Senior Counsel 
appearing on behalf of the appellant in CA Nos. 265-266 of 
2021 and on behalf of respondent No.7 in CA Nos.258-259 of 
 
11 Hereinafter referred to as the “NGT Act”. 

2021, Shri Ninad Laud, learned counsel appearing on behalf 
of respondent No.1 in both the matters and Shri Rahul 
Kaushik, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of 
respondent No.2-MPCB in both the appeals. 
5. 
Shri Nadkarni submitted that the Draft Development 
Plan 2002 for Pune city was sanctioned on 18th September 
2008. He submitted that this was done after inviting and 
hearing objections under Section 28 of the Maharashtra 
Regional and Town Planning Act, 196612. He submitted that, 
at that stage, no objection was raised by anyone. He further 
submitted that the advertisement inviting Expression of 
Interest for setting up Waste Segregation and Processing Unit 
was published on 4th March 2014. He submitted that the 
Concession Agreement was entered into on 30th March 2015. 
It is submitted that the Waste Segregation Unit is set up 
within Pune city limits and the Processing Plant is situated at 
Talegaon that is outside the city limits. It is further 
submitted that the MPCB granted its authorization to set up 
and operate on 2nd December 2015 and the Environmental 
Clearance was also issued on 1st February 2016. 
 
12 Hereinafter referred to as the “MRTP Act”. 

6. 
Shri Nadkarni submitted that the respondent No. 1 
herein despite having knowledge of the reservation in the 
Development Plan, EC and grant of authorization for the 
Waste Segregation and Processing Unit, filed an OA seeking 
cancellation and revocation of EC only on 2nd March 2019. It 
is therefore submitted that the OA was filed belatedly almost 
after a period of three years from the date of grant of EC. It 
is therefore submitted that the OA was filed much beyond 
the period prescribed under Section 16 of the NGT Act. As 
such, the OA ought to be dismissed on the ground of 
limitation alone. 
7. 
Shri Nadkarni further submitted that the learned 
Tribunal had mixed up the facts. Whereas the GPP 
reservation is in Plot No. 48/2/1 under the Development 
Plan, the Bio-diversity Park is in Plot No. 49 which is an 
adjoining plot. As such, the direction issued by the learned 
Tribunal to use Plot No. 48/2/1 for Bio-diversity Park is 
unsustainable. 
8. 
Shri Nadkarni further submitted that the reservation for 
the GPP in the Draft Development Plan is since 2002 which 
was subsequently sanctioned in 2008. The residential 

buildings had come up at a much later point in time. He 
submitted that only one project was commenced on 27th 
December 2005 whereas the second project was commenced 
on 25th March 2008 and all other projects that is 17 in 
number were commenced only from 2010 onwards that is 
much after sanction of the Development Plan. 
9. 
Shri 
Nadkarni 
further 
submitted 
that 
the 
Environmental Clearance for the GPP was received on 1st 
February 2016 and the Plant was set up and commenced in 
the same year. He submitted that, at the relevant time, the 
2000 Rules were in force. It is submitted that the Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 201613 granted two years period for the 
migration and upgrading of the existing Plant to the 2016 
Rules and as such, the provisions pertaining to the waste 
disposal came into force on 8th April 2018 i.e. after two years 
from the date of notification of the 2016 Rules. 
10. Shri Nadkarni further submitted that the provisions as 
regards the buffer zones around waste processing and 
disposal facility came into force in 2017 and as such, would 
not apply to a plant which was conceived, set up and became 
 
13 Hereinafter referred to as the “2016 Rules”. functional in 2016. It is submitted that, even the 2016 Rules 
envisage decentralization of the process i.e. segregation at 
source. It is submitted that the present location of the GPP 
conforms to the requirement of the 2016 Rules inasmuch as 
only the waste generated from surrounding areas alone is 
segregated and crushed at the Baner Plant. 
11. Shri Nadkarni further submitted that in pursuance of 
the observations made by this Court, the appellant-
Corporation took steps to look for an alternative site, but it 
has not been possible to find out an alternative site on 
account of variety of reasons. 
12. Shri Nadkarni further submitted that the reasoning 
given by the learned Tribunal that there was no consent of 
MPCB for establishment of the GPP is also unsustainable. It 
is submitted that, at the relevant time, the MPCB was not 
issuing a separate “consent to establish” under the Water 
Act, 1974 or the Air Act, 1981 but was issuing a composite 
authorization to “set up and operate” across the State. It is 
submitted that the circular issued by the MPCB dated 6th 
September 2021 would clarify this position. It is further 
submitted that the said practice was followed throughout the 

State. Shri Nadkarni relies on the proceedings of the Minutes 
of the Consent Committee Meeting dated 9th November 2015. 
13. Shri Nadkarni submitted that, since initially the 
authorization granted by MPCB on 2nd December 2015 was 
valid till 31st December 2016, the appellant-Corporation and 
the respondent-Concessionaire applied for renewal and the 
authorization, vide communication of the MPCB dated 4th 
May 2017, was renewed for a period of five years i.e. till 31st 
December 2021. It is submitted that, before the expiry of five 
years period which was to expire on 31st December 2021, the 
appellant-Corporation and the respondent-Concessionaire 
again applied for renewal of the authorization to set up and 
operate on 26th October 2021 and vide communication dated 
3rd August 2022, the authorization to set up and operate was 
renewed till 31st July 2027. Not only that, but on 1st 
November 2022, consent to operate was also obtained as per 
notification dated 6th September 2021. The consent to 
operate has been further renewed till 30th September 2025. 
14. Shri Nadkarni further submitted that the Joint 
Inspection Committee appointed by the learned Tribunal 
erroneously applied the 2016 Rules which did not apply to 

the GPP which was conceived and became functional prior to 
2016. 
15. Insofar as the finding of the learned Tribunal regarding 
buffer zone is concerned, Shri Nadkarni submitted that the 
said buffer zone of 500 meters is to be maintained from land 
fill sites and does not apply to Waste Segregation Plant. Shri 
Nadkarni further submitted that the continuation of the 
Project was in the larger public interest. It is submitted that 
the GPP processes the organic waste generated in the 
western part of the city i.e., Aundh, Baner, Kothrud, 
Sinhagad road and Katraj. It is submitted that, prior to 
commencement of the said Plant, the organic waste 
generated in the western part of the city was taken all the 
way to Hadapsar which is in the eastern part of the city. It is 
submitted that this led to foul odour and nuisance to public. 
It is therefore submitted that the impugned order of the 
learned Tribunal rather than subserving in public interest, 
would be detrimental to the public interest. 
16. Shri Nadkarni submitted that, in any case, in order to 
address the concern of the respondents, the appellant-
Corporation 
is in the process 
of installing portable 

compactors with hook lifting mechanism to ensure that the 
reject waste generated does not touch the ground. It is 
submitted that the tenders for the same have already 
awarded to one M/s Global Waste Management and the 
installation of the machinery would be completed by 
December 2024. He further submitted that the construction 
of shed to cover the reject area would also be completed by 
December 2024. Shri Nadkarni further submitted that the 
appellant-Corporation would construct bitumen road to the 
Waste Segregation Plant and concrete the Reject Area 
immediately. This will in turn enhance the clean transfer of 
waste and avoid accumulation of water around the Waste 
Segregation Plant. He submitted that though the appellant-
Corporation desired to do it earlier, it could not be done since 
the 
appellant-Corporation 
was 
facing 
objections 
from 
protestors due to pendency of the present proceedings. 
17. Shri Parameshwar, learned Senior Counsel appearing 
on behalf of the respondent-Concessionaire also supported 
the 
submissions 
made 
on 
behalf 
of 
the 
appellant-
Corporation. 
He 
submitted 
that 
the 
respondent-
Concessionaire specializes in processing food waste with 

cutting edge anaerobic digestion technology – a process in 
which microorganisms break down biodegradable waste to 
produce biogas and organic manure. He submitted that, 
when cleaned and purified to 96% purity, Bio CNG/CBG can 
replace fossil fuels such as LPG, diesel, petrol, etc. It is 
further submitted that the anaerobic digestion is an efficient 
and controlled biological process that productively utilises 
waste in an enclosed space, rather than dumping it in a 
landfill, which causes environmental harm through leaching, 
contamination of groundwater, risk of fires, etc. It is further 
submitted that Indian food waste is unique in its 
composition, with a high concentration of antibacterial 
ingredients like turmeric and spices, and greases such as 
ghee that cannot be broken down using conventional 
enzymes and cultures. He submitted that the respondent-
Concessionaire, through years of research and experience, 
has successfully developed enzymes, cultures, and processes 
to biologically break down Indian food. It is submitted that 
the Project commissioned by the respondent-Concessionaire, 
as a matter of fact, is environment friendly inasmuch as it 

converts the food waste into biogas which has also been used 
to run public transport buses in Pune City. 
18. Shri Parameshwar submitted that, in order to carry out 
the conversion of food waste into biogas, the respondent-
Concessionaire has established two plants – one in Baner 
and one in Talegaon. He submitted that the site at Baner is 
a waste processing facility where pre-segregated, non-
compacted organic waste is received from the appellant-
Corporation. The waste is segregated again to remove any 
non-biodegradable materials, and the residual organic waste 
is crushed to make a slurry. The slurry produced is then 
transported to a different site in Talegaon, which is about 34 
kms away from Pune City, where raw biogas is generated 
from the slurry. 
19. Shri 
Parameshwar 
submitted 
that 
though 
the 
reservation in the Draft Development Plan is of 2002 which 
was sanctioned in 2008, no challenge has been made in the 
OA challenging the reservation of this Plot as GPP. He 
therefore joins Shri Nadkarni in submitting that the 
impugned order passed by the learned Tribunal is not 
sustainable in law. 

20. Shri Ninad Laud, learned counsel appearing on behalf 
of respondent No.1 in both the matters submitted that the 
checklist prescribed by the MPCB in 2003 would also apply 
to waste processing facility and the same is not restricted to 
landfill sites. He submitted that, as per the said checklist, no 
development zone of 500 meters is prescribed for Municipal 
Solid Waste Processing Plants and Landfill sites. He further 
submitted that a mere reservation in the municipal land will 
not absolve the appellant-Corporation of the environmental 
obligation. He submitted that the appellant-Corporation itself 
has sanctioned the plans of the buildings where the residents 
of respondent No.1 reside. Having sanctioned the Plans, the 
appellant-Corporation cannot run away from its duty of 
preventing pollution in the area on account of GPP. 
21. Insofar as the contention that the MPCB was only 
granting authorization and not consent, Shri Laud submitted 
that merely because the MPCB was following a particular 
practice, it cannot absolve the appellant-Corporation of 
obtaining consent under the Water Act, 1974 or the Air Act, 
1981 which are statutory requirements. Shri Laud submitted 
that the 2003 checklist is traceable to 2000 Rules. 

22. Shri Laud further submitted that, a perusal of the Joint 
Inspection Committee Report itself would reveal that the 
Joint Inspection officials felt prevalence of odour in and 
around the plant premises. He further submitted that the 
Joint Inspection Committee also found that the segregation 
rejects has been transported in open truck without any 
cover. He has submitted that the said Report also suggests 
that such open carriage would cause nuisance during 
transportation. He therefore submitted that it is clear that 
the GPP was causing pollution in the area thereby making 
the life of the residents of respondent No. 1 miserable. He 
submitted that, not only that even the suggestions which are 
given by the National Engineering and Environment Research 
Institute14 have also not been implemented. 
23. Shri Laud, in the alternative, submitted that, in the 
event this Court is inclined to hold that the GPP is entitled to 
continue its operations, the Court should issue stringent 
directions so that the residents are not compelled to suffer 
the pollution. 
 
14 Hereinafter referred to as the “NEERI”. 

24. Shri Kaushik, learned Senior Counsel appearing on 
behalf of the MPCB also accepts the position that, at the 
relevant time i.e. when the GPP commenced, the MPCB was 
following the practice of only granting authorization and only 
after its circular dated 6th September 2021, it has started 
granting consent. He therefore submitted that accordingly, 
the first consent was granted on 1st November 2022 and the 
second consent has been granted on 16th March 2024. 
25. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and 
also perused the materials placed on record. 
26. A perusal of the proposed Land Use Map for village 
Balewadi, Baner which was notified on 31st December 2002 
would reveal that in the said Plan, Plot No. 48/2/1 has been 
reserved for GPP. Plot Nos. 49/289/50 and 7 have been 
shown in Green Belt. The Draft Development Plan was 
published under Section 28(4) of the MRTP Act on 30th 
November 2005. In the said Plan also, Plot No. 48/2/1 has 
been shown as reserved for GPP. Plot Nos. 49/289/50 and 7 
have been reserved for Bio-diversity Park (BDP). The 
Government of Maharashtra vide notification dated 18th 
September 2008 sanctioned the said Draft Development 

Plan. It could thus clearly be seen that right from 2002, the 
Plot in question has been reserved for GPP. As already 
observed hereinabove, the first building was granted 
commencement certificate on 27th December 2005 whereas 
the second was granted commencement certificate on 25th 
March 2008 and all other, that is 17 buildings, have been 
granted commencement certificate only after 2008. It is thus 
clear that the commencement certificate insofar as the first 
building is concerned is also after the Draft Development 
Plan was statutorily notified. The commencement certificates 
insofar as all other buildings are also after the Draft 
Development Plan was sanctioned by the State Government. 
It is thus clear that the commencement certificates in respect 
of all the buildings are after the date on which the Plot was 
reserved for GPP. 
27. The learned Tribunal while allowing OA of respondent 
No.1 has also come to a conclusion that the GPP is also in 
violation of Rule 20 of 2016 Rules. For considering the 
correctness of the said finding of the learned Tribunal, we 
will have to first consider as to which of the Rules are to be 
applicable to the said GPP. 

28. It is the contention of the appellant-Corporation that 
the GPP would be covered by the 2000 Rules whereas it is 
the contention of the respondent No. 1 that the same would 
be covered by the 2016 Rules. 
29. As per sub-rule (2) of Rule 1 of the 2016 Rules, the 
Rules were to be given effect from the date of their 
publication in the Official Gazette. The 2016 Rules were 
notified on 8th April 2016. As per Entry No. 7 under Rule 22 
of the 2016 Rules, the time frame for establishment of 
necessary infrastructure for implementation of these Rules 
was to be created by the local bodies and other concerned 
authorities within a period of two years from the date of the 
said Rules coming into force. It is further to be noted that the 
application for authorization as per sub-rule (2) of Rule 4 of 
the 2000 Rules was made by the appellant-Corporation on 
10th August 2015 in Form-I and the authorization was 
granted in Form-III of the 2000 Rules on 2nd December 2015. 
The processing plant also became operational on 17th 
December 2015. It is also to be noted that the SEIAA granted 
Environment Clearance in respect of the Organic Waste 
Management Plant at Talegaon, Dabhade after public hearing 

on 1st February 2016. The GPP and the Organic Waste 
Management Plant at Talegoan, Dabhade are part of the 
same Concession Agreement which was entered into between 
the 
appellant-Corporation 
and 
the 
respondent-
Concessionaire on 30th March 2015. It could thus clearly be 
seen that the application for grant of authorization, grant of 
authorization, grant of Environment Clearance by the SEIAA 
and the commencement of the project was all prior to 8th 
April 2016 i.e. the date on which the 2016 Rules came into 
force. 
30. It will also be relevant to refer to the Preamble of the 
said 2016 Rules, which reads thus: 
“Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred 
by sections 3, 6 and 25 of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986) and in 
supersession 
of 
the 
Municipal 
Solid 
Waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules, 2000, except as 
respect things done or omitted to be done before 
such supersession, the Central Government hereby 
makes the following rules for management of Solid 
Waste, namely:-” 

31. It could thus clearly be seen that the Preamble itself 
states that though the 2016 Rules are in supersession of the 
2000 Rules, they will apply except as respect things done or 
omitted to be done before such supersession. 

32. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations 
of this Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Harnek 
Singh15, wherein this Court after considering the earlier 
decisions has observed thus: 
“16. The words “anything duly done or suffered 
thereunder” used in clause (b) of Section 6 are often 
used by the legislature in saving clause which is 
intended to provide that unless a different intention 
appears, the repeal of an Act would not affect 
anything duly done or suffered thereunder. This 
Court in Hasan Nurani Malak v. S.M. Ismail, Asstt. 
Charity Commr., Nagpur [AIR 1967 SC 1742] has 
held that the object of such a saving clause is to 
save what has been previously done under the 
statute repealed. The result of such a saving clause 
is that the pre-existing law continues to govern the 
things done before a particular date from which the 
repeal of such a pre-existing law takes effect. 
In Universal Imports Agency v. Chief Controller of 
Imports and Exports [AIR 1961 SC 41: (1961) ] this Court while construing the words “things 
done” held that a proper interpretation of the 
expression 
“things 
done” 
was 
comprehensive 
enough to take in not only the things done but also 
the 
effect 
of 
the 
legal 
consequence 
flowing 
therefrom.” 

33. It can thus be seen that this Court has in unequivocal 
terms held that the term “things done” was comprehensive 
enough to take in not only the things done but also the effect 
of the legal consequences flowing therefrom. 
 
15 (2002): 2002 INSC 84 

34. In the present case, as already discussed hereinabove, 
the application for authorization, the grant of authorization, 
the grant of Environment Clearance by the SEIAA and the 
commencement of the GPP all have taken place prior to 8th 
April 2016 i.e. the date on which the 2016 Rules came into 
force. As such, we hold that the learned Tribunal has grossly 
erred in observing that the GPP in question was covered by 
the 2016 Rules. 
35. The next finding of the learned Tribunal is with regard 
to the consent under the Water Act or the Air Act. A perusal 
of the Minutes of the 11th Consent Committee Meeting of 
2015-16 held on 9th November 2015 would clearly reveal that 
the 
MPCB 
was 
following 
the 
practice 
of 
granting 
authorization under the 2000 Rules which covers all the 
aspects of the consent. As such, MPCB did not find it 
necessary to cover such processing plant for the consent 
management. 
36. It will be relevant to refer to the Circular issued by the 
MPCB dated 6th September 2021, which reads thus: 
“Board is receiving applications from solid waste 
Management Facilities and ULBs for grant of 
consent for installation and operation of the facility. 

As there is no comprehensive categorization of all 
Solid waste processing operations/activities in 
modified CPCB categorization for Solid Waste 
Management, Board is not granting the consent for 
Solid 
Waste 
Management 
Facility/operations/activities. 
 
Presently, Board is granting authorization under 
The Solid Waste Management rules, 2016, for 
setting up and operation of solid waste management 
facilities. 
 
The Board in its 176th meeting held on 25/O2/2O2I 
passed resolution on consent management for solid 
waste processing plants / facilities and decided to 
grant Consent to Establish/Operate for Solid Waste 
Management facilities. 
 
The Consent fees is charged as per Env. Dept. GoM 
GR dated 25.8.2011 to individual/Integrated Solid 
Waste Management facility depending upon type of 
ULB. The term of consent for Red, Orange, and 
Green category of Industry is one, two and three 
years respectively". 
 
Local Bodies to pay the consent fees to the Board as 
per the statement given below. 
 
• Urban Local Bodies- 
Sr. 
No. 
Urban Local Body 
Fees 
1. Municipal Corporation 
Rs.1,00,000/- 
2. Municipal Council Class-A Rs.50,000/- 
3. Municipal Council Class-B Rs.5,000/- 
4. Municipal Council Class-C Rs.2,000/- 
 
• Other than Local Body- 
Individual 
Based 
on 
gross 

Operator/Industry 
installing 
MSW 
based 
processing plant. capital investment 
as per prevailing 
rules 
for 
industries. 
• Delegation of powers to various authorities for 
grant of consent will be as per "revised 
delegation of powers for consent Management" 
issued vide Office Order No. 12, Dated- 
23/12/2O2O. 
 
Therefore, all Ros and SROs are hereby directed to 
communicate all local Bodies/Cantonment Boards 
of Concern area of jurisdiction for submission of 
application to obtain Consent to Establish/Operate 
for setting up and operation of existing as well as 
proposed solid waste management facilities.” 

37. It could thus be seen that prior to 6th September 2021, 
the MPCB was not granting Consent for Solid Waste 
Management facility/operations/activities. The MPCB was 
granting authorization for setting up and operation of solid 
waste management facilities. Only in the meeting dated 25th 
February 2021, a Resolution was passed on consent 
management and it was decided to grant Consent to operate 
for Solid Waste Management Facilities. Vide the said 
communication, all ROs and SROs were directed to 
communicate to all local Bodies/Cantonment Boards of 
concerned areas for submission of applications to obtain 
Consent to establish/operate for setting up and operation of 

existing as well as proposed Solid Waste Management 
Facilities. 
38. Admittedly, after the said date i.e. 6th September 2021, 
the Consent to Operate was granted by the MPCB on 1st 
November 2022. The said Consent to Operate has been 
further renewed till 30th September 2025 and authorization 
to set up and operate has been granted till 31st July 2027. It 
can thus clearly be seen that the MPCB started granting 
Consent only after 6th September 2021 and prior to that, it 
was only issuing a composite authorization. We find that the 
learned Tribunal has failed to take this into consideration 
and as such, the finding in that regard also deserves to be 
set aside. 
39. The next contention is that the Checklist issued by the 
MPCB which was published in 2003 would also apply to the 
GPP. The learned counsel for respondent No. 1 submitted 
that the said Checklist specifically prescribes that no 
development zone of 500 metres was required to be kept from 
the boundary of the landfill site. Further relying on the 
Checklist, the learned counsel submitted that the buffer zone 
of 500 metres was required to be kept from the Solid Waste 

Processing Plant as well. A perusal of the said Checklist 
would reveal that the requirement of no-development zone or 
a buffer zone is only with regards to landfill sites. It can 
further be seen that the Schedules framed under Rules 6 
(1)(3) and 7 (2) of the 2000 Rules prescribe separate 
Schedules for landfill sites on one hand and Composting, 
Treated Leachates and Incineration by waste processing or 
disposal facilities on the other hand. From the said Schedule-
III which is applicable to landfill sites, it can be seen that 
under clause 9, a buffer zone of no-development is required 
to be maintained around the landfill site and the same shall 
be incorporated in the Town Planning Department’s land use 
plans. However, insofar as the Standards for Composting, 
Treated Leachates and Incineration are concerned, the same 
read as under: 
“3. In order to prevent pollution problems from 
compost plant and other processing facilities, the 
following shall be complied with, namely:- 
i. The incoming wastes at site shall be 
maintained prior to further processing. 
To the extent possible, the waste storage 
area should be covered. If, such storage 
is done in an open area, it shall be 
provided with impermeable base with 
facility for collection of leachate and 
surface water run-off into lined drains 

leading to a leachate treatment and 
disposal facility; 
ii. Necessary precautions shall be taken 
to minimise nuisance of odour, flies, 
rodents, bird menace and fire hazard; 
iii. In case of breakdown or maintenance 
of plant, waste intake shall be stopped 
and arrangements be worked out for 
diversion of wastes to the landfill site; 
iv. Pre-process and post-process rejects 
shall be removed from the processing 
facility on regular basis and shall not be 
allowed to pile at the site. Recyclables 
shall be routed through appropriate 
vendors. The non-recyclables shall be 
sent for well designed landfill site(s). v. In case of compost plant, the windrow 
area shall be provided with impermeable 
base. Such a base shall be made of 
concrete or compacted clay, 50 cm thick, 
having permeability coefficient less than 
10 –7 cm/sec. The base shall be provided 
with 1 to 2 per cent slope and circled by 
lined drains for collection of leachate or 
surface run-off; 
vi. Ambient air quality monitoring shall 
be regularly carried out particularly for 
checking odour nuisance at down-wind 
direction on the boundary of processing 
plant.” 

40. We are therefore of the considered view that the 
contention of the learned counsel for respondent No. 1 that 
under the 2000 Rules, a buffer zone is required to be 

maintained insofar as the GPP is concerned is without 
substance. 
41. We further find that the finding of the learned Tribunal 
that initially the plot where GPP was constructed was 
reserved for Bio-diversity Park is also erroneous and factually 
incorrect. As discussed hereinabove, the plot in question has 
been reserved for the GPP since inception and it is only the 
adjoining plot which was reserved for the Bio-diversity Park. 
42. We are therefore of the considered view that the learned 
Tribunal has erred in allowing the OA of the respondent No. 
1 and directing closure of the GPP. Apart from that, we find 
that the closure of the GPP in question rather than 
subserving the public interest, would be detrimental to 
public interest. If the GPP in question is closed, the organic 
waste generated in the western part of Pune city would be 
required to be taken all the way throughout the city to 
Hadapsar which is in the eastern part of the city. This will 
undoubtedly lead to foul odour and nuisance to the public. 
43. It will be relevant to refer to clauses (q) and (v) of Rule 
15 of the 2016 Rules, which read thus: 

“15. Duties and responsibilities of local authorities 
and village Panchayats of census towns and urban 
agglomerations.- 
The 
local 
authorities 
and 
Panchayats shall,- 
………….. 
(q) transport segregated bio-degradable waste to the 
processing 
facilities 
like 
compost 
plant, 
bio-
methanation plant or any such facility. Preference 
shall be given for on site processing of such waste; 
…………… 

facilitate 
construction, 
operation 
and 
maintenance of solid waste processing facilities and 
associated infrastructure on their own or with 
private sector participation or through any agency 
for optimum utilization or various components of 
solid waste adopting suitable technology including 
the following technologies and adhering to the 
guidelines 
issued 
by 
the 
Ministry 
of 
Urban 
Development from time to time and standards 
prescribed by the Central Pollution Control Board. 
Preference shall be given to decentralized processing 
to minimize transportation cost and environmental 
impacts such as- 
a) 
bio-methanation, 
microbial 
composting, vermi-composting, anaerobic 
digestion 
or 
any 
other 
appropriate 
processing 
for 
bio-stabilisation 
of 
biodegradable waste; 
b) waste to energy processes including 
refused derived fuel for combustible 
fraction of waste or supply as feedstock to 
solid waste based power plants or cement 
kilns;” 

44. It can thus be seen that the 2016 Rules also give 
preference to the on-site processing of the waste. It also 
emphasizes 
preference 
to 
be 
given 
to 
decentralized 

processing 
to 
minimize 
transportation 
cost 
and 
environmental impact. It has been submitted on behalf of 
the appellant-Corporation that 48 such GPPs have been 
commissioned throughout the city of Pune wherein the non-
compacted, organic waste is segregated to remove any non-
biodegradable materials and the residual organic waste is 
crushed to make a slurry. The said slurry is then transported 
to a site in Talegaon where raw biogas is generated from the 
slurry. At the Talegaon plant, biogas is produced which is 
used for providing fuel to the public transport buses. As 
such, the entire Project is environmentally friendly. 
45. The approach of respondent No. 1 appears to be that 
such a Facility though could be established in the vicinity of 
the other buildings, it should not be established in their 
backyard. The Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in 
the case of Bhavya Height Co-operative Housing Society 
Ltd. v. 
Mumbai 
Metropolitan 
Region 
Development 
Authority and Others16 had an occasion to consider a 
similar situation, wherein the High Court observed thus: 
“36. …….. To this affidavit there are sketch plans 
annexed prepared by the Petitioner's architects. 
 
16 2019 SCC OnLine Bom 1075 

These propose that the Monorail Station staircase 
be shifted to a point to the south, directly in front of 
Rehab Building No. 5. In other words, it would prima 
facie seem that this is the classic NIMBY principle 
— Not In My Back Yard. For what the Petitioner 
seems to be suggesting is that it is perfectly all right 
if the lives of the residents of the seven-storey slum 
rehab building (all previously slum dwellers) are 
endangered 
by 
the 
same 
staircase, 
but 
the 
Petitioner's 
members' 
interest 
must 
remain 
paramount. We cannot and do not countenance any 
such submission.” 

46. We agree with the said observations of the High Court. 
47. We are therefore of the considered view that the 
impugned judgment and order of the learned Tribunal 
deserves to be quashed and set aside and the OA of the 
respondent No. 1 is to be dismissed. 
48. In the result, the appeals are allowed. The impugned 
judgments and orders dated 27th October 2020 passed by the 
learned Tribunal in OA No. 210 of 2020 and dated 22nd 
December 2020 in 
are quashed and set aside. OA No. 210 of 2020 filed by 
respondent No. 1 is also dismissed. 
49. However, before we part with the judgment, we find it 
necessary to caution the appellant-Corporation as well as the 
respondent-Concessionaire that they should take necessary 

steps so that the residents residing in the nearby buildings 
do not have to suffer on account of foul odour. The NEERI, in 
its Report, had made the following recommendations: 
“Recommendations: 
Based on the observations and good engineering 
practices, following suggestions are offered: 
Plant A: 
• The slurry making area needs proper cover in 
the hopper area to reduce odour / foul smell, 
• A suitable odour control system / misting 
system (e.g carbon filters, etc) needs to be 
installed immediately, 
• Better material of construction and design 
could be employed to avoid corrosion problems 
and frequent shut downs, 
• The space is too congested for capacity 
enhancement. 
PMC 
may 
think 
of 
additional/alternative space, 
• The food bags need to be stored properly 
before using them. 
• Slurry sampling and analysis needs to be done 
frequently to understand the decomposition of 
food waste and control it to the level so that 
maximum methane can be produced in the 
Talegaon plant. 
• The technology provider must also look into 
reducing the transporting cost between slurry 
making facility at Baner and Talegaon plant by 
finding an optimum slurry density.” 

50. We 
direct 
the 
appellant-Corporation 
and 
the 
respondent-Concessionaire to ensure that all the aforesaid 

suggestions made by NEERI should be strictly complied with. 
We further direct the appellant-Corporation to install the 
portable compactors with hook mechanisms so as to ensure 
that the reject waste does not touch the ground by 31st 
December 2024. 
51. The 
appellant-Corporation 
is 
further 
directed 
to 
construct bitumen road to the Waste Segregation Plant and 
concrete the reject area which will enhance clean transfer of 
waste and avoid accumulation of water around the Waste 
Segregation Plant. 
52. We further direct the appellant-Corporation as well as 
the respondent-Concessionaire to construct a shed so as to 
cover the reject area by 31st December 2024. 
53. We 
further 
direct 
the 
appellant-
Corporation/respondent-Concessionaire 
to 
carry 
out 
plantation with thick density so that there would be a green 
cover on all the sides of the GPP. 
54. A perusal of the sanctioned plan would reveal that, on 
one side, there is a reservation for the Bio-diversity Park. As 
such, the plantation would be required to be done to cover 
the three sides. 

55. Insofar as the Bio-diversity Park is concerned, we direct 
the State Government to consider the possibility of growing 
Miyawaki forests so as to provide green lungs to the nearby 
areas. 
56. We 
further 
direct 
the 
NEERI 
to 
conduct 
an 
environmental audit of the GPP every six months and in 
turn, 
the 
appellant-Corporation 
and 
the 
respondent-
Concessionaire are directed to ensure that the suggestions 
made in the said audit are strictly complied with. 
57. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.