IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 449-450 OF 2019 

RABBU 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH 

JUDGMENT 
 
B.R. Gavai, J. 

1. 
Heard Shri N. Hariharan, learned Senior Counsel for the 
appellant and Shri Bhupendra Pratap Singh, learned Deputy 
Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State of Madhya 
Pradesh. 
2. 
These appeals arise out of the judgment and order 
dated 17.01.2019 passed by the Division Bench of the High 
Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur, dismissing the appeal 
of the appellant and confirming the judgment and order 
dated 20.08.2018 passed by the First Additional Sessions 
Judge, Bina, District Sagar (hereinafter referred to as the 
“Trial Judge”), thereby convicting the appellant for offences 

punishable under Sections 450, 376(2)(i), 376D, 376A and 
302 read with 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, 
‘IPC’) and Section 5(g)/6 of the Protection of Children from 
Sexual Offenses Act, 2012 (for short, ‘POCSO’) awarding 
death penalty under Sections 376A and 302 IPC and life 
imprisonment under Section 376D of the IPC and rigorous 
imprisonment for 10 years under Section 450 of the IPC. 
3. 
Shri Hariharan submits that the present case basically 
rests on the three dying declarations and the DNA report. He 
submits that the dying declarations are inconsistent. He 
further submits that as the time progressed there were 
improvements in the dying declaration. He therefore submits 
that in the present case the truthfulness of the dying 
declarations itself is doubtful and therefore the conviction 
could not be based on the said dying declarations. He further 
submits that the DNA report also points out towards the 
presence of a third person. In such an eventuality, the 
learned Senior Counsel submits that the order of conviction 
could not be sustained. 
4. 
Shri Hariharan, in the alternative, submits that the 
present case is not a ‘rarest of the rare’ case, which would 

justify awarding death penalty. He further submits that, in 
the present case, the order convicting the appellant and 
imposing death penalty were done simultaneously. He 
submits that the learned Trial Judge also does not consider 
the balance between the mitigating circumstances and 
aggravating circumstances while awarding the death penalty. 
Learned Senior Counsel therefore submits that in the event 
this Court is not inclined to interfere with the finding of the 
conviction, in the facts and circumstances of this case and 
particularly taking into consideration the fact that the 
appellant lost his mother and brother at a tender age, the 
socio-economic background of the appellant and the age of 
the appellant at the time of commission of crime so also his 
conduct and behaviour in the prison entitle him for 
commutation of sentence. 
5. 
Shri Bhupendra Pratap Singh, learned Deputy Advocate 
General (DAG), on the contrary, submits that the learned 
Trial Judge as well as the High Court, upon appreciation of 
the evidence, have correctly come to a finding that the 
present appellant is guilty for the offences committed. He 
therefore submits that no interference is warranted in the 

present appeals. 
6. 
Insofar as the prayer made by the learned Senior 
Counsel 
for 
the 
appellant regarding 
commutation 
is 
concerned, the learned DAG for the respondent-State relies 
on the following judgments of this Court in the cases of 
Shivu and Another v. Registrar General, High Court of 
Karnataka and Another1, Purushottam Dashrath Borate 
and Another v. State of Maharashtra2, and Deepak Rai v. 
State of Bihar3, in order to contend that merely the age of 
the appellant cannot be taken into consideration. He further 
submits that the appellant taking advantage of the 
circumstances that the deceased was alone in the house has 
committed the heinous crime and therefore the present case 
would squarely fit in the category of ‘rarest of the rare’ cases. 
He submits that the psychological report would also show 
that there is no remorse expressed by the appellant. He 
therefore submits that taking into consideration all these 
aspects, the death penalty needs to be confirmed. 
7. 
We have perused the material on record and find that 
 
1 (2007): 2007 INSC 136 
2 (2015): 2015 INSC 392 
3 (2013): 2013 INSC 638 

the dying declaration recorded by the Executive Magistrate 
(Naib Tehsildar), PW-11, which was endorsed by Dr. Avinash 
Saxena, PW-9 is reliable and trustworthy. The dying 
declaration recorded by PW-11 is in question-answer form. 
In the said dying declaration, the deceased clearly implicates 
the present appellant. The Medical Officer, PW-9, before the 
commencement of the dying declaration has given an 
endorsement regarding fit mental status of the deceased to 
make a declaration and at the end of the dying declaration 
again he has endorsed that the deceased was in a fit state of 
mind. The written dying declaration is corroborated by the 
oral dying declaration as has come on record in the evidence 
of her grand-father Sohan Singh (PW-1), her grand-father’s 
brother Mukund Singh (PW-2), her aunt Preeti (PW-13) and 
her uncle Sandeep Singh Rajpoot (PW-14). 
8. 
In the said dying declaration, all the witnesses have 
clearly stated that the deceased after coming out from the 
room in flames has narrated the incident about the appellant 
committing the crime. Not only this, but DW-1-Golu Chaubey 
who was examined on behalf of the defence has also clearly 
stated that when the deceased came out of the house, she 

was shouting that the accused person(s) had committed rape 
on her and set her on fire. The statement of the deceased 
recorded under Section 164 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (for short, Cr.P.C.) by Smt. Suchita 
Srivastava, Judicial Magistrate First Class, Sagar (PW-23) 
also supports the prosecution case. The Dehat Nalishi (Ex. 
P/28) recorded by Sub Inspector, Anjana Parmaar (PW-16) 
also narrates the same factual position. 
9. 
In that view of the matter, we do not find that there is 
any error in the concurrent orders of the Trial Judge and the 
High Court convicting the appellant for the offences 
punishable under Sections 450, 376(2)(i), 376D, 376A and 
302 read with 34 of the IPC and Section 5(g)/6 of the POCSO. 
10. The question that now requires to be considered is as to 
whether the present case would fall in the category of ‘rarest 
of rare case’ so as to confirm the death penalty or the 
sentence could be commuted. 
11. We have perused the psychological assessment of the 
present appellant as conducted by the Department of 
Psychiatry, 
NSCB 
Medical College, 
Jabalpur, 
Madhya 
Pradesh so also the report of the Senior Probation and 

Welfare Officer, Central Jail, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh dated 
12.06.2023 and the report of the Divisional Officer, Western 
Division/Assistant 
Jail 
Superintendent, 
Central 
Jail 
Jabalpur dated 10.06.2023. 
12. In the said reports, it has been found that there is 
nothing against the behaviour of the appellant herein in the 
prison. His conduct in the prison has been found to be 
satisfactory. The reports further reveal that though not 
allotted any work, the appellant is engaging himself in 
plantation of trees, cleaning the temple and surrounding 
area. 
13. While considering as to whether the death penalty 
needs to be confirmed or not, we would be required to take 
into consideration various factors. 
14. It is not in dispute that the appellant lost his mother at 
the tender age of 8 years and his elder brother at the age of 
10 years. The appellant was brought up by his father as a 
single parent. The appellant has close family ties with his 
father, his sister, who is married and his grand-mother. 
Though, Shri Singh is right that the age of the appellant at 
the time of commission of crime solely cannot be taken into 

consideration, however the age of the appellant/accused at 
the time of commission of crime along with other factors can 
certainly be taken into consideration as to whether the death 
penalty needs to be commuted or not. 
15. In the present case, it is to be noted that the appellant 
comes from a socio-economic backward stratum of the 
society. As already discussed hereinabove, he lost his mother 
and brother at the tender age. The appellant and his family 
members do not have any criminal background. The 
appellant was of a tender age of 22 years when the aforesaid 
incident occurred. 
16. It cannot be said that the appellant is a hardened 
criminal, who cannot be reformed. The possibility of the 
appellant, if given the chance of being reformed, cannot be 
ruled out. 
17. In that view of the matter, we find that in the present 
case the confirmation of death penalty would not be justified. 
However, at the same time we also find that the ordinary 
sentence of life i.e. 14 years imprisonment with remission 
would not meet the ends of justice. In our considered view, 
the present case would fall in the middle path, as laid down 

by this Court in a catena of judgments, which are as follows:- 
i. 
Swamy 
Shraddananda 

alias 
Murali 
Manohar Mishra v. State of Karnataka4; 
ii. 
Shankar 
Kisanrao 
Khade 
v. 
State 
of 
Maharasthra5; 
iii. 
Gandi 
Doddabasappa 
alias 
Gandhi 
Basavaraj v. State of Karnataka6; 
iv. Prakash Dhawal Khairnar (Patil) v. State of 
Maharashtra7; 
v. Mohinder Singh v. State of Punjab8; 
vi. Madan v. State of Uttar Pradesh9; 
vii. Navas ulanavas v. State of Kerala10 
 
18. We, therefore, find that in the facts and circumstances 
of the present case, the death penalty needs to be commuted 
to fixed imprisonment without remission for a period of 20 
years. 
19. The order of conviction is maintained however the death 
 
4 (2008): 2008 INSC 853 
5 (2013): 2013 INSC 281 
6 (2017) 
7 (2002): 2001 INSC 606 
8 (2013): 2013 INSC 61 

10: 

penalty awarded under Sections 376A and 302 IPC is 
commuted to rigorous imprisonment for 20 years. 
20. The appeals are allowed to the extent indicated above. 
21. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of....J 
(PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)