IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). of 2024) 

(Diary No(s). 24776/2020) 

J.N. PURI.….APPELLANT(S) 

VERSUS 

STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH 
(NOW STATE OF UTTARAKHAND) & ORS. …..RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Delay condoned. 
2. 
Leave granted. 
3. 
The instant appeals take exception to the judgment and order 
passed by the Division Bench of High Court of Uttarakhand in; 
and 

 dated 14th August, 
2020. 
4. 
As per the facts emanating from record, the Writ 
Petition(M/B) No. 156/1987 was filed by the appellant before the 
High Court of Allahabad challenging the acquisition of his land by 
the respondents undertaken way back in the year 1987. The 
appellant claims that he continues to be in possession of the land. 
The writ petition was dismissed for want of prosecution vide order 
dated 26th February, 1992. 
5. The appellant filed an application dated 23rd March, 1992 
seeking restoration of the said writ petition mainly on two grounds, 
(a) the name of his Advocate Shri G.N. Verma was not printed in 
the cause list and (b) one of the Hon’ble Judges(Mr. Justice A.P. 
Singh) before whom the matter was listed had himself as an 
Advocate filed various applications etc. in the writ petition and 
thus, the appellant was carrying a bonafide belief that the matter 
would be deferred on account of recusal. 
6. 
It seems that the said restoration application was not taken 
up for a significant period of time, upon which the appellant filed 
yet another in Writ 
Petition(M/B) No. 156/1987 in the year 1999 with a prayer to take 

up the restoration application dated 23rd March, 1992 and to pass 
appropriate order thereupon. 
7. 
Be that as it may, the application preferred by the appellant 
in the year 1999 was treated to be an application for restoration of 
the writ petition and the Division Bench of the Uttrakhand High 
Court rejected the same vide order dated 20th November, 2001, for 
want of prosecution. 
8. The appellant claims to be carrying a bonafide belief that his 
writ petition was still pending because of certain observations 
made by the Division Bench of High Court of Uttarakhand in a 
collateral 
proceeding 
being 
ITA 
No. 
09/2003 
titled 
as 
Commissioner of Income Tax Vs. M/s. R.B. Premnath & Sons 
wherein it was recorded that the writ petition of the appellant was 
still pending before the High Court of Allahabad. However, upon 
finally receiving an information from the Registry of the High Court 
of Uttarakhand under RTI Act, vide communication dated 4th 
November, 2019 that the writ petition of the appellant had been 
dismissed on default on 26th February, 1992, the appellant 
preferred recalling and restoration application with an application 
seeking condonation of delay in filing above recalling application, 
which was dismissed by the High Court of Uttarakhand vide order 

dated 8th March, 2019. Further, a review application against above 
order was filed which also came to be dismissed by order dated 
14th August, 2020. These two orders are assailed in these appeals. 
9. 
Mr. Dushyant Dave, learned senior counsel for the appellant 
submitted that the application for restoration of the Writ 
Petition(M/B) No. 156/1987 was filed by the appellant on 23rd 
March, 1992, i.e., within a period of one month from the date of 
dismissal of writ petition for non-prosecution. It was submitted 
that the name of the appellant’s Advocate was not reflected in the 
cause list and that one of the Hon’ble Judges constituting the 
Division Bench before whom the matter was listed, had 
represented one of the parties in the writ Court and thus, the 
appellant was bonafide prevented from pursuing the Civil 
Miscellaneous Writ Petition. 
10. Learned senior counsel drew Court’s attention to para 5 of 
the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the State of Uttar 
Pradesh/Uttarakhand wherein the factum of filing of the 
application dated 23rd March, 1992 seeking restoration of Writ 
Petition(M/B) No. 156/1987 to its original number is admitted. 
11. Learned 
senior 
counsel 
further 
submitted 
that 
the 
application filed in the year 1999 which was referred to by the High 

Court as a restoration application was as a matter of fact an 
application seeking passing of appropriate order on the pending 
restoration application dated 23rd March, 1992. He urged that in 
the affidavit filed by the appellant in support of the Civil Misc. 
Application No. 34664 of 1999, the appellant specifically pleaded 
that despite great efforts, the case had not been listed for 
consideration of the application for recall of the order dated 26th 
February, 1992. 
12., learned counsel appearing for the respondents 
while supporting the impugned order, vehemently and fervently 
opposed the submissions advanced by learned counsel for the 
appellant. 
13. Having considered the entirety of facts prevailing on record, 
we are of the view that the High Court of Uttarakhand was not 
correct in holding that the application for restoration of the writ 
petition which was dismissed for non-prosecution vide order dated 
26th February, 1992 was submitted with a delay of seven years. As 
a matter of fact, the application for restoration was filed within a 
period of one month which fact has been admitted at para 5 of the 
counter 
affidavit 
filed 
by 
the 
State 
of 
Uttar 

Pradesh/Uttarakhand(respondent no. 1). The said application was 
never considered on merits. 
14. In the facts and circumstances noted above and more 
particularly the fact that the appellant still claims to be in 
possession of the land under acquisition, we feel that the writ 
petition preferred by the appellant should have been heard and 
decided on merits. 
15. In the wake of the above discussion, the impugned orders are 
set aside. The matter is remitted to the High Court of Uttarakhand 
which shall restore the writ petition of the appellant and proceed 
to decide the same on merits expeditiously after giving an 
opportunity of hearing to all concerned. 
16. The appeals are allowed in these terms. 
17. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

 ………………………….J. 

 (B.R. GAVAI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
January 29, 2024