IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Ravinder Kumar 

 … Appellant 

versus 

State of Haryana... Respondent 

JUDGMENT 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
The appellant claims that he has been practising as a 
general Physician since 2001 and as a Radiologist since 2007. 
On 27th April 2017, a team comprising four officers raided the 
appellant's clinic. Based on the complaint against one woman, 
Dhanpati (accused no.1), that she is running a racket of sex 
determination and medical termination of pregnancy, a decoy 
patient was selected. The allegation is that Dhanpati was 
contracted to do the medical termination of the pregnancy of 
the decoy patient. The decoy patient and shadow witness, S.I. 
Usha Rani, informed Dhanpati that they knew the sex of the 
foetus. Dhanpati called the decoy patient on 27th April 2017 at 

8 am for MTP. The shadow witness informed Dhanpati that 
family members of the decoy patient were suggesting 
reconfirming the sex of the foetus through ultrasound. 
Dhanpati called the shadow witness on 27th April 2017 at 7 am 
and stated that the Doctor who would perform the ultrasound 
would charge Rs.20,000/- but ultimately, she fixed the deal at 
Rs.15,000/-. 
 
2. 
Accordingly, the decoy patient was given a sum of 
Rs.15,000/-. The members of the search party, along with the 
police staff as well as the shadow witness and decoy patient, 
went to the Gurugram bus stand where Dhanpati asked for 
Rs.15,000/- which amount was handed over to her. After that, 
a nurse, Anju (accused no.2), was called by Dhanpati, and a 
part of the amount of Rs.15,000/- was given to her. 
Thereafter, the decoy patient and others entered the appellant's 
clinic, known as the Divine Diagnostic Centre at Gurugram. 
The decoy patient was taken inside. When the decoy patient 
and Anju came out of the diagnostic centre, the police caught 
them. The search team entered the diagnostic centre. The 
cash amount was seized, and the team recovered even the USG 
report for the decoy patient. It was alleged that the appellant 
had signed the said report. 
 
3. 
A first information report was registered on 27th April 
2017 in the Police Station, Gurugram, alleging the commission 
of an offence punishable under Section 23 of the Pre-
Conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition 

of Sex Selection) Act, 1994 (for short, ‘the Act of 1994’). It was 
followed by a complaint filed by the District Appropriate 
Authority under Section 28(1) of the Act of 1994 before the 
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Gurugram, alleging the 
commission of punishable offences against the appellant, the 
said Dhanpati and Anju. The allegation against the appellant 
and the co-accused was of indulging in the illegal activity of sex 
determination of a foetus by using ultrasound. 
 
4. 
The appellant filed a petition for quashing the complaint 
and the FIR before the High Court. By the impugned judgment, 
the High Court declined to quash both the complaint and FIR. 
 
SUBMISSIONS 
5. 
Learned counsel appearing for the appellant invited our 
attention to the provisions of the 1994 Act. He pointed out a 
notification issued on 7th November 2013 by the Government 
of Haryana under sub-section (2) read with clause (b) of sub-
section (3) of Section 17 of the 1994 Act by which Appropriate 
Authorities were constituted for each District consisting of Civil 
Surgeon, District Programme Officer, Women and Child 
Development Department and District Attorney. He submitted 
that the search /raid purportedly conducted under the orders 
of the Appropriate Authority of the District under Section 30(1) 
of the 1994 Act was completely illegal as there was no order 
passed by the Appropriate Authority authorising the conduct 
of the raid. He submitted that only the Civil Surgeon signed 

the order authorising officers to conduct the raid. But, two 
other members of the Appropriate Authority did not sign the 
said order. He pointed out an affidavit filed by Dr. Virender 
Yadav, the Chairman of the District Appropriate Authority -
cum-Civil Surgeon, Gurugram. He stated that the Civil Surgeon 
accepted that he alone constituted the raiding team vide order 
dated 27th April 2017 and issued the order authorising the 
search. He submitted that the so-called raid under Section 
30(1) is the only basis of the FIR and the complaint. He 
submitted that the raid was completely illegal as it was not 
conducted by the officers authorised by the Appropriate 
Authority. 
 
6. 
The learned counsel appearing for the State did not 
dispute that the order appointing officers to conduct the raid 
was issued and signed only by the Civil Surgeon, the 
Appropriate Authority's Chairman. He submitted that as there 
was an emergency, the Civil Surgeon had to take action. He 
submitted that the complaint under sub-Section (1) of Section 
28 has been filed by an officer authorised by the Appropriate 
Authority. The decision to file the complaint is made by the 
Appropriate Authority. The learned counsel appearing for the 
respondent would, therefore, submit that even if there is a 
defect in the procedure adopted while appointing the officers to 
conduct the raid, it does not amount to illegality, but it is a 
curable irregularity which has been cured by subsequent order 
of the Appropriate Authority to file a complaint. 

CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
7. 
To appreciate the submissions, we must refer to relevant 
provisions of the 1994 Act. Section 23 of the 1994 Act, which 
is a penal provision, reads thus: 
“23. Offences and penalties.- (1) Any 
medical geneticist, gynaecologist, registered 
medical practitioner or any person who owns 
a Genetic Counselling Centre, a Genetic 
Laboratory or a Genetic Clinic or is employed 
in such a Centre, Laboratory or Clinic and 
renders his professional or technical services 
to or at such a Centre, Laboratory or Clinic, 
whether on an honorary basis or otherwise, 
and who contravenes any of the provisions of 
this Act or rules made thereunder shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years and with 
fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees and on any subsequent conviction, 
with imprisonment which may extend to five 
years and with fine which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 
2. The name of the registered medical 
practitioner 
shall 
be 
reported 
by 
the 
appropriate authority to the State Medical 
Council concerned for taking necessary 
action 
including 
suspension 
of 
the 
registration if the charges are framed by the 
court and till the case is disposed of and on 
conviction for removal of his name from the 
register of the Council for a period of five 
years for the first offence and permanently 
for the subsequent offence. 
3. Any person who seeks the aid of a Genetic 
Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory, 

Genetic Clinic or ultrasound clinic or 
imaging clinic or of a medical geneticist, 
gynaecologist, 
sonologist 
or 
imaging 
specialist or registered medical practitioner 
or any other person for sex selection or for 
conducting pre- natal diagnostic techniques 
on any pregnant women for the purposes 
other than those specified in sub-section (2) 
of section 4, he shall, be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to three years and with fine which may 
extend to fifty thousand rupees for the first 
offence and for any subsequent offence with 
imprisonment which may extend to five years 
and with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees. 
4. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
provided, that the provisions of sub-section 
(3) shall not apply to the woman who was 
compelled 
to 
undergo 
such 
diagnostic 
techniques or such selection.” 
 
8. 
The procedure for cognizance is incorporated in Section 
28, which reads thus: 
“28. Cognizance of offences. - 
1. No court shall take cognizance of an 
offence under this Act except on a complaint 
made by— 
(a) the appropriate authority concerned, or 
any officer authorised in this behalf by the 
Central Government or State Government, as 
the case may be, or the appropriate 
authority; or 
(b) a person who has given notice of not less 
than fifteen days in the manner prescribed, 

to the appropriate authority, of the alleged 
offence and of his intention to make a 
complaint to the court. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this clause, 
“person” includes a social organisation. 
2. No court other than that of a Metropolitan 
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the 
first class shall try any offence punishable 
under this Act. 
3. Where a complaint has been made under 
clause (b) of subsection (1), the court may, on 
demand 
by 
such 
person, 
direct 
the 
appropriate authority to make available 
copies of the relevant records in its 
possession to such person. 
 
9. 
Section 30(1) deals with the power to search and seize 
records, which reads thus: 
“30. Power to search and seize records, 
etc. –(1) If the Appropriate Authority has 
reason to believe that an offence under 
this Act has been or is being committed at 
any Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic 
Laboratory or Genetic Clinic or any other 
place, 
such 
Authority 
or 
any 
officer 
authorised thereof in this behalf may, 
subject to such rules as may be prescribed, 
enter and search at all reasonable times with 
such assistance, if any, as such authority or 
officer considers necessary, such Genetic 
Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or 
Genetic Clinic or any other place and 
examine any record, register, document, 
book, pamphlet, advertisement or any other 
material object found therein and seize and 
seal the same if such Authority or officer has 

reason to believe that it may furnish evidence 
of the commission of an office punishable 
under this Act...................................” 
(emphasis added) 
 
10. 
The condition precedent for the search of a clinic is that 
the Appropriate Authority must have reason to believe that an 
offence under the 1994 Act has been or is being committed. 
The Appropriate Authority, as defined under Section 2(a), is the 
Appropriate Authority appointed under Section 17. Sub-
sections (1) to (3) of Section 17 read thus: - 
“17. Appropriate Authority and Advisory 
Committee. - 1. The Central Government shall 
appoint, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
one or more Appropriate Authorities for each of 
the Union territories for the purposes of this 
Act. 
 
2. The State Government shall appoint, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, one or more 
Appropriate Authorities for the whole or part of 
the State for the purposes of this Act having 
regard to the intensity of the problem of pre-
natal sex determination leading to female 
foeticide. 
 
3. The officers appointed as Appropriate 
Authorities under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) shall be,— 
 
(a) when appointed for the whole of the State or 
the Union territory, consisting of the following 
three members:- 

i) an officer of or above the rank of the 
Joint Director of Health and Family 
Welfare - Chairperson; 
 
ii) an eminent woman representing 
women’s organization; and 
 
iii) an officer of Law Department of the 
State or the Union territory concerned: 
 
Provided that it shall be the duty of the State 
or 
the 
Union 
territory 
concerned 
to 
constitute multimember State or Union 
territory level appropriate authority within 
three months of the coming into force of the 
Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation 
and Prevention of Misuse) Amendment Act, 
2002: 
Provided further that any vacancy occurring 
therein shall be filled within three months of 
that occurrence. 
(b) when appointed for any part of the State 
or the Union territory, of such other rank as 
the State 
Government or the Central 
Government, as the case may be, may deem 
fit................................. ” 
 
11. 
Now, coming back to Section 30, it is a very drastic 
provision which grants power to the Appropriate Authority or 
any officer authorized by it to enter a Genetic Laboratory, a 
Genetic Clinic, or any other place to examine the record found 
therein, to seize the same and even seal the same. The first 
part of sub-section (1) of Section 30 safeguards these centres 
or laboratories from arbitrary search and seizure action. The 

safeguard is that search and seizure can be authorized only if 
the Appropriate Authority has a reason to believe that an 
offence under the 1994 Act has been committed or is being 
committed. 
 
12. 
The question is what meaning can be assigned to the 
expression “has reason to believe”. Section 26 of the Indian 
Penal Code defines the expression “reason to believe”, which 
reads thus: 
 
“26. “Reason to believe”.— A person is said 
to have “reason to believe” a thing, if he has 
sufficient cause to believe that thing but not 
otherwise.” 

In the case of Aslam Mohammad Merchant v. Competent 
Authority & Ors.1, this Court had an occasion to interpret the 
same expression. In paragraph 41, this Court held thus: 
“41. It is now a trite law that whenever a 
statute provides for “reason to believe”, either 
the reasons should appear on the face of the 
notice or they must be available on the 
materials which had been placed before 
him.” 
 
However, interpretation of the expression will depend on the 
context in which it is used in a particular legislation. In some 
statutes like the present one, there is a power to initiate action 
under the statute if the authority has reason to believe that 
 
1 (2008) 

certain facts exist. The test is whether a reasonable man, 
under the circumstances placed before him, would be propelled 
to take action under the statute. Considering the object of the 
1994 Act, the expression “reason to believe” cannot be 
construed in a manner which would create a procedural 
roadblock. The reason is that once there is any material placed 
before the Appropriate Authority based on which action of 
search is required to be undertaken, if the action is delayed, 
the very object of passing orders of search would be frustrated. 
Therefore, what is needed is that the complaint or other 
material received by the appropriate authority or its members 
should be immediately made available to all its members. After 
examining the same, 
the Appropriate 
authority 
must 
expeditiously decide whether there is a reason to believe that 
an offence under the 1994 Act has been or is being committed. 
The Appropriate Authority is not required to record reasons for 
concluding that it has reason to believe that an offence under 
the 1994 Act has been or is being committed. But, there has 
to be a rational basis to form that belief. However, the decision 
to take action under sub-section (1) of Section 30 must be of 
the Appropriate Authority and not of its individual members. 
 
13. 
Under the notification dated 7th November 2013, the 
Appropriate Authority for the district consists of the Civil 
Surgeon, the District Program Officer of the Women and Child 
Development Department, and the District Attorney. The Civil 
Surgeon is the Chairman of the appropriate authority. Looking 
at the object of sub-section (1) of Section 30 and the express 

language used therein, only the Chairman or any other 
member acting alone cannot authorise search under sub-
section (1) of Section 30. It must be a decision of the 
Appropriate Authority. If a single member of the Appropriate 
Authority authorises a search, it will be completely illegal being 
contrary to sub-section (1) of Section 30. If the law requires a 
particular thing to be done in a particular manner, the same 
shall be done in that manner only. In the present case, going 
by the affidavit filed by Dr Virender Yadav, the Chairman of the 
District Appropriate Authority cum-Civil Surgeon, Gurugram, 
the decision to conduct a search by appointing three officers by 
order dated 27th April 2017 was only his decision purportedly 
taken in his capacity as the Chairman of the Appropriate 
Authority. Admittedly, the other two members of the 
appropriate authority are not parties to the said decision. The 
Civil Surgeon has given the excuse of urgency. The Appropriate 
authority doesn't need to have a physical meeting. The Civil 
Surgeon could have held a video meeting with the other two 
members. However, when a video meeting is held, every 
member must be made aware of the complaint or the material 
on which a decision will be made. It was a matter of a few 
minutes. 
 
14. 
Therefore, in the facts of the case, no legal decision was 
made by the Appropriate Authority in terms of sub-section (1) 
of Section 30 to search for the appellant's clinic. As stated 
earlier, sub-section (1) of Section 30 provides a safeguard by 
laying down that only if the Appropriate Authority has reason 

to believe that an offence under the 1994 Act has been 
committed or is being committed that a search can be 
authorized. In this case, there is no decision of the Appropriate 
Authority, and the decision to carry out the search is an 
individual decision of the Civil Surgeon, who was the Chairman 
of the concerned Appropriate Authority. Therefore, the action 
of search is itself vitiated. 
 
15. 
There is another factual aspect of the case. The seizure 
Memo dated 27th April 2017 (Annexure P-4) contains the names 
of three persons. The Seizure Memo records that on 27th April 
2017, the District Appropriate Authority constituted a team 
comprising three members whose names were stated in the 
seizure memo. However, a letter dated 27th April 2017 
(annexure P-3) addressed by Deputy Civil Surgeon Rewari to 
Deputy Civil Surgeon Gurugram records that the team 
comprised four members, and the raid was conducted by the 
said four members. 
 
16. 
A perusal of the impugned FIR and impugned complaint 
shows that its foundation is the material seized during the raid 
on 27th April 2017. Except for what was found in the search 
and the seized documents, there is nothing to connect the 
accused with the offence punishable under Section 23 of the 
1994 Act. As the search itself is entirely illegal, continuing 
prosecution based on such an illegal search will amount to 
abuse of the process of law. The High Court ought to have 
noticed the illegality we have pointed out. 

17. 
Therefore, the appeal is allowed, and the impugned 
judgment dated 13th January 2023 is set aside. FIR No.408, 
dated 27th April 2017, registered in the Police Station, 
Gurugram at Gurugram, is hereby quashed. The complaint 
bearing no. COMA No.40 of 2018, pending before the court of 
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Gurugram, also stands 
quashed....…………………………….J. 

 (Abhay S Oka)..…………………………….J. 
 (Augustine George Masih) 
New Delhi; 
September 12, 2024.