1 | SLP (C) No. 24805/2023

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO…..…… OF 2024 
( SLP (C) No. 24805 of 2023) 
 
RASHMI KANT VIJAY CHANDRA & ORS. 
 
Versus 
 
BAIJNATH CHOUBEY & COMPANY 
 
ORDER 

Leave Granted. 
2. This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 24th August, 
2023 passed in S.A.No.100 of 2021 by the High Court of Calcutta, whereby 
the judgment and order dated 12th December, 2019 passed by the City Civil 
Court at Calcutta1 in Title Appeal No.14/2018 was set aside. The First 
Appellate Court set aside the findings returned by the Presidency Small 
 
1 Hereinafter referred as ‘First Appellate Court’ 

2 | SLP (C) No. 24805/2023
Cause Court2 in favour of the respondent-tenant, at Calcutta in Ejectment 
Suit No.1079 of 2002 by order dated 27th November, 2017. 
3. The issue inter se the parties, is one between a landlord and tenant. The facts 
stretch about 90 years in time beginning on 19th February, 1933, when one 
Harak Chand Veljee by a registered deed of settlement, settled premises 
Nos.37, 38 and 39, Ezra Street, Calcutta-700001 in Trust of which the 
present plaintiff-appellants were the trustees. One Baijnath Choubey was a 
tenant in respect of part of the suit premises. The tenancy stood in the name 
of M/s. B.N. Choubey and Company (a partnership concern). He died having 
created a Trust to care for his son who was in an asylum at Agra. The said 
Trust (which allegedly came to an end with the death of the son in 1949 and 
his daughter having passed away issueless) carried on business and the 
plaintiff-appellants allege that the trustees of the respondent-tenant formed 
an illegal partnership with two individuals, namely, Sarbottam Das Mundra 
and Chetandas Mundra. On 31st May, 1984, the plaintiff-appellants came to 
know that one of the trustees of the respondent or his legal representatives 
did not exist and, therefore, the business was being carried on by 
perpetuating fraud. 
 
2 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘Trial Court’ 

3 | SLP (C) No. 24805/2023
4. The case of the plaintiff-appellants is that the respondent-defendant had 
illegally inducted a sub-tenant into the subject premises. An eviction notice 
was served by the plaintiff-appellants on 22nd July, 1984. Thereafter, the suit 
for eviction, subject matter of the present lis, came to be filed. 
 
5. The Trial Court framed 9 issues. The following is a snapshot of the issues as 
framed and its corresponding findings. For the purposes of clarity, it is 
mentioned that the appellants are the plaintiffs and the respondent is the 
defendant: 

 As such, the Trial Court dismissed the Suit. 
S.No. Issues 
Findings 
1. 
Is the suit maintainable in its present form and 
prayer? 
In favour of the 
defendant 
2. 
Is there any cause of action to file the instant suit? In favour of the 
plaintiffs 
3. 
Is the plaintiff Trust owner of the suit property as 
described in the schedule of the plaint? 
In favour of the 
plaintiffs 
4. 
Did the plaintiffs send a notice of eviction? Was 
there proper service of the same? If so, was the 
same legal and valid? 
In favour of the 
plaintiffs 
5. 
Is the defendant a defaulter in payment of rent? 
In favour of the 
defendant 
6. 
Is there any relationship of landlord and tenant in 
between the parties to this suit? 
In favour of the 
defendant 
7. 
Has the defendant sublet the suit premises? 
In favour of the 
plaintiffs 
8. 
Are the plaintiffs entitled to the relief as prayed 
for? 
In favour of the 
plaintiffs 
9. 
To what other relief or reliefs, are the plaintiffs 
entitled? 
In favour of the 
plaintiffs 

4 | SLP (C) No. 24805/2023
6. The plaintiff-appellants preferred an appeal against the Trial Court judgment, 
which came to be numbered as Title Appeal No. 14/2018. The respondent-
defendant also preferred cross-objection thereafter on 08.07.2019. The 
learned First Appellate Court vide Judgment dated 25.07.2019, dismissed 
the cross-objections preferred on the ground of delay and that such cross-
objections have been preferred after the plaintiff-appellants had concluded 
their arguments in the appeal. 
7. The learned First Appellate Court set aside the findings of the Trial Court 
and decreed the suit in favour of the plaintiff-appellants. The Court held that 
there were contradictions in the reasoning of the Trial Court, where it had 
on the one hand observed that a valid legal notice was served upon the 
defendant and on the other, held the relationship of landlord and tenant is 
not proved. The question of the relationship of landlord and tenant between 
the plaintiff-appellants and defendant-respondent in fact, had to be answered 
in affirmative. The Court held that the defendant has sublet the suit premises 
and is, therefore, liable to be evicted from the same. 
8. The High Court of Calcutta in Second Appeal, under Section 100 of the Civil 
Procedure Code, 19083 admitted the appeal vide Order dated 25th August, 
2021 on the following questions of law: 
 
3 Hereinafter referred to as “CPC” 

5 | SLP (C) No. 24805/2023
i. Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, 
impleadment of M/s. Baijnath Choubey and company as a sole 
defendant in the plaint was correct? ii. Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the heirs, 
executors, trustees etc. representing the estate of Baijnath Choubey 
were also necessary parties? iii. Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the suit 
was liable to be dismissed for non-joinder of necessary party? 

9. The High Court, vide the impugned judgment dated 24th August, 2023, 
allowed the appeal and answered the above questions in the affirmative. The 
Court observed that: 
 
“21. It leaves no manner of doubt, that a trade name can never be 
considered, to be a juristic person, so is a partnership firm. Therefore, 
the plaintiff cannot maintain the suit without impleading the trustees of 
the trust, created by the original tenant, Baijnath Choubey, in the breach 
of Order XXXI Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
…. 
26. Thus the substantial questions are answered in the affirmative. That 
decree has been granted by the First Appellate Court on the ground of 
sub-letting. In absence of any evidence to constitute the ingredients of 
sub-letting, the decree cannot be maintained… 
 
27. …. In absence of any evidence, oral or documentary, the finding of 
the learned First Appellate Court is based on no evidence and therefore 
warrants interference. I am of the opinion that the impugned judgment 
by the learned First Appellant Court is erroneous and should not be 
allowed to remain in force.” 
 
10. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also perused the 
written submissions filed. We are of the view that the High Court fell in 
error in overturning the findings of the learned First Appellate Court. 

6 | SLP (C) No. 24805/2023
11. The answer to the objection raised by the respondent-defendant qua the 
non-joinder of all trustees as necessary parties, is in the impugned judgment 
itself. The High Court, in paragraph 22 of the impugned judgment, notes that 
the respondent-defendant contested the suit by filing written statement, 
which was signed by Sarbottum Das Mundra, who is a partner of the 
defendant. Pertinently, before the Trial Court, in the written statement, there 
is no reference made to the non-joinder of necessary parties. 
12. Reference is made to the judgment of this Court in Gajendra Narain Singh 
v. Johrimal Prahlad Rai4 to state that where a person is served with 
summons as a partner of a firm and he files an appearance without protest, 
his appearance must be deemed to be on behalf of the firm, unless the Court 
permits him to withdraw such appearance. 
13. The issue which remains to be considered, is whether the High Court erred 
in observing that the Order of the First Appellate Court is based on no 
evidence. In our view, the answer is in the affirmative. 
14. This Court in Dnyanoba Bhaurao Shemade v. Maroti Bhaurao Marnor5, 
while considering the scope of Section 100 of the CPC, observed: 
 
“10. Having given our anxious consideration to the rival contentions 
aforesaid, we find ourselves unable to sustain the decision rendered by 
the learned Single Judge of the High Court for the reasons that follow: 
 
 SC 581 
5 (1999) 

7 | SLP (C) No. 24805/2023
 
It has to be kept in view that the learned Single Judge was exercising 
jurisdiction under Section 100 CPC as it was amended in 1976. A mere 
look at the said provision shows that the High Court can exercise its 
jurisdiction under Section 100 CPC only on the basis of substantial 
questions of law which are to be framed at the time of admission of the 
second appeal and the second appeal has to be heard and decided only 
on the basis of such duly framed substantial questions of law. The 
impugned judgment shows that no such procedure was followed by the 
learned Single Judge. It is held by a catena of judgments by this Court, 
some of them being, Kshitish Chandra Purkait v. Santosh Kumar 
Purkait [(1997) 
] 
and Sheel 
Chand v. Prakash 
Chand [(1998) ] that the judgment rendered by the High 
Court under Section 100 CPC without following the aforesaid 
procedure cannot be sustained. On this short ground alone, this appeal 
is required to be allowed.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
15. This exposition came to be followed by this Court in Narayanan Rajendran 
v. Lekshmy Sarojini6 wherein after tracing out a catena of judgments on 
Section 100 of the CPC, it was observed: 
“70. Now, after the 1976 Amendment, the scope of Section 100 has 
been drastically curtailed and narrowed down. The High Courts would 
have jurisdiction of interfering under Section 100 CPC only in a case 
where substantial questions of law are involved and those questions 
have been clearly formulated in the memorandum of appeal. At the time 
of admission of the second appeal, it is the bounden duty and obligation 
of the High Court to formulate substantial questions of law and then 
only the High Court is permitted to proceed with the case to decide 
those questions of law.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

6 (2009) 

8 | SLP (C) No. 24805/2023
16. While placing reliance on the above observations, this Court in Hardeep 
Kaur v. Malkiat Kaur7 affirmed that it is the duty of the High Court to frame 
substantial questions of law before hearing an appeal under Section 100 of 
the CPC and such a second appeal has to be heard and decided on such 
substantial question of law. 
17. More recently, in Kirpa Ram v. Surendra Deo Gaur8 and Suresh Lataruji 
Ramteke v. Sau. Sumanbhai Pandurang Petkar and Ors.9, it was reiterated 
that High Courts are required to hear second appeals under Section 100 of 
the CPC only on the satisfaction that there exists a substantial question of 
law and the appeal has to be heard on the question so formulated. 
18. Adverting to the facts of the case at hand, the questions of law framed by 
the High Court for admission of the appeal, as have been reproduced above, 
pertain to necessary parties, non-joinder of such parties, and the effect it has 
on the suit filed by the plaintiff-appellants. 
19. In the impugned Judgment, deciding the appeal, there is another substantial 
question of law framed as to “Whether an interlocutory order of the learned 
First Appellate Court can be held to have attained finality to bring the issue 
within the mischief of Section 11 of the CPC.” The finding returned is in the 
 
7 (2012) 
8 (2021) 
9 2023 SCC Online SC 1210 

9 | SLP (C) No. 24805/2023
affirmative and this interlocutory order whereby the cross-objection of the 
respondent-defendants was dismissed due to delay has been held to be 
amenable to appeal. Thereafter, the High Court has proceeded to discuss the 
issue of sub-letting of the suit premises and the decree of the learned First 
Appellate Court was set aside on that ground. 
20. There is no question framed about lack of evidence, sub-letting or incorrect 
appreciation of facts by the learned First Appellate Court, on which the final 
finding of the High Court is returned. Furthermore, there is no discussion by 
the High Court, as to the reasons required for the departure from the 
substantial questions of law framed at the stage of admission or in the 
impugned order. The impugned judgment overturns the finding of fact of the 
First Appellate Court qua sub-letting without framing a substantial question 
of law in this regard at any stage. 
21. Therefore, in view of the above exposition of law and the foregoing 
discussion, the impugned order is liable to be set aside on this ground. 
22. The judgment and order dated 24th August, 2023 passed in S.A.No.100 of 
2021 by the High Court of Calcutta is set aside. The judgment and order 
dated 12th December, 2019 passed by the City Civil Court at Calcutta in Title 
Appeal No.14/2018 stands affirmed. 

10 | SLP (C) No. 24805/2023
23. In the interest of justice, the respondent-defendant is directed to hand over 
vacant physical possession of the suit property by 31.12.2024. Any dues up 
till the date of occupation shall be borne by the respondent-defendant. 
24. The civil appeal is allowed and disposed of in the aforesaid terms. Pending 
applications if any, shall also stand disposed of. 
25. No order as to costs. 
 
……………..………….J. 
(J.K. MAHESHWARI) 

…………..……………J. 
(SANJAY KAROL) 
Dated: September 13, 2024; 
Place: New Delhi.