IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
EXTRA-ORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

TALLURI SRIKAR (MINOR) THROUGH 
HIS FATHER TALLURI SRIKRISHNA …PETITIONER 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL 
TESTING AGENCY & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 

MANOJ MISRA, J. 
 
1. 
By this Special Leave Petition, the petitioner seeks leave 
to appeal against the judgment and order of the High Court1 
dated 09.08.2024, whereby the writ petition2 of the petitioner, 
inter alia, seeking a direction to the first respondent to conduct 
re-examination of NEET(UG)-2024 for the petitioner, as it did 
for 1563 candidates, has been dismissed. 
 
1 The High Court for the State of Telangana at Hyderabad 

2. 
The case of the petitioner is that he suffers from a 
medical condition called ‘Hyperhidrosis’ of palms and soles. 
Due to which, his palms sweat profusely. Therefore, to keep 
them dry, he needs a piece of cloth, such as a handkerchief, to 
wipe off the sweat. According to the petitioner, though he was 
allowed to appear in the NEET-2024 examination, he was not 
permitted to take his handkerchief inside the examination hall. 
As a result, he was extremely inconvenienced and could not 
gainfully utilize the allotted time for the examination. It is also 
his case that because of that he could not attempt many 
questions and even bubbled a wrong digit on the OMR sheet. 
He, therefore, prayed that a fresh examination be conducted 
for him as was done for 1563 candidates who lost examination 
time because of delay in distribution of correct question paper 
to them. 
3. 
It appears that in connection with the above grievance, 
the petitioner had submitted a representation which stood 
rejected by order dated 21.06.2024. The said order was 
therefore impugned in the writ petition filed before the High 
Court. 

4. 
The High Court dismissed the petition upon finding 
that full allotted time for giving the examination was provided 
to all the candidates including the petitioner at the relevant 
examination center; therefore, the case of the petitioner is not 
at par with those 1563 candidates for whom a fresh 
examination was conducted. The High Court observed that 
even if it is assumed that the petitioner was wrongly denied 
permission to carry a handkerchief, the same would not have 
materially affected his performance in the examination as 
sweat on palms could easily be wiped off on the clothes worn 
by a person. 
5. 
We have heard the father of the minor petitioner along 
with the petitioner, who appeared in person, and perused the 
materials on record. 
6. 
The thrust of the submissions was on the negligence of 
the security personnel manning the examination center in not 
allowing the petitioner to carry a handkerchief inside the 
examination hall even though it was not a prohibited item. It 
has been argued before us that had the petitioner been 
provided the benefit of a handkerchief, his performance would 

have been a lot better thereby improving his chances for 
admission in a college of his choice. 
7. 
Having given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions made, we are of the view that it is not a fit case 
for interference for the following reasons: 
(a) There is no case that allotted time for giving the 
examination was not provided to the petitioner at the 
examination center. Thus, the case of the petitioner is 
distinguishable from those 1563 candidates for whom 
re-examination was conducted because of loss of 
examination time on account of delay in distribution 
of correct question paper. 
(b) In the examination, answers were to be rendered 
by darkening blank circles on the OMR sheet. In such 
a case, the use of a pen or a pencil is much less than 
where answers are to be written. Hence, the view 
taken by the High Court that denial of permission to 
take a handkerchief inside the examination hall would 
not have materially affected petitioner’s performance, 
as he could have rubbed his palms on his clothes, is a 
plausible view. 

(c) Courts must be circumspect in entertaining an 
individual grievance relating to a Public Examination 
as it delays finalization of result thereby seriously 
prejudicing larger public interest. 
8. For all the reasons above, we find no merit in the 
Special Leave Petition. The same is dismissed. 
9. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of. 

…………………………………..CJI. 

 (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud) 

New Delhi; 
September 13, 2024