IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

KAMAL KISHORE SEHGAL (D) 
THR. LRS. & ORS. 

VERSUS 

MURTI DEVI (DEAD) THR. LRS. 

JUDGMENT 

PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
The suit of the plaintiff now represented by her heirs and 
legal representatives (respondents herein) for the decree of 
permanent injunction in respect of the use of passage, 
more commonly described as ‘common passage’, was 
dismissed by the court of first instance, but in appeal the 
judgment and order of the Trial Court has been reversed 
and the suit stands decreed. 
2. 
In the above circumstances, the defendants and their 
legal representatives (appellants herein) have preferred 
this appeal. 

3. 
We have heard Mr. S. K. Sharma, advocate for the 
appellants and Mr. Gaurav Agrawal, Sr. Advocate for the 
respondents. 
4. 
The pleadings of the parties reveal that Sh. Jaspal Singh 
along with Smt. Raj Rani and Smt. Sudesh Rani jointly 
purchased a piece of land measuring 3116 square yards, 
more popularly/particularly described as plot no. 8C, 
Rajpur Road, Civil Lines, Delhi vide sale deed dated 
30.09.1972. Out of the aforesaid 3116 square yards of 
land, Sh. Jaspal Singh became the absolute owner in 
possession of 1398 square yards of land with all 
easementary rights and this area in his possession came 
to be marked as Municipal No. 8C/1, Rajpur Road, Civil 
Lines, Delhi. The said plot of land faces the Battery Lane 
on the northern side and on one side of it is Tirath Ram 
Hospital and on the other two sides there are properties of 
two other private persons. It means that the said plot had 
no other access except through the Battery Lane. 
5. 
Sh. Jaspal Singh divided his plot of land measuring 1398 
square yards in two equal halves of 699 square yards and 
marked them as A (front portion) and B (back portion). He 

sold both portions A and B each having an area of 699 
square yards vide separate registered sale deeds dated 
12.04.1974. Portion A was sold to plaintiff-respondents 
and portion B to the defendants-appellants. Since portion 
B was in the back and had no access to the Battery Lane, 
the sale deed of the plaintiff-respondents, categorically 
provided that she would leave a 15 feet wide common 
passage on side of portion A for the common use of the 
owners of portions A & B both. However, in the sale deed 
of the defendants-appellants, there was no similar 
stipulation that they would also have to leave any such 
passage, much less to be used by the owners of portion A. 
6. 
It is worth noting that the size of both the portions A & B 
transferred by Sh. Jaspal Singh were exactly the same. 
The sale deeds were executed on the same day and on the 
same sale consideration. In other words, plot A, which 
was in the front and plot B, which was on the back side 
were valued at the same rate. It may be relevant to note 
that since the portions which were sold, were little 
elevated vis a vis the Battery Lane, a ramp was 
constructed at the entry point of the passage. It is also 

important to note that though the respective sale deeds 
refer to a 15 feet wide common passage, but in reality, the 
said passage is only 10-11 feet wide to which no one has 
objected as of date. 
7. 
The plaintiff-respondents sometime in the year 1991, 
brought about the aforesaid suit for permanent injunction 
inter-alia alleging that the 15 feet wide common passage 
shown in green colour is not the passage adjoining only 
portion A of the plaintiff-respondents, but it also includes 
the passage which runs across the portion B of the 
defendants-appellants as well. Therefore, the plaintiff-
respondents have a right to use the said entire common 
passage shown in green colour in the map attached to the 
sale deeds. The defendants-appellants cannot obstruct 
the use of the said common passage by the plaintiff-
respondents. As such, they may be, apart from other 
things, restrained from causing any obstruction in the 
use of the said entire common passage by the plaintiff-
respondents. 
8. 
The suit was contested by the defendants-appellants by 
filing written statement contending that according to the 

sale deed of the plaintiff-respondents, they alone were 
required to leave a common passage of 15 feet wide for 
use of defendants-appellants, as they had no other way to 
access their property i.e., portion B. The said common 
passage has been marked as X to Y in the map forming 
part of the sale deed. The open space left by the 
defendants-appellants in their portion B in alignment with 
the common passage X-Y which is marked in the map as 
Y-Z or Z-Z1, was never intended to be used as common 
passage but was exclusive part of portion B purchased by 
them. 
9. 
On the pleadings of the parties, issues were framed by the 
court of first instance and finally the suit was dismissed 
holding that the plaintiff-respondents under their sale 
deed had to leave the common passage X to Y for ingress 
& egress of defendants-appellants as an access to their 
back portion B to be used jointly by both the parties. 
There was no stipulation that portion Y-Z is to be used by 
the plaintiff-respondents. 
10. Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order of the Trial 
Court, 
plaintiff-respondents 
preferred 
Regular 
First 

Appeal in the High Court which has been allowed by the 
impugned judgment and order dated 01.11.2011. It has 
been held that the entire common passage X-Z1 is a 
common passage which is usable by both the parties i.e., 
the owners of portions A and B. 
11. The basic issue before this Court is whether the entire so 
called ‘common passage’ shown in the green colour in the 
map annexed to the sale deeds which is in 3 parts, and 
marked by letters X to Y, Y to Z and Z to Z1 is to be used 
by both the parties i.e., the plaintiff-respondents and 
defendants-appellants or the portion of the said passage 
marked by X to Y alone is to be used as a ‘common 
passage’ by the parties and the passage marked Y to Z 
and Z to Z1 are the exclusive properties of the defendants-
appellants. 
11.A. A sketch map as per that enclosed to the sale deeds 
showing the position of portion A & B with the alleged 
common passage X-Y, Y-Z & Z-Z1 is produced below for 
the easy understanding of the controversy: 

12. The answer to the said issue largely depends upon the 
interpretation of the recitals of the sale deeds and as to 
whether the ‘common passage’ in use by both the parties 

refer to the entire common passage from X-Y, Y-Z and 
Z-Z1 or only to X-Y. 
13. The sale deed of portion A executed in favour of plaintiff-
respondents dated 12.04.1974 in unequivocal terms 
provides that the vendor is transferring his absolute 
rights in the said land portion A together with right to use 
of 15 feet wide common passage which has been left for 
access to the back portion. The relevant extract of part of 
clause 1 of the said sale deed in context with 15 feet wide 
common passage is extracted below for ready reference: 
 
“…… the said seller doth hereby sell, convey, 
transfer and assign by way of absolute sale his 
share to the extent of 699/3116 in Plot No. 8-C, 
Rajpur Road, Delhi i.e., 699 square yards out of 
his own 1398 square yards as shown and 
marked as portion A in the plan annexed 
together with right of use of 15 feet wide common 
passage which has been left for access to the 
back portion as shown in green colour in the plan 
annexed unto the purchaser along with all his 
right, title, interest, option and privileges. The 
vacant possession in respect of the demised 
property has already been given to the purchaser 
on spot.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
14. A plain reading of the above recitals of the sale deed would 
make it crystal clear that the plaintiff-respondents were 
supposed to leave a 15 feet wide common passage for 

access to the back portion, i.e., for the defendants-
appellants of the portion B, but, the plaintiff-respondents 
would also have the right to use the same. Therefore, by 
necessary implication the said 15 feet wide common 
passage refers to the passage to be left by the plaintiff-
respondents, meaning thereby, the passage marked X-Y 
only. The aforesaid recitals in the sale deed are in 
continuation with the agreement to sell between the 
parties dated 11.06.1973 which also provides for leaving of 
15 feet wide passage by the plaintiff-respondents for use of 
the owner of the back portion. The aforesaid sale deed 
nowhere contains any stipulation that the plaintiff-
respondents, the purchaser of portion A, will have any 
right, in any manner, over portion B or to use the passage 
if any existing or to be constructed in part of portion B 
owned by defendants-appellants. 
15. Now coming to the sale deed dated 12.04.1974 executed in 
favour of the defendants-appellants, it categorically states 
that the vendor Sh. Jaspal Singh is transferring portion B 
with the right of use of 15 feet wide common passage for 
access thereto as left by Smt. Murti Devi (plaintiff-

respondents) for that purpose, to whom the whole of front 
portion A belongs. The said recitals as contained in clause 
6 of the aforesaid sale deed are reproduced herein below: 

“The seller agreed to sell his 699/3116 share in 
Plot No.8-C, Rajpur Road, measuring 1398/3116 
square yards i.e., 699 square yards out of his 
1398 square yards more specifically shown in 
the plan annexed i.e., being the areas measuring 
699 square yards with right of use of 15 feet 
wide common passage for access thereto as left 
by Smt. Murti Devi for that purpose, to whom the 
whole of the front portion measuring 699 square 
yards facing Battery Lane has been sold, unto 
the purchasers for a 
total sale price of 
Rs.98,000/- (Ninety eight thousand) and the 
purchasers agreed on 06.11.1973 to purchase 
the same vide terms and conditions in the 
agreement of sale registered as No. 1219 in addl. 
Book No. I, Vol. No. 3084 on pages 54 to 58 in 
the 
office 
of 
the 
sub-Registrar, 
Delhi 
on 
28.03.1974.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

16. There is no recital in the said sale deed that the 
defendants-appellants also have to leave a 15 feet wide 
passage in their portion B for use as a common passage by 
the plaintiff-respondents, the owner of portion A. 
17. On a harmonious reading of the above recitals contained in 
both the sale deeds, it is implicit that portion A was 
purchased by the plaintiff-respondents whereas portion B 

in the back was purchased by the defendants-appellants. 
The plaintiff-respondents have agreed to leave a 15 feet 
wide common passage in their portion A for common use 
by the defendants-appellants and the plaintiff-respondents 
for the purposes of ingress and egress to their portion from 
the Battery Lane. This passage alone has been referred to 
as the ‘common passage’ to be used by both the parties 
and has been marked as X-Y. The defendants-appellants, 
purchaser of portion B has no-where agreed to leave any 
passage in portion B for use by the plaintiff-respondents. 
Therefore, implicitly the defendants-appellants are the 
exclusive owner of the entire portion B. 
18. It is a cardinal principle of interpretation that where the 
language employed in the instrument is clear and 
unambiguous, the common literary meaning ought to be 
assigned in interpreting the same and one should not fall 
back on any other inference. Only the expression in clear 
words contained in the instrument/document must be 
considered and not the surrounding circumstances. In 
short, literal construction must be considered first, rather 
than going into the intention behind what is said in the 

instrument/document if the language of the instrument is 
clear and unambiguous. 
19. The court of first instance, applying the above principle of 
interpretation and upon proper and due consideration of 
the recitals in the two sale deeds, categorically ruled that it 
was only the plaintiff-respondents, the owner of the front 
portion A, who had to sacrifice for the 15 feet wide passage 
and not the defendants-appellants who own the back 
portion B. It would be beneficial to reproduce Paragraph 14 
from the Trial Court judgment which reads thus: 
 
“A perusal of these clauses clearly goes to show 
that in the sale deed of plaintiff, he was required 
to leave 15 feet wide common passage for access 
to the back portion and there was no clause that 
she will have access to the passage in front of 
the portion of the defendants. Similarly, in the 
sale deed of the defendants, it has been provided 
that they will have access to the back portion 
from the front portion while the plaintiff was to 
leave 15 feet wide common passage no such 
condition was imposed on the defendants to 
leave passage as common to be jointly used by 
plaintiff and defendants. It was admitted by the 
attorney of the plaintiff that the sale deed of both 
the parties was drafted by him. He also admitted 
that no agreement took place between the 
parties with regard to passage and its user. He 
also admitted that agreement to sell Ex.DW1/2 
executed 
between 
Jaspal 
Singh 
and 
the 
defendants is witnessed by him and bears his 
signature at point A. In pursuance to a specific 

question put by the learned counsel for the 
defendant to Shri R.P Bansal as to whether there 
was condition in the sale deed in favour of the 
plaintiff that she will leave passage of 15 feet for 
access to the back portion of the plot owned by 
Jaspal Singh and sale deed Ex.DW1/1 executed 
by Jaspal Singh in favour of the plaintiff had a 
rider that the plaintiff will leave a passage of 15 
feet for access to the rear portion and that in the 
agreement to sell Ex.DW1/2 there was no such 
condition or rider that defendant will leave 
common passage for use of occupants of front 
portion out of defendants property measuring 
699 sq. yards and on the other hand, it was 
mentioned that purchaser agreed to purchase 
the remaining 699 square yards being the back 
portion after leaving 15 feet side passage for 
access to back portion agreed to be sold to the 
site plans attached to the respective sale deeds 
of the parties. Relevant clauses of the sale deeds 
as reproduced above makes it amply clear that 
while in the sale deed Ex.DW1/1 executed by 
Jaspal Singh in favour of plaintiff there was a 
rider that the plaintiff will leave passage of 15 
feet for access to the rear portion but there was 
no clause in her favour that she will have 
corresponding right of common passage in front 
of the portion of defendants more specifically 
shown in portions Y to Z and Z to Z-1 in the site 
plan. It may be mentioned that true intention of 
parties is not correctly reflected in the site plan 
attached with the sale deeds of respective parties 
because both of them are exactly similar. 
Moreover, there is no ambiguity in the sale deed 
so that any clarification may be sought from the 
site plan. There is force in the contention of the 
learned counsel for the defendants that since the 
plaintiff was getting front portion and the 
defendants was getting rear portion for the same 
consideration amount, the plaintiff had to 
sacrifice passage of 15 feet. It is common 
knowledge that market value of front portion is 

practically more when both the parties were 
purchasing 
exactly 
same 
land, 
why 
the 
defendants would have agreed to pay same 
consideration except for the fact that since the 
plaintiff was deriving all the benefits of being 
purchaser of front portion that she was required 
to sacrifice passage of 15 feet wide for access to 
the defendants and there was no such rider on 
the part of the defendants. If the plaintiff 
intended to use 214 feet wide passage as 
common, there could have been no hitch in 
marking specific mention of it in the sale deed 
which was drafted by none else but the attorney 
of the plaintiff who is a senior advocate and each 
and every clause must have been drafted very 
carefully. Further in para 10 of the plaint, it has 
been alleged that parties agreed/arrived at an 
understanding that entire common passage 214 
ft deep passing adjacent to the portion A and B 
should be made of marble by the parties at their 
own costs. The defendants put up kota stones in 
the portion of the common passage in front of 
their portion B while the plaintiff put up crazy 
marble tiles in the portion in front of her portion 
in front of her portion A. So, the fact that the 
different constructions of both the portions 
between X and Y and Y and Z have taken place 
this also reflects the intention of the parties that 
these portions are in occupation of two different 
persons and while portion shown X to Y in the 
site plan was to be a common passage, since the 
defendants was to have access to his portion 
from that passage, rest of the passage from point 
Y to Z is part of property of the defendants and 
plaintiff has nothing to do with that portion.” 

20. Upon the reading of the entire sale deeds and even 
considering the map attached thereto, we are satisfied that 
the court of first instance has rightly interpreted the two 

documents to conclude that the common passage referred 
thereto is only in respect of common passage marked in 
the letters X-Y as this was the passage supposed to be left 
aside by the plaintiff-respondents, the owners of the 
portion A for common use by both the parties, with no 
stipulation that the owners of the back portion are also to 
leave a similar passage in their portion for use by the other 
party. 
21. The first appellate Court completely misconstrued the two 
sale deeds and simply for the reason that the passage Y-Z 
and Z-Z1 were in alignment with the passage X-Y left by 
the plaintiff-respondents for common use held that the 
entire passage from X-Z1 is a common passage for the use 
of both the parties. This is something which is completely 
erroneous and in conflict with the clear recitals of the sale 
deeds. The first appellate Court has unnecessarily laid 
undue emphasis on the words ‘common passage’ to hold 
that it refers to the entire passage from X-Z1 otherwise it 
would defeat the whole intention behind using the phrase 
‘common passage’ in the two sale deeds. 

22. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, on the 
simple reading of the contents of the two sale deeds, we 
are of the opinion that the common passage referred to in 
those sale deeds and the map thereto is only in context 
with the common passage X-Y which was supposed to be 
left by the purchasers/owners of the portion A i.e., 
plaintiff-respondents for ingress and egress of the owners 
of portion B as they have no other alternative way of 
access to the Battery Lane or as a matter of fact to any 
other road or lane. Since the defendants-appellants under 
their sale deed were not supposed to leave any such 
passage in the portion purchased or owned by them, the 
plaintiff-respondents have no right to use any part of 
portion B which exclusively belongs to the defendants-
appellants. 
23. There is otherwise no justification for allowing the plaintiff-
respondents to have access or use of the passage Y-Z or Z-
Z1 comprised in portion B as there is no access to their 
portion from the said passage. Simply for the reason that 
the said passage is in alignment with the common passage 

X-Y, the plaintiff-respondents cannot claim any right over 
it. 
24. Accordingly, in our opinion the judgment and order of the 
First Appellate Court dated 01.11.2011 cannot be 
sustained in law and is hereby set aside and that of the 
court of first instance dated 22.02.2002 is restored. 
25. The appeal is allowed with no order as to cost....………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL)...……………………………….. J. 
(R. MAHADEVAN)