IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

SANTOSH... 
APPELLANT(S) 

 VERSUS 

STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH... 
RESPONDENT(S) 

J U D G E M E N T 

SANJIV KHANNA, J. 

Five individuals, namely, Laadkunwar Bai, Jitendra Singh, 
Nirbhay Singh ajesh Mama, Meharban Singh and the appellant, 
Santosh ajesh opal, were prosecuted for the murder of 
Narayan Singh in the chargesheet First 
Information Report No. 640/2011 dated 13.11.2011, registered 
with Police Station – Industrial Area, District Dewas, Madhya 
Pradesh, for offence(s) punishable under Sections 302, 34 and 
120B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, and Section 25(1-B)(A) of 
the Arms Act, 1959. 
 
2. 
Three out of these five persons are related to the victim, 
Narayan Singh. Laadkunwar Bai and Jitendra Singh are the wife 
and son of the victim, Narayan Singh. Meharban Singh is the 
father-in-law of Jitendra Singh, the son of Narayan Singh. The 
remaining 
two 
persons, 
namely, 
Nirbhay 
Singh 
and 
the 

appellant, Santosh ajesh opal, are allegedly hired 
killers. 
 
3. 
On 30.11.2017, the trial court acquitted Laadkunwar Bai and 
Meharban Singh. However, Nirbhay Singh ajesh Mama, Jitendra 
Singh, and the appellant, Santosh ajesh opal, were 
convicted. 
 
4. 
Following this, Nirbhay Singh ajesh Mama, Jitendra Singh, 
and the appellant filed appeals before the High Court of 
Madhya Pradesh at Indore. During the pendency of the appeal, 
Nirbhay Singh ajesh Mama passed away, resulting in the 
dismissal of his appeal as abated. 
 
5. 
By the impugned judgment dated 18.10.2022, Jitendra Singh has 
been acquitted. His acquittal has not been challenged. 
However, the conviction of the appellant, Santosh ajesh opal, was upheld, prompting him to file the present appeal. 
 
6. 
The prosecution’s case, in brief, is that on 13.11.2011, at 
9.30 p.m., Rachna Bai, the mother of the victim, Narayan 
Singh, deposed as PW-2 that both she and Narayan Singh were 
sleeping at their house in Village Binjana, District Dewas, 
Madhya Pradesh. Someone called out Narayan Singh’s name from 
outside, prompting him to open the door. At that moment, 
Rachna Bai (PW-2) heard a gunshot. She ran towards Narayan 
Singh, and shortly after, a second gunshot was fired, striking 
Narayan Singh in the chest, and causing him to fall. When 
Rachna Bai (PW-2) went outside, she saw her daughter-in-law, 

Laadkunwar Bai (Narayan Singh’s wife), and Jitendra Singh 
(Narayan Singh’s son) standing on the opposite side of the 
house. She also saw two individuals with their faces covered 
fleeing the scene on a motorcycle. 
 
7. 
The prosecution’s primary evidence against the appellant, 
Santosh ajesh opal, also referenced in the impugned 
judgment, is the recovery (Exhibit P-6) of a pistol and the 
ballistic report (Exhibit P-57), which confirms that the 
bullet (Exhibit B-1) recovered from the body of the victim, 
Narayan Singh, was fired from the country-made pistol (Exhibit 
A-1 and C-1). There is evidence to show that the pistol was 
recovered (Exhibit P-6) from the appellant, Santosh ajesh opal, 
and 
we 
would 
accept 
the 
said 
version 
of 
the 
prosecution. 
 
8. 
There are no eyewitnesses to the crime, implicating the 
appellant, Santosh ajesh opal. The case against the 
appellant, Santosh ajesh opal, rests entirely on 
circumstantial evidence. 
 
9. 
Where the case rests entirely on circumstantial evidence, a 
finding of guilt is justified only if all the incriminating 
facts and circumstances are incompatible with the accused's 
innocence. In other words, there must be a chain of evidence 
so far complete, such that every hypothesis is excluded but 
the one proposed to be proved and such circumstances must show 
that the act has been done by the accused within all human 

probability.1 
 
10. 
In Sharad Birdhichand Sharda v. State of Maharasthra,2 this 
Court outlined five essential principles, often referred to as 
the “golden rules”, which must be satisfied for circumstantial 
evidence to conclusively establish the guilt of the accused: 
“(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion 
of 
guilt 
is 
to 
be 
drawn 
should 
be 
fully 
established. xxx 

xxx 

xxx 
(2) the facts so established should be consistent 
only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the 
accused, that is to say, they should not be 
explainable on any other hypothesis except that 
the accused is guilty, 
(3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive 
nature and tendency, 
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis 
except the one to be proved, and 
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete 
as not to leave any reasonable ground for the 
conclusion consistent with the innocence of the 
accused 
and 
must 
show 
that 
in 
all 
human 
probability the act must have been done by the 
accused.” 
 
11. 
The ballistic report (Exhibit P-57) connects the pistol 
recovered (Exhibit P-6) from the appellant, Santosh ajesh opal, with the bullet (Exhibit B-1) recovered from the body 
of the victim, Narayan Singh. This is an inculpatory fact. 
However, it is also the prosecution’s case that the said 
 
1 Hanumant v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1952). 
2 (1984). discovery and recovery is attributable to the disclosure 
statement (Exhibit P-35) provided by the co-accused, Nirbhay 
Singh (since deceased). Such discovery and recovery at the 
instance of an accused are governed by Sections 83 and 274 of 
the Indian Evidence Act, 18725. 
 
12. 
This Court, in Perumal Raja v. State, Represented By Inspector 
of Police,6 has referred to Mohmed Inayatullah v. State of 
Maharashtra,7 which elucidated the conditions required to be 
satisfied under Section 27: 
“Section 27 of the Evidence Act is an exception 
to Sections 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act. It 
makes that part of the statement which distinctly 
leads to discovery of a fact in consequence of 
the information received from a person accused of 
an offence, to the extent it distinctly relates 
to the fact thereby discovered, admissible in 
evidence against the accused. The fact which is 
discovered as a consequence of the information 
given is admissible in evidence. Further, the 
fact discovered must lead to recovery of a 
 
3 Section 8 of the Evidence Act reads: 
“8. Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent conduct.— Any fact is relevant 
which shows or constitutes a motive or preparation for any fact in issue or 
relevant fact. The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to any 
suit or proceeding, in reference to such suit or proceeding, or in reference to 
any fact in issue therein or relevant thereto, and the conduct of any person an 
offence against whom is the subject of any proceeding, is relevant, if such 
conduct influences or is influenced by any fact in issue or relevant fact, and 
whether it was previous or subsequent thereto.” 
 
4 Section 27 of the Evidence Act reads: 
“27. How much of information received from accused may be proved.— Provided that, 
when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of information received 
from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of a police officer, so much 
of such information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates 
distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved.” 
 
5 For short, “Evidence Act”. 
6 [2024]. 
7 (1976). physical object and only that information which 
distinctly relates to that discovery can be 
proved.” 

The word, “distinctly”, used in Section 27 relates to the 
discovered fact. Only that much which relates to the discovery 
of a physical object is admissible. The rest of the testimony 
is to be excluded. The facts proved by the prosecution, 
particularly the admissible portion of the statement of the 
accused, would give rise to two alternative hypotheses, 
namely, (i) that the accused had himself deposited the 
physical items that were recovered; or (ii) only the accused 
knew that the physical items were lying at that place. The 
second hypothesis is wholly compatible with the innocence of 
the accused, whereas the first would be a factor to show the 
involvement of the accused in the offence. The court has to 
analyse which of the hypotheses should be accepted in a 
particular case. Further, a fact already known to the police 
is not admissible under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. 
 
13. 
As the disclosure statement (Exhibit P-35) has led to the 
arrest of the appellant, Santosh ajesh opal, the 
prosecution may take the benefit of Section 8 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872. However, even assuming this to be the 
case, the absence of any corroborative evidence directly 
linking the appellant to the crime introduces a significant 
gap in facts as alleged in the chain of circumstances. In our 
view, this fails to establish a hypothesis of guilt that 
conclusively excludes all other reasonable possibilities. 

14. 
This Court, in State of Maharashtra v. Suresh,8 observed that 
when any incriminating material is discovered based on a 
disclosure statement, three hypotheses emerge: - 
“26. We too countenance three possibilities when 
an accused points out the place where a dead body 
or 
an 
incriminating 
material 
was 
concealed 
without stating that it was concealed by himself. 
One is that he himself would have concealed it. 
Second is that he would have seen somebody else 
concealing it. And the third is that he would 
have been told by another person that it was 
concealed there…” 
 
15. 
In the present context, it is the prosecution’s case that the 
location of the pistol was disclosed by the co-accused, 
Nirbhay Singh (since deceased). However, to establish that the 
appellant, Santosh ajesh opal, participated in the 
murder, the prosecution must present further material and 
evidence linking the appellant to the actual crime. While the 
appellant, Santosh ajesh opal, may be guilty of an 
offence under Section 201 of the IPC, the evidence provided by 
the prosecution is insufficient to secure a conviction for the 
murder 
of 
the 
victim, 
Narayan 
Singh, 
on 
13.11.2011. 
Consequently, the prosecution has failed to prove that the 
appellant, Santosh ajesh opal, is guilty of murder, 
either individually or with shared common intention or in 
conspiracy with the co-accused, Nirbhay Singh ajesh Mama 
(now deceased). 
 
8 (2000). 

16. 
We, therefore, allow the present appeal and set aside the 
conviction of the appellant, Santosh ajesh opal. The 
appellant, Santosh ajesh opal, was granted bail by this 
Court on suspension of sentence, vide order dated 08.04.2024. 
The bail bonds and sureties furnished by the appellant, 
Santosh ajesh opal, shall be treated as cancelled. 
 
17. 
The impugned judgment is set aside and the appeal is allowed. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.