SLP (C) No. 25347 of 2023 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
[ Special Leave Petition (Civil) No(s). 25347 of 2023] 
 
PRIYANKA PRAKASH 
KULKARNI 

VERSUS 
MAHARASHTRA PUBLIC 
SERVICE COMMISSION 

ORDER 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The decision of the Division Bench of the High Court of 
Judicature at Bombay (the “High Court”) wherein the High 
dismissed; and consequently, 
granted imprimatur to the decision of the Maharashtra 
Administrative 
Tribunal, 
Mumbai 
(the 
“MAT”) 
dated 
07.07.2023 in Original Application No. 396 of 2023 (the “OA”) 
is assailed before us (the “Impugned Order”). 
3. 
An advertisement was issued by the Respondent on 
11.05.2022 in relation to the State Services Preliminary 
Examination for the recruitment of person(s) to the gazetted post 
of ‘Group A’ and ‘Group B’ officers under the Government of 

SLP (C) No. 25347 of 2023 

Maharashtra (the “Impugned Advertisement”). Pertinently, 
Paragraph 5.5 of the Impugned Advertisement contemplated the 
benefit of inter alia female reservation subject to certain 
prerequisites which included (i) that the candidate must be a 
domicile of Maharashtra; and (ii) that the candidate must belong 
to the Non-Creamy Layer (“NCL”). 
4. 
Furthermore, under Paragraph 5.10 read with Paragraph 
5.14 of the Impugned Advertisement, a candidate seeking to avail 
inter alia female reservation must not only clearly state that 
he/she is domiciled in Maharashtra but should also submit an 
NCL Certificate issued by the competent authority which must 
be valid as on the last date of submission of the application form 
i.e., 01.06.2022. 
5. 
In the aforesaid context, the Appellant i.e., a candidate 
employed as State Tax Officer in the Goods and Services Tax 
(“GST”) Department, Nodal 3, Pune, Maharashtra submitted her 
application for the aforesaid examination under the ‘Open 
General Category’ on account of her inability to produce a valid 
NCL Certificate as on the last date of submission of the 
application form. However admittedly, and undoubtedly the 
Appellant was otherwise eligible to apply under ‘Reserved 
Female Category’ qua the underlying examination being 
conducted pursuant to the Impugned Advertisement. 

SLP (C) No. 25347 of 2023 

6. 
Thereafter, the Appellant cleared the preliminary 
examination and qualified for the main examination. 
Subsequently, on 11.10.2023, the Appellant cleared the main 
examination from the ‘Open General Category’. 
7. 
However, in the interregnum, on 17.02.2023, the 
Department of Other Backward Bahujan Welfare issued a 
corrigendum (the “Corrigendum”) amending Clause 2 (iii) of a 
circular bearing number CBC-2012/P.No.182/Vijabhaj-1, dated 
25.03.2013 issued by Department of Social Justice and Special 
Assistance, Government of Maharashtra whereunder (i) the 
procedure of obtaining; and (ii) validity of inter alia NCL 
Certificates’ were regulated (the “Circular”). Pertinently, the 
Corrigendum enabled candidates to submit an NCL Certificate 
which would have been valid in the current financial year as 
against an NCL Certificate which had to have been valid as on 
the last date of submission of the application form i.e., 
01.06.2022. 
8. 
In light of the changed circumstances following the 
issuance of the Corrigendum as more particularly delineated 
above, the Appellant, who had otherwise been eligible to apply 
under the ‘Reserved Female Category’ but for mandatory 
requirement of a valid NCL Certificate as on 01.06.2022, 
subsequently obtained an NCL Certificate on 09.03.2023. 
Thereafter, the Appellant made a representation to the 

SLP (C) No. 25347 of 2023 

Respondent to consider her candidature as a ‘Reserved Female 
Category’ candidate. 
9. 
Aggrieved by the non-consideration of her representation, 
the Appellant preferred the OA before the MAT. Vide an order 
dated 07.07.2023, the MAT dismissed the OA observing inter 
alia that the Appellant was not in possession of an NCL 
Certificate prior to the issuance of the Corrigendum (the 
“Underlying Order”). Aggrieved by the Underlying Order, the 
Appellant herein preferred a writ petition before the High Court. 
Vide the Impugned Order, the writ petition came to be dismissed. 
The operative paragraph of the Impugned Order is reproduced 
below: 
“6. Therefore, after hearing both the side and 
considering the conspectus of the matter, it is 
amply clear that the Petitioner had applied 
from Open General Category, because she did 
not hold the NCL Certificate. Having appeared 
for the Preliminary examination as well as 
Main examination from the “Open General” 
Category, merely because a corrigendum is 
issued, the Petitioner cannot be allowed to 
change the category at this stage, more so, on 
background of the general instructions to the 
candidate contained in paragraph Nos.1.2.5.6 
and 1.2.5.7, which does not permit to make any 
changes once the form is filled in. If the 
Petitioner was desirous of making an 
Application for general women category, she 
ought to have obtained the NCL in advance 
showing diligence, which she has failed. At this 

SLP (C) No. 25347 of 2023 

stage, if the Petitioner is allowed to change her 
category, it will open a flood gate of litigation, 
as observed by the MAT. Hence, the said 
prayer of the Petitioner cannot be considered.” 
 
10. 
Mr. Amit Sharma, Ld. Counsel appearing on behalf of the 
Appellant has fairly submitted before us that the Appellant did 
not submit her application under the ‘Reserved Female Category’ 
on account of her inability to obtain an NCL Certificate which 
was valid as on the last date of submission of the application form 
i.e., 01.06.2022. However, upon the issuance of the 
Corrigendum, the Appellants’ eligibility qua the ‘Reserved 
Female Category’ came to be revived as the Appellant was no 
longer mandated to furnish an NCL Certificate which was valid 
as on the last date of submission of the application form but 
instead was called upon to furnish an NCL Certificate pertaining 
to current financial year. 
11. 
Furthermore, Mr. Sharma has submitted before us that 7 
(seven) – 8 (eight) other persons who dishonestly applied under 
the ‘Reserved Female Category’ without a valid NCL Certificate, 
have been granted the benefit under the Corrigendum, and 
subsequently upon producing the NCL Certificate as per the 
terms of the Corrigendum, the Respondent has proceeded to 
consider their candidature under the ‘Reserved Female 
Category’. 

SLP (C) No. 25347 of 2023 

12. 
On the other hand, Mr. Rahul Chitnis, Ld. Counsel 
appearing on behalf of the Respondent has vehemently opposed 
the aforesaid submission(s). The main thrust of the arguments of 
Mr. Chitnis is two-fold i.e., (i) the Appellant cannot be allowed 
to change the category of her candidature in light of Clause 
1.2.5.6 and 1.2.5.7 of the General Instructions to Candidates 
published on the Respondent Commission’s website (the 
“Instructions”)1; and (ii) the Appellant has failed to mark ‘yes’ 
against the specific question pertaining to a prospective 
candidates’ status as a person belonging to the NCL. Accordingly, 
it was submitted that the Appellant’s case is differently placed 
from the other 7 (seven) – 8 (eight) persons whom whilst having 
applied without a valid NCL Certificate, marked ‘yes’ against the 
specific question pertaining to their status as a person belonging 
to the NCL, and accordingly were granted the benefit under the 
Corrigendum. 
13. 
Upon a perusal of Paragraph 5.10 read with Paragraph 5.14 
of the Impugned Advertisement, it is clear that any application 
under the ‘Reserved Female Category’ was to be supported by an 
NCL Certificate that was valid as on the last date of submission 
of the application form i.e., 01.06.2022. Subsequently, vide the 
issuance of the Corrigendum, the aforenoted position changed; 
 
1 Reliance in this regard was placed on State of T.N. v. G. Hemalathaa, (2020). 

SLP (C) No. 25347 of 2023 

and candidates were now eligible to furnish an NCL Certificate 
pertaining to the current financial year. 
14. 
Additionally, Clause 1.2.5.6 and 1.2.5.7 of the Instructions 
although prohibits any modification and / or change in the 
application submitted pursuant to the Impugned Advertisement, 
could not have been interpreted in such a manner so as to nullify 
the effect of the Corrigendum. 
15. 
In this regard, the reliance placed on G. Hemalathaa, 
(Supra) is misdirected as therein a rule issued by the Tamil Nadu 
Public Service Commission was admittedly contravened; and 
thereafter relaxed by the High Court on humanitarian grounds 
erroneously. Herein, it is the on account of the Corrigendum that 
certain relaxations have been awarded to all person(s) however, 
on account of an overly restrictive interpretation of (i) the 
Corrigendum; and (ii) the Instructions, the benefit(s) under the 
Corrigendum are being selectively restricted by the Respondent. 
16. 
Admittedly, the Appellant i.e., a candidate who was 
scrupulously following the terms and conditions of the Impugned 
Advertisement was constrained to apply under the ‘Open General 
Category’ only on account of certain logistical limitations 
preventing her from obtaining a valid NCL Certificate. 
Consequently, in the absence of the requisite documents 
evidencing status as a person belonging to the NCL under the 
Impugned Advertisement read with the Circular i.e., a valid NCL 

SLP (C) No. 25347 of 2023 

Certificate as on the date of submission of the application form, 
the Appellant did not mark ‘yes’ against the specific question 
pertaining to her status as a person belonging to the NCL. 
17. 
The aforenoted conduct of the Appellant is bona-fide. 
Accordingly, in our view the Appellant cannot be unfairly 
deprived of the benefit of female reservation merely on account 
of the Appellant’s honesty and restraint which did not allow her 
to mark ‘yes’ against a column inquiring about a prospective 
candidates’ status as a person belonging to the NCL, in the 
absence of the underlying supporting document. Additionally, 
other similarly situated candidates have been granted the benefit 
under the Corrigendum; and their otherwise defective 
applications have now been considered by the Respondent. 
18. 
In our considered opinion, the High Court adopted a hyper-
technical interpretation of the Instructions without appreciating 
that such an interpretation would nullify the effect of the 
Corrigendum. Such an interpretation ought not to have been 
adopted especially in light of the fact that other persons have been 
granted the benefit of the Corrigendum; and that the Respondent 
has relaxed the Instructions qua such persons so as to enable valid 
NCL Certificates to be furnished. 
19. 
In light of the aforesaid, we find that the Impugned Order 
and resultantly, the Underlying Order ought to be set aside. 
Accordingly, taking note of the peculiar facts of the case; and that 

SLP (C) No. 25347 of 2023 

the Appellant is a meritorious candidate who has cleared the main 
examination under the ‘Open General Category’ despite being 
deserving of the benefit of female reservation, we are inclined to 
balance the equities and do justice by exercising our power under 
Article 142 of the Constitution of India. Accordingly, we direct 
the Respondent to forthwith treat the Appellant as a candidate 
under the ‘Reserved Female Category’. 
20. 
The appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms. Pending 
application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

……………………………………J. 
 (VIKRAM NATH) 

……………………………………J. 
 (SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA) 
 
NEW DELHI 
JANUARY 29, 2024