IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
( the ) 

M/s. ULTRA-TECH CEMENT LTD. 

…APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 
 
MAST RAM & ORS. 

…RESPONDENTS 

JUDGMENT 

J.B. PARDIWALA, J.: 
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following 
parts: - 
INDEX 
I. 
FACTUAL MATRIX …………………………………………………3 
II. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT ……………...8 
III. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NOS. 1-6 
……………………………………………………………………….12 
IV. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NO. 10 …13 
V. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NO. 11 …..15 
VI. 
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION ………………………………….17 
VII. ANALYSIS ………………………………………………………….18 
A. Scheme of Arrangement between the Appellant and JAL under 
Sections 391 to 394 respectively of the Companies Act, 1956 
……………………………………………………………………18 
B. Return of acquired land under the 2013 Act ……………………..25 
C. Impugned Order of the High Court …...………………………….28 
D. Role of the State under Article 300-A of the Constitution ……...…30 
VIII. CONCLUSION ……………………………………………………..37 

1. 
Leave Granted. 
2. 
This appeal arises from the order passed by the High Court of Himachal 
Pradesh at Shimla dated 12.07.2022 in 
filed by the Respondent Nos. 1 to 6 herein (original petitioners) by which 
the High Court allowed the writ petition and directed the Appellant herein 
to pay the requisite amount towards compensation as determined in the 
Supplementary Award dated 02.05.2022 passed by the Land Acquisition 
Collector, Arki (“LAC”) (Respondent No. 10) in the first instance with 
liberty to recover the same from M/s Jaiprakash Associates Limited (“JAL”) 
(Respondent No. 11) if permissible under the legal relationship between the 
two companies. 
I. 
FACTUAL MATRIX 
3. 
The State of Himachal Pradesh (Respondent No. 7) issued a notification 
dated 25.07.2008 under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (the 
“1894 Act”) through its Department of Industries declaring its intention to 
acquire the subject land admeasuring 56-14 bigha, situated at Mauza Bhalag, 
Tehsil Arki, District Solan, Himachal Pradesh (the “subject land”) in favour 
of Jaypee Himachal Cement project, a unit of JAL, invoking special powers 
in cases of urgency as provided under Section 17 of the 1894 Act. It appears 
that the purpose for acquiring the subject land was to create a safety zone 
surrounding the mining area. In other words, the subject land was situated 

in the vicinity of the leasehold area of the mining project and could not have 
been otherwise used for residential purposes or creation of any other 
structures. Subsequently notifications were also issued under Sections 6 and 
7 respectively of the 1894 Act. 
4. 
It appears from the materials on record that during the acquisition 
proceedings, some of the landowners, including the Respondent Nos. 1-6 
herein did not allow the authorities to undertake the evaluation of their 
houses, trees, structures, etc., standing on the subject land for the purpose of 
determination of compensation. 
5. 
The acquisition proceedings ultimately came to be challenged by some of 
the landowners before the High Court by way of CWP No. 2949 of 2009 
titled as Premlal & Ors. v. State of Himachal Pradesh & Ors. and CWP 
No. 481 of 2010 titled as Chunni Lal & Ors. v. State of Himachal Pradesh 
& Ors. inter alia, on the ground that sub-section (4) of Section 17 of the 
1894 Act could not have been invoked as the acquisition was not for any 
public purpose. The High Court passed an ad interim order dated 14.12.2011 
granting stay on the acquisition proceedings. 
6. 
The High Court by a common judgment dated 23.06.2016 dismissed the writ 
petitions referred to above inter alia, on the ground that acquisition of the 
lands in question was for a public purpose as the said land contained vital 
raw material (limestone) for the manufacturing of cement and the usage of 

such mineral wealth would advance the public purpose of infrastructure 
development. 
7. 
As the writ petitions stood dismissed, the Land Acquisition Collector, Arki 
proceeded to pass the Award No. 1/2018 dated 08.06.2018 as per Section 
11(1) of the 1894 Act and Section 24(1)(a) of the Right to Fair Compensation 
and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 
2013 (the “2013 Act”) determining the compensation to the tune of Rs. 
10,77,53,842.27/- (Rupees Ten Crore Seventy Seven Lakh Fifty Three 
Thousand Eight Hundred and Forty Two and Twenty Seven paisa Only) 
along with the incidental charges @ 2% amounting to Rs. 9,09,315.12/-. The 
LAC clarified in the award passed by him that the compensation amount 
towards the houses and other structures constructed prior to the date of 
notification under Section 4, whose survey was not allowed by the 
landowners during the acquisition proceedings would be considered in the 
supplementary award that may be passed separately after the reports 
regarding the valuation of structures were received. 
8. 
The amount as determined under the Award dated 08.06.2018 was deposited 
by JAL and disbursed to the landowners. The possession certificate dated 
07.06.2019 in respect of the subject land was issued in favour of JAL. 
Subsequently, the entries in the revenue record of the subject land in favour 
of JAL came to be mutated on 12.11.2020. 

9. 
Being dissatisfied with the Award dated 08.06.2018, the Respondent Nos. 1-
6 herein filed before the High Court on 
16.09.2018, praying for a direction to the LAC to pass a supplementary 
award after quantifying the compensation for the damage caused to the 
structures and standing crops on the subject land for the period between 2008 
and 2018 as well as for a direction to the LAC to pass a fresh award under 
the provisions of the 2013 Act to provide additional amount @ 12% on 
market value with effect from the date of notification under Section 4 till the 
date of Award dated 18.06.2018. On 12.07.2019, the Respondent Nos. 1-6 
also filed a Reference Petition under the 2013 Act praying inter alia for the 
enhancement of the amount of compensation determined under the Award 
dated 08.06.2018. 
10. On 24.11.2021, the High Court passed an order directing the LAC to pass a 
supplementary award in accordance with law. On 23.05.2022, the High 
Court recorded that the supplementary award dated 02.05.2022 had been 
passed in compliance with its order dated 24.11.2021 under which an 
additional amount of Rs. 3,02,75,605/- along with incidental charges @ 2% 
of total assessment value was to be paid by JAL. Thus, the total additional 
amount determined was Rs. 3,05,31,095/- (Rupees Three Crore Five Lakh 
Thirty One Thousand and Ninety Five). However, the High Court recorded 

on 20.06.2022 that the said amount had not been deposited in terms of its 
order dated 23.05.2022. 
11. During the pendency of the acquisition proceedings, JAL entered into an 
agreement with the Appellant herein for the transfer of the cement project in 
question. In this regard, a Scheme of Arrangement was signed between the 
Appellant, JAL and Jaypee Cement Corporation Ltd. (the unit of JAL 
operating the cement project) (the “Scheme”) under the relevant provisions 
of the Companies Act, 1956. The Scheme was approved by the National 
Company Law Tribunal (“NCLT”) Mumbai Bench on 15.02.2017 and 
NCLT Allahabad Bench on 02.03.2017. 
12. On 21.06.2017, the Director of Industries, Department of Industries, 
Government of Himachal Pradesh issued a letter to JAL and the Appellant 
acknowledging the approval given by the Joint Secretary to the Government 
of Himachal Pradesh as regards the transfer of the cement plant, as per the 
Scheme approved by the NCLT and as per the Tripartite Agreement between 
the Appellant, JAL and Government of Himachal Pradesh respectively, 
entered into on 29.06.2017. 
13. In such circumstances, the High Court examined the relationship between 
the Appellant and JAL and also referred to the Scheme for the purpose of 
determining the issue as to who should pay the compensation amount 

determined under the Supplementary Award to the Respondent Nos. 1-6 
respectively. 
14. On 12.07.2022, the High Court relying on Clause 7.1 of the Scheme, passed 
the impugned order, directing the Appellant to pay the compensation amount 
at the first instance and left it open for the Appellant to recover the same 
from JAL later, if permissible in law. 
15. In view of the aforesaid, the Appellant is before this Court with the present 
appeal. 
II. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT 
16. Mr. Navin Pahwa, the learned senior counsel appearing for the Appellant 
made the following submissions: 
a. The High Court, in its impugned order, erred in directing the Appellant 
to pay the compensation amount determined under the Supplementary 
Award because the initial Award dated 08.06.2018 as well as the 
Supplementary Award dated 02.05.2022 were passed by the LAC fixing 
the liability to pay compensation on JAL. b. The High Court failed to consider that under the Scheme between the 
Appellant and JAL, as sanctioned by NCLT, Mumbai on 15.02.2017 and 
NCLT, Allahabad on 02.03.2017, all contingent liabilities pertaining to 
matters relating to the “JAL Business” (as defined in Clause 1.1(w) of 

the Scheme), including those of pending litigations where the disputed 
claims were not crystallized on or before the effective date, i.e., 
29.06.2017, would be the sole liability of JAL. Since the acquisition 
proceedings for the subject land were initiated by a notification under 
Section 4 of the 1894 Act dated 25.07.2008, therefore, the litigation was 
pending as on 29.06.2017 (the “Effective Date”) and the disputed claim 
was not crystallized till the passing of the Supplementary Award dated 
02.05.2022. c. The High Court erred in recording that the Appellant had made the 
payment under the Award dated 08.06.2018, whereas factually, it was 
JAL who had paid the compensation amount under the said Award. The 
High Court also failed to consider that by making the payment under the 
Award dated 08.06.2018, JAL had accepted its liability for claims arising 
out of the acquisition proceedings. d. The subject land was acquired for JAL. Accordingly, the LAC had issued 
a possession certificate dated 07.06.2019 in favour of JAL and handed 
over spot possession of the subject land to it under Section 16 of the 1894 
Act. The subject land was duly mutated in the name of JAL vide Mutation 
No. 232 dated 12.11.2020. The High Court failed to take into 
consideration the fact that the subject land had not been transferred as an 
asset to the Appellant under the Scheme. To establish the same, the 

Appellant had placed on record and referred to a Chart of Comparison of 
Khasra Numbers under the Scheme and the Khasra Numbers which were 
transferred to JAL under the Award dated 08.06.2018 contending that 
none of the Khasra Numbers of the subject land or portions thereof 
overlap with the Khasra Numbers of the land/assets transferred under the 
Scheme. Therefore, since the Appellant was not enjoying the possession 
or benefit, if any, of the subject land, the liability of paying the 
compensation under the Supplementary Award could not have been 
fastened on it. e. As per the Scheme, the Appellant only purchased certain assets listed in 
the Schedule-I and Schedule-IA thereof on a “slump exchange basis” 
and did not take over JAL. Mr. Pahwa clarified that JAL is a surviving 
entity and the High Court had erred in understanding that JAL stood 
merged or transferred with the Appellant. f. Mr. Pahwa also brought our attention to the order passed by this Court 
dated 16.12.2019 in Ultratech Cement Ltd. v. Tonnu Ram, SLP (C) 
(Diary) No. 42997 of 2019 wherein this Court clarified that the impugned 
judgment of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh could not have been 
construed as permitting third party to pursue claim for recovery against 
the Appellant in disregard of the Scheme and the executing court would 

be duty-bound to examine the purport of the Scheme and pass orders 
strictly in consonance therewith. 
The relevant observations made by this Court in Tonnu Ram (supra) are 
reproduced below: 
“…It cannot be construed as permitting third party to 
pursue claim for recovery against the petitioner in 
disregard of the scheme of arrangement propounded by 
the NCLT in respect of respondent No.4- M/s. 
Jaiprakash Industries. 
Despite this clear position, if any third party intends to 
pursue remedy against the petitioner, the Executing 
Court would be duty bound to examine the purport of 
the stated scheme propounded by the NCLT and pass 
orders strictly in consonance therewith. It would be 
open to the petitioner to invite attention of the Executing 
Court or any other Forum about the relevant provisions 
in the scheme in support of the argument that the 
liability to pay the dues will remain that of respondent 
No.4- M/s. Jaiprakash Industries as per the stated 
scheme.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
g. The senior counsel also submitted that JAL had made a declaration on 
oath in Form-16A under Order XXI Rule 41(2) of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 dated 04.12.2023 in Civil Revision Petition No. 174 of 
2022 titled Tohnu Ram (Deceased) v. M/s Ultratech Cement Ltd. before 
the High Court of Himachal Pradesh which read as follows: 
“…(e) Other Property: List of Property of Jaiprakash 
Associates Ltd., i.e. Land measuring 56-14 bigha, 
situate at village bhalag, PO Kandhar, Tehsil Arki, 

Distt. Solan (HP), vide which the Mutation was attested 
on 12.11.2020 in favour of Jaiprakash Associates 
Ltd…” 
Therefore, in view of the above, the subject land remained in ownership 
of JAL and the Appellant had no connection with the subject land, 
directly or indirectly and that the subject land was neither acquired for 
the benefit of the Appellant nor was it transferred under the Scheme to 
the Appellant. 
III. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NOS. 1-6 
17. Mr. Biju P. Raman, the learned counsel appearing for the Respondent Nos. 
1-6 made the following submissions: 
a. The subject land forms a part of the safety zone area meant for the cement 
plant that was being operated by the cement unit of JAL. The District 
Administration acquired 56.14 bhigas of land and the Award for the same 
was passed on 08.06.2018 by the LAC, Arki. b. The plant/project had been taken over by the Appellant herein by 
acquiring all the assets and liabilities of JAL in the year 2017 and all 
movable and immovable assets and liabilities ancillary thereto were 
transferred to the Appellant, which was affirmed by a tripartite 
Memorandum of Understanding signed between the Appellant, JAL and 
the Government of Himachal Pradesh (the “MOU”) dated 29.06.2017. c. The High Court vide order dated 12.07.2022 recorded the submission of 
the Respondent Nos. 1-6 that the payment towards the Award No. 1 of 
2018 pertaining to the subject land was deposited by the Appellant. d. The Appellant and JAL are trying to escape from their legal obligation 
and liability to pay the compensation amount as determined under the 
Supplementary Award to the Respondents and are in collusion with each 
other creating an inter-se dispute with the intention of depriving the 
original landowners of their legitimate right to receive compensation due 
to them. e. The subject land was acquired for public purpose and was being utilized 
by the Appellant for its purposes. 
IV. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NO. 10 
18. Mr. Puneet Rajta, the learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the 
Respondent No. 10 i.e., the Land Acquisition Collector, Arki made the 
following submissions: 
a. The subject land was acquired in the year 2018 for providing a safety 
zone to the cement plant which had already been taken over by the 
Appellant in the year 2016. b. The acquired land is being utilized by the Appellant as a safety zone for 
the cement plant being run by them. However, the land is recorded in the 
name of JAL. c. The role of the State was limited to the extent of initiating the acquisition 
proceedings and as per the MOU signed with the Government of 
Himachal Pradesh, all costs pertaining to the acquisition/transfer of land 
would be borne by the company only. It was clarified that the State had 
no role to play in the business of manufacturing or running the cement 
plant of the company and all payments under the Award No. 1 of 2018 
dated 08.06.2018 stood paid to the landowners by JAL. d. The Supplementary Award was passed on 02.05.2022 in accordance with 
the direction of the High Court dated 16.09.2018 in CWP No. 2350 of 
2018 and the High Court through a separate order dated 12.07.2022 
directed the Appellant to make the payment to the landowners and 
recover the said amount from JAL. The said order was challenged by the 
Appellant and this Court while issuing notice vide order dated 
22.08.2022 directed that there shall be a stay of operation and 
implementation of the impugned order of the High Court. e. The land is being used by the Appellant for the purpose of operating the 
cement plant however, they are raising disputes only with the view to 
deny the rights of the landowners. Therefore, the liability for payment of 

compensation be fixed as against the Appellant or JAL. It was submitted 
that if the State was directed to compensate the landowners, it would have 
to do so out of public funds and seek reimbursement. 
V. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NO. 11 
19. Mr. Ranjit Kumar, the learned senior counsel appearing for the Respondent 
No. 11 i.e., M/s Jaiprakash Associates Limited (JAL) made the following 
submissions: 
a. During the process of passing of the Supplementary Award dated 
02.05.2022, JAL had clarified that that it had handed over the cement 
project to the Appellant on 29.06.2017 and the subject land was acquired 
for the purpose of mining activities and safety zone. It was asserted that 
the subject land was an integral part of the cement project. Therefore, 
whosoever was operating the cement plant and carrying out the mining 
activities was responsible for maintaining the safety zone. Accordingly, 
it was the duty of the Appellant to pay the amount determined under the 
Supplementary Award. b. During the course of the hearing of the, 
the Appellant had stated that it did not require the subject land for its 
projects. The Counsel contended that since JAL had already handed over 
the cement project to the Appellant and the subject land was acquired for 

the purpose of safety zone for the said project, the Appellant cannot say 
that they never had any need for this particular land. c. Although the State Government had handed over the symbolic 
possession of the subject land in favour of JAL on 07.06.2019 yet the 
physical possession of this land remained with the villagers/landowners 
including Respondent Nos. 1-6 who had illegally occupied the subject 
land and had constructed houses/structures on the same even after the 
deliverance of the Award dated 08.06.2018 and the Supplementary Award 
dated 02.05.2022. d. It was submitted that the substantial delay in the issuance of the Award 
by the LAC had frustrated the purpose of acquisition for JAL. Since the 
entire project has been under the custody and possession of the Appellant, 
it is the appropriate party to address the issue of the requirement of the 
subject land for the purpose of Mining Activities & Safety Zone. If the 
Appellant is not interested in the subject land, then the same should be 
returned to the original landowners (Respondent Nos. 1-6 herein) and the 
amount deposited as an award of Rs. 10,77,53,842/- in the year 2018 
should be refunded to JAL. e. Mr. Kumar contended that according to the statement provided by the 
Appellant to the High Court, it can be reasonably concluded that the 
Appellant does not require the land in question, which was acquired for 

the purpose of Mining Activities and Safety Zone for the Cement project. 
Therefore, the Appellant may proceed to submit an application in this 
regard to the Government of Himachal Pradesh, as submitted before the 
High Court. f. The Counsel reiterated that JAL had sold out and handed over the entire 
cement project to the Appellant in the year 2017, which included the 
acquired private land and government land diverted for this purpose. It 
was submitted that the subject land was required for an entity involved 
in cement production in the area, therefore, the responsibility for 
maintaining the Safety Zone of the cement project was with the 
Appellant. If the Appellant is not interested in the acquired subject land, 
then the same may be returned and the amount of Rs. 10,77,53,842/- 
deposited as award in the year 2018 be refunded to JAL. 
VI. ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION 
20. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone 
through the materials on record, the following four questions fall for our 
consideration: - 
i. Whether the subject land and all other liabilities associated with it were 
transferred to the Appellant in terms of the Scheme? ii. Whether it was the Appellant or JAL who was legally obliged to pay 
the compensation amount determined under the Supplementary Award? iii. Whether the land in terms of Section 101 of the 2013 Act can be 
returned to the Respondent Nos. 1-6 at this stage under the scheme of 
the Act? In other words, what is the scope of Section 101? iv. Whether the State of Himachal Pradesh, being a welfare state, had the 
responsibility to ensure full payment of compensation amount 
determined under the Supplementary Award dated 02.05.2022? 
VII. ANALYSIS 
A. Scheme of Arrangement between the Appellant and JAL under Sections 
391 to 394 respectively of the Companies Act, 1956 
21. An analysis of the Scheme agreed between the Appellant and JAL as 
sanctioned by the NCLT, Mumbai and NCLT, Allahabad respectively is the 
key to determine who should pay the amount determined under the 
Supplementary Award dated 02.05.2022. With respect to the Scheme, the 
following questions need to be looked into: 
i. 
Whether the dispute pertaining to payment of the requisite amount 
under the Supplementary Award arose before or after the “Effective 
Date” fixed in the Scheme? ii. 
Whether the subject land is an integral part of the cement project and 
the liability of paying compensation under the Supplementary Award 
for the said land can be imposed on the Appellant despite the said land 
not being in its name? 
22. Clause 1.1 (o) defines the “Effective Date” as the date on which the Scheme 
becomes effective in accordance with its terms, which shall be the Closing 
Date [defined in Clause 1.1(k) and Clause 10.1]. The said date was decided 
to be 29.06.2017 among the parties. 
23. Clause 1.1(w) defines the business and assets transferred by JAL to the 
Appellant. The definition of the same is reproduced below: 
“…(w) "JAL Business" means the business of 
manufacturing, sale and distribution of cement and 
clinker manufactured at the JAL Cement Plants, 
including all rights to operate such business, its 
movable or immovable assets, captive power plants, DG 
sets, coal linkages, rights, privileges, liabilities, 
guarantees, land, leases, licenses, permits, mining 
leases, prospecting licenses for mining of limestone, 
letters of intent for mining of limestone, tangible or 
intangible assets, goodwill, all statutory or regulatory 
approvals, logistics, marketing, warehousing, selling 
and distribution networks {marketing employees, 
offices, depots, guest houses and ether related facilities 
for the JAL Business), employees, existing contracts 
including fly-ash contracts, railway sidings, fiscal 
incentives in relation to the JAL Business, more 
particularly described in Schedule I hereto, but does not 
include 

construction equipment an.d such assets to be 
listed in Schedule II. any liability including contingent liability 
disclosed in the balance sheet of JAL Business 
on the Closing Date provided to the Transferee, 
other than those included in the JAL Financial 
Indebtedness and JAL Net Working Capital; 

any guarantee or deposits for any disputes; 

the JAL Excluded Employees; 

JAL Non Moving Stores, Doubtful Receivables 
of the JAL Business, non-recoverable debtors, 
loans or advances in the books of the 
Transferor1. For this purpose, non-recoverable 
debtors; loans or advances shall refer to such 
debtors; 
loans 
or 
advances 
for 
which 
Transferor1 has not received any confirmation 
for the receivables as mentioned in Clause 9.1 
(i); 

coal mitting block - Mandla (North) and the 
related guarantees, deposits etc; 

fiscal incentives in relation to the JAL Business 
that accrue up to the Closing Date; 

any intellectual property of Transferor1; 

litigations pertaining to the JAL Business as of 
the Closing Date; 

freehold plot of land admeasuring about 1087 
square 
metres 
at 
Varanasi 
and 
land 
admeasuring 24.7 acres outside the Balaji plant 
in Krishna, Andhra Pradesh; 

180 megawatt power plant at Churk, Uttar 
Pradesh; 

railway siding in Turki, Rewa, Madhya Pradesh; 

Related Party payables or receivables; and 

Ghurma limestone mine, Padrach limestone 
mine and Bari dolomite mine 
It is clarified that the guarantee listed in Schedule III B, 
which shall be updated as of the Closing Date, shall be 
the only guarantees which shall be taken over by the 
Transferee on the Closing Date…” 
[Emphasis Supplied] 
 
24. The parties by way of Clause 1.1(w)(ix) agreed that all litigations pertaining 
to the business and assets being transferred to the Appellant that arose before 

or on the Closing Date would not be transferred to the Appellant and will 
remain with JAL. 
25. The aforesaid aspect has been further elaborated under Clause 7 of the 
Scheme which is reproduced below: 
“7. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 
7.1 All legal or other proceedings (whether civil or 
criminal, including before any statutory or judicial or 
quasi-judicial authority or tribunal) by or against the 
Transferor1 and /or the Transferor2, initiated on or 
arising and pending before the Effective Date, and 
relating to the JAL Business and the JCCL Business 
shall remain with the Transferor1 and/or the 
Transferor2, as the case may be. 
 
7.2 In the event any case or matter pertaining to 
contingent liabilities being in the nature of disputed 
claims, not crystallized on the Closing Date or 
guarantees listed in Schedule III A and Schedule XI A or 
any similar instrument by whatsoever name called 
which have been advance against disputes related to the 
JAL Business or the JCCL Business existing on the 
Closing Date, or pertaining to NPV of afforestation 
charges in respect of mining land being Block 1, 2, 3, 4 
and Ningha of Dalla Plant and Jaypee Super Plant, by 
force of law are transferred to the Transferee, then the 
Transferor1 and the Transferor 2, shall have full control 
in respect of the defence of such proceedings including 
filing the necessary appeals, revisions, etc.. provided 
that the Transferor1 and the Transferor2, as the case 
may be, shall not, take any action that is detrimental to 
the operation of the JAL Business and the JCCL 
Business. Provided that in respect of such cases 
pertaining to immovable properties which are part of the 
JAL Business or the JCCL Business, as the case may be 
the Transferee shall have a right to participate in such 
proceedings to ensure that no action detrimental to the 
operation of JAL Business and the JCCL Business is 

taken. It is clarified that: (a) any liabilities in respect of 
cases or matter referred to in this Clause 7.2 shall be 
paid by the Tranferor1 or the Transferor2 and if paid by 
the Transferee, the same shall be reimbursed by the 
Transferor1 or the Transferor2 within 7 (seven) days of 
such payment; and (b) the aforesaid bank guarantees 
provided by the Transferor1 and the Transferor2 in 
respect of the contingent liabilities being in the nature 
of disputed claims related to the JAL Business or the 
JCCL Business shall continue wherever required and 
the Transferee shall have no obligation to replace such 
bank guarantees on the Closing Date and in the event 
the period of any such bank guarantee expires after the 
Closing Date, the Transferor1 and /or the Transferor2, 
as the case may be, shall renew or replace such 
guarantees wherever required. 
 
7.3 The Transferor1, the Transferor2 and the Transferee 
shall give full and timely cooperation to each other for 
the pursuit of such case or matter. The Transferee shall 
promptly give necessary authorization, power of 
attorney, board resolution, etc. for pursuit of such case 
or matter to the Transferor1 and the Transferor2. ” 
[Emphasis Supplied] 
26. Clause 7.1 of the Scheme states without any ambiguity that any legal or other 
proceeding by or against JAL or its unit operating the cement project relating 
to the JAL Business as defined in Clause 1.1(w), initiated on or arising and 
pending before the Effective Date shall remain with JAL. 
27. It is pertinent to note that the subject land was acquired under the 
compulsory provisions of the 1894 Act to provide a safety zone for the 
cement plant and mining areas. Therefore, the land was acquired in 
connection with the JAL Business. The acquisition proceedings began with 

the notification issued under Section 4 dated 25.07.2008 which was stayed 
by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh on 14.12.2011. After the disposal of 
the writ petitions filed by the original landowners, the operation of the stay 
on the acquisition proceedings came to an end on 23.06.2016. As the next 
step towards the proceedings, an Award dated 08.06.2018 was passed. The 
facts indicate that the land acquisition proceedings had commenced before 
the Effective Date of the Scheme (i.e. 29.06.2017) and the compensation 
remained undetermined as on the Effective Date. To our understanding, 
these facts attract the application of Clause 7.1 of the Scheme as the 
acquisition proceedings and the liability to pay compensation associated 
with it squarely falls within the meaning of ‘other proceedings’ as intended 
by the parties under the said Clause. 
28. JAL has also not disputed that it had made payment of the amount 
determined under the Award of 2018 i.e., Rs. 10,77,53,842/- after the 
Effective Date of the Scheme. The said amount has already been disbursed 
to the landowners. There is nothing on record to show that the payment of 
compensation amount at that time was contested by JAL. 
29. Further, the exercise of determination of compensation amount which is a 
part of the acquisition proceedings remained pending even after the 
Effective Date of the Scheme. After the LAC determined the amount under 
the Award dated 08.06.2018, JAL paid the same without any protest or 

reference to the Scheme. Therefore, at the stage of the Supplementary Award 
pertaining to the same land and same original landowners, JAL cannot be 
allowed to take the plea that the payments with respect to the subject land 
were required to be made by the Appellant. 
30. As regards the contention of JAL that the subject land formed an integral 
part of the cement project transferred to the Appellant for the purpose of 
payment of compensation determined under the Supplementary Award, we 
find it difficult to accept the same. The subject land was acquired as a safety 
zone for the cement project and in light of the several safety hazards as stated 
in the Award No. 1 of 2018, the land had to be acquired to safeguard the lives 
and property of the original landowners. 
31. However, we take notice of the fact that the subject land was not covered 
under the list of assets transferred to the Appellant under the Scheme and 
remains in the ownership of the JAL till date. While we agree that the 
acquisition of the subject land was done for the purposes of the cement 
project, we cannot accept the contention of JAL that the liabilities arising 
out of the said land should be fastened upon the Appellant without any such 
liabilities being covered by the Scheme, not even on the strength of the 
argument that the subject land was integral to the cement project. 
32. We may only say that the issue regarding the ownership of the subject land 
may be decided between the parties i.e., the Appellant and JAL amongst 

themselves. In our considered view, disputes regarding the ownership of the 
subject land, if any cannot be an impediment to the legitimate rights of the 
original landowners to receive compensation. Therefore, the contention of 
JAL that the Appellant should pay the amount as determined under the 
Supplementary Award because the subject land was integral to the cement 
project is rejected. 
B. 
Return of acquired land under the 2013 Act 
33. It is the case of JAL that the substantial delay in acquisition of the subject 
land has frustrated its purpose, and it could not make any use of the land. It 
was submitted that if the Appellant does not require the said land, then it 
should be returned to the original landowners and the amount of Rs. 
10,77,53,842/- paid under the Award of 2018 should be refunded to JAL. 
34. The return of acquired land is governed by Section 101 of the 2013 Act 
which is reproduced below: 
“101. Return of unutilised land.– When any land 
acquired under this Act remains unutilised for a period 
of five years from the date of taking over the possession, 
the same shall be returned to the original owner or 
owners or their legal heirs, as the case may be, or to the 
Land Bank of the appropriate Government by reversion 
in the manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate 
Government. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, “Land 
Bank” means a governmental entity that focuses on the 
conversion of Government owned vacant, abandoned, 

unutilised acquired lands and tax-delinquent properties 
into productive use.” 
[Emphasis Supplied] 
35. The necessary conditions for the application of Section 101 are: (1) the land 
should be unutilized; and (2) the period it remains not in use should be at 
least five years from the date of taking of possession. 
36. We do not find any merit in the contention of JAL that the land be returned 
to the original landowners. While we agree that a period of five years has 
elapsed from the date of taking of possession by JAL, the first condition that 
the land should remain unutilized is not fulfilled. 
37. The subject land was acquired for the purpose of providing a safety zone to 
the mining area of the cement plant. The objective for acquiring the subject 
land mentioned in the Award of 2018 is reproduced below: 
“…3. Compulsory Acquisition by invoking the 
provisions of Section 17 (4) 
During the process of Notification issued under Section 
- 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, the matter was taken up 
for compulsory acquisition U/s 17(4) of Land 
Acquisition, Act, 1894 with the Govt. or Himachal 
Pradesh for the reasons that the land area under 
acquisition fell just below the mine leasehold area and 
was necessarily required as Mining Area Safety Zone. 
As the land area under acquisition cannot be allowed 
for any residential purpose in view of safety reasons 
and because the land proposed for acquisition is 
located just along the bank or Bhalag Nallah and most 
of the residents of village Bhalag had been 

constructing structures in large numbers on the right 
Bank of Nallah in Bhalag village, therefore provisions 
of compulsory acquisition needed to be invoked. 
Furthermore, to invoke the provisions of compulsory 
acquisition, it was submitted vide this office letter No. 
2766 dated 06.01.2009 to Pr. Secretary (Industries) 
GoHP that the main dumping site of the project at 
Baga - Sehnali is situated above village Bhalag and 
during the unprecedented I I heavy rain season of 
2007 – 08, muck had over flown into the Bhalag 
Nallah endangering the Safety Zone area under 
proposed acquisition…” 
[Emphasis Supplied] 
38. Therefore, the acquisition of the subject land was done as a safety measure 
for the residents of the area and not to be used actively in the cement project. 
No other use except that the subject land may pose hazard to the residents 
was envisaged during the acquisition proceedings. JAL cannot pray for 
return of the land as that would result in endangering the lives and property 
of the original landowners. We find that the subject land has been in use all 
throughout the operation of the cement project by serving as a safety zone 
and the condition of being unutilized is not satisfied. 
39. It is not in dispute that the Supplementary Award had to be passed as the 
compensation for standing crops, structures and other damages for the 
subject land which could not be fixed and evaluated under the Award No. 1 
dated 08.06.2018. The same was also recorded in the Award of 2018. We 
find that the passing of Supplementary Award was not a fresh exercise but 

rather a continuation/extension of the Award of 2018. Therefore, when JAL 
has already paid the compensation amount as determined under the previous 
Award without any demur, it cannot be allowed to question its liability under 
the Supplementary Award and make a plea for return of the land at this stage 
on the ground that the purpose of the land is frustrated due to delay in 
acquisition proceedings. 
40. At this stage, it is necessary for us to discuss the purport of Section 101 of 
the 2013 Act. The instant section was introduced in the 2013 Act for the first 
time as a beneficial provision for the landowners whose lands were usurped 
but remained unutilized or were not used in accordance with the purpose 
stated in the notifications under Section 4. However, the application of the 
Section is warranted only in the circumstances where the return of the land 
would benefit the landowners. The party which has failed to utilize the land 
cannot plead for the return of the land and consequent refund of the 
compensation paid, as that would tantamount to taking advantage of its own 
wrong or default. 
C. Impugned Order of the High Court 
41. The High Court directed the Appellant herein to pay compensation amount 
determined under the Supplementary Award at the first instance and if 
permissible, recover the same from JAL. 

42. We find that the High Court’s reasoning for passing such a direction is 
unsustainable for the following reasons: 
i. 
The High Court has referred to Clause 7.1 of the Scheme but has not 
applied it correctly in any manner, thereby ignoring the Scheme of 
Arrangement between the parties. ii. 
The High Court has also recorded that JAL has been taken over by the 
Appellant herein and that the Appellant had made payment of 
compensation under the Award No. 1 of 2018 dated 08.06.2018. We 
find that these are incorrect facts on the basis of the materials 
presented to us by the parties to this appeal. 
JAL has only transferred the cement project and clinkerisation 
business to the Appellant by way of the Scheme and is still existing 
independently of the Appellant’s control in respect of its other 
functions. 
The documents on record also show that it was JAL that had made 
payments under the Award of 2018 and not the Appellant. iii. 
The High Court failed to consider that the ownership of the subject 
land continued to be with JAL despite the Scheme being brought into 
effect on 29.06.2017. The Appellant cannot be directed to make 

payment of the amount determined by the Supplementary Award for 
the portions of land which are neither in its ownership nor possession. iv. 
The High Court also failed to consider the order of this Court in 
Tonnu Ram (supra) dated 16.12.2019 which imposed a duty on the 
executing court to examine the purport of the Scheme propounded by 
the NCLT and pass orders strictly in consonance therewith. It was held 
that it would be open to the Appellant to take support of the relevant 
provisions of the Scheme in support of the argument that the liability 
to pay the dues remains with JAL as per the stated scheme. 
D. Role of the State under Article 300-A of the Constitution 
43. The Right to Property in our country is a net of intersecting rights which has 
been explained by this Court in Kolkata Municipal Corporation & Anr. v. 
Bimal Kumar Shah & Ors.,. A division bench 
of this Court identified seven non-exhaustive sub-rights that accrue to a 
landowner when the State intends to acquire his/her property. The relevant 
observations of this Court under the said judgment are reproduced below: 
“…27. 
… Seven such sub-rights can be identified, albeit non-
exhaustive. These are: i) duty of the State to inform the 
person that it intends to acquire his property – the right 
to notice, ii) the duty of the State to hear objections to 
the acquisition – the right to be heard, iii) the duty of the 
State to inform the person of its decision to acquire – the 
right to a reasoned decision, iv) the duty of the State to 

demonstrate that the acquisition is for public purpose – 
the duty to acquire only for public purpose, v) the duty 
of the State to restitute and rehabilitate – the right of 
restitution or fair compensation, vi) the duty of the 
State to conduct the process of acquisition efficiently 
and within prescribed timelines of the proceedings – 
the right to an efficient and expeditious process, and 
vii) final conclusion of the proceedings leading to 
vesting – the right of conclusion…” 
[Emphasis Supplied] 
This Court held that a fair and reasonable compensation is the sine qua non 
for any acquisition process. 
44. In Roy Estate v. State of Jharkhand, (2009); Union of India 
v. Mahendra Girji, (2010) and Mansaram v. S.P. Pathak, 
(1984), this Court underscored the importance of following 
timelines prescribed by the statutes as well as determining and disbursing 
compensation amount expeditiously within reasonable time. 
45. The subject land came to be acquired by invoking special powers in cases of 
urgency under Section 17(4) of the 1894 Act. The invocation of Section 
17(4) extinguishes the statutory avenue for the landowners under Section 5A 
to raise objections to the acquisition proceedings. These circumstances 
impose onerous duty on the State to facilitate justice to the landowners by 
providing them with fair and reasonable compensation expeditiously. The 
seven sub-rights of the landowners identified by this Court in Kolkata 
Municipal Corporation (supra) are corresponding duties of the State. We 

regret to note that the amount of Rs. 3,05,31,095/- determined as 
compensation under the Supplementary Award has not been paid to the 
landowners for a period of more than two years and the State of Himachal 
Pradesh as a welfare State has made no effort to get the same paid at the 
earliest. 
46. This Court has held in Dharnidhar Mishra (D) and Another v. State of 
Bihar and Others, and State of Haryana v. 
Mukesh Kumar, (2011) that the right to property is now 
considered to be not only a constitutional or statutory right, but also a human 
right. This Court held in Tukaram Kana Joshi and Ors. thr. Power of 
Attorney Holder v. M.I.D.C. and Ors., (2013) that in a welfare 
State, the statutory authorities are legally bound to pay adequate 
compensation and rehabilitate the persons whose lands are being acquired. 
The non-fulfilment of such obligations under the garb of industrial 
development, is not permissible for any welfare State as that would 
tantamount to uprooting a person and depriving them of their 
constitutional/human right. 
47. That time is of the essence in determination and payment of compensation 
is also evident from this Court’s judgment in Kukreja Construction 
Company & Ors. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors., wherein it has been held that once the compensation has been 

determined, the same is payable immediately without any requirement of a 
representation or request by the landowners and a duty is cast on the State 
to pay such compensation to the land losers, otherwise there would be a 
breach of Article 300-A of the Constitution. 
48. In the present case, the Government of Himachal Pradesh as a welfare State 
ought to have proactively intervened in the matter with a view to ensure that 
the requisite amount towards compensation is paid at the earliest. The State 
cannot abdicate its constitutional and statutory responsibility of payment of 
compensation by arguing that its role was limited to initiating acquisition 
proceedings under the MOU signed between the Appellant, JAL and itself. 
We find that the delay in the payment of compensation to the landowners 
after taking away ownership of the subject land from them is in 
contravention to the spirit of the constitutional scheme of Article 300A and 
the idea of a welfare State. 
49. Acquisition of land for public purpose is undertaken under the power of 
eminent domain of the government much against the wishes of the owners 
of the land which gets acquired. When such a power is exercised, it is 
coupled with a bounden duty and obligation on the part of the government 
body to ensure that the owners whose lands get acquired are paid 
compensation/awarded amount as declared by the statutory award at the 
earliest. 

50. The State Government, in peculiar circumstances, was expected to make the 
requisite payment towards compensation to the landowners from its own 
treasury and should have thereafter proceeded to recover the same from JAL. 
Instead of making the poor landowners to run after the powerful corporate 
houses, it should have compelled JAL to make the necessary payment. 
51. Although the requirement to pass a supplementary award for the purpose of 
determining additional compensation for the standing trees, damaged 
structures, houses, etc. had been envisaged and recorded in the Award dated 
08.06.2018, yet the possession of the subject land came to be handed over 
to JAL vide the possession certificate dated 07.06.2019 without passing such 
a supplementary award. We are of the considered view that the omission or 
lapse to complete such exercise before taking possession of the land could 
be said to be in contravention of the mandate of Section 38(1) of the 2013 
Act. The relevant portion of Section 38 is reproduced below: 
“38. Power to take possession of land to be acquired. – 
(1) The Collector shall take possession of land after 
ensuring that full payment of compensation as well as 
rehabilitation and resettlement entitlements are paid or 
tendered to the entitled persons within a period of three 
months for the compensation and a period of six months 
for the monetary part of rehabilitation and resettlement 
entitlements listed in the Second Schedule commencing 
from the date of the award made under section 30: 
Provided that the components of the Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Package in the Second and Third 
Schedules that relate to infrastructural entitlements 
shall be provided within a period of eighteen months 

from the date of the award: Provided further that in case 
of acquisition of land for irrigation or hydel project, 
being a public purpose, the rehabilitation and 
resettlement shall be completed six months prior to 
submergence of the lands acquired…” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
52. A bare reading of Section 38 as reproduced above indicates that the payment 
of full and final compensation to the land owners is a precursor to taking 
possession of the land sought to be acquired from such persons. It is clear 
from the facts that the acquisition proceedings herein failed to confirm to 
this statutorily mandated sequence of events. It is regrettable that the State 
of Himachal Pradesh, being a welfare state, did not ensure payment of 
compensation to the Respondent Nos. 1-6 before taking possession of their 
land. In fact, the landowners had to approach the High Court to seek 
directions to the LAC for passing of the supplementary award which was 
finally passed on 02.05.2022 that is, after a period of almost four years from 
the date of passing of the Award of 2018. 
53. Further, the acquisition proceedings for the subject land had commenced 
vide the notification under Section 4 dated 25.07.2008. In such 
circumstances it is necessary to consider the relevant provisions of the 1894 
Act, more particularly Section 41 thereof which pertains to the process 
required to be followed in cases of acquisition of land for companies. The 
relevant portion of Section 41 of the 1894 Act is reproduced below: 

“41. Agreement with appropriate Government. – 
If the appropriate Government is satisfied [after 
considering the report, if any, of the Collector under 
section 5A, sub-section (2), or on the report of the officer 
making an inquiry under section 40 that the proposed 
acquisition is for any of the purposes referred to in 
clause (a) or clause (aa) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
of section 40, it shall require the Company to enter into 
an agreement with the appropriate Government, 
providing to the satisfaction of the appropriate 
Government for the following matters, namely:- 
(1) the payment to the appropriate Government of the 
cost of the acquisition; 
(2) the transfer, on such payment, of the land to the 
Company….” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
54. Section 41 necessitates an agreement between the appropriate government 
and the company for whose purpose the land is being acquired. One of the 
purposes of such an agreement is to ensure that payment towards the cost of 
acquisition is made by the company to the appropriate government and it is 
only upon such payment that the land is transferred to the company. Thus, it 
can be said that JAL was mandated to make the requisite payment to the 
State of Himachal Pradesh prior to the subject land being transferred to it. 
55. However, as discussed in the foregoing paragraphs, even before the amount 
of compensation could be determined by way of a supplementary award as 

stipulated in the Award dated 08.06.2018, the subject land stood transferred 
to JAL. This, in our view, is in contravention of Section 38 of the 2013 Act 
and Section 41 of the 1894 Act respectively. 
56. Thus, we deem it appropriate to direct the Respondent Nos. 7 and 10 that is, 
the State of Himachal Pradesh and the Land Acquisition Collector, Arki, to 
pay the amount of Rs. 3,05,31,095/- to the Respondent Nos. 1-6 for 
expeditious conclusion of the acquisition proceedings. However, we clarify 
that the State shall recover the said amount from JAL as the liability to pay 
the cost of acquisition of the subject land ultimately falls on JAL in view of 
the aforesaid discussion. 
 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
 
57. For all the foregoing reasons, this appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed in 
the aforesaid terms. The impugned order dated 12.07.2022 passed by the 
High Court is set aside. 
58. The Respondent Nos. 7 and 10 are directed to pay the compensation amount 
of Rs. 3,05,31,095/- (Rupees Three Crore Five Lakh Thirty-One Thousand 
and Ninety-Five Only) along with 9% interest thereupon from the date of 
passing of the Supplementary Award i.e., 02.05.2022 till the date of 

realization, within a period of fifteen days from today. The total amount paid 
by the State shall be recovered from the Respondent No. 11 (JAL). 

………………………………….J. 
[J. B. Pardiwala] 
 
………………………………….J. 
[Manoj Misra] 
New Delhi: 
September 20, 2024