IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3593-3594 OF 2024 

RAJESH MITRA 
& ANR. 
 
…APPELLANTS 

VERSUS 
KARNANI PROPERTIES LTD. 
 
 …RESPONDENT 

JUDGMENT 
 
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J. 
1. 
The appellants (the defendants in the suit), are here in 
challenge to the judgement dated 08.12.2022 whereby their Appeal 
was dismissed by the Division Bench of Calcutta High Court, 
upholding the judgment of the learned Single Judge (which was a 
judgment on admission), dated 29.06.2022. While decreeing the 
suit, the Court had directed the appellants (tenant) to vacate the 
suit property and handover the vacant possession to the 
respondent-plaintiff, within sixty days! 
2. 
This is a landlord-tenant matter an eviction suit 
filed by the respondent before the Calcutta High Court, inter alia, 
praying for eviction of appellants from Room No.208, 2nd Floor, 25-

A Park Street, Kolkata (hereafter referred as the “premises”). Even 
before the appellants could file a Written Statement, the plaintiff, 
without loosing any time, filed an application under Order XII Rule 
61 Code of Civil Procedure (“CPC”) seeking a ‘judgment on 
admission’ by relying on the deposition of defendant no.1 in 
another case where the defendant had admitted that the tenancy 
was in his mother’s name. According to the plaintiff/respondent, 
since the mother of the defendants/appellants had admittedly died 
way back in the year 2009, they are not entitled to stay in the 
premises beyond the year 2014 in terms of section 2(g) of the 1997 
Act, which protects the rights of the children and dependents of a 
tenant only for a limited period of five years. 
3. 
At the outset, we must state that both, the learned single-
judge bench and to some extent even the Division Bench of the 
High Court, in the present case, ought not to have decreed the suit 
of the landlord on the basis of alleged “admission” by the appellant 
 
1 6. Judgment on admissions.— (1) Where admissions of fact have been made either in 
the pleading or otherwise, whether orally or in writing, the Court may at any stage of the suit, 
either on the application of any party or of its own motion and without waiting for the 
determination of any other question between the parties, make such order or give such 
judgment as it may think fit, having regard to such admissions. 
(2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under sub-rule (1) a decree shall be drawn up in 
accordance with the judgment and the decree shall bear the date on which the judgment was 
pronounced. no.1 which was made in another unconnected matter, as to our 
mind, it does not pass muster the test of “admission” visualised in 
Order XII Rule 6 CPC. It is not that a court cannot pass a judgment 
on the basis of an admission made in some other case. All the 
same, what has to be kept in mind is that Order XII Rule 6 is an 
enabling provision conferring wide discretionary powers on the 
courts which cannot be claimed by any party as a matter of right. 
Courts can invoke Order XII Rule 6 only in cases where admissions 
are unconditional, unequivocal and unambiguous or when 
admission is based upon undisputed inferences. (See: Charanjit 
Lal Mehra & Ors. v. Kamal Saroj Mahajan (Smt) And Anr. 
(2005), Raveesh Chand Jain v. Raj Rani Jain 
(2015), Uttam Singh Duggal & Co. Ltd. v. United 
Bank of India And Ors. (2000) ) 
Here, we would like to reproduce that portion of the cross-
examination of appellant no. 1, as quoted by the Single Judge of 
the High Court, which is alleged to be an admission on part of the 
appellant no.1 to deny him the right of occupying the disputed 
premises. It is as follows: 
 
“33. Flat No.208 in respect whereof you are an occupant- 
is it a tenancy? 

Yes, it is in my mother’s name. 
34. Your mother is Usha Mitra- am I right? 
Yes, Late Usha Mitra. 
35. When did Usha Mitra expire? 
On 3rd November, 2009” 
 
This deposition is the so called ‘admission’ on which the 
respondent-landlord relies to claim that only the mother (Usha 
Mitra) of the appellants was the tenant and not the appellants. The 
appellant no.1 had admitted that the tenancy was in the name of 
his mother. 
We have perused the examination-in-chief and cross-
examination of appellant no.1 made in that ‘other case’ where this 
statement was made. Such questions and their answers are 
common place in depositions before courts, but every such 
statement cannot be considered as an ‘admission’ to invoke Order 
XII Rule 6 of CPC. It is for the courts to see whether any statement 
in the pleadings or otherwise amounts to an admission of such a 
nature as to inspire the confidence of the court to pass judgment 
on admission under Order XII Rule 6 of CPC. It will depend upon 
the content and kind of statement/admission which may vary from 
case to case. In other words, it would depend upon the totality of 
facts and circumstances of a particular given case. In the present 
case, here, it is not a ‘clear admission’ as is being made out. 

Moreover, where the question and its answer are both a mixed 
question of fact and law, as in the present case, a so called 
‘admission’ against the law can never be an “admission” as 
visualised under Order XII Rule 6. However, more on this later. 
 Order XII Rule 6 is meant for speedy disposal of the suits in 
some cases but on the risk of repetition, we would like to caution 
that unless there is a clear, unambiguous, unequivocal and 
unconditional admission, courts should not exercise their 
discretion under the Rule because judgment on admissions is 
without a trial which may even preclude a party to challenge the 
matter on merits in the court of appeal. The provision of law, which 
is meant for the expeditious disposal of appropriate cases, should 
therefore be cautiously exercised and it should never come in the 
way of any defendant denying him the valuable right of contesting 
the claim. (See: Himani Alloys Ltd. v. Tata Steel Ltd. (2011), Hari Steel & General Industries Ltd. v. Diljit Singh 
(2019) ) 
4. 
We will have to go briefly on the facts of the case in order to 
have a perspective of what we have before us. The premises was 
originally let out to one Sri S.K. Mitra. Subsequent to his death in 
1970, as per section 2(h) of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 

1956 (hereafter referred to as “1956 Act” or the “old Act”), the 
tenancy devolved on his legal heirs who were ordinarily residing 
with him. Section 2(h) of the old Act defined the ‘tenant’ as follows: 
“(h) “tenant” [means any person] by whom or on whose 
account or behalf, the rent of any premises is, or but for 
a special contract would be, payable and [includes any 
person continuing in possession after the termination of 
his tenancy or in the event or such person's death, such 
of his heirs as were ordinarily residing with him at the 
time of his death,] but shall not include any person 
against whom any decree or order for eviction has been 
made by a Court of competent jurisdiction.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
In other words, in the event of the death of the tenant the 
tenancy devolved on the legal heirs of the tenant ‘who ordinarily 
resided with him’. In the case at hand, therefore, the tenancy 
devolved on SK Mitra’s widow and the appellants, who were his 
children aged 2 and 5 years, at the time of his death. 
Subsequently, the new act, i.e., the West Bengal Tenancy 
Premises Act, 1997 (hereafter “1997 Act”) came into force with 
effect from 10.07.2001. Under the 1997 Act, the tenancy would 
devolve to the legal heirs of the tenant as specified under section 
2(g), but for a limited period of five years. The spouse of the tenant 
though is excluded from the time limit provided she meets the 
criteria as laid therein. Section 2(g) of the 1997 Act reads as 
follows: 

“(g) “tenant” means any person by whom or on whose 
account or behalf the rent of any premises is or, but for 
a special contract, would be payable, and includes any 
person continuing in possession after termination of his 
tenancy and, in the event of death of any tenant, also 
includes, for a period not exceeding five years from the 
date of death of such tenant or from the date of coming 
into force of this Act, whichever is later, his spouse, son, 
daughter, parent and the widow of his predeceased 
son, who were ordinarily living with the tenant up to the 
date of death of the tenant as the members of his family 
and were dependent on him and who do not own or 
occupy any residential premises, and [in respect of 
premises let out for non-residential purpose his spouse, 
son, daughter and parent who were ordinarily living 
with the tenant up to the date of his death as members 
of his family, and were dependant on him or a person 
authorised by the tenant who is in possession of such 
premises] but shall not include any person against 
whom any decree or order for eviction has been made 
by a Court of competent jurisdiction: 
 
Provided that the time-limit of five years shall not apply 
to the spouse of the tenant who was ordinarily living 
with the tenant up to his death as a member of his 
family and was dependent on him and who does not 
own or occupy any residential premises, 
 
Provided further that the son, daughter parent or the 
widow of the predeceased son of the tenant who was 
ordinarily residing with the tenant in the said premises 
up to the date of death of the tenant as a member of his 
family and was dependent on him and who does not 
own or occupy any residential premises, shall have a 
right of preference for tenancy in a fresh agreement in 
respect of such premises [on condition of payment of 
fair rent]. This proviso shall apply mutatis mutandis to 
premises let out for non-residential purpose.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

5. 
The landlord’s case is that after the death of Sh. S.K. Mitra in 
1970 his wife Smt. Usha Mitra had become the tenant as per 
section 2(h) of the 1956 Act. There is also a mention that she gave 
an undertaking to the landlord that only she succeeds on the 
property as a tenant and it was her who continued to pay rent after 
the death of her husband. When Smt. Usha Mitra died in 2009, 
the appellants would be considered tenants only till 03.11.2014 
(five years after the death of Usha Mitra on 03.11.2009), as per 
section 2(g) of the 1997 Act. As we have already referred earlier, 
the 
main 
thrust 
of 
the 
landlord’s 
case 
was 
that 
the 
appellant/defendant had admitted, in his deposition in a different 
matter, that his mother was the tenant on the property who had 
passed away in 2009. Hence, their tenancy had expired long back 
in 2014 as per his own admission. 
 In their Written Statements, appellants did not deny the 
deposition made by appellant no.1 as a “witness” in another case 
but submitted that this cannot be used as an admission under 
Order XII Rule 6. Further, it was asserted that it was not just their 
mother who had become a tenant after the death of his father in 
the year 1970, but both appellants had also become tenants as the 

tenancy was heritable as per section 2(h) of the 1956 Act, which 
was then in force. 
6. 
The Single Judge of the High Court, however, did not accept 
this contention. What was relied upon were the rent receipts in the 
name of Smt. Usha Mitra (the mother of the present appellant), for 
the period between 1970 and 2009 and an affidavit attested by 
Smt. Usha Mitra, showing that she was the sole tenant of the 
premises while dismissing the claim of the defendants. 
Undisputedly, Smt. Usha Mitra had become a tenant under 
section 2(h) of the 1956 Act. However, when these facts were 
considered along with the deposition of appellant no. 1, it was held 
by the Single Judge of the High Court that after the death of Smt. 
Usha Mitra in 2009, the appellants would be tenants under section 
2(g) of the 1997 Act only for a period of five years which would be 
calculated from the date of Usha Mitra’s death due to the words 
“whichever is later” appearing in section 2(g). Five years got 
completed on 02.11.2014, after which the appellants had no right 
to remain on the premises. As we have already stated above, the 
learned Single Judge was not correct in decreeing the suit on this 
so called “admission”. Looking at the facts of the case and the 
position of law, it was not proper for the Court to give a judgment 

on admission simply because there cannot be an admission 
against law and in any case, it is not an unambiguous admission 
as is being made out. 
In view of the discussion above, the legal question to be 
determined by us is whether the appellants had also became 
tenants upon the death of their father, by virtue of section 2(h) of 
the old Act. Further, what effect would the enforcement of the new 
Act have on their tenancy. 
This goes to the root of the controversy and involves a 
question of law and thus, the learned single Judge erred in passing 
the judgment under Order XII Rule 6. What has been given to the 
appellants under law cannot be taken away on the basis of an 
unclear deposition. In short, there cannot be an admission against 
law. Whether a particular statement amounts to an “admission” 
will depend on the fact of each case. In the case at hand, we are of 
the opinion that it is not an admission as visualised under Order 
XII Rule 6. 
7. 
The appellants filed an appeal against this order before the 
Division Bench of the High Court which was dismissed, vide order 
dated 08.12.2022, which is presently under challenge before us. 
The Division Bench held that under section 2(g), the legislature 

intended that where the original tenant has died before the coming 
into force of the 1997 Act, his legal heirs would be protected for 
five years from the date of coming into force of the act. Otherwise, 
the latter phrase in section 2(g) “from the date of coming into force 
of this Act, whichever is later” would stand frustrated. This is what 
the High Court held: 
“What can be logically deduced therefrom that the 
heritability of the estate of the tenant was restricted for 
a period of five years from the date of the death in case 
the tenant died after promulgation of the said Act to the 
other heirs excluding the spouse who have been kept in 
the exception (provided the conditions imposed therein 
are duly fulfilled and/or satisfied). A striking feature 
may further be noticed from the definition of tenant 
under 1997 Act in relation to the fixation of the time limit 
fixed therein which, if lost sight of, shall frustrate the 
legislative intent. The son, daughter and parents shall 
not be entitled to take protection under the aforesaid 
definition, if the tenant dies prior to the promulgation of 
the said Act and the aforesaid period would be 
reckoned from the date of coming into force of the said 
Act. Otherwise, the expression “from the date of coming 
into force of this Act, whichever is later” shall be 
redundant and meaningless. What can be legally 
deduced therefrom is that even if the tenant dies when 
the Act of 1956 was in vogue, yet the heirs other than 
the spouse would not get any protection in relation to a 
time limit under the definition of the tenant in the Act of 
1997 and, therefore, the concept of “devolution” of the 
tenancy right under the 1956 Act cannot be said to be 
inflexible. The legislatures can restrict the heritability of 
the tenanted estate which does not offend the 
constitutional ethos nor can be impinge (sic: impinged) 
on the ground of restricting the succession in relation to 
our tenanted property. What can be culled out from the 
aforesaid discussion that the heirs other than the 

spouse, even if they satisfy the other conditions laid 
down in the definition provision, loses their right as a 
tenant nor protected under the provisions thereof after 
the expiration of five years from the date of death and 
in the event the death occurs after coming into force of 
the said Act or upon expiration of five years from the 
date of coming into force of the Act or 1997, whichever 
is later.” 
 
The entire case here rests upon the interpretation of “tenant” as 
defined in the new Act. In case, the defendants i.e., the present 
appellants come under the definition of “tenant” the order 
impugned has to be set aside. However, if the case is that the 
appellant does not come under the definition of “tenant” as referred 
above, this appeal would fail. 
8. 
On behalf of the appellants, we have heard learned counsel 
Ms. Rashi Bansal, who relies on the decision of the Single Judge 
of the Calcutta High Court (Goutam Dey v. Jyotsna Chatterjee 
reported in 2012 SCC OnLine Cal 642). In the above cited case, 
the original tenant had died prior to the enforcement of the1997 
Act. He was survived by his daughter and her husband, Goutam 
Dey. Subsequently, the daughter of the original tenant also died in 
2011, after which the respondent-landlord filed a suit for eviction 
against Goutam which was decreed. By virtue of section 2(h) of the 
1956 Act, it was held that a vested right had accrued in favour of 
the daughter of the original tenant, which could not be abrogated 

by the enactment of the 1997 Act. It was further held that if section 
2(g) of the 1997 Act was interpreted literally, it would mean that 
all inherited tenancies under the 1956 Act would expire on 
09.07.2006 (five years after the coming into force of the 1997 Act). 
This is a position which cannot be tenable in law according to the 
learned Single Judge in the above case. It was held that the phrase 
“or from the date of coming into force of the act, whichever is later” 
was wrongly drafted by the legislature, and it is in fact redundant. 
This is what was said: 
“19. Even otherwise, I am of the further view that 
portion of section 2(g), as extracted in the preceding 
paragraph starting from “or” and ending with “later”, 
and on which Mr. Bhattacharya laid emphasis, if read 
literally would produce absurd results and, therefore, 
the provision must be so read so as to make it 
meaningful. Law is well settled that in exceptional 
circumstances, it would be proper for the Court to 
depart from the literal rule and such rule of 
interpretation could be adopted that is just, reasonable 
and sensible, and does not offend the sense of justice. 
In the context, one may possibly conceive either of three 
inevitable situations, - death of a tenant (i) before July 
10, 2001; (ii) after July 10, 2001; and (iii) on July 10, 
2001. Regarding situation (i) i.e. death of a tenant 
before July 10, 2001 and the case with which I am 
concerned (Sunil died on May 4, 1997), undoubtedly it 
was the Act of 1956 that was in force and had a tenant 
governed by the provisions of the Act of 1956 died on 
July 9, 2001 or even previous to that date, the tenancy 
would be governed by that Act meaning thereby that 
the tenancy being heritable, the heirs would be justified 
in claiming tenancy right subject to fulfilment of the 
residence requirement in section 2(h) of the Act of 1956 

but unfettered by the other two conditions newly 
inserted and the stipulation of five years in section 2(g) 
of the Act of 1997. Law appears to be settled that 
provisions of a new statute which touch a right in 
existence at the date it is enforced are not to be applied 
retrospectively in the absence of express provision or 
necessary intendment. The Act of 1997 has not been 
given retrospective effect so as to bring within its 
coverage death of tenants occurring prior to July 10, 
2001 and a different intention does not appear on a 
reading of the Act of 1997 so as to affect any right or 
privilege that has been acquired or has accrued in 
favour of the specified heirs of the deceased tenant 
under the Act of 1956, since repealed. Having regard to 
section 8(c) of the Bengal General Clauses Act, 1899, a 
vested right that accrued in favour of an heir like 
Subhra on the death of the tenant i.e. Sunil cannot be 
abrogated. There is a presumption against curtailment 
of or washing away a vested right by a repealing 
legislation, 
and 
a 
construction 
involving 
such 
curtailment of or washing away the right accrued ought 
not to be adopted unless a contrary intention clearly 
appears in the repealing legislation. It could not have 
been and it does not seem to be the intention of the 
legislature to fix July 9, 2006 as the last date fill which 
tenancy of an heir of a deceased tenant would continue 
(assuming all the other conditions were fulfilled), no 
matter when he died prior to July 10, 2001. The absurd 
result that the aforesaid extract of section 2(g) of the Act 
of 1997 has the potential of producing is best illustrated 
by the facts of the present case and needs no further 
elaboration. Insofar as situations (ii) and (iii) are 
concerned, it is obvious that the definition of tenant in 
section 2(g) of the Act of 1997 shall apply and for 
achieving the purpose that it seeks to achieve, it was 
not necessary to insert the phrase “or from the date of 
coming into force of this Act, whichever is later”. The 
period of five years mentioned in section 2(g) 
automatically would have application only in respect of 
death of tenants occurring on and from July 10, 2001 
and in such case the portion extracted above, is in my 
considered view, a piece of loose drafting and ought to 

be considered redundant unless in a given case, which 
I have been unable to perceive, the same is shown to 
have application. I hasten to record here that the above 
observation regarding redundancy has been made by 
me despite my best effort to make the statute effective 
with all the words that have been used by the 
legislature and conscious of the principle that 
legislature is presumed not to waste words.” 
 
Relying upon the above Judgment of Calcutta High Court, the 
counsel for the appellants would submit that similarly the tenancy 
in the present case had in fact devolved in favour of the present 
appellants way back in the year 1970 on the death of their father, 
who was the original tenant. This could not be undone by applying 
the provisions of the 1997 Act which was a subsequent legislation. 
In other words, in 1970, the tenancy was heritable and thus the 
appellants along with their mother had become tenants on the 
property/premises. 
9. 
On the other hand, learned counsel Mr. Sabyasachi 
Chowdhary appearing on behalf of the respondent-landlord would 
rely on the findings given by the High Court, in the present case, 
and in addition, he would rely upon two judgments of the Calcutta 
High Court Sri. Sushil Kumar Jain & Ors. v. Pilani Properties 
Limited, and Satyanarayana 
More v. Milagrina Rose Correia,, 

which are both Division Bench judgments laying down a law 
contrary to the judgment in Goutam Dey (supra). 
The Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in Sushil 
Kumar (supra) had in fact overruled the judgment of the Single 
Judge in Goutam Dey (supra). It relied on the statement of objects 
and reasons of the 1997 Act and its purpose which was to do away 
with the heritability of tenancy. The relevant paragraphs have been 
reproduced below: 
“20. The underlying logic of the judgment in Goutam 
Dey is that if a right vests in a person under a statute, 
the same cannot be undone. As a proposition of law it 
may sound attractive, but it will not hold good in all 
cases. While it is true that certain rights if they vest 
under a predecessor statute cannot be undone by a 
successor statute, the purpose of the statutes, the 
nature of the rights and the extent of the vesting of such 
rights are relevant considerations. 
 
21. The 1956 Act provided for a degree of protection to 
certain classes of tenants in this State. In course of time, 
the legislative wisdom provided for a relaxation in the 
norms such that the protection was limited to a smaller 
class of persons and in certain specified situations by 
the Act of 1997. It cannot be said, for instance, that 
merely because a tenancy had been created prior to the 
1997 Act, the protection enjoyed under the 1956 Act 
would continue even after the 1997 Act has come into 
operation. The 1997 Act does not admit of such a 
situation… 
* 

* 

* 
23. It must also be added that courts ought to be very 
cautious before finding words used in the statute to be 
otiose or meaningless. The intention of Section 2(g) of 
the 1997 Act is to regard heirs of the original tenant who 

were dependent on him and were residing with him at 
the time of his death as tenants for a period of five 
years. That would imply that for a period of five years 
from the death of the original tenant, the heirs of the 
original tenant who were dependent on the original 
tenant and were residing with him will be entitled to the 
same protection under Section 6 of the 1997 Act as the 
original tenant. However, such umbrella of protection is 
removed upon the conclusion of the fifth year from the 
date of death of the original tenant, in case the original 
tenant died after the 1997 Act came into effect. For the 
similar heirs of the original tenants who had died prior 
to the 1997 Act coming into force, a period of five years 
was counted from the date of the 1997 Act coming into 
operation. 
 
24. It was a policy decision taken by the legislature to 
afford a five-year period for the dependents of the 
original tenant who ordinarily resided with him at the 
time of his death to make alternative arrangements. To 
ensure that all such heirs of the original tenant had the 
same time period to make alternative arrangements, the 
clause “whichever is later” was introduced in Section 
2(g) of the 1997 Act so that the heirs of the original 
tenant who had died prior to the 1997 Act coming into 
force did not have a shorter time to make such 
alternative arrangements. That is the meaning and 
purpose of the expression, “whichever is later”, in 
Section 2(g) of the Act.” 
 
Thus, the counsel for the respondent/landlord would argue 
that even if the appellants claim tenancy under the 1956 Act, then 
also their tenancy would expire on 09.07.2006, i.e., five years after 
the 1997 Act came into force. This logic is based on the 
interpretation of the term “whichever is later”. In other words, 
protection is only for five years, even for the one who had inherited 

‘tenancy’ when the old Act was in force, as it say five years from 
the death of the tenant or five years from the enforcement of the 
Act, “whichever is later”. Since the new Act came into force in 
2001, therefore, although the tenant (and in this case it would be 
the father of the appellant i.e., the original tenant) died in the year 
1970 but five years will be counted from 2001. In other words, the 
language of the statute suggests that its purpose was to cover even 
the death of a tenant which occurred during the subsistence of the 
old Act. But such an interpretation would depend upon whether 
the new Act has a retrospective application! 
10. Whether the 1997 Act would cover such tenants who were 
protected under the 1956 Act is the question? The High Court has 
held that the legislature by virtue of section 2(g) of the 1997 Act, 
intended to extinguish the tenancy of all such legal heirs, who 
inherited it on the death of their predecessor-in-interest before the 
enforcement of the 1997 Act. Such rights would expire after five 
years from the commencement of Act. 
To understand the intention of the legislature, we will have to 
examine the provisions of the 1956 Act and also the 1997 Act. 
11. The West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1997 received assent 
from the President of India on 28.11.1998 and as per notification 

dated 09.07.2001, the provisions of the 1997 Act came into force 
on 10.07.2001. The Object and Reasons of the 1997 Act are also 
important, the portion relevant for our examination is reproduced 
below: 
“The National Housing Policy approved by the Central 
Government 
recommended 
that 
appropriate 
amendment in existing laws and regulations be carried 
out for creating enabling atmosphere for housing 
activities in the country. A number of export bodies such 
as the Economic Administration Reform Commission 
and the National Commission on Urbanisation have 
recommended reforming the rent legislation in a way 
that balances the interests of both the landlords and 
the tenants and also that stimulates future construction 
to meet the growing demands for housing. 
On the basis of the various recommendations of the 
experts and also after a series of consultations with the 
State Governments, the Ministry of Urban Development 
of India prepared a Model Rent Control Legislation, and 
sent to the States for consideration.” 

12. The entire issue revolves around the interpretation of the 
phrase “for a period not exceeding five years from the date of death 
of such tenant or from the date of coming into force of this Act, 
whichever is later” used in section 2(g) of the 1997 Act. There is no 
ambiguity in case the original tenant passes away after the 
commencement of 1997 Act, as in such a case, it is clear that the 
specified heirs will get a limited protection of five years only. The 
difficulty is in enforcing the above provision of section 2(g) of 1997 

Act in a situation where the original tenant had died before the 
commencement of 1997 Act i.e., prior to July 10, 2001. The matter 
at hand falls in the latter. 
The Single Judge in Goutam Dey (supra) observed that a 
literal reading of ‘or from the date of coming into force of this Act, 
whichever is later’ would lead to absurd results as all tenancies 
devolved under the 1956 Act, would end together on the same day 
(July 9, 2006), i.e., five years after the enforcement of the 1997 Act! 
Thus, the Single Judge held the aforesaid phrase to be redundant 
and a piece of loose drafting by the State Legislature. 
13. Subsequently, the Calcutta High Court considered this issue 
in Prabir Kumar Jalan v. Laxmi Narayan Jalan, 2012 SCC 
OnLine Cal 1313 where another Bench of a learned Single Judge 
did assign meaning to the phrase, which was referred to as a piece 
of loose drafting in Gautam Dey (supra). In Prabir Kumar (supra), 
the High Court decreed the suit for eviction against the respondent-
defendant therein and observed that if the Legislature intended to 
apply section 2(g) of 1997 Act only to the deaths which would have 
occurred after the commencement of the new Act, then legislature 
was not required to use the phrase “or from the date of coming into 
force of this Act, whichever is later”. This is what was said: 

“21. Now, if Ms. Doshi's argument that the rights of the 
original tenant vested in the defendants on his death 
on 25th December, 1999 was true, then there would be 
no occasion for the legislature to enact that the status 
of a tenant would cease on expiry of five years from the 
date of the Act or five years after the death whichever 
was later. If the legislature had intended to protect the 
heirs of a tenant under the 1956 Rent Act, the tenant 
having died before coming into force of the new Rent 
Act, the legislature would have only prescribed five 
years from the date of death which must occur on or 
after coming into force of the new Act. Or better still it 
could have said five years from the death and no more. 
The legislature need not have said any more…” 
 
But to our mind, the Single Judge bench while deciding this 
case did not consider the observations made in Goutam Dey 
(supra). Eventually, this issue came before a Division Bench of the 
Calcutta High Court. 
14. In Sushil Kumar Jain (supra), the Division Bench, in its 
effort to give meaning to the words of sec. 2(g) of the 1997 Act, held 
that there appears to be ‘a different intention’ on the part of the 
legislature, which was to dilute the rights of the tenant given under 
the old Act. A challenge against this decision was also made before 
this Court, which came to be dismissed without issuance of notice 
at the admission stage itself with the following order:2 
“We see no reason to interfere with the impugned 
order passed by the High Court at Calcutta. 
 
2 SLP(C) No.2750/2018, decided on 07.02.2018. 

The Special Leave Petition is, accordingly, 
dismissed. 
However, as prayed for, one month's time is 
granted to vacate the suit premises subject to 
filing usual undertaking in the Registry of this 
Court within two weeks from today, stating that 
the petitioners shall not create any third party 
rights, will clear all the rent/dues/occupational 
charges in the meanwhile and will peacefully 
vacate the suit premises concerned at the end of 
one month positively.” 
 
Here, we want to pause for a while to note that this dismissal of 
SLP is no bar on us to decide the issue at hand. The dismissal of 
an SLP at the admission stage before issuance of notice, with a 
non-speaking order, does not mean that this Court has affirmed 
the law laid down by impugned order. [See: P.Singaravelan v. 
District Collector, Tiruppur (2020) 1 SCC (L&S) 453; Palam 
Gas Service v. CIT (2017); Kunhayammed v. State 
of Kerala (2000) ] 
15. Subsequently, the view taken in Sushil Kumar Jain (supra) 
by the Calcutta High Court, was reiterated by another Division 
Bench in Satyanarayan More v. Milagrina Rose Correia, 2020 
SCC OnLine Cal 957. Both these judgments have put much 
emphasis on the object behind the promulgation of the 1997 Act. 
According to them, the new Act aims to free the landlords from the 
clutches of the 1956 Act by creating a balance between the rights 

of tenants and interest of the landlord. We agree with the view so 
far as it says that the purpose of the 1997 Act was to create a 
balance between the interests of tenants and landlords but we 
doubt that it can be extended to say that legislature intended to 
extinguish the rights of legal heirs (who had become tenants under 
the old Act after the death of their predecessor-in-interest) on a 
particular date. 
16. The current position of law as it seems from the decision of 
the Calcutta High Court is that the 1997 Act represents a shift of 
legislative intent. While the 1956 Act approached tenancy as a 
heritable right that can be claimed by legal heirs of an original 
tenant, this position was changed by the 1997 Act, to provide a 
limited protection of five years to the specific heirs of an original 
tenant and, as per the High Court, in cases where original tenant 
had died during the existence of old Act, five years shall be counted 
from the commencement of the new Act. 
17. In our considered opinion, the above view of the Calcutta High 
Court cannot be sustained. The High Court in the case of Goutam 
Dey (supra) has held that the new statute which touches upon the 
existing rights cannot be retrospective, without an express 
provision or necessary implication expressing the clear intent of 

the Legislature. Goutam Dey (supra) relied upon Section 8(c) of the 
West Bengal General Clauses Act to say that a new statute does 
not affect existing rights. Section 45 of the 1997 Act repealed the 
1956 Act but that cannot mean that rights accrued under the old 
Act are extinguished altogether with the enforcement of the new 
Act. 
The enforcement of a new statute ipso facto will not take away 
the rights already accrued under a repealed statute, unless this 
intention is reflected in the new statute. 
This Court in CIT v. Vatika Township (P) Ltd., (2015) reiterated the general principles concerning retrospectivity of 
statutes. This is what was said: 
“28. Of the various rules guiding how a legislation has 
to be interpreted, one established rule is that unless a 
contrary intention appears, a legislation is presumed 
not to be intended to have a retrospective operation. The 
idea behind the rule is that a current law should govern 
current activities. Law passed today cannot apply to 
the events of the past. If we do something today, we do 
it keeping in view the law of today and in force and not 
tomorrow's backward adjustment of it. Our belief in the 
nature of the law is founded on the bedrock that every 
human being is entitled to arrange his affairs by relying 
on the existing law and should not find that his plans 
have been retrospectively upset. This principle of law is 
known as lex prospicit non respicit: law looks forward 
not backward. As was observed in Phillips v. Eyre 
[(1870) LR 6 QB 1], a retrospective legislation is contrary 
to the general principle that legislation by which the 
conduct of mankind is to be regulated when introduced 

for the first time to deal with future acts ought not to 
change the character of past transactions carried on 
upon the faith of the then existing law. 
 
29. The obvious basis of the principle against 
retrospectivity is the principle of “fairness”, which must 
be the basis of every legal rule as was observed in 
L'Office Cherifien des Phosphates v. Yamashita-
Shinnihon Steamship Co. Ltd. [(1994) 1 AC 486: (1994) 
2 WLR 39: (1994) 1 All ER 20 (HL)] Thus, legislations 
which modified accrued rights or which impose 
obligations or impose new duties or attach a new 
disability have to be treated as prospective unless the 
legislative intent is clearly to give the enactment a 
retrospective effect; unless the legislation is for purpose 
of supplying an obvious omission in a former legislation 
or to explain a former legislation.” (emphasis supplied) 
 
18. It is to be kept in mind that Courts can, and must, differ from 
the literal meaning of words if the reading of any provision provides 
absurd results. 
There are specific grounds under which a landlord can seek 
eviction of the tenant. There are provisions as well for immediate 
recovery of possession for certain classes of landlords. But Section 
2(g) of the 1997 Act cannot be interpreted in the manner it has 
been done by the Calcutta High Court in Sushil Kumar (supra) 
and Satyanarayan More (supra). 
19. We are of the view that the phrase “or from the date of coming 
into force of this Act, whichever is later”, used in section 2(g) of 1997 
Act, was rightly held to be superfluous in Goutam Dey (supra). We 

do not doubt the wisdom of the legislature but we are constrained 
to hold that the case at hand reflects loose drafting, as it seems to 
have created more problems than it sought to resolve. 
 Francis Bennion, who has been quoted by Krishna Iyer, J. in 
State of Karnataka v. Ranganatha Reddy (1977) 
while dealing with Karnataka Contract Carriages (Acquisition) Act, 
1976, had said the following words about the Renton Committee 
Report (Report on Preparation of Legislation): 
“The Renton Committee points out that the 
problem of obscure statute law is important to 
every citizen. 

There is hardly any part of our national life or of 
our personal lives that is not affected by one 
statute or another. The affairs of local authorities, 
nationalised industries, public corporations and 
private commerce are regulated by legislation. 
The life of the ordinary citizen is affected by 
various provisions of the statute book from cradle 
to grave. 
The committee might have added that the rule of 
law and parliamentary democracy itself are 
imperilled if laws are incomprehensible. They did 
say that it is of fundamental importance in a free 
society 
that 
the 
law 
should 
be 
readily 
ascertainable and reasonably clear, and that 
otherwise it is oppressive and deprives the 
citizen of one of his basic rights. It is also 
needlessly 
expensive 
and 
wasteful. 
Reed 
Dicerson, the famous American draftsman, said 
it cost the Government and the public ‘many 
millions of dollars annually.” 

Justice 
Iyer 
in State 
of 
Karnataka 
v. 
Ranganatha 
Reddy, (1977) further observes that “our draftsmen 
handle foreign know-how meant for different circumstances, and 
without full grasp of the economic regulation or the leisure and 
facilities for such study”. He went on to further state that: 
“In a country where the people are, by and 
large, illiterate, where a social revolution is 
being pushed through by enormous volume 
and variety of legislation and where new 
economic adventures requiring unorthodox 
jural techniques are necessitous, if legal 
drafting is to be equal to the challenge of 
change, a radicalisation of its methodology 
and philosophy and an ability for the 
legislative manpower to express themselves 
in 
streamlined, 
simple, 
project-oriented 
fashion is essential. In the hope that a role-
conscious court communicates to a responsive 
Cabinet, we make this observation.” 
 (Para 49) 

 Ambiguous drafting leads to manifold problems and 
generates lengthy litigations, as it has evidently done in the case 
at hand. There is no clarity in the 1997 Act to suggest that it 
extinguishes the rights of all tenants (who inherited tenancy rights 
under Old Act) retrospectively. 
20. This is also not the first occasion where Section 2(g) of the 
1997 Act has been under consideration by this Court. In Nasimi 
Naqi v. Todi Tea Company Ltd. & Ors. (CA No.9052/2019, 

decided on 26.11.2019) the second proviso to the same section was 
held to contain an inadvertent omission as the spouse was not 
given the right of preference for tenancy in case of a fresh 
agreement, which was given to certain other specified heirs. This 
is what was said: 
“The exclusion of a spouse of a deceased tenant 
is 
without 
rationale, 
discriminatory 
and 
deprives the surviving spouse of a valuable 
entitlement granted to the other heirs. There is a 
valid justification for amending the provision so 
as to bring the widow within the ambit of the 
second proviso. This is a matter which, in our 
view, deserves to be considered by the 
legislature. Having due regard to the object and 
purpose underlying the recognition of a right of 
preference under the second proviso and the 
social 
welfare 
purpose 
underlying 
the 
enactment of the legislation, it would be 
appropriate if this aspect is considered… There 
would appear to be no justification for not 
considering the grant of such a protection on the 
spouse of the original tenant. We hope and trust 
that this aspect of the omission in the second 
provisio will engage the attention of the law 
makers so as to fulfill the salutary purpose of 
the provision.” 
 
21. It is true that legislature can restrict heritability by amending 
or repealing the law, as the case might be. The Division Bench’s 
finding (in the impugned judgment dated 08.12.2022), is that since 
legislature can restrict the heritability it has done precisely that in 
the 1997 Act, by adding the words “five years from the date of death 

of such tenant or from the date of coming into force of this Act, 
whichever is later”. Hence, as per the Division Bench of the 
Calcutta High Court, the death of SK Mitra in 1970 also stands 
covered under new Act. In other words, the 1997 Act changes 
“heritable rights” retrospectively according to the Division Bench of 
the Calcutta High Court. Although, the actual date when eviction 
would happen is post the new Act but it does have a retrospective 
application as well in as much as it is applicable retrospectively to 
an earlier date (1970 in the present case) and had taken away a 
right of the appellants, given to them under the old statute. 
Statutory laws operate from the date of their enforcement i.e., 
prospectively. In case the legislature intends to make a law 
retrospective then such an intention of the legislature must be 
shown clearly and unambiguously in the statute itself. The 
Division Bench’s mere interpretation of a statutory provision will 
not make the law retrospective and take away the heritable rights 
of a tenant. 
22. In view of the above, we hold that Smt. Usha Mitra and the 
appellants jointly inherited the tenancy from Sh. S.K. Mitra, in the 
year 1970. Thus, the impugned judgment is liable to be set aside 
as appellants’ tenancy did not expire in the year 2006, by the 

introduction of 1997 Act, in the absence of a clear and unequivocal 
intention in the 1997 Act to have a retrospective operation. 
23. Accordingly, these appeals are allowed. Orders dated 
29.06.2022 and 08.12.2022 of the Single Judge and the Division 
Bench respectively are set aside. 
24. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
25. Interim order(s), if any, shall stand vacated. 

……...……….………………….J. 
 [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]..…...………………………….J. 
 [PRASANNA B. VARALE] 
 
New Delhi. 
September 20, 2024.