IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION NO.261 OF 2024 
IN 

STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH PETITIONER(S) Criminal Appeal No.293 of 

VERSUS 
 
RAMJI LAL SHARMA & ANOTHER 
 
 RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
NAGARATHNA, J. 
The Applicant/Respondent No. 2 herein, i.e., Brijnandan rajesh Sharma has filed the present Miscellaneous Application 
in the disposed of. seeking his 
release from further jail sentence, on the ground of his juvenility 
on the date of the offence, i.e., on 17.01.2002. 
2. 
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the 
Respondents in were two of the 
four accused in the crime registered pursuant to FIR No.8/2002 
dated 17.01.2002 at Police Station AJK Bhind, District Bhinda, 
Madhya Pradesh, for the offences committed under Sections 

302, 307 and 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short “IPC”), 
read with Section 3(2)(v) of the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (in short 
“SC/ST Act”). Pursuant to the trial in Special Case No. 74 of 
2002 before the Ld. Special Judge, Bhind, the Respondents were 
convicted for the offences punishable under Section 302 read 
with Section 34 of the IPC and were awarded life imprisonment 
and fine of Rs. 5000/- vide judgment dated 24.02.2006. 
3. 
Being aggrieved by the judgment of the Trial Court, the 
Respondents filed before the 
High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Gwalior Bench. The High Court 
allowed the appeal preferred by the Respondents vide judgment 
dated 13.12.2018 and thereby set aside the conviction of the 
Respondents. 
4. 
Being aggrieved by the judgment of acquittal passed by the 
High Court, the State preferred this SLP ( before this 
Court. This Court, vide judgment dated 09.03.2022, allowed the 
appeal filed by the State and, resultantly, the Respondents were 
convicted and the sentence imposed by the Trial Court was 
restored. Hence, the Respondents were directed to undergo the 

remaining sentence as per the judgment and order of conviction 
passed by the Trial Court. 
It is in these circumstances that the applicant/respondent 
No.2 has preferred the instant application seeking his release 
from further jail sentence on the ground that he was a minor on 
the date of commission of the offence i.e. 17.01.2002 and has 
already undergone a sentence of more than four years. 
5. 
During the course of submissions, learned counsel for the 
applicant Brijnandan alias Brajesh Sharma submitted that 
although by the judgment of this Court the applicant herein was 
convicted and serving his sentence; thereafter, on becoming 
aware of the law the applicant has filed this application claiming 
juvenility as on the date of the incident, i.e. 17.01.2002. 
6. 
During the course of submissions, it was borne out that 
while the date of birth of the applicant as per the school record 
is 04.10.1984, it is 10.03.1984 as per the Aadhaar Card. We 
note that the date of the commission of offence was on 
17.01.2002. It was therefore submitted at the Bar that the 
applicant’s plea of juvenility be accepted as Applicant was a 
juvenile aged about 17 years and 3 months on the date of the 
commission of offence. 

7. 
Considering the aforesaid inconsistency, this Court, vide 
order dated 16.05.2024, had directed the Sessions Court, 
District Bhind, Madhya Pradesh to conduct an enquiry with 
regard to the claim of juvenility made by the applicant herein 
and to submit a report to this Court in accordance with law. The 
said enquiry has been conducted and by report dated 
16.07.2024, the learned Special Judge (Atrocities), Bhind, M.P. has held that the applicant’s date of birth is 04.10.1984 and 
consequently on the date of the incident, i.e. on 17.01.2002, he 
was 17 years 3 months and 13 days old (though wrongly typed 
as 17.03.2002 and 17 years 5 months and 13 days in the order 
dated 16.07.2024). Therefore, the applicant being a juvenile on 
the date of the commission of the offence is entitled to the 
benefit of the provisions of Juvenile Justice (Care and Protocol of 
Children) Act, 2015 is the submission. Learned counsel for the 
applicant contended that having regard to the fact that the 
learned Sessions Judge has conducted a detailed enquiry by 
examining not only the applicant but also his mother and in-
charge Head Teacher Government Primary School, Deori, Police 
Station Mehgaon, District Bhind, Madhya Pradesh. Finally, it 
was contended that the said report, which is in favour of the 

applicant herein, may be considered and the benefit of juvenility 
be granted to the applicant herein. Consequently, the conviction 
as against the applicant herein may be set aside. 
8., learned counsel for the respondent-State at the 
outset submitted that the plea of juvenility is highly belated 
inasmuch as the incident took place on 17.01.2002 but the 
applicant after being convicted by this Court has subsequently 
filed the application. The long delay in making the claim of 
juvenility must be accounted for at the first instance before 
considering other pleas made by the applicant. He also 
submitted that there is discrepancy in the name of the applicant 
in the special leave petition. The petition notes the applicant’s 
name as Brijnandan alias Brajesh Sharma son of Ramji Lal 
Sharma, whereas in the school documents it is noted as Brijesh 
Kumar and in the Aadhaar Card it is just Brijesh. Therefore, the 
miscellaneous application may be dismissed. 
9. 
By way of reply, learned counsel for the applicant placed 
reliance on a judgment of this Court in Abuzar Hossain vs. 
State of West Bengal, (2012) to contend that the 
claim for juvenility may be made at any stage of the criminal 
proceedings and even after final conviction and sentence being 

imposed. Therefore, the said argument of the learned counsel for 
the respondent-State is without any substance. He further 
submitted that although the name of the applicant as stated by 
the informant and the prosecution may be slightly at variance 
with the name of the applicant in the school records as well as in 
the enquiry that has been conducted on the basis of the 
documents but the fact remains that the applicant is the son of 
Ramji Lal and there being no dispute about the same, a slight 
discrepency in the name would not negate his claim for 
juvenility. 
 
He further submitted that pursuant to the order of this 
Court a comprehensive enquiry has been conducted. The 
applicant, his mother and the head master of the school where 
the applicant was studying have all been examined. There has 
been no cross examination of the said witnesses in the enquiry 
by the respondent-State. Therefore, there can now be no 
objection raised by the State to the said report submitted by the 
learned Sessions Judge. In the circumstances, he contended 
that the report may be taken into consideration and relief may 
be granted to the applicant herein. 

10. We have considered the submissions advanced at the Bar. 
11. It is noted that in respect of the incident dated 17.01.2002, 
the applicant was convicted on 24.02.2006 by the Special 
Sessions Judge, Bhind. Thereafter, he was acquitted by the High 
Court vide judgment dated 13.12.2018. Subsequently, in the 
appeal filed by the respondent-State, this Court by judgment 
dated 09.03.2022, convicted the applicant. It is thereafter that 
the applicant has undergone sentence of four years and three 
months in all. Subsequently, this miscellaneous application was 
filed and this Court vide order dated 16.05.2024 directed that 
the enquiry be conducted. Subsequently, the learned Sessions 
Judge has passed his order on 16.07.2024 and has submitted 
his report to this Court. Pursuant to the order of this Court on 
16.05.2024, the applicant has been released on interim bail. 
Therefore, on perusal of this report, we note that not only the 
applicant herein, but the mother as well as the Head Master of 
school have been examined as PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3 
respectively and as many as five documents were also 
considered by the learned Sessions Judge. It is on consideration 
of the same and having regard to Section 94 of the Juvenile 
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 that the 

learned Sessions Judge found that the applicant was below 
eighteen years of age as on the date of the incident. Although the 
application has been filed subsequent to the conviction ordered 
by this Court, we have regard to the judgment of this Court as 
noted above and in judgment dated 17.01.2004 in Criminal 
Appeal 
No.64/2012, 
titled 
as 
Pramila 
vs. 
State 
of 
Chhattisgarh, that an application for claiming juvenility may be 
made even after the judgment and order of conviction and 
sentence has been granted against a person which has attained 
finality. 
 
Bearing in mind the aforesaid judgments and the report 
submitted by the learned Sessions Judge, pursuant to the 
directions of this Court, we find that the date of birth of the 
applicant has been proved to be 04.10.1984. Consequently, the 
claim of juvenility made by the applicant, who was arrayed as 
accused no.3 is upheld and the conviction as recorded against 
him by this Court is set-aside and he stands acquitted. As he is 
on interim bail, his bail-bonds stand cancelled. 

Consequently, the miscellaneous application is allowed in 
the aforesaid terms...…………………………………..……………J. 

 [B.V. NAGARATHNA] 

….………………………………………………J. 

[NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH]