IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

YOGARANI 

VERSUS 
STATE BY THE INSPECTOR OF POLICE 
 
JUDGMENT 
Aravind Kumar, J. 
 
1. 
The appellant who has been arraigned as accused No.2 has 
challenged the concurrent conviction and sentence ordered under Section 
420 Indian Penal Code (for short ‘IPC’) read with Section 12(2) of the 
Passports Act, 1967 (herein after referred as ‘Passports Act’) and sentenced 
to one-year rigorous imprisonment for each of the offences which are to run 
concurrently. 
 
2. 
The short and long of prosecution story is that appellant had 
wrongfully and illegally facilitated accused No. 1, for obtaining a second 
passport, who was already holding an Indian passport. It was further alleged 

that accused No.1 having deposited his passport with his employer at Dubai 
had applied for second passport in order to have better employment 
opportunities and said application was forwarded/ routed through the 
appellant. The prosecution alleged that second passport which was issued 
and dispatched to Accused No.1 had been returned undelivered to the 
Passport Office Trichy and was kept in safe custody and later it was 
delivered to the appellant by accused No.3 who was in charge of safe 
custody of the passports through accused No.4 who was working as a casual 
labourer in the Passport Office. It was also alleged that appellant had 
demanded payment of Rs.5,000/- from accused No.1 for handing over the 
passport and he having refused resulted in appellant returning the second 
passport to the Passport Office by registered post. 

3. 
Along with the appellant other accused persons namely Mr. J. Joseph 
(Accused No.1), Smt. Sasikala (Accused No.3) - in charge of safe custody 
of passports, Mr. P. Manisekar (Accused No.4) working as a casual labour 
in the Passport Office, Trichy and Mr. S. Raghupathy (Accused No.5) then 
working as an Upper Division Clerk in Passport Office, Trichy who had 
made an endorsement that no passport had earlier been issued in favour of 
Accused No.1 were also tried for the offences punishable under Section120B 
read with Section 420 of IPC, Section 12(1)(b), 12(2) of Passports Act and 
Section 13(2) and Section 13(1)(d) of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 

before the Special Judge for CBI cases, Madurai, which resulted in acquittal 
of all the accused persons in respect of charge of conspiracy. Accused Nos.3 
and 4 were acquitted of all other charges also. The CBI did not prefer any 
appeal against acquittal of accused Nos.3 and 4. However, accused Nos.1 
and 2 were convicted for offences punishable under Section 420 IPC and 
Section 12(1)(b) and Section 12(2) of Passports Act respectively. Accused 
No.5 was convicted under Section 12(2) of Passports Act and Section 13(2) 
and 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. Accused Nos.1, 2 
and 5 preferred criminal appeals challenging their conviction and sentence 
and by impugned common judgment the High Court allowed the appeals 
filed by accused Nos.1 and 5 and acquitted them and said judgment has 
attained finality as it has not been challenged by the CBI. However, the 
appeal filed by accused No.2 came to be dismissed and as such she is before 
this Court. 
 
4. 
We have heard the arguments canvassed on behalf of the appellant 
and the respondent. 

5. 
The thrust of the argument advanced by the learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the appellant is that conviction of appellant alone is 
not sustainable for more than one reason. Firstly, when accused Nos.3 and 4 
who were charged for similar offences had been acquitted of all the charges 
and no appeal having been filed challenging their acquittal; secondly, when 

accused No.1 for whose benefit the alleged second passport had been issued, 
had been acquitted by disbelieving the story of the prosecution namely 
accused No.3 who was in charge of safe custody of passport had illegally 
given the second passport to the appellant through accused No.4. It is further 
contended that both the courts had erroneously convicted the appellant on 
the strength of the testimony of PW-3 though she had not deposed that 
appellant being aware of the details of the previous passport held by accused 
No.1 had knowingly processed the application of accused No.1. It is further 
contended that PW-3 had turned hostile and had not supported the story of 
prosecution and as such conviction could not have been sustained on the 
basis of the testimony of the said witness. He would also further contend 
that the High Court had erroneously evaluated the evidence of PW-16 
(handwriting expert) who had not expressed any definite opinion with regard 
to the hand writing found on the returned postal cover with that of admitted 
hand writing of the appellant and thereby the guilt of the accused was not 
proved or established beyond reasonable doubt. Learned Counsel would also 
elaborate his submissions by contending that the testimony of PW-15 did not 
establish as to when the application of the accused No.1 had been received 
by the appellant and there was no iota of evidence placed by the prosecution 
in this regard including the purported payment of registration fees and 
service charges from appellant by PW-15. Pointing to these gaping holes in 
the prosecution story it is contended that the judgment of conviction and 

sentence imposed on the appellant would not be sustainable as such he has 
prayed for appeal being allowed and appellant being acquitted. 
 
6. 
 On the contrary, learned counsel appearing for the respondent 
would support the case of the prosecution and would contend that both the 
courts on proper evaluation of evidence has arrived at a conclusion that the 
appellant had committed the offence and convicted her, which finding does 
not suffer from any infirmity either in law or on facts calling for interference. 
Hence, learned counsel appearing for the respondent has prayed for 
dismissal of the appeal. 
 
DISCUSSION AND FINDING 
 
7. 
The case of the prosecution as noted herein above is that appellant 
had illegally facilitated the issuance of second passport in favour of accused 
No.1 or in other words accused No.1 who held an Indian Passport had 
deposited the same with his employer at Dubai and in search of better 
employment opportunities had clandestinely applied for second passport 
through the appellant and other accused persons had connived with the 
appellant in procuring second passport to Accused No.1. 

8. 
The conviction of appellant is based on the deposition of three 
witnesses namely PW-3 (Selvi Sakila Begum), PW-15(Mr. Selvaraj), and 
PW-16 (Mr. Ravi). PW-3 is an employee of the proprietorship firm of 

appellant i.e. Kamatchi Travels and in her examination-in-chief she has 
deposed that she was working in the said travels which was offering various 
services including facilitating and obtaining the passports. She has further 
deposed that as the firm in which she was working could not render such 
services directly and the applications of their customers for issuance of 
passports were routed through Eagle Travels run by PW-15. She has also 
deposed that the application of accused No.1 was filled by her. However, she 
had turned hostile and nothing worthwhile was elicited in her cross-
examination except to the extent of her admission that appellant was sitting 
next to her while she was filling the application form of accused No.1. She 
does not depose that appellant had any knowledge of Accused No.1 was 
already possessing a passport or appellant having informed her about the 
passport already held by Accused No.1. 
 
9. 
PW-15 (Mr. Selvaraj) who is the proprietor of Eagle Travels has 
deposed that the application Ex.P-7 for issuance of passport in favour of 
accused No.1 was submitted through his firm and it was received from the 
appellant and appellant had paid the registration fee. PW-16 (Mr. Ravi), the 
Principal Scientific Advisor of Central Forensic Sciences Laboratory who 
has been examined by prosecution to drive home the fact that hand writing 
found on the returned postal cover is that of the appellant, though had 
deposed that there are similarities in the writings has also admitted that it is 

not possible for him to express any opinion in that regard on the basis of 
material on hand. It is pertinent to note at this juncture that prosecution had 
contended that accused No.3 who was in charge of safe custody of returned 
passports in the Passport Office had illegally removed the returned passport 
of accused No.1 from safe custody and had handed over the same to the 
appellant through accused No.4. However, trial court has not accepted this 
version of the prosecution and had acquitted accused Nos.3 and 4. The 
prosecution had failed to place on record any evidence to establish as to the 
how the passport kept in the safe custody had gone missing and in what 
manner it was handed over to the appellant or appellant in turn having 
returned the same back to Passport Office by post. Thus, for lack of direct 
evidence the accused No.3 and 4 have been acquitted. 
 
10. 
The Court cannot convict one accused and acquit the other when 
there is similar or identical evidence pitted against two accused persons. In 
the case of Javed Shaukat Ali Qureshi v State of Gujarat reported in 2023 
INSC 829, this court has held that: 
“15. When there is similar or identical evidence of 
eyewitnesses against two accused by ascribing them the 
same or similar role, the Court cannot convict one accused 
and acquit the other. In such a case, the cases of both the 
accused will be governed by the principle of parity. This 
principle means that the Criminal Court should decide like 
cases alike, and in such cases, the Court cannot make a 
distinction between the two accused, which will amount to 
discrimination.’’ 

In the case on hand, allegations against the appellant being the same as made 
against Accused No.3 & 4, the Courts below could not have convicted the 
Appellant while acquitting the other two. 
 
11. 
There is no direct incriminating information emanating from the 
evidence of the PW-3 against the Appellant. All that she has deposed is that 
she had filled the application form of accused No.1 and Appellant was by 
her side while she was filling the application and she has also deposed that 
appellant would verify and check the application after filling of the 
application. PW-3 was treated as hostile by prosecution as already noted 
herein above and prosecution was not able to elicit any incriminating 
material against the Appellant in her cross examination. As such the 
evidence of PW-3 is not reliable and trustworthy. 
 
12. 
PW-15 has deposed that application of accused No.1 has been 
submitted to his firm by Appellant herein and that the charges were paid by 
Appellant. Apart from the said statement, no documentary evidence was 
produced to show that charges were paid by the Appellant and that the 
Appellant had prior knowledge of accused No.1 having a passport. Evidence 
of this witness does not inspire confidence and even if the same is taken at 
its face value, it would not discharge the burden cast on the prosecution to 
prove the guilt of the Appellant beyond reasonable doubt. 

13. 
Evidence of PW-16 would also not come to the assistance of 
prosecution and, merely because he has deposed there are some similarities 
between the writings found on postal cover i.e. Ex.P8 and that of admitted 
writings of Appellant, by itself would not be sufficient to convict the 
Appellant, since he has admitted that it is not possible for him to express any 
opinion on the rest of the questioned items except with regard to handwriting 
of PW-3. It is pertinent to note that with regard to signature found in 
Ex.P7/passport application, no opinion was given by him as to who signed 
the same. It is crucial to note that evidence of PW-16 is not corroborated by 
any other evidence. This Court in catena of decisions has held that, without 
independent and reliable corroboration, the opinion of the handwriting 
experts cannot be solely relied upon to base the conviction. This Court in 
Padum Kumar v State of Uttar Pradesh reported in (2020) has 
held as under:- 
“14. The learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that 
without independent and reliable corroboration, the opinion of 
the handwriting experts cannot be relied upon to base the 
conviction. In support of his contention, the learned counsel for 
the appellant has placed reliance upon S. Gopal Reddy v. State of 
A.P. [S. Gopal Reddy v. State of A.P., (1996): 1996 
SCC (Cri) 792], wherein the Supreme Court held as under: (SCC 
pp. 614-15, para 28) 
“28. Thus, the evidence of PW 3 is not definite and cannot 
be said to be of a clinching nature to connect the appellant 
with the disputed letters. The evidence of an expert is a 
rather weak type of evidence and the courts do not 
generally consider it as offering “conclusive” proof and 
therefore safe to rely upon the same without seeking 
independent and reliable corroboration. In Magan Bihari 
Lal v. State of Punjab [Magan Bihari Lal v. State of Punjab, 
(1977): 1977 SCC (Cri) 313], while dealing 

with the evidence of a handwriting expert, this Court 
opined: (SCC pp. 213-14, para 7) 
‘7. …we think it would be extremely hazardous to 
condemn the appellant merely on the strength of 
opinion evidence of a handwriting expert. It is now 
well settled that expert opinion must always be 
received with great caution and perhaps none so with 
more caution than the opinion of a handwriting 
expert. There is a profusion of precedential authority 
which holds that it is unsafe to base a conviction 
solely on expert opinion without substantial 
corroboration. This rule has been universally acted 
upon and it has almost become a rule of law. It was 
held by this Court in Ram Chandra v. State of U.P. 
[Ram Chandra v. State of U.P., AIR 1957 SC 381: 
1957 Cri LJ 559] that it is unsafe to treat expert 
handwriting 
opinion 
as 
sufficient 
basis 
for 
conviction, but it may be relied upon when supported 
by other items of internal and external evidence. This 
Court again pointed out in Ishwari Prasad Misra v. 
Mohd. Isa [Ishwari Prasad Misra v. Mohd. Isa, AIR 
1963 SC 1728] that expert evidence of handwriting 
can never be conclusive because it is, after all, 
opinion evidence, and this view was reiterated in 
Shashi Kumar Banerjee v. Subodh Kumar Banerjee 
[Shashi Kumar Banerjee v. Subodh Kumar Banerjee, 
AIR 1964 SC 529] where it was pointed out by this 
Court that an expert's evidence as to handwriting 
being opinion evidence can rarely, if ever, take the 
place of substantive evidence and before acting on 
such evidence, it would be desirable to consider 
whether it is corroborated either by clear direct 
evidence or by circumstantial evidence. This Court 
had again occasion to consider the evidentiary value 
of expert opinion in regard to handwriting in 
Fakhruddin v. State of M.P. [Fakhruddin v. State of 
M.P., AIR 1967 SC 1326: 1967 Cri LJ 1197] and it 
uttered a note of caution pointing out that it would be 
risky to found a conviction solely on the evidence of a 
handwriting expert and before acting upon such 
evidence, the court must always try to see whether it 
is corroborated by other evidence, direct or 
circumstantial.’” 
15. Of course, it is not safe to base the conviction solely on the 
evidence of the handwriting expert. As held by the Supreme Court 
in Magan Bihari Lal v. State of Punjab [Magan Bihari Lal v. State 
of Punjab, (1977): 1977 SCC (Cri) 313] that: (SCC 
p. 213, para 7) 

“7. … expert opinion must always be received with great 
caution … it is unsafe to base a conviction solely on expert 
opinion without substantial corroboration. This rule has 
been universally acted upon and it has almost become a 
rule of law.” 
16. It is fairly well settled that before acting upon the opinion of 
the handwriting expert, prudence requires that the court must see 
that such evidence is corroborated by other evidence either direct 
or circumstantial evidence. In Murari Lal v. State of M.P. [Murari 
Lal v. State of M.P., (1980): 1980 SCC (Cri) 330], 
the Supreme Court held as under: (SCC pp. 708-09, paras 4 and 
6) 
“4. … True, it has occasionally been said on very high 
authority that it would be hazardous to base a conviction 
solely on the opinion of a handwriting expert. But, the 
hazard in accepting the opinion of any expert, handwriting 
expert or any other kind of expert, is not because experts, 
in general, are unreliable witnesses — the quality of 
credibility or incredibility being one which an expert shares 
with all other witnesses — but because all human judgment 
is fallible and an expert may go wrong because of some 
defect of observation, some error of premises or honest 
mistake of conclusion. The more developed and the more 
perfect a science, the less the chance of an incorrect opinion 
and the converse if the science is less developed and 
imperfect. The science of identification of fingerprints has 
attained near perfection and the risk of an incorrect opinion 
is practically non-existent. On the other hand, the science 
of identification of handwriting is not nearly so perfect and 
the risk is, therefore, higher. But that is a far cry from 
doubting the opinion of a handwriting expert as an 
invariable 
rule 
and 
insisting 
upon 
substantial 
corroboration in every case, howsoever the opinion may be 
backed by the soundest of reasons. It is hardly fair to an 
expert to view his opinion with an initial suspicion and to 
treat him as an inferior sort of witness. His opinion has to 
be tested by the acceptability of the reasons given by him. 
An expert deposes and not decides. His duty “is to furnish 
the Judge with the necessary scientific criteria for testing 
the accuracy of his conclusion, so as to enable the Judge to 
form his own independent judgment by the application of 
these criteria to the facts proved in evidence [ Vide Lord 
President Cooper in Davis v. Edinburgh Magistrate, 1953 
SC 34 quoted by Professor Cross in his evidence]. 
5. *** 
6. Expert testimony is made relevant by Section 45 of the 
Evidence Act and where the Court has to form an opinion 
upon a point as to identity of handwriting, the opinion of a 

person “specially skilled” “in questions as to identity of 
handwriting” is expressly made a relevant fact. … So, 
corroboration may not invariably be insisted upon before 
acting on the opinion of an handwriting expert and there 
need be no initial suspicion. But, on the facts of a particular 
case, a court may require corroboration of a varying 
degree. There can be no hard-and-fast rule, but nothing will 
justify the rejection of the opinion of an expert supported by 
unchallenged reasons on the sole ground that it is not 
corroborated. The approach of a court while dealing with 
the opinion of a handwriting expert should be to proceed 
cautiously, probe the reasons for the opinion, consider all 
other relevant evidence and decide finally to accept or 
reject it.” 
 
14. 
Appellant has also been charged for the offence punishable under 
Section 12(2) of the Passports Act, 1967 which reads as under: 
“12. Offences and penalties.— (1) Whoever— 
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 3; or 
(b) knowingly furnishes any false information or 
suppresses any material information with a view to 
obtaining a passport or travel document under this 
Act or without lawful authority alters or attempts to 
alter or causes to alter the entries made in a passport 
or travel document; or 
(c) fails to produce for inspection his passport or travel 
document (whether issued under this Act or not) when 
called upon to do so by the prescribed authority; or 
(d) knowingly uses a passport or travel document 
issued to another person; or 
(e) knowingly allows another person to use a passport 
or travel document issued to him; 
 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to 
five thousand rupees or with both. 
(1A) xxxxxxx 
 (2) Whoever abets any offence punishable under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) shall, if the act 
abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment, 

be punishable with the punishment provided in that 
sub-section for that offence.” 
 
It is needless to state that burden is cast on the prosecution to prove that the 
appellant had knowingly furnished false information or supressing known 
material information with the intent of securing a passport or travel 
document to a person and thereby had abetted in the commission of offence 
punishable under Section 12(1) and thereby punishable under Section 12(2) 
of the Passports Act. 
 
15. 
In the case on hand the prosecution failed to place any evidence to 
prove that the appellant had prior information of accused No.1 was already 
possessing a passport or knowingly had furnished false information to the 
passport authorities namely after knowing that accused No.1 had possessed 
or holding a passport was applying for second passport or having known the 
fact of accused No.1 possessing the passport was applying for the second 
passport and thereby there has been suppression of material information. In 
other words, the prosecution had failed to place on record any evidence to 
prove that appellant had any previous knowledge of accused No.1 was 
already possessing a passport. In the absence of any cogent evidence placed 
in this regard and accused Nos. 1 and 3 to 5 having been acquitted of the 
offences alleged, the conviction and order of sentence imposed against the 
appellant alone cannot be sustained or in other words it has to be held that 

prosecution had failed to prove the guilt of the appellant beyond reasonable 
doubt. 
 
16. 
For the reasons afore-stated the appeal succeeds and appellant-
accused No.2 is acquitted of the offences alleged against her. The judgment 
of the Trial Court passed in C.C. No.5 of 2007 as affirmed in C.A.(Md) 
No.203 of 2008 by the High Court of Madras at Madurai Bench dated 
18.08.2011 are hereby set aside. 
 
17. 
The bail bonds of the appellant stands cancelled. The appeal stands 
allowed in the above terms. 

……………………………….J. 
(Sanjay Kumar).………………………………J. 
(Aravind Kumar) 
 
New Delhi 
September 23, 2024