IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. OF 2024 
[ SLP(Crl.) Nos. 6250-6251 of 2024] 

SUNIL. 

VERSUS 
 
STATE NCT OF DELHI 

JUDGMENT 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 

1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeals challenge the judgment and order 
dated 26th June 2023, passed by the Division Bench of the 
High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in, wherein the Division Bench dismissed 
the appeals filed by the appellants Sunil onu (Accused 
No.1) and Nitin evender (Accused No.4). By the said 
judgment and order, the High Court upheld the judgment 
and order dated 25th October 2017 rendered by the 
Additional Sessions Judge, North District, Rohini, Delhi 

(hereinafter referred to as “the trial court”) in Sessions Case 
No. 139 of 2017 convicting the appellants for the offences 
punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as “IPC”). 
The High Court also upheld the order of sentence dated 6th 
November 2017 vide which the trial court had sentenced 
them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life along with 
fine of Rs. 10,000/- each, in default whereof simple 
imprisonment for 1 year for the offence punishable under 
Section 302 read with Section 34 of IPC. 
3. 
Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present appeals 
are as under: 
3.1 The case of the prosecution is that Rahul (PW-1) and 
Sachin (deceased) had pre-existing disputes with one of the 
present appellants Sunil onu (Accused No.1) and his 
brother Satish hhotu (Accused No. 2). On 28th November 
2016, Rahul (PW-1) along with Sachin (deceased) was 
walking on the road and appellant Sunil onu (Accused 
No.1), Satish hhotu (Accused No.2), Gaurav (Accused No. 
3) and the other appellant Nitin evender (Accused No.4) 
were standing there. At about 09:15 PM, they started 

abusing Rahul (PW-1) and Sachin (deceased) and after a 
verbal altercation, all the four accused caught hold of them 
and started attacking them with knives and dandas. Sachin 
(deceased) tried to run, and the present appellants chased 
him while being armed with a knife. They caught him and 
inflicted knife blows. Thereafter, Shivani (PW-2) (Aunt of 
Rahul/PW-1) while trying to save Rahul (PW-1), saw a police 
official namely ASI Subhash Chandra (PW-15) passing by 
and after stopping him took him to the place of the incident. 
On seeing them, the accused persons ran away. 
3.2 The police were called, and two separate PCR vans took 
Rahul (PW-1) and Sachin (deceased) to the hospital. 
Thereafter, SI Suresh (PW-19) arrived at the spot. Rahul (PW-
1) could not be found, and Sachin (deceased) was found unfit 
to give a statement. A search was conducted for Rahul (PW-1) 
but he could not be found. Thereafter, Rahul (PW-1) himself 
arrived at the Police Station on 29th November 2016 at about 
11:45 PM and his statement was recorded. Subsequently, a 
First Information Report (hereinafter referred to as “FIR”) No. 
667 of 2016 was registered at P.S. Jahangir Puri, District 
North West, Delhi on 30th November 2016 against three out 

of the four accused persons for offences punishable under 
Section 307 read with Section 34 of IPC based on the written 
statement of Rahul (PW-1) narrating the whole incident from 
his point of view. 
3.3 The search for the accused persons began and all the 
four accused were found behind PRAYAS Home, EE Block, 
Jahangir Puri. All four were arrested and their disclosure 
statements were recorded. 
3.4 On 2nd December 2016, information was received that 
Sachin (deceased) had died during treatment and the charge 
for offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 
34 of IPC was added. 
3.5 The post-mortem of Sachin (deceased) was conducted 
by Dr. Arun Kumar (PW-8), and as per the post-mortem 
report the cause of death was opined to be septicemic shock 
consequent upon compartment syndrome and infection of 
left lower limb as a result of ante mortem injury to left thigh 
produced by pointed sharp edged object. 
3.6 The 
medical 
examination 
of 
Rahul 
(PW-1) 
was 
conducted on 30th November 2016 by Dr. Avinash Tripathi 

(PW-9) and the existence of abrasions were found and it was 
opined that Rahul had sustained simple injuries. 
3.7 On completion of the investigation, charge-sheet was 
filed by the Investigating Officer Inspector Ajay Kumar (PW-
23). Charges were framed against the accused persons Satish 
hhotu and Gaurav Kumar for offences punishable under 
Section 308 read with Section 34 of IPC and the present 
appellants were charged for offences punishable under 
Section 302 read with Section 34 of IPC. 
3.8 In order to substantiate its charges levelled against the 
accused persons, the prosecution examined 23 witnesses 
and on the other hand, to rebut the case of the prosecution, 
the defense examined 3 witnesses. 
3.9 After the evidence of the prosecution was completed, 
one of the appellants Sunil onu (Accused No.1) gave his 
statement under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as “Cr.P.C.”) and 
denied all charges. He further stated that the present FIR 
was registered as a counterblast to an earlier FIR (No. 664 of 
2016 lodged at P.S. Jahangir Puri, District North West, Delhi) 
for offences punishable under Section 307 read with Section 

34 of IPC registered by appellant Sunil onu (Accused 
No.1) himself and where Rahul (PW-1) is an accused person. 
It was further stated that Shivani (PW-2) is an interested 
witness being the aunt of Rahul and that she is trying to save 
him from the earlier FIR by helping him take revenge through 
the present FIR. 
3.10 At the conclusion of the trial, the trial court convicted 
the present appellants (Accused No. 1 and 4) for offences 
punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 of IPC 
and convicted Satish hhotu (Accused No. 2) and Gaurav 
Kumar (Accused No. 3) for offences punishable under Section 
323 read with Section 34 of IPC. The trial court vide a 
separate order dated 6th November 2017 sentenced the 
present appellants to rigorous imprisonment for life with fine 
of Rs. 10,000/- each in default to undergo further simple 
imprisonment for 1 year for the offences punishable under 
Section 302 read with Section 34 of IPC. 
3.11 Being 
aggrieved 
thereby, 
the 
present 
appellants 
preferred criminal appeals before the High Court challenging 
the orders of conviction and sentence awarded by the trial 
court. The High Court vide the common impugned judgment 

and order dismissed the appeals and affirmed the conviction 
and sentence awarded by the trial court. 
3.12 Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeals. 
4. 
We have heard Shri Rishi Malhotra, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants and Shri 
Prashant Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondent-State. 
5. 
Shri Malhotra, learned Senior Counsel appearing on 
behalf of the appellants submitted that the learned trial court 
has erred in convicting the appellants and the High Court 
has also erred in affirming the said conviction. Shri Malhotra 
submitted that there is an inordinate delay in lodging the FIR 
which is not explained by the prosecution. It is submitted 
that although Rahul (PW-1) was present with the deceased 
Sachin at the time of the occurrence, he has lodged the FIR 
only on the next day. It is submitted that there are material 
contradictions in the testimony of Rahul (PW-1). The learned 
Senior Counsel further submitted that insofar as Shivani 
(PW-2) is concerned, she is an interested witness. It is 
submitted that Shivani (PW-2), in her cross-examination, has 
admitted that she did not tell the police in her statement 

about the accused persons causing injuries to deceased 
Sachin and Rahul (PW-1). Shri Malhotra further submitted 
that with respect to the same incident, a cross FIR being No. 
664/2016 was already registered by the appellant Sunil onu on 29th November 2016 which was much prior in point 
of time. It is submitted that, in the said incident, both the 
appellants Sunil onu and Nitin evender had received 
severe injuries. It is submitted that both the courts below 
have failed to take into consideration that the prosecution 
has failed to explain the injuries sustained by the appellants. 
The learned Senior Counsel therefore submitted that the 
order of conviction as recorded by the trial court and affirmed 
by the High Court is not sustainable in law. 
6. 
In the alternative, Shri Malhotra submitted that since 
the prosecution has failed to explain the injuries sustained 
by the appellants, the prosecution has suppressed the real 
genesis of the incident. It is therefore submitted that the 
conviction under Section 302 of the IPC would not be 
sustainable and the same would be at the most under Part-I 
or II of Section 304 of IPC. 

7. 
Shri Prashant Singh, learned counsel appearing on 
behalf of the respondent-State, on the contrary, submitted 
that the trial court and the High Court have concurrently, 
upon correct appreciation of evidence, found that the 
prosecution has proved the case beyond reasonable doubt 
and as such, the judgment and order of conviction and 
sentence warrants no interference. 
8. 
With the assistance of the learned counsel for the 
parties, we have perused the materials placed on record. 
9. 
From the evidence of Dr. Arun Kumar (PW-8) who 
conducted the post-mortem as well as the evidence of Rahul 
(PW-1) and Shivani (PW-2), we find that the prosecution has 
proved beyond reasonable doubt that the injuries which were 
sustained by deceased Sachin were caused by the appellants 
and injury No. 13 was sufficient to cause death of deceased 
Sachin. As such, we find that no interference would be 
warranted with the finding of the trial court and the High 
Court that the appellants have caused homicidal death of 
deceased Sachin. 
10. The next question that arises for consideration is as to 
whether the accused can be convicted for the offence 

punishable under Section 302 of IPC or in the facts and 
circumstance of the case, the conviction needs to be altered 
to a lesser offence. 
11. According to Rahul (PW-1), on the date of the incident 
i.e. 28th November 2016 at around 8:45-9:00 PM, when he 
was talking to Shivani (PW-2), the accused persons came 
there and started arguing with deceased Sachin. He stated 
that accused Gaurav akra started abusing deceased 
Sachin and when they both (Rahul (PW-1) and deceased 
Sachin) objected to this, the accused persons caught hold of 
deceased Sachin. When the said witness attempted to save 
deceased Sachin, the accused persons hit him with danda on 
his head. Then, accused Nitin evender pulled out a knife 
from his possession. On seeing this, deceased Sachin started 
running to save himself. However, accused persons caught 
deceased Sachin at the pulia of gandanala at Block-EE and 
started giving knife blows to him. At that time, a police 
official was passing from the street on motor-cycle and 
Shivani (PW-2) stood before his motor-cycle and stopped him. 
Shivani (PW-2) brought the police official to the place where 
deceased Sachin was being beaten up. On seeing the said 

police official, all the four accused ran away. Shivani (PW-2) 
made calls on No. 100 and after some time, a PCR van 
reached the spot. Thereafter, deceased Sachin and Rahul 
(PW-1) were taken to the hospital. 
12. It is to be noted that, though the incident was alleged to 
have taken place on the night of 28th November 2016, the FIR 
was lodged on 30th November 2016 i.e. after more than 24 
hours. Though Rahul (PW-1) has tried to give an explanation 
that after he had been taken to BJRM Hospital, he left the 
said hospital in order to search for his friend deceased 
Sachin and thereafter he fell unconscious; the said 
explanation does not appear to be plausible inasmuch as the 
record would show that deceased Sachin had already been 
taken to BJRM Hospital. If that be so, then the conduct of 
Rahul (PW-1) in leaving the BJRM Hospital in search of 
deceased Sachin appears to be strange. It can further be 
seen that, though in the statement recorded under Section 
161 Cr.P.C., Rahul (PW-1) admitted that he and deceased 
Sachin had consumed liquor, he has denied the same in his 
cross-examination. Rahul (PW-1) has admitted that there is 
one case registered against him for the offence punishable 

under Section 307 of IPC with respect to the present 
incident. It is further to be noted that though in his 
examination-in-chief, Rahul (PW-1) tried to give explanation 
that he could not lodge the FIR expeditiously since he fell 
unconscious, he admitted in his cross-examination that he 
regained consciousness in the morning of the next day. Then 
the question is what prevented him from lodging the FIR till 
21:15 hours. Shivani (PW-2) also deposed almost to the same 
effect. There are various contradictions in her deposition. She 
also admitted that Rahul (PW-1) was also arrested by the 
police and that she gave her statement after Rahul (PW-1) 
was arrested by the police. 
13. In the FIR lodged at the instance of appellant Sunil onu, it is stated that Rahul (PW-1) and deceased Sachin 
had come to the shop of Satish in a heavily drunken 
condition, and they had tried to assault the appellants. The 
medical certificates of appellants Sunil onu and Nitin evender would show that they had sustained the following 
injuries: 

“Injuries sustained by appellant Sunil onu: 
1) Pain and bleeding from Right side of parietal 
region. 
2) Abrasions on middle finger of the right 
hand. 
 
Injuries 
sustained 
by 
appellant 
Nitin 
evender 
1) Incised 
contused 
lacerated 
wound 
on 
parietal region of size 3 x 1 x 0.5 cm. 
2) Abrasion over left side of abdomen of size 3 
x 0.5 cm.” 
 
14. Undisputedly, the said injuries are not explained by the 
prosecution. 
15. The defence of the accused persons is specific that, it is 
the deceased Sachin and Rahul (PW-1) had come in a 
drunken condition at the shop of Satish and they started 
abusing and assaulting the appellants. The evidence of SI 
Suresh, Investigating Officer (PW-19) would reveal that when 
he visited the BJRM Hospital on 28th November 2016, he 
found not only deceased Sachin but also found all the 
accused persons admitted in the said hospital. He has also 
admitted that he did not find Rahul (PW-1) in the said 
hospital. SI Rakesh Kumar (DW-3), who is an IO in FIR No. 
664/2016 which was registered at the instance of appellant 

Sunil onu, also deposed that all the accused persons 
were medically examined and had received injuries which 
were exhibited vide Ex.DW-3/A to Ex.DW-3/D. It can thus 
clearly be seen that the defence of the appellants is a 
possible defence. There is a possibility of deceased Sachin 
and Rahul (PW-1) coming to the shop of Satish and a fight 
taking place between the two groups. There is nothing on 
record to establish that there was any pre-meditation. As 
such, we find that the possibility of the offence being 
committed by the appellants without pre-meditation in a 
sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel 
cannot be ruled out. There is nothing on record to show that 
the appellants have taken undue advantage or acted in a 
cruel or unusual manner. 
16. In that view of the matter, we are of the considered 
opinion that the appellants are entitled to the benefit of 
doubt. We find that the present case would be covered under 
Part-I of Section 304 of IPC and as such, the conviction 
under Section 302 of IPC would not be tenable. 

17. The appellants have undergone the sentence of more 
than 8 years without remission. We are therefore inclined to 
partly allow the appeals. 
18. In the result, we pass the following order: 

The appeals are partly allowed; 

The conviction of the appellants under Section 302 of 
IPC is altered to Part-I of Section 304 of IPC; 
(iii) The appellants are sentenced to the period already 
undergone and are directed to be released forthwith if 
not required in any other case. 
19. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.