1 of 16 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

BALJINDER SINGH...APPELLANTS 

VERSUS 
 
STATE OF PUNJAB...RESPONDENT 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
DIPANKAR DATTA, J. 
 
THE APPEAL 
1. 
This is an appeal, by special leave, by 4 (four) appellants. They call in 
question the judgment and order dated 04th May, 20111 passed by the High 
Court of Judicature at Punjab and Haryana2 dismissing a criminal appeal3 
under section 374(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19734. Such appeal 
was preferred by the appellants, arraigned as “A-1”, “A-2”, “A-3” and “A-4” 
in the trial, and a co-accused (“A-5”). The judgment of conviction and the 
 
1 impugned judgment, hereafter 
2 High Court, hereafter 

4 Cr. PC, hereafter 

 2 of 16 
 
order of sentence dated 04th August, 2001, passed by the Additional 
Sessions Judge, Punjab5 in a sessions case6 registered against A-1, A-2, A-
3, A-4 and A-5 was majorly upheld. While A-5 was acquitted, conviction of 
A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 and the sentence imposed upon them were 
maintained by the High Court. The Trial Court convicted A-4 under sections 
148, 302, 307 of the Indian Penal Code7 and section 27 of the Arms Act, 
while A-1, A-2 and A-3 as well as A-5 were convicted under sections 148, 
302, 307 IPC read with section 34 IPC. All the accused were sentenced to 
life in prison. 
2. 
The appeal was heard in the presence of learned advocates for the parties 
on 09th May, 2024. It was submitted in course of such hearing that A-4 
might have died during pendency of the appeal and that A-1 and A-3 were 
juveniles as on the date of the offence, i.e., 12th December, 1997. Learned 
advocate for the respondent - State of Punjab was directed to obtain 
appropriate instructions. He confirmed on 23rd July, 2024 that A-4 was 
indeed no more, having breathed his last on 16th February, 2019; hence, it 
was recorded by an order passed on that date that the appeal at the 
instance of A-4 stands abated. Insofar as the claim of juvenility raised by 
A-1 and A-3 is concerned, the same was overruled by an order passed by 
us on 23rd July, 2024 itself. 
 
BRIEF RESUME OF FACTS 
3. 
The facts, leading to the present appeal, may be summarised as follows: 
 
5 Trial Court, hereafter 
6 Sessions Case No. 121 of 1998 
7 IPC, hereafter 

 3 of 16 
 
a) The prosecution case was set in motion when P.W.8 - Inspector Gurbhinder 
Singh/Investigating Officer, SHO, Police Station Sadar, Taran Tarn, upon 
receiving information on 12th December, 1997 from P.W.2 – Dr. Brij Mohan 
of the Civil Hospital, Taran Tarn - reached the hospital and recorded the 
statement of P.W. 3 – victim Puran Singh hola. P.W.3 recounted that on 
the morning of 12th December, 1997 around 9:00 AM, he was standing 
outside his residence near the chowk, when A-1, son of A-4, came riding a 
scooter from the direction of the gurudwara and bumped into P.W. 3, 
causing minor injuries to little and the ring fingers of P.W. 3’s right hand. In 
response, P.W. 3 slapped A-1, who in return hurled pejoratives at P.W. 3. 
Indignantly, P.W. 3 again slapped A-1. Upon hearing the commotion, P.W. 4 
– victim Jit Singh, deceased victim Karam Singh8, deceased victim Laddi9 
and P.W. 5 – victim Jagga agjit Singh intervened and separated P.W. 3 
and A-1. b) Within 15 minutes of such altercation, A-1, A-2 and A-3 (all sons of A-4), 
armed with dangs and sofas, accompanied by A-4 (who wielded a 12 bore 
double-barrel gun) and A-5 (armed with a dang) assembled on the street 
and while raising exhortations (lalkaras) attacked P.W. 3, P.W. 4, P.W. 5, and 
the deceased nos. 1 and 210. A-1, A-2 and A-3 began brick batting and A-
4, with an intention to kill, fired five shots at the victims, resulting in minor 
injury to P.W. 3 and serious injuries to P.W.4, P.W. 5 and the victims. 
 
8 deceased no.1, hereafter 
9 deceased no.2, hereafter 
10 victims, hereafter when referred to collectively 

 4 of 16 
 
c) First Information Report11 was registered on 12th December, 1997 at about 
12:45 PM, for the offences under sections 307 and 148, IPC read with 
section 149, IPC and section 25 and 27 of the Arms Act. Deceased no. 1 
breathed his last on 13th December, 1997 and consequently offence under 
section 302, IPC was added to the said FIR. Deceased no.2 succumbed to 
the gunshot injury suffered by him on 10th January, 1998. d) Charges were framed against A-4 under sections 148, 302, IPC [on two (2) 
counts], sections 307 [on three (3) counts] and 324, IPC; and against A-1, 
A-2, A-3 and A-5 under sections 148, 302 read with 149 [on two (2) counts], 
307 read with 149 [on three (3) counts] and 324 read with 149, IPC. e) The Trial Court vide judgment and order dated 04th August, 2001, after 
finding the appellants and A-5 guilty, convicted them for the offences and 
sentenced them as enumerated in paragraph 1 of this judgment. f) The outcome of the appeal carried from the aforesaid conviction and 
sentence has also been noticed above. 
 
SUBMISSIONS 
4. 
The argument advanced by learned counsel for the appellants is primarily 
directed against what he contended to be an apparent error of judgment in 
convicting the appellants. According to him, the following points deserve 
deliberation: 
a) firstly, the High Court did not dwell upon the dissimilitude between common 
object and common intention, while transmuting appellants’ conviction 
 
11 FIR, hereafter 

 5 of 16 
 
under section 302 IPC read with section 149 IPC to section 302 IPC read 
with section 34 IPC. b) secondly, the absence of brick bat injuries on the bodies of the P.W.3, P.W.4, 
P.W.5 and the victims, substantiate that A-1, A-2 and A-3 were not present 
at the crime scene. c) thirdly, in criminal cases, it is the propensity of a human being to undermine 
his role while exaggerating the role of the assailant. d) fourthly, Bir Singh, uncle of P.W.3, was inimical towards the appellants as 
an FIR was registered against his son by the daughter of A-4. e) fifthly, the case of exceeding the right of private defence can be made 
against A-4 for firing in retaliation; when he was chased and attacked by 
victims and no case against the other appellants has been made out. Names 
of A-1, A-2, and A-3 were included in the FIR with an intention to implicate 
all the members of the family. f) sixthly, the genesis of the entire crime, that is the injury caused on the 
fingers of P.W.3 by the collision between P.W.3 and A-1, was not found on 
the fingers of P.W.3; hence, deposition by P.W.3, P.W.4 and P.W.5 appears 
incredulous. g) finally, no independent witness has been examined, despite the crime 
scene, as enumerated by prosecution, being adjoined by several shops and 
residential houses. 
5. 
Learned counsel for the appellants, called into question “the legality of the 
impugned order”, on merits, by underlining inconsistencies in deposition(s) 
and has, therefore, prayed for the acquittal of the appellants by setting 

 6 of 16 
 
aside the judgment of conviction and order of sentence passed by the Trial 
Court, as affirmed by the High Court. 
6., learned counsel for the respondent, by denying the grounds 
taken by appellants in the instant appeal, supported the judgment of 
conviction and order of sentence passed by the Trial Court, which has been 
affirmed by the High Court. 
ANALYSIS 
7. 
We have heard the parties and considered the evidence led by them before 
the Trial Court. We have also read the trial and appellate judgment and 
order. 
8. 
The sole issue that we are tasked to decide is, whether the conviction of A-
1, A-2 and A-3 and the sentence imposed on them warrant interdiction. 
9. 
Prosecution in order to substantiate its case adduced evidence, both ocular 
and documentary, before the Trial Court. The genesis of the crime is the 
collision of the scooter driven by A-1 with P.W.3, whereupon P.W.3 slapped 
A-1 followed by abuses hurled at P.W. 3 by A-1 and retaliation of P.W.3 by 
again slapping A-1. A-1 was 18 years of age while P.W. 3 was double his 
age. An elderly man slapping a young boy was considered credible by the 
High Court. This incident was witnessed by P.W.3, P.W.4, P.W.5 and the 
victims, who were already present on the spot; and, this has been proved 
by the unanimous and coherent ocular versions, as narrated by P.W.3, P.W.4 
and P.W.5 in their depositions. 
10. The learned counsel for the appellants, however, questioned the integrity of 
the genesis of the case by highlighting the absence of any reference to a 

 7 of 16 
 
finger injury in the medical records of P.W.3. Additionally, the learned 
counsel for the appellants contended that during cross-examination, P.W.4 
and P.W.5 had testified that blood was oozing from P.W.3's fingers. This 
argument aimed to challenge the reliability of the ocular testimonies of 
P.W.3, P.W.4, and P.W.5. 
11. In the context of the case, it is pertinent to emphasize that the incident 
involving A-1’s scooter bumping into P.W.3, and the subsequent altercation 
in which P.W.3 slapped A-1, is of greater significance for establishing motive 
than the minor finger injury sustained by P.W.3. This sequence of events 
has been unequivocally testified to by P.W.3, P.W.4, and P.W.5. 
Furthermore, P.W.3 has testified that the injury to the finger was minor, 
which may account for the absence of any mention of this injury in P.W.3’s 
medical records. 
12. Also, it is worth indicating that P.W.3, P.W.4, and P.W.5 are “injured 
witnesses” or “injured eye-witnesses” in this case. The sworn testimonies 
provided by injured witnesses generally carry significant evidentiary weight. 
Such testimonies cannot be dismissed as unreliable unless there are pellucid 
and substantial discrepancies or contradictions that undermine their 
credibility. If there is any exaggeration in the deposition that is immaterial 
to the case, such exaggeration should be disregarded; however, it does not 
warrant the rejection of the entire evidence. Therefore, the suspicion raised 
by the appellants regarding the genesis of the case is rendered unfounded. 

 8 of 16 
 
13. The abovementioned conclusion stands fortified with reference to paragraph 
26 of the decision of this Court in Balu Sudam Khalde and Anr. vs. State 
of Maharashtra12. The relevant passage is reproduced as under: 
“26. When the evidence of an injured eye-witness is to be 
appreciated, the under-noted legal principles enunciated by the 
Courts are required to be kept in mind: 
(a) The presence of an injured eye-witness at the time and place 
of the occurrence cannot be doubted unless there are material 
contradictions in his deposition. 
(b) Unless, it is otherwise established by the evidence, it must 
be believed that an injured witness would not allow the real 
culprits to escape and falsely implicate the accused. 
(c) The evidence of injured witness has greater evidentiary 
value and unless compelling reasons exist, their statements are 
not to be discarded lightly. 
(d) The evidence of injured witness cannot be doubted on 
account of some embellishment in natural conduct or minor 
contradictions. 
(e) If there be any exaggeration or immaterial embellishments 
in the evidence of an injured witness, then such contradiction, 
exaggeration or embellishment should be discarded from the 
evidence of injured, but not the whole evidence. 
(f) The broad substratum of the prosecution version must be 
taken into consideration and discrepancies which normally creep 
due to loss of memory with passage of time should be 
discarded.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
14. Furthermore, A-1 returned to the street within 15 minutes, accompanied by 
A-2, A-3, and A-4, all armed with various weapons, viz. a 12 bore double-
barrel gun, dangs, and lathis. They launched an attack on the victims, 
wherein A-1, A-2, A-3 threw brick bats and A-4 opened fire at the victims. 
This account is corroborated by testimonies of P.W.3, P.W.4 and P.W.5, which 
also stood the test of cross-examination and no glaring discrepancies can 
be found. P.W.8 (I.O.) deposed that three (3) empties of 12 (twelve) bore 
double barrel gun were recovered from the crime spot, and the gun was 

 9 of 16 
 
recovered with 2 (two) live cartridges after the disclosure statement was 
made by A-4. Additionally, the serious/fatal injuries sustained by the victims 
have been substantiated by medico-legal evidence provided by witnesses 
from the medical field, who have also testified under oath. The severe 
nature of the attack by A-4, assisted by A-1, A-2 and A-3, inflicting 
serious/fatal injuries upon the victims leads to the inference that the 
appellants came with an intention to kill in retaliation of a previous 
altercation. Hence, the prosecution version is indeed reliable. 
15., the learned counsel for the appellants contended that A-4 was 
alone at the time of the alleged offence. He asserted that A-4 used to read 
sehra in weddings and en route to the Sarpanch’s son’s wedding, where he 
was supposed to read sehra, he was ridiculed by P.W.3, P.W.4, P.W.5, and 
the victims for carrying what they claimed was a dummy gun. In response 
to the mockery, A-4 verbally retorted, which led to an attack on him with 
brickbats. According to the appellants, A-4 fired in self-defence during this 
confrontation. They further claim that A-4, along with A-1, A-2, and A-3, 
have been falsely implicated in this case as retaliation for an FIR filed by A-
4’s daughter against the son of Bir Singh, who is the uncle of P.W.1. 
However, P.W1, P.W.2 and P.W.3 in unison have deposed that they were 
oblivious of the case registered against the son of Bir Singh by the daughter 
of A-4. 
16. While the depositions of D.W.1 and P.W.5 establish that A-4’s daughter filed 
an FIR against the son of Bir Singh and that A-4 was known for reading 
sehra at weddings, the burden of proving an assertion that A-4 was on his 
way to the Sarpanch’s son's wedding lay upon A-4, which would have been 

 10 of 16 
 
more credibly substantiated by the testimony of the Sarpanch himself, as 
rightly noted in the High Court’s judgment. In the absence of testimonies 
from the Sarpanch and the daughter of A-4, the appellants' claim of being 
falsely implicated remains unsubstantiated and, therefore, deemed 
unreliable. 
17. Regarding the question of common intention, capable of being formed 
within 15 minutes’, profitable reference may be made to paragraph 26 of 
the decision of this Court in Krishnamurthy alias Gunodu and Ors. vs. 
State of Karnataka13. Paragraph 26 being relevant is quoted hereunder: 
“26. Section 34 IPC makes a co-perpetrator, who had 
participated in the offence, equally liable on the principle of joint 
liability. For Section 34 to apply there should be common 
intention between the co-perpetrators, which means that there 
should be community of purpose and common design or 
prearranged plan. However, this does not mean that co-
perpetrators should have engaged in any discussion, agreement 
or valuation. For Section 34 to apply, it is not necessary that the 
plan should be prearranged or hatched for a considerable time 
before the criminal act is performed. Common intention can be 
formed just a minute before the actual act happens. Common 
intention is necessarily a psychological fact as it requires prior 
meeting of minds. In such cases, direct evidence normally will 
not be available and in most cases, whether or not there exists 
a common intention has to be determined by drawing inference 
from the facts proved. This requires an inquiry into the 
antecedents, conduct of the co-participants or perpetrators at 
the time and after the occurrence. The manner in which the 
accused arrived, mounted the attack, nature and type of injuries 
inflicted, the weapon used, conduct or acts of the co-
assailants/perpetrators, 
object 
and 
purpose 
behind 
the 
occurrence or the attack, etc. are all relevant facts from which 
inference has to be drawn to arrive at a conclusion whether or 
not the ingredients of Section 34 IPC are satisfied. We must 
remember that Section 34 IPC comes into operation against the 
co-perpetrators because they have not committed the principal 
or main act, which is undertaken/performed or is attributed to 
the main culprit or perpetrator. Where an accused is the main 
or final perpetrator, resort to Section 34 IPC is not necessary as 
 
13 (2022) 

 11 of 16 
 
the said perpetrator is himself individually liable for having 
caused the injury/offence. A person is liable for his own acts. 
Section 34 or the principle of common intention is invoked to 
implicate and fasten joint liability on other co-participants.” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
18. Section 34, IPC underlines that when a criminal act is done by two or more 
persons in furtherance of common intention, each of them is liable for the 
act done as if it were done by him alone. 
19. We are of the view that there cannot be a fixed timeframe for formation of 
common intention. It is not essential for the perpetrators to have had prior 
meetings to conspire or make preparations for the crime. Common intention 
to commit murder can arise even moments before the commission of the 
act. Since common intention is a mental state of the perpetrators, it is 
inherently challenging to substantiate directly. Instead, it can be inferred 
from the conduct of the perpetrators immediately before, during, and after 
the commission of the act. 
20. In the present case, the appellants, who are related by blood, arrived at the 
crime scene armed with a 12 bore double-barrel gun, dangs, and lathis 
within 15 minutes of the initial altercation, and subsequently attacked 
P.W.3, P.W.4, P.W.5, and the victims. During this attack, A-4, the father of 
A-1, raged by the incident of P.W.3 slapping his adult son A-1 and the 
pursuant altercation, fired with his gun at P.W.3, P.W.4, P.W.5 and the 
victims. Thereafter, all the appellants fled together carrying their weapons. 
In view of such conduct of the appellants as mentioned above and in the 
light of interpretation of Section 34, IPC in Krishnamurthy alias Gunodu 
(supra), it is evident that the appellants acted with a common intention to 
kill, seeking to avenge the slapping incident. 

 12 of 16 
 
21. Be that as it may, the determination of common intention or common object 
should primarily be within the domain of the trial courts, and at the most 
the high courts. It should not be the role of this Court to directly adjudicate 
issues of common intention and common object. This Court has, in a catena 
of decisions, elaborated on the differences between section 149 and section 
34, IPC; the overlapping nature of section 149 and section 34, IPC; and 
when can the offence under section 302 read with section 149, IPC be 
changed to section 302 read with section 34, IPC. Such decisions do provide 
suitable guidance for the lower courts to draw from, to reach their 
conclusions. 
22. In this connection, we may refer to paragraph 14 of the decision of this 
Court in Chittarmal vs. State of Rajasthan14. The relevant excerpt from 
such decision reads: 
“14. It is well settled by a catena of decisions that Section 34 
as well as Section 149 deal with liability for constructive 
criminality i.e. vicarious liability of a person for acts of others. 
Both the sections deal with combinations of persons who 
become punishable as sharers in an offence. Thus, they have a 
certain resemblance and may to some extent overlap. But a 
clear distinction is made out between common intention and 
common object in that common intention denotes action 
concert and necessarily postulates the existence of a 
prearranged plan implying a prior meeting of the minds, while 
common object does not necessarily require proof of prior 
meeting of minds or preconcert. Though there is a substantial 
difference between the two sections, they also to some extent 
overlap and it is a question to be determined on the facts of 
each case whether the charge under Section 149 overlaps the 
ground covered by Section 34. Thus, if several persons 
numbering five or more, do an act and intend to do it, both 
Section 34 and Section 149 may apply. If the common object 
does not necessarily involve a common intention, then the 
substitution of Section 34 for Section 149 might result in 
prejudice to the accused and ought not, therefore, to be 
 
14 (2003) 

 13 of 16 
 
permitted. But if it does involve a common intention then the 
substitution of Section 34 for Section 149 must be held to be a 
formal matter. Whether such recourse can be had or not must 
depend on the facts of each case. The non-applicability of 
Section 149 is, therefore, no bar in convicting the appellants 
under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC, if the evidence 
discloses commission of an offence in furtherance of the 
common intention of them all. [See Barendra Kumar Ghosh v. 
King Emperor, AIR 1925 PC 1, Mannam Venkatadari v. State of 
A.P., (1971), Nethala Pothuraju v. State of Α.Ρ., 
(1992), Ram Tahal v. State of U.P., (1972) ].” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
23. In paragraph 17 of the decision of this Court in Chandra Pratap Singh vs. 
State of M.P.15, while dealing with conversion of charge from section 302 
read with section 149, IPC to section 302 read with section 34 thereof, the 
above passage has been quoted with approval. 
24. It would be relevant at this juncture to consider section 464 of the Cr. PC. 
On its plain terms, sub-section (1) of section 464 clearly indicates that no 
finding, sentence or order by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be 
deemed invalid merely on the ground that no charge was framed or on the 
ground of any error, omission or irregularity in the charge including any 
misjoinder of charges, unless, in an appeal, confirmation or revision, a claim 
of "failure of justice" has been substantiated. 
25. Law is well-settled that in order to judge whether a failure of justice has 
been occasioned, it will be relevant to examine whether the accused was 
aware of the basic ingredients of the offence for which he is being convicted 
and whether the main facts sought to be established against him were 
explained to him clearly and whether he got a fair chance to defend himself. 
 
15 (2023) 

 14 of 16 
 
Reference in this connection may be made to the decision in Dalbir Singh 
vs. State of Uttar Pradesh16. 
26. Also, it is beyond any cavil of doubt that the burden to show that in fact a 
failure of justice has been occasioned is on the accused. The decision in 
State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Paras Nath Singh17 can profitably be referred 
to in this regard. 
27. We have no hesitation to hold that based on the above parameters, the 
appellants have fairly and squarely failed in their pursuit to demonstrate 
any failure of justice, which would impel us to exercise power of the nature 
contemplated in sub-section (2) of section 464, Cr. PC. We, therefore, see 
no reason to uphold the contention advanced on behalf of the appellants to 
the contrary. 
28. Next, in order to impeach the oral evidence of P.W.3, P.W.4 and P.W.5, the 
appellants asserted that there is no testimony of any independent witness, 
despite the place of crime as per the case of prosecution being surrounded 
by shops and residential houses. 
29. It is also settled law that examination of independent witness is not an 
indispensable requisite if the testimonies of other witnesses are deemed 
trustworthy and reliable. Non-examination of any independent witness by 
the prosecution will not go to the root of the matter affecting the decision 
of the court, unless other witnesses’ testimonies and evidences are scant to 
establish the guilt of the accused. Reference is made to paragraph 24 of the 
 
16 (2004) 
17 (2009) 

 15 of 16 
 
decision of this court in Guru Dutt Pathak vs. State of U.P.18, where it 
was ruled as follows: 
“24. One another ground given by the learned trial court while 
acquitting the accused was that no independent witness has 
been examined. The High Court has rightly observed that where 
there is clinching evidence of eyewitnesses, mere non- 
examination of some of the witnesses/independent witnesses 
and/or in absence of examination of any independent witnesses 
would not be fatal to the case of the prosecution. 
24.1. In Manjit Singh vs. State of Punjab19, it is observed 
and held by this Court that reliable evidence of injured 
eyewitnesses cannot be discarded merely for reason that no 
independent witness was examined. 
24.2. In the recent decision in Surinder Kumar vs. State of 
Punjab20, it is observed and held by this Court that merely 
because prosecution did not examine any independent witness, 
would not necessarily lead to conclusion that the accused was 
falsely implicated. 
24.3. In Rizwan Khan vs. State of Chhattisgarh21, after 
referring to the decision of this Court in State of H.P. vs. 
Pardeep Kumar22, it is observed and held by this Court that 
the examination of the independent witnesses is not an 
indispensable requirement and such non-examination is not 
necessarily fatal to the prosecution case.” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
 
30. It has been rightly pointed out by the Trial Court that the prosecution’s case 
is not that people from the surrounding locality gathered at the time of the 
incident. In the light of the aforenoted decisions of this Court and upon 
careful examination of the testimonies of P.W.3, P.W.4, and P.W.5, along 
with the relevant other evidence on record, the prosecution's case cannot 
be dismissed solely on the ground of the absence of independent witness. 
 
18 (2021) 
19 (2019) 
20 (2020) 
21 (2020) 
22 (2018) 

 16 of 16 
 
31. Having regard to the foregoing discussion, the High Court's decision finding 
A-1, A-2, and A-3 guilty of offences under sections 148, 302, and 307, IPC 
read with section 34 thereof is affirmed as correct and upheld. 
32. The sole issue is, thus, answered in the negative. 
CONCLUSION 
33. The appeal is bereft of any merit and, therefore, stands dismissed. 

……………………….…………….. J. 
(DIPANKAR DATTA) 

…………………………….……….. J. 
(AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH) 

NEW DELHI; 
SEPTEMBER 25, 2024.