IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
Suo Motu Writ (Civil) No 9 of 2024
 IN RE: REMARKS BY HIGH COURT JUDGE DURING COURT PROCEEDINGS
 
JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI

The Court was apprised of reports circulating in the media pertaining to
comments attributed to Justice V Srishananda, a Judge of the High Court of
Karnataka, during the conduct of judicial proceedings.

In this backdrop, a suo motu proceeding has been registered.

On 20 September 2024, the Registrar General of the High Court of Karnataka
was requested to submit a report after seeking administrative directions of the
Chief Justice of the High Court of Karnataka in regard to the subject matter of the
suo motu proceedings.

A report dated 23 September 2024 has been submitted by Mr K S Bharath
Kumar, Registrar General of the High Court of Karnataka, in pursuance of the
above directions.

The report deals with two proceedings before the Judge, the first of which took
place on 6 June 2024 and the second on 28 August 2024. The Registrar General
has submitted a transcript, duly translated as a part of his report, bearing in
mind the fact that some part of the dialogue in the Court had taken place in
Kannada. The report, insofar as the proceedings of 6 June 2024 are concerned,
is set out below:
“The Proceedings on 6th June 2024,
3. 
On the aforesaid date, in Court Hall No.26, in the court
presided over by Hon’ble Shri Justice Vedavyasachar
Srishananda, the proceedings of Criminal Revision Petition
No.634 of 2021 filed under Section 397 read with Section
401 of Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 in M.V. Krishnappa v.
M. Srinivas were conducted. Therein the petitioner had
prayed to set aside the judgment and order dated 15th
February 2021 passed by learned Principal District and
Sessions Judge, Bengaluru Rural District in Criminal
Application No.26 of 2020 confirming the judgment and
order of conviction and sentence dated 25th February 2020
by the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Bengaluru Rural
District, Bengaluru in 
convicting the petitioner-accused for the offence punishable
under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
and imposing sentence of six months simple imprisonment
to the accused and in default to pay Rs.25,10,000/- towards
fine.
3.1
The proceedings of the court were being live-
streamed. During the aforesaid proceedings, part of the
submissions, conversation and comments were as under,
which is the part got widely circulated in the social media
through YouTube clips,
Hon’ble Judge:
Do you understand that…
Learned Advocate for the Respondent:
It is admitted My Lords…
Hon’ble Judge:
Do you understand?

Learned Advocate for the Respondent:
I understand that concept.
Hon’ble Judge:
Where is the books of Accounts. Give us. Are you an Income
Tax Assessee?
Learned Advocate for the Petitioner:
Yes, he is an Income Tax Assessee
Hon’ble Judge:
Wait amma
Learned Advocate for the Petitioner:
Sorry sir, sorry sorry sorry, sir sorry
Hon’ble Judge:
Why you are telling, you know everything about the
opponent.
At this point, the learned Advocate for the Respondent tries
to intervene, Hon’ble Judge continues…
If you are asked tomorrow morning, you will tell everything
and you will also tell the color of the undergarment he
wears.
Learned Advocate for the Respondent:
Both are friends and it is a story of a carpenter…
[The above submissions, conversations and comments in the
video clipping is available from 7.27 to 7.53 minutes]
3.2
The above conversation and comments are available
through virtual access in the form of recorded video clipping.
The part of the conversation took place in vernacular-
Kannada language, which part is submitted with true
translation. The text of the conversation is submitted in
exact form.
3.3
It may be stated that the clipping submitted herewith

to the Hon’ble Court contains portion of previous part as well
as portion of subsequent part also to ensure the link and in
order to put forth the total.”
(emphasis supplied)

The report indicates that one of parties to the proceedings was represented by a
lawyer who is a woman. The report also contains a narration of the proceedings
which took place on 28 August 2024 and is reproduced below:
“The proceedings on 28th August 2024,
4.
On this day, in the court presided by the same Hon’ble
Judge of the High Court of Karnataka, proceedings of
House Rent Revision Petition No.28 of 2021 filed under
Section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in
Miss Rina Vitha D Souza Vs. Mr. A M Alwyn Pinto and
another were underway. The Revision was against
judgment dated 20th March 2021 delivered in Rent
Revision Petition No.7 of 2019 on the file of learned
Principal District and Sessions Judge, Dakshina
Kannada-Mangaluru dismissing the petition and
confirming the order dated 6th December 2018 passed
in House Rent Case No.22 of 2013 by learned Principal
Civil Judge, Dakshina Kannada-Mangaluru dismissing
the petition filed, under Section 27(2)(a)(c)(r) and (o)
read with Section 5 of the Karnataka Rent Act.
4.1
In the aforesaid proceedings in the Court, the Hon’ble
Judge made the following observations and the
remarks,
“Hon’ble Judge: Even after that incident that happened
where that van got upsided...capsized and then fell
down and 3 small children died, no action, police is
tally inactive. When something like this happens, one
would stand for two days and blow whistle and say
stop that, stop this.
They are into lobby. Majority of the school are run by
the so and so and so and so, so they manage. You
don’t look into. Go to Mysuru Road flyover, every auto
rickshaw has got 10 people, every auto rickshaw, it is
not applicable because the Mysore Road flyover, till up
to the market from Gori Palya is in Pakistan, not in
India. This is the reality, this is the reality.
If you put any strict officer in that area, let me see who
would catch such person, no channel will see it.
This is the problem you know, 9 people 10 people in

an auto rickshaw two beside the driver.
Every two minutes, you will find one auto rickshaw
dropping the people there in soon after city market, no
Rule is applicable. That is the problem. So, it is all
there. People are also of that nature.
[The above submissions, conversations and comments
in the video clipping is available from 18.37 to 20.05
minutes]
4.2
The reproduction of the observations is in exact words
as were made in the vernacular-Kannada language,
with true translation in English of the part spoken in
Kannada language.
4.3
The above conversation and comments are available
through virtual access in the form of recorded video
clipping. The part of the conversation took place in
vernacular-Kannada language, which part is submitted
with true translation. The text of the conversation is
mentioned in the same form.”
(emphasis supplied)

The High Court of Karnataka has notified the Karnataka Rules on Live Streaming
and Recording of Court Proceedings 2021 with effect from 1 January 2022. The
report of the Registrar General states that live streaming of the court
proceedings is conducted in accordance with the Rules and is transmitted
through the official YouTube channel of the High Court of Karnataka. As of date,
it has a subscription of 1,38,000 subscribers. The High Court of Karnataka has
also notified Rules for Video Conferencing for Courts 2020 with effect from 25
June 2020 to regulate the conduct of court proceedings through the video
conferencing mode. Video recordings in relation to the court proceedings on 6
June 2024 and 28 August 2024 are a part of the video recordings officially
maintained by the High Court of Karnataka.

The Court presided over by Justice V Srishananda assembled on 21 September
2024 after this Court had taken suo motu notice of the above events on 20
September 2024,. During the course of the post-lunch session, Justice

Srishananda proceeded to read out an address in the presence of the members
of the Bar, including the President, Secretary and other office bearers of the
Bengaluru Advocates Association.

The report of the Registrar General reproduced the text of what was stated by
the Judge in the course of the proceedings on 21 September 2024, thus:
“Sir, this is through the Bar Association to all in general.
Few observations made by the court during the course of
judicial proceedings are being quoted out of context in
social media. Those observations of this Court are totally
unintentional and not to hurt the feelings of any sections
of the society at large or any individual in particular.
However, if any of the section of the society or individual
has been directly or indirectly hurt by the observations of
this Court, with all sincerity I regret the same. Convey it
to the concerned.”

As in the case of the earlier two proceedings, the video clip containing the above
part forms a part of the official video recordings maintained by the High Court of
Karnataka. The video recordings have been submitted to this Court in a pen
drive.

The proceedings which took place before the Court of Justice V Srishananda on
21 September 2024 indicate that the Judge has indicated that:

Certain observations made by him have been quoted out of context in
social media;

The observations made by him in the course of court proceedings were
unintentional and were not intended to hurt the feelings of any section of
society or any individual, in particular; and

An apology was tendered by him, if any section of society or any individual
“has been directly or indirectly hurt by the observations” (made on 6 June

2024 and 28 August 2024).

We have consciously desisted from issuing notice to the Judge of the High Court
of Karnataka in the interest of maintaining the institutional dignity of the High
Courts and the Judges who occupy those offices.

Bearing in mind the apology which has been tendered by the Judge of the High
Court in the course of open court proceedings on 21 September 2024, we
consider it in the interest of preserving the dignity of the institution to not
pursue these proceedings further. However, before concluding the proceedings,
it would be necessary for this Court to make some observations having a bearing
on what has transpired..

The prevalence and reach of social media encompasses the live reporting of
court proceedings. Most High Courts in the country have adopted rules for live
streaming and for the extension of video conferencing facilities for hearing of
cases. While it emerged as a necessity in the course of the Covid-19 pandemic,
video conferencing, together with live streaming of proceedings, has emerged as
an important outreach facility for courts to promote access to justice. Live-
streaming has provided fresh sunlight. The answer to sunlight is to provide more
sunlight. All stake holders in the judicial system, including judges, lawyers and
parties in person, have to be conscious of the fact that the reach of judicial
proceedings extends beyond those who are physically present. The reach of
judicial hearings extends to audiences well beyond the physical precincts of the
court. This places an added responsibility on judges and lawyers as well as
litigants who appear in person to conduct the proceedings conscious of the wide
and immediate impact of casual observations on the community at large. 

Judges need to be conscious of the fact that each individual bears a certain

degree of accumulated predispositions, based on their experiences of life. Some
may be early experiences. Others are gained later. Every Judge should be
aware of those predispositions. The heart and soul of judging lies in the need to
be impartial and fair. Intrinsic to that process is the need for every Judge to be
aware of their own predispositions. Awareness of these predispositions is the
first step in excluding them in the decision making process. It is on the basis of
that awareness that a judge can be faithful to the fundamental obligation to
render objective and fair justice. Every stake holder in the administration of
justice has to understand that the only values which must guide decision making
are those which are enshrined in the Constitution of India. 

Casual observations often reflect individual bias, particularly, when they are
likely to be perceived as being directed against a particular gender or
community. Courts, therefore, have to be careful not to make comments in the
course of judicial proceedings which may be construed as being misogynistic or,
for that matter, prejudicial to any segment of our society.

The report which has been submitted by the Registrar General would amply
indicate that the observations which were made in the course of the proceedings
before the High Court of Karnataka were unrelated to the course of the
proceedings. They should have been eschewed. The perception of justice to
every segment of society is as important as the rendition of justice as an
objective fact.

Since the Judge of the High Court of Karnataka is not a party to these
proceedings, we desist from making any further observations, save and except
to express our serious concern about both the reference to gender and to a
segment of the community. Such observations are liable to be construed in a

negative light thereby impacting not only the court of the Judge who expressed
them, but the judicial system as well.

We have made these observations in the hope and expectation that the
demands which have been placed on all stake holders in the judicial system in
the electronic age would elicit an appropriate modulation of behaviour both on
the part of the Bar and the Bench in the future.

The proceedings shall stand concluded with these observations.

Pending application, if any, stands disposed of...…..…...…...……………….…...CJI.
 [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]
…..…..…...…...……………….…
 [Sanjiv Khanna]
…..…..…...…...……………….…
 [B R Gavai]
…..…..…...…...……………….…
 [Surya Kant]
…..…..…...…...……………….…
 [Hrishikesh Roy]
New Delhi; 
September 25, 2024
-S-

ITEM NO.301 COURT NO.1 SECTION PIL-W
 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A
 RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
SMW (C) No(s). 9/2024
 IN RE: REMARKS BY HIGH COURT JUDGE DURING COURT PROCEEDINGS
 
Date: 25-09-2024 This petition was called on for hearing today.
CORAM: 
 HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
 Justice SANJIV KHANNA
 Justice B.R. GAVAI
 Justice SURYA KANT
 Justice HRISHIKESH ROY
For Petitioner(s)
 
By Courts Motion
 
For Respondent(s)
Mr. R. Venkataramani, Attorney General for India
Mr. Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General

UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
 ORDER

In terms of the signed judgment, the proceedings shall stand
concluded.

Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
 (SANJAY KUMAR-I) 
(SAROJ KUMARI GAUR)
ADDITIONAL REGISTRAR ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
(Signed judgment is placed on the file)