IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 806-807 OF 2023 

SHIVKUMAR RAMSUNDAR SAKET Criminal Appeal No.2943 of 

VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA 

WITH 

JUDGMENT 

B.R. GAVAI, J. 

1. 
We have heard Ms. Sadhana Jadhav, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing for the appellant in Criminal Appeal 
Nos.806-807 of 2023 and Mr. Sudhanshu S. Choudhari, 
learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant in. 

2. 
We have also heard Mr. Shrirang B. Varma along with 
Mr. Varad Kilor, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondent-State of Maharashtra. 
3. 
Mr. Shrirang B. Varma, learned counsel appearing for 
the respondent submits that he has been informed by the jail 
authorities that appellant-Rajeshsingh Hariharsingh Thakur 
in. 
In support of the same, he handed over a document received 
from the jail authorities, which is taken on record. 
4. 
Ms. Jadhav submits that the evidence of PW.4-
Sumitkumar Shrishamji Tiwari is full of contradictions. She 
submits that the only circumstance which is against the 
appellant-Shivkumar Ramsundar Saket (Accused No.3) is the 
testimony of PW.4-Sumitkumar Shrishamji Tiwari and 
PW.28-Sau. Suraj Sharad Gundecha and the recovery of a 
ladies watch. 
5. 
Ms. Jadhav further submits that in the evidence of 
Investigating Officer it is proved that PW.4-Sumitkumar 
Shrishamji Tiwari had substantially improved his version and 
as such his testimony could not be believed. She further 

submits that the recovery of ladies watch would also not be a 
circumstance 
to 
connect 
the 
appellant-Shivkumar 
Ramsundar Saket (Accused No.3), inasmuch as the said 
watch is commonly found in the market. 
6. 
Ms. Jadhav, in the alternative, submits that in any case 
the learned High Court was not justified in imposing death 
penalty upon appellant-Shivkumar Ramsundar Saket. She 
further 
submits 
that 
even 
assuming 
that 
appellant-
Shivkumar Ramsundar Saket had a role to play in the crime 
still his role could not be segregated from the other accused 
so as to award him the penalty of death sentence. 
7. 
Mr. Sudhanshu S. Choudhari, learned Senior Counsel 
appearing 
for 
appellant-Balendrasingh 
Shivmurtisingh 
Thakur (Accused No.6) in 
submits that the evidence of PW.4-Sumitkumar Shrishamji 
Tiwari does not support the prosecution case. He submits 
that the identification parade is totally farcical and the 
conviction only on the basis of such an identification parade 
would not be permissible. 

8. 
Mr. Shrirang B. Varma, on the contrary, submits that 
the prosecution has established a chain of circumstances 
which leads to no other conclusion than the guilt of the 
accused. He submits that the learned Judges of the High 
Court have culled out the entire chain of circumstances, 
which are proved. It is, therefore, submitted that no 
interference is warranted in the present appeals. 
9. 
We have scrutinized the material on record. 
10. We find that the learned Trial Judge as well as the 
learned Judges of the High Court have correctly appreciated 
the material on record and come to a conclusion that the 
appellants are guilty of committing the crime. 
11. We notice no reason to interfere with the well-reasoned 
judgment and order of the learned Trial Judge as well as the 
learned High Court insofar as the aspect of conviction is 
concerned. 
12. However, insofar as the award of capital punishment 
imposed 
upon 
appellant-Shivkumar 
Ramsundar 
Saket 
(Accused No.3) is concerned, we find that the High Court was 
not justified in imposing it. The learned Trial Judge upon 

consideration of the material placed on record had come to a 
considered conclusion that the present case does not fit in 
the category of ‘rarest of rare cases’. Therefore, unless the 
finding recorded by the learned Trial Judge was found to be 
perverse or impossible, the High Court ought not to have 
interfered with the same. In any case, the role played by 
appellant-Shivkumar Ramsundar Saket (Accused No. 3) is 
similar with all the other accused and the case of appellant-
Shivkumar Ramsundar Saket (Accused No.3) could not have 
been segregated to impose death penalty upon him. In that 
view of the matter, while sustaining the conviction of 
appellant-Shivkumar Ramsundar Saket (Accused No.3), we 
are inclined to partly allow the appeal insofar as appellant- 
Shivkumar Ramsundar Saket (Accused No.3) is concerned. 
13. In the result, we pass the following order: 

 is dismissed; 

Criminal Appeal Nos.806-807 of 2023 are partly 
allowed. The sentence of death imposed by the High 
Court upon appellant-Shivkumar Ramsundar Saket 
(Accused No.3) is set aside and the sentence which is 

awarded by the Trial Court is restored; and 
(iii) In view of the death of appellant-Rajeshsingh 
Hariharsingh Thakur, is disposed of as abated. 
14. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.