IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 30250 of 2018) 

LAKHA SINGH. 

VERSUS 

BALWINDER SINGH & ANR. 
 
 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Heard. 
2. 
Leave granted. 
3. 
This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment 
dated 25th April, 2018 rendered by the High Court of Punjab and 
Haryana at Chandigarh, whereby the second appeal1 preferred by 
the appellant-defendant was dismissed, and the judgment dated 
20th March, 2017 passed by the learned Additional District Judge, 
 
1 RSA No. 4577 of 2017(O&M). 

Tarn Taran2 in Civil Appeal3 was affirmed. The First Appellate 
Court dismissed the Civil Appeal preferred by the appellant-
defendant and upheld the judgment and decree dated 18th 
February, 2013 passed by the learned Additional Civil Judge 
(Senior Division), Patti, Tarn Taran4 in Civil Suit5 filed by the 
respondent-plaintiff. The trial Court allowed the suit partly, 
directing the recovery of Rs. 16,00,000/- and the interest accrued 
thereupon from the appellant-defendant by way of alternative relief 
of recovery while denying the prayer of specific performance sought 
for by the respondent-plaintiff. 
4. 
The facts in a nutshell relevant and essential for disposal of 
the appeal are noted hereinbelow. 
5. 
The respondent-plaintiff filed the subject suit in the trial 
Court seeking a decree for specific performance of an agreement to 
sell dated 7th May, 20076 in respect of an agricultural plot of land 
admeasuring 30 Kanals 8 Marlas7 located at Village Amrike, Tehsil 
Patti, District Tarn Taran, Punjab. Besides the relief of specific 
performance, the respondent-plaintiff also sought permanent 
 
2 ‘First Appellate Court’. 
3. 
4 ‘trial Court’. 
5. 
6 ‘disputed agreement’. 
7 ‘suit land’. injunction for restraining the appellant-defendant from alienating 
the suit land and dispossessing the respondent-plaintiff from the 
same. In the alternative, respondent-plaintiff sought relief of 
recovery 
of 
Rs.19,00,000/- 
including 
the 
amount 
of 
Rs.16,00,000/- paid as earnest money on the date of execution of 
the disputed agreement along with the damages to the tune of 
Rs.3,00,000/-. 
6. 
The respondent-plaintiff averred in the plaint that the 
appellant-defendant, being the owner of the suit land, had agreed 
to sell the same to the respondent-plaintiff vide the disputed 
agreement wherein, the rate of the land was fixed at Rs.5,00,000/- 
per Killa with a condition to get the sale deed executed and 
registered on 19th September, 2008. As per the recitals in the 
disputed agreement, the appellant-defendant received a sum of 
Rs.16,00,000/- by way of earnest money on the date of the 
execution of the agreement with a further stipulation that the 
balance consideration would be paid on 19th September, 2008, 
when both the parties would appear at the Registrar office. It was 
further stipulated that if on the said date, the appellant-defendant 
failed to execute the registered sale deed then, he would become 
liable to return the earnest money to the tune of Rs.16,00,000/- 

along with penalty of equal amount, totalling to Rs.32,00,000/- to 
the respondent-plaintiff. Even after receiving the money and the 
penalty, the respondent-plaintiff would be entitled to file a suit for 
getting the sale deed executed in his favour. This disputed 
agreement was attested by two witnesses namely, Major Singh 
(PW-4) and Balwinder Singh (PW-2). 
7. 
It was also averred in the plaint that a part of the property 
was under mortgage with respondent No. 2 i.e. The State Bank of 
Patiala. The respondent-plaintiff claimed that he reached the Office 
of Joint Registrar, Khem Karan on the date stipulated in the 
disputed agreement i.e. 19th September, 2008 and remained 
present there from 09:00 am to 05:00 pm waiting for the appellant-
defendant to arrive. However, the appellant-defendant did not turn 
up to get the sale deed registered in favour of the respondent-
plaintiff, thereby violating the terms and conditions of the 
agreement. As such, the respondent-plaintiff got an affidavit of 
attendance attested from the Executive Magistrate, Khem Karan, 
who was also discharging the duties of the Joint Sub-Registrar, 
Khem Karan. In this manner, the respondent-plaintiff claimed to 
have marked his presence before the Joint Sub-Registrar showing 

his readiness and willingness to get the sale deed executed and 
registered in his favour, in terms of the disputed agreement. 
8. 
Respondent-plaintiff further averred in the plaint that the 
appellant-defendant had breached the terms of the disputed 
agreement and was not ready and willing to execute and get the 
sale deed registered despite numerous requests, being made. The 
respondent-plaintiff also averred that the possession of the land, 
was handed over to him at the time when the disputed agreement 
was executed and that the respondent-plaintiff continued to 
remain in possession of the suit land as a prospective vendee. 
Apprehending that the appellant-defendant could alienate the suit 
land in favour of some other person, thereby dispossessing him, 
the respondent-plaintiff filed the subject suit8 seeking reliefs in the 
following terms: - 
“It is therefore respectfully prayed that a decree for Specific 
Performance of Agreement to sell dated 7.5.2007 with regard to 
land measuring 30 Kanals 8 Marlas detail of which is as 
follows: 
a. Land measuring 12 Kanals 14 Marlas i.e. 4/72 
share of land measuring 229 Kanals 5 Marlas bearing 
Khata/Khatoni No. 153 /372 to 379, Rectangle and 
Killa Nos. 31//14//1, 20, 21, 32//15, 17,327/24, 
25, 
337/5, 
31/722, 
347/9, 
2,31//12, 
13, 
19, 317/2671, 327/16, 337/74, 6, 7, 14,15,16, 25, 
347/1, 
10,20,44//5, 
32//4, 
5,6,7.8/1, 
14/2, 
32/714/1, 337/17 

b. Land measuring 7 Kanals 17 Marlas i.e. 1/3rd 
share of land measuring 23 Kanals 10 Marlas bearing 
Khata/Khatoni No. 153/374, Rectangle and Killa 
Nos. 327/22, 34/79,2. c. Land measuring 9 Kanals 17 Marlas i.e. 4/72 share 
of land measuring 170 Kanals 10 Marlas bearing 
Khata/Khatoni No. 101/243, 244/, 244.1 246, 
102/246 Rectangle and Killa Nos. 31/ /11, 8/2, 
19/22/221//14, 15, 16, 17, 24, 25, 22//2, 3/1, 
10/2, 22//9, 11,12, 19, 20, 21, 22, 31//1,2,10 min 
(6-16), 
32//1,2.21/211/9,10 
nub, 
(1-4), 
21//22,23,32//3/1, situated in village Amrike Tehsil 
Patti district Tarn Taran as per Jamabandi 2002-
2003 on payment of Rs.3,00,000/- or any sum which 
this Hon'ble Court finds due and for execution and 
registration of sale deed and for delivery of symbolic 
actual possession of above land to the plaintiff with 
consequential relief of permanent injunction thus, 
restraining the defendant no. 1 from alienating the 
suit land with anybody in any way, except the plaintiff 
and also restraining the defendant no. 1 forever from 
dispossessing 
the 
plaintiff 
forcibly 
from 
land 
measuring 30 Kanals 8 Marlas bearing Khasra No. 
31//14/1 min (1-0), 20, (7-16), 21 (8-32)/715 (7-12), 
327//17 (7-0) situated at Village Amrike, Tehsil Patti, 
District Tarn Taran as per Jamabandi for the year 
2002 - 03 and also restraining the defendant no. 1 
from interfering in the peaceful possession of the 
plaintiff over the same. 
In the alternative, suit for recovery of Rs.19,00,000/- detailed 
as follow: 
a) 
Amount of earnest money paid on 7.5.2007 at 
the 
time 
of 
execution 
of 
agreement 
i.e., 
Rs.16,00,000/-. b) 
Amount of damage and compensation for 
breach of contract dated 7.5.2007 of Rs. 3,00,000/-, 
totalling to Rs. 19,00,000/- be passed in favour of 
plaintiff and against the defendant No.1 with costs. 
 
Any other relief to which the plaintiff is found entitled to that 
may also kindly be granted in favour of plaintiff.” 
 
9. 
The appellant-defendant, upon being summoned, appeared 
before the trial Court and filed a written statement denying the 

averments made in the plaint. It was specifically averred in the 
written statement filed by the appellant-defendant that the 
disputed agreement was without consideration, result of 
misrepresentation, impersonation and must have been prepared 
fraudulently by the respondent-plaintiff who was an employee of 
the Punjab police, posted as the Head Constable at Amritsar by 
colluding with the scribe and the attesting witnesses. 
10. It was further alleged that the respondent-plaintiff’s brother 
was a commission agent and ran a commission business at Mandi, 
Amarkot. The appellant-defendant used to sell his agricultural 
produce through the commission agency of the respondent-
plaintiff’s brother. The appellant-defendant was an illiterate 
simpleton and the respondent-plaintiff, and his brother used to get 
the thumb impressions of the customers/agriculturists including 
the appellant-defendant on blank stamp papers. It was specifically 
asserted in the written statement that the disputed agreement had 
been prepared by fraudulent means on one of such blank stamp 
papers, on which the thumb impression of the appellant-defendant 
had been taken by deceitful means. The appellant-defendant also 
denied the receipt of sale consideration from the respondent-
plaintiff and asserted that he was not bound by the disputed 

agreement. A plea was also made by the appellant-defendant that 
the market rate of agricultural land in Village Cheema Khurd was 
not less than Rs.12,00,000/- per Killa and that there was no 
reason for the appellant-defendant to have sold his valuable land 
to the respondent-plaintiff at a throw away rate of Rs.5,00,000/- 
per Killa, more particularly as the suit land was his only source of 
livelihood. 
11. A pertinent plea was also taken by the appellant-defendant 
that the suit for specific performance of the disputed agreement 
and for permanent injunction, was bad for non-joinder of 
necessary parties because all the co-sharers of the suit land were 
not arrayed as parties in the subject suit. Based on aforesaid 
pleadings of the parties, the trial Court framed the following issues 
for determination: - 
“1. Whether the defendant no. 1 executed an agreement to sell 
dated 7.5.2007 regarding land measuring 30 Kanals 8 Marlas 
in favour of the plaintiff? OPP. 
2. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for specific performance of 
agreement to sell? OPP. 
3. Whether the plaintiff is entitled in the alternative to recover 
Rs.19,00,000/- from the defendant no. 1? OPP. 
4. Whether the plaintiff and defendant no. 1 were owner/co-
sharer in possession to the extent of his share in the disputed 
property? OPP. 
5. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the relief of permanent 
injunction as prayed for? OPP. 
6. Whether the suit is maintainable in the present form? OPP. 

7. Whether the plaintiff has locus standi to file the present suit? 
OPP. 
8. Whether the cause of action arisen to the plaintiff for filing of 
present suit? OPP. 
9. Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties? 
OPP. 
10. Whether the plaintiff has not come to the court with clean 
hands? OPD. 
11. Whether the plaintiff is estopped by his own act and 
conduct from filing the present suit? OPD. 
12. Relief.” 
 
12. The 
issue 
No.2(supra) 
regarding 
entitlement 
of 
the 
respondent-plaintiff for specific performance of the disputed 
agreement and the affiliated issue No. 5(supra) for the relief of 
permanent injunction were decided against the respondent-
plaintiff. However, issue No.3(supra) regarding the alternative relief 
seeking recovery of the amount to the tune of Rs. 19,00,000/- was 
partly decided in favour of the respondent-plaintiff and partly 
against him. The trial Court recorded the following findings: - 
a. It was an admitted fact that the appellant-defendant was 
the owner of the suit land and respondent-plaintiff while 
appearing as PW-1 produced on record the agreement to 
sell9, duly signed by the appellant-defendant. 
 
9 ‘disputed agreement’ 

b. The respondent-plaintiff testified that the appellant-
defendant had agreed to sell the suit land in his favour 
and received a sum of Rs. 16,00,000/- as earnest money 
with a condition to execute the sale deed on 19th 
September, 2008. c. On the date fixed as per the disputed agreement, the 
appellant-defendant failed to appear at the office of the 
Sub-Registrar whereas the respondent-plaintiff got his 
presence marked by way of an affidavit attested by the 
Executive Magistrate-cum-Sub-Registrar, Khem Karan. d. The version of the respondent-plaintiff was also 
corroborated by the attesting witnesses namely, Major 
Singh (PW-4) and Balwinder Singh (PW-2). e. That the respondent-plaintiff had proved the execution of 
the disputed agreement and his willingness to get the sale 
deed executed by cogent evidence. f. That the possession of the suit land was never handed 
over to the respondent-plaintiff although this fact was 
mentioned in the disputed agreement. g. That the person who pays a huge amount and fixes a long 
date for the execution of the sale deed, would not be 

expected to wait for possession to be taken in future. 
However, in the case at hand, the date fixed for the 
execution of the sale deed was after a period of about a 
year and four months from the date of the execution of 
the disputed agreement. 
13. Based on the aforesaid findings, the trial Court concluded 
that the transaction between the parties appeared to be a loan 
transaction rather than an agreement for sale and purchase of the 
property and held that the respondent-plaintiff was not entitled to 
the relief of specific performance of the agreement in respect of the 
suit land. However, the respondent-plaintiff was held to be entitled 
to recover the earnest money paid to the appellant-defendant at 
the time of the execution of the agreement along with interest. 
14. The trial Court decreed the suit vide judgment dated 18th 
February, 2013 and directed the appellant-defendant to refund the 
earnest money to the tune of Rs. 16,00,000/- with pendente lite 
interest @ 9% per annum and future interest @ 6% per annum to 
the respondent-plaintiff. 
15. As noted above, the first appeal as well as the second appeal 
preferred by the appellant-defendant against the judgment and 
decree rendered by the trial Court stood rejected by the First 

Appellate Court and the High Court, respectively vide judgments 
dated 20th March, 2017 and 25th April, 2018. These judgments are 
subjected to challenge in this appeal by special leave. 
16. Shri Ankit Goel, learned counsel for the appellant-defendant, 
vehemently and fervently contended that the findings of facts 
recorded by the Courts below, though concurrent, are perverse on 
the face of the record and thus, it is a fit case warranting 
interference by this Court in exercise of the jurisdiction conferred 
by Article 136 of the Constitution of India. 
17. To buttress the above contention, learned counsel for the 
appellant-defendant, drew the Court’s attention to the following 
excerpts from the cross-examination of the respondent-plaintiff 
(PW1): - 
“Amarjit Singh S/o Massa Singh is my real brother. He is 
running a commission agent shop at Amarkot, and the name of 
the commission agent shop is Cheema Trading Company, at 
Amarkot. I know Lakha Singh from my childhood. He belongs 
to my village. I do not know whether Lakha Singh deft sold his 
agriculture produce through the commission agent shop of my 
brother Amarjit Singh. I am posted as Head constable in Punjab 
Police and now posted at Ludhiana at Division no. 11nd. The 
agreement was scribed at Patti by a typist, but I do not know 
his name. 
Possession was not delivered on the basis of agreement to sell. 
It was mentioned in the agreement that the possession will be 
delivered on the agreement but the defendant refused to deliver 
the possession of the land agreed to sold the land to me. 
I file the income tax return because I am employee of Punjab 
Govt. I have not shown the amount of Rs.16,00,000/- in my 
income tax return. It is correct if any Govt. employee want to 
purchase any land it is necessary to get the permission from 

their department. I have not taken any permission from my 
department before purchasing the agreement to sell with the 
defendant not I show any amount of Rs. Sixteen lakh to my 
department. It is correct that agriculture income also not shown 
in my income tax return. I have never shown my agricultural 
income in my income tax return. 
This amount was not withdrawn by me from any bank & this 
amount was lying be me in my house. 
It is correct that at present the marked rate in vill. Cheema 
Khurd Rs. 9/10 lakhs per Killa. 
It is also wrong. to suggest that defendant never purchase the 
stamp paper through Angrej Singh for execution of the 
agreement to sell dated 07-5-2007. It is also wrong to suggest 
that agreement is prepared and dated with the collusiveness of 
the attesting witnesses. It is also wrong to suggest defendant 
never receipt any amount of Rs.16 lakhs from me as earnest 
money. It is also wrong to suggest deft use to sell his agriculture 
produce at that shop of my brother Amarjit Singh. It is also 
wrong to suggest my brother might have got the thumb 
impression by fraud.” 
 
18. He highlighted and stressed upon the following facts elicited 
from the deposition (supra) of the respondent-plaintiff: - 
a. The respondent-plaintiff was employed as a Head 
Constable in the Punjab Police at the time of the incident. b. The 
respondent-plaintiff’s 
brother 
was 
running 
a 
commission agent shop at Mandi Amarkot. c. Contrary to the recital in the disputed agreement that the 
possession of suit land was given to the respondent-
plaintiff, it was admitted by the respondent-plaintiff in his 
evidence that the possession of suit land was not handed 
over to him on the basis of the disputed agreement. d. The respondent-plaintiff admitted that he used to file 
Income Tax returns being an employee of the Punjab 
Government, but he did not show the amount of 
Rs.16,00,000/- in the Income Tax return. e. He also admitted that he had not obtained any permission 
from the department to purchase the suit land. f. The respondent-plaintiff admitted that the amount in 
question was not withdrawn from any bank and the 
currency notes used for the transaction were lying in his 
house. g. He also admitted that the market rate of the land in Village 
Cheema Khurd was around Rs.9-10 lakhs per Killa. h. He denied the suggestion given on behalf of the appellant-
defendant that his brother Amarjeet Singh had procured 
the thumb impression of the appellant-defendant on blank 
stamp papers by fraud. 
19. Learned counsel urged that the admissions as appearing in 
the testimony of the respondent-plaintiff, completely discredit the 
version regarding the execution of the disputed agreement. 
Therefore, he submitted that the findings recorded in the 
judgments of the Courts below are patently perverse and are based 

on misreading/ignorance of the admitted facts available on record 
and thus, the appeal merits acceptance and the impugned 
judgments deserve to be reversed. 
20., learned counsel representing the respondent-
plaintiff, supported the findings recorded in the impugned 
judgments. He urged that the trial Court, the First Appellate Court 
and the High Court appreciated and re-appreciated the evidence 
minutely and have arrived at an unimpeachable conclusion that 
the transaction in question was a loan transaction inter se between 
the respondent-plaintiff and the appellant-defendant and thus, the 
appellant-defendant was rightly held liable to reimburse the 
amount of loan secured from the respondent-plaintiff at the time 
of the execution of the disputed agreement. He urged that the law 
is well settled that this Court whilst exercising the jurisdiction 
under Article 136 of the Constitution of India, would not enter into 
pure questions of fact so as to reverse the well-reasoned judgments 
of the Courts below. On these counts, learned counsel for the 
respondent-plaintiff implored the Court to dismiss the appeal. 
21. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the material 
placed on record. 

22. It is trite law that jurisdiction under Article 136 of the 
Constitution of India should not be exercised unless the findings 
on facts recorded by the Courts below suffer from perversity or are 
based on omission to consider vital evidence available on record. 
23. The scope of an appeal by special leave under Article 136 of 
the Constitution of India against concurrent findings is well-
established. In the case of Sukhbiri Devi v. Union of India10, this 
Court noted: 
“3. At the outset, it is to be noted that the challenge in this 
appeal is against concurrent findings by three Courts, as 
mentioned hereinbefore. The scope of an appeal by special 
leave under Article 136 of the Constitution of India against the 
concurrent 
findings 
is 
well 
settled. 
In State 
of 
Rajasthan v. Shiv Dayal11 reiterating the settled position, this 
Court held that a concurrent finding of fact is binding, unless 
it is infected with perversity. It was held therein: — 
“When any concurrent finding of fact is assailed in 
second appeal, the appellant is entitled to point 
out that it is bad in law because it was recorded 
de hors the pleadings or it was based on no 
evidence or it was based on misreading of material 
documentary evidence or it was recorded against 
any provision of law and lastly, the decision is one 
which no Judge acting judicially could reasonably 
have reached. (see observation made by learned 
Judge Vivian Bose, J. as His Lordship then was a 
Judge of the Nagpur High Court in Rajeshwar 
Vishwanath 
Mamidwar v. Dashrath 
Narayan 
Chilwelkar, AIR 1943 Nag 117 Para 43).” 
4. Thus, evidently, the settled position is that interference 
with the concurrent findings in an appeal under Article 
136 of the Constitution is to be made sparingly, that too 
when the judgment impugned is absolutely perverse. On 
appreciation of evidence another view is possible also cannot 
be a reason for substitution of a plausible view taken and 
 
10. 
11 (2019). confirmed. We will now, bearing in mind the settled position, 
proceed to consider as to whether the said appellate power 
invites invocation in the case on hand.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
24. This Court in Mekala Sivaiah v. State of A.P.,12 while 
dealing with its power under Article 136 to interfere with 
concurrent findings held the following: - 
“15. It is well settled by judicial pronouncement that Article 
136 is worded in wide terms and powers conferred under the 
said Article are not hedged by any technical hurdles. This 
overriding and exceptional power is, however, to be exercised 
sparingly and only in furtherance of cause of justice. Thus, 
when the judgment under appeal has resulted in grave 
miscarriage of justice by some misapprehension or misreading 
of evidence or by ignoring material evidence then this Court is 
not only empowered but is well expected to interfere to promote 
the cause of justice. 
16. It is not the practice of this Court to re-appreciate the 
evidence for the purpose of examining whether the findings of 
fact concurrently arrived at by the trial court and the High 
Court are correct or not. It is only in rare and exceptional cases 
where there is some manifest illegality or grave and serious 
miscarriage of justice on account of misreading or ignoring 
material evidence, that this Court would interfere with such 
finding of fact. 
… 
18. In Bharwada 
Bhoginbhai 
Hirjibhai v. State 
of 
Gujarat [Bharwada 
Bhoginbhai 
Hirjibhai v. State 
of 
Gujarat, (1983): 1983 SCC (Cri) 728], a two-
Judge Bench of this Court held that this Court does not 
interfere with the concurrent findings of fact unless it is 
established: 
18.1. That the finding is based on no evidence. 
18.2. That the finding is perverse, it being such as no 
reasonable person could arrive at even if the evidence was 
taken at its face value. 
18.3. The finding is based and built on inadmissible 
evidence which evidence, excluded from vision, would 
negate the prosecution case or substantially discredit or 
impair it. 
 
12 (2022). 

18.4. Some vital piece of evidence which would tilt the 
balance in favour of the convict has been overlooked, 
disregarded or wrongly discarded.” 

(emphasis supplied) 
25. 
Keeping in mind the aforesaid principles, we shall now advert 
to the submissions advanced on behalf of the parties with 
reference to the findings recorded by the Courts below and the 
material available on record. 
26. The respondent-plaintiff filed the subject suit with a pertinent 
assertion that the disputed agreement was executed by the 
appellant-defendant for sale of his agricultural land admeasuring 
30 Kanals and 8 Marlas at the rate of Rs.5,00,000/- per Killa. As 
per the recital in the agreement, the respondent-plaintiff paid a 
sum of Rs.16,00,000/- in cash to the appellant-defendant at the 
time of the execution of the disputed agreement. 
27. At this stage, a very crucial fact which is noticeable from the 
disputed agreement needs to be highlighted. It is not in dispute 
that the stamp papers were not purchased by the appellant-
defendant and rather Amarjeet Singh was the person who 
purchased the same. The document was typed out in Gurmukhi 
language and the photostat copy thereof is available on record. A 
visual overview of the disputed agreement would show that it runs 
into three pages. The signature of the respondent-plaintiff, and the 

thumb impression of the appellant-defendant are marked only on 
the last page thereof. The first and second pages of the agreement, 
do not bear the signature of the respondent-plaintiff or the thumb 
impression of the appellant-defendant. There exist significant 
blank spaces at the foot of the first two pages below the 
transcription typed out on these two pages. These observations 
give rise to a strong inference fortifying the contention of the 
appellant-defendant’s counsel that the thumb impression of the 
appellant-defendant may have been taken on a blank stamp paper 
and the disputed agreement was typed thereon subsequently. 
28. It cannot be denied that the respondent-plaintiff being a 
Police Constable was mandatorily required to seek permission 
from his department before entering into an agreement to 
purchase property of such a high value. However, admittedly, he 
did not seek any such permission from the department. As per the 
disputed agreement, the appellant-defendant agreed to sell the 
suit land to the respondent-plaintiff s. 5,00,000/- per Killa, 
which was just about half of the market rate of the land at the 
relevant point of time, as admitted by the respondent-plaintiff. 
Going by the rate as fixed in the disputed agreement, the total sale 
consideration 
would 
have 
amounted 
to 
approximately, 

Rs.18,87,000/-. The disputed agreement recites that the 
appellant-defendant had received earnest money to the tune of 
Rs.16,00,000/- for the purpose of doing agriculture and to buy 
cheaper and better land nearby. Thus, a lion’s share of the sale 
consideration was already paid to the appellant-defendant at the 
time of the execution of the disputed agreement and the remaining 
amount was hardly 15% of the total value of the suit land as agreed 
upon between the parties. Therefore, it does not stand to reason 
that the respondent-plaintiff being a Police Constable would part 
with a huge sum of Rs.16,00,000/- towards a transaction to 
purchase land and thereafter, agree to defer the execution of the 
sale deed to a date almost 16 months later with the balance 
amount being a fraction of the total sale consideration. 
29. Apparently thus, there was no rhyme or reason as to why, the 
respondent-plaintiff would agree to defer the execution of the sale 
deed to a date more than a year and four months after the 
execution of the disputed agreement. Thus, the disputed 
agreement i.e., the agreement to sell read in entirety is highly 
suspicious and does not inspire confidence at all. 
30. As per the disputed agreement, the consequence of non-
appearance of the appellant-defendant at the Registrar’s office on 

19th September, 2008 and his failure to get the sale deed 
registered, was that the appellant-defendant would be liable to 
return the earnest money of Rs.16,00,000/- along with a penalty 
of equal amount, totalling to Rs.32,00,000/- and even thereafter, 
the respondent-plaintiff would be entitled to file a case in the civil 
Court for the execution of the sale deed. Simultaneously, it was 
agreed that if the balance amount was not paid by the respondent-
plaintiff, the earnest money would be liable to be forfeited by the 
appellant-defendant. 
31. As per the averments made in the plaint, the respondent-
plaintiff did not even once, during the aforesaid period of 16 
months, approach the appellant-defendant for getting the sale 
deed executed in terms of the disputed agreement. He claimed that 
he straight away proceeded to the Sub-Registrar’s office on 19th 
September, 2008 and remained present there from 09:00 am to 
05:00 pm waiting for the appellant-defendant to turn up and get 
the sale deed registered. However, the appellant-defendant failed 
to appear at the office of the Sub-Registrar on the scheduled date. 
Admittedly, the respondent-plaintiff did not give any advance 
intimation to the appellant-defendant imploring him to receive the 
balance consideration and execute the sale deed on the scheduled 

date i.e. 19th September, 2008 or anytime thereafter. Instead, he 
directly proceeded to file the subject suit in the month of 
December, 2008 wherein, alternative prayers, one for the 
execution of the sale deed and the other for the refund of the 
earnest money were made. 
32. Ex-facie, the averments set out in the plaint and the evidence 
of the respondent-plaintiff do not bear an iota of truth and appear 
to be nothing but a sheer concoction. The circumstances noted 
above, the evidence of the respondent-plaintiff; the disputed 
agreement and the plaint clearly indicates that the disputed 
agreement seems to have been prepared on a blank stamp paper 
on which, the thumb impressions of the illiterate appellant-
defendant had been taken prior to its transcription. The large 
blank spaces on the first and second pages of the disputed 
agreement and the absence of thumb impression/signatures of the 
parties and the attesting witnesses on these two pages, fortifies the 
conclusion that the disputed agreement was transcribed on one of 
the blank stamp papers on which the thumb impression of the 
appellant-defendant had been taken beforehand. 
33. It may be mentioned here that the appellant-defendant 
appeared before the trial court, to give evidence as DW-1 and 

emphatically denied the factum of the execution of the disputed 
agreement. 
He 
also 
denied 
having 
received 
a 
sum 
of 
Rs.16,00,000/- from the respondent-plaintiff. The trial Court 
disbelieved the version of the respondent-plaintiff on the aspect 
that the disputed agreement, for the execution whereof the subject 
suit was filed, was an agreement to sell and instead treated the 
amount mentioned in the disputed agreement to be a loan. 
However, on-going through the cross-examination conducted from 
the appellant-defendant, we do not find any suggestion whatsoever 
that the amount of Rs. 16,00,000/- was given to the appellant-
defendant by way of loan. 
34. On perusal of the plaint and the affidavit by way of 
examination-in-chief of the respondent-plaintiff, a very significant 
fact can be culled out. The respondent-plaintiff did not even make 
a whisper in his deposition affidavit that when he proceeded to the 
office of the Sub-Registrar on 19th September, 2008, he was 
carrying the balance sale consideration with him. Furthermore, it 
is not the case of the respondent-plaintiff that he ever offered the 
balance sale consideration in terms of the disputed agreement to 
the appellant-defendant at any point of time either before 19th 

September, 2008 or on 19th September, 2008, when the 
respondent-plaintiff appeared before the Sub-Registrar. 
35. The respondent-plaintiff admitted that he did not seek 
permission from his department before entering into the 
agreement for purchase of property having high value. It is not the 
case of the respondent-plaintiff that he and the appellant-
defendant were on such close terms that he would readily agree to 
give cash loan to the appellant-defendant without any security. 
36. The factors enumerated above, are sufficient for this Court to 
conclude that the entire case of the respondent-plaintiff regarding 
the execution of the disputed agreement; the alleged payment of 
Rs. 16,00,000/- in cash to the appellant-defendant on 7th May, 
2007 and the alleged appearance of the respondent-plaintiff in the 
office of the Sub-Registrar in the purported exercise of getting the 
sale deed executed in terms of the disputed agreement is nothing 
but a sheer piece of fraud and concoction. 
37. These vital factual aspects were totally glossed over by the 
Courts below while deciding the suit, the first appeal and the 
second appeal. In these facts and circumstances, we find it to be a 
fit case to exercise our powers under Article 136 of the Constitution 
of India so as to interfere with the impugned judgements. 

38. Hence, there cannot be any escape from the conclusion that 
the judgment and decree dated 18th February, 2013 rendered by 
the trial Court, judgment dated 20th March, 2017 passed by the 
First Appellate Court and the judgment dated 25th April, 2018 
rendered by the High Court suffer from perversity on the face of 
the record and hence, the same cannot be sustained. 
39. Resultantly, the appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed. 
40. The impugned judgments are hereby quashed and set aside. 
Decree be prepared accordingly. No order as to costs. 
41. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of...……………….………………….……….J. 

 (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA) 

……………………………………………….J. 
 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 

New Delhi; 
September 27, 2024