IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 12891 of 2022) 

SUB INSPECTOR SANJAY KUMAR.. 

VERSUS 

STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH 
& ORS. 
 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 

1. 
Heard. 
2. 
Leave granted. 
3. 
The appellant herein, while being posted as Sub-Inspector at 
Police Station Hanumanganj, District Khushinagar, Uttar Pradesh, 
was condemned for gross negligence, indifference and selfishness 
in discharge of duties vide office order dated 16th November, 20211 
issued by the Additional Chief Secretary, Home (Police). As a 
consequence, he was handed down a penalty of censure vide letter 
 
1 In short ‘impugned order’. dated 7th March, 2022 issued by the Superintendent of Police, 
District Khushinagar. 
4. 
The relevant part of the impugned order is reproduced 
hereinbelow for the sake of ready reference: - 
“Uttar Pradesh Government 
 
Home (Police) Section-1 
 
Number: U.O.-74(23)/6-P-1-21-107/2021 
 
Lucknow: Date: 16 November 2021 
 
Office Order 
 
In the video conferencing held by the hon'ble Chief Minister on 
dt. 09.09.2021, during the review of disposal of investigations 
of state's law and order, crimes, and the cases registered till dt. 
31.07.2021, in the 12 districts which have disposed of the least 
number of investigations, 03 sub-inspectors and inspectors 
have been identified and after receiving their clarifications, the 
investigating officers' name, designation, current deployment 
details/report, were made available by Addl. Director General 
of Police (Crime), U.P., Lucknow vide letter number DG-7-S 
2(1)/2021 dated 26.09.2021. 
 
2- According to the clarification provided by the Addl. Director 
of Police (Crime) U.P., Lucknow, Mr. Sanjay Kumar, Sub-
Inspector, 
ΡΝΟ-982650369, 
PS 
Hanumanganj, 
District 
Khushinagar didn't show the expected interest in the disposal 
of investigations. This act is a sign of gross negligence, 
indifference and selfishness while performing his duty and is 
highly condemned. 
 
S/d 
 
illegible 
 
(Avnish Kumar Awasthi) 
 
Additional Chief Secretary 

Number and Date as in: 

Copy: Sent to the following for information and necessary 
action: - 
 
(1) Director General of Police, Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow 
 
(2) Additional Director Establishment, U.P., Lucknow General 
of Police, 
 
(3) Additional Director General of Police, Police Headquarters, 
U.P., Lucknow 
 
(4) Additional Director General of Police, Gorakhpur Zone, 
Gorakhpur 
 
(5) Superintendent of Police, Dist. Khushinagar provided 03 
copies with the intention of handing over 01 copy to Mr. Sanjay 
Kumar, Sub- Inspector, PNO-982650369, PS Hanumanganj, 
District Khushinagar and the receipt to be made available to 
the government and censure to be mentioned in their character 
record 
 
(6) Guard Book. 
By Order, 
 
S/d illegible 
 
(Mahendra Prasad Bharti) 
 
Joint Secretary” 
 
5. 
The appellant preferred a writ petition2 before the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad assailing the impugned order and the 
consequent censure entry made in his service book. The learned 
Single Judge dismissed the writ petition denying relief to the 
appellant vide order dated 23rd March, 2022. Being aggrieved, the 
appellant preferred an intra-Court writ appeal3 which came to be 
dismissed by the Division Bench of Allahabad High Court vide 
 
2. 
3 Special Appeal (Defective) No. 150 of 2022. judgment dated 9th May, 2022 which is assailed in the present 
appeal by special leave. 
6. 
Learned counsel for the appellant, vehemently and fervently 
contended that no opportunity to show cause was ever afforded to 
the appellant before imposing the penalty of censure upon him. 
He urged that the impugned order and the consequent 
communication issued by the Superintendent of Police, District 
Khushinagar, are in clear breach of the provisions of the Uttar 
Pradesh Police Officers of the Subordinate Ranks (Punishment and 
Appeal) Rules, 19914 and also suffer from the vice of non-
adherence to the principles of natural justice. 
7. 
The learned counsel for the appellant emphatically referred 
to Rule 5 read with Rule 14(2) of the Rules, 1991 and urged that 
no notice in writing was issued to the appellant before subjecting 
him to the penalty of censure. It was submitted that specific plea 
in this regard was incorporated in the pleadings before the learned 
Single Judge as well as the Division Bench of the High Court. 
However, the pertinent assertion which goes to the root of the 
matter, was not considered by the High Court in the right 
perspective. Learned counsel pointed out that the learned Single 
 
4 In short ‘Rules, 1991’. 

Judge dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellant merely by 
recording oral instructions procured by the Standing Counsel for 
the State and without even requiring the respondents to submit 
their reply. Thus clearly, the decision on the writ petition was made 
without the reply of the State being taken on record and hence, the 
assertions made by the appellant remained uncontroverted. 
8. 
Learned counsel further urged that the specific ground taken 
by the appellant regarding the impugned order having been passed 
without affording an opportunity to show cause or without giving 
any opportunity to make representation against the same, has not 
been traversed by the respondents in the counter affidavit filed in 
this Court. He thus urged that the impugned order dated 16th 
November, 2021 and the letter dated 7th March, 2022 suffers from 
gross violation of the principles of natural justice and are de hors 
the Rules, 1991 and consequently, the appellant deserves relief 
sought for in the appeal. 
9. 
Per-contra, learned Standing Counsel appearing for the State, 
vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions advanced by 
the learned counsel for the appellant. He urged that the Chief 
Minister of Uttar Pradesh, analysed the law and order situation in 
different districts of the State while taking a review meeting with 

the officials of the Home Department. The Chief Minister sought 
information as to whether the investigations in accordance with 
law were being carried out and duly completed by the concerned 
police officials. As a consequence, the Additional Chief Secretary, 
Government of Uttar Pradesh directed the Commissioners of 
Police, Senior Superintendents and Superintendents of Police of 
various districts of the State to submit detailed reports along with 
the names of Investigating Officers, who had not completed the 
investigations and/or submitted a police report before the Court 
in time. 
10. In pursuance of the aforesaid direction, the Circle Officer 
Khadda, District Khushinagar issued a notice dated 25th 
September, 2021 to the appellant seeking response on the issue of 
long pendency of investigations assigned to him. The appellant 
duly submitted his reply to the above notice sent by the Circle 
Officer. As per learned counsel for the respondents, the reply 
offered by the appellant was forwarded to the senior police officials 
and 
was 
found 
to 
be 
unsatisfactory. 
Based 
on 
these 
communications, the Additional Deputy General of Police prepared 
a report furnishing the individual details of three erring 
Investigating Officers from each district. The appellant was 

identified as one of the slack Investigating Officers in the District 
Khushinagar, Uttar Pradesh who had failed to complete the 
minimum number of investigations and his name was included in 
the detailed report, which was submitted to the Government. 
Based on this report, the Additional Chief Secretary, Home (Police) 
issued the impugned order dated 16th November, 2021, 
condemning the appellant for gross negligence, indifference and 
selfishness while performing his duties and not completing the 
assigned investigations within the specified time frame. 
11. In consequence of the above order, the Superintendent of 
Police being the officer competent under the Rules, issued a 
communication dated 7th March, 2022, whereby an adverse entry 
was directed to be recorded in the appellant’s service book. The 
learned counsel for the respondents fervently urged that it is 
incorrect to say that the decision to record the censure entry was 
taken without following the due process of law or without adhering 
to the principles of natural justice. 
12. We have heard the submissions advanced by learned counsel 
for the parties at bar and have gone through the material placed 
on record. 

13. The short question requiring consideration is, whether the 
direction to record the censure entry in the appellant’s service book 
suffers from the vice of non-adherence to the principles of natural 
justice and whether the said action is dehors the Rules, 1991. 
14. The relevant rules of the Rules, 19915 which are germane to 
the controversy at hand are reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“Rule 4 - Punishment 
(1) The following punishments may, for good and sufficient 
reasons and as hereinafter provided, be imposed upon a Police 
Officer, namely: - 
(a) Major Penalties: 
(i) Dismissal from service. 
(ii) Removal from service. 
(iii)Reduction in rank including reduction to a lower scale or 
to a lower stage in a time scale. 
(b) Minor penalties: 
(i) With-holding of promotion. 
(ii) Fine not exceeding one month's pay. 
(iii)With-holding of increment, including stoppage at an 
efficiency bar. 
(iv) Censure. 
Rule 5 - Procedure for award of Punishment 
(1) The cases in which major punishments enumerated in 
clause (a) of sub-rule (1) of Rule-4 may be awarded, shall be 
dealt with in accordance with the procedure laid down in sub-
rule (1) of rule-14. 
(2) The cases in which minor punishments enumerated in 
clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of rule-4 may be awarded, shall be 
dealt with in accordance with the procedure laid down in 
sub-rule (2) of rule-14. 
(3) The cases in which minor penalties mentioned in sub-rules 
(2) and (3) of rule-4 may be awarded shall be dealt with in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in rule-15. 
 
5 Ibid. 

Rule 7- Powers of punishment 
(1) The Government or any officer of police department not 
below the ranks of the Deputy Inspector General may award 
any of the punishments mentioned in rule-4 on any police 
officer. 
(2) The Superintendent of Police may award any of the 
punishments mentioned in sub-clause (iii) of clause (a) and 
clause (b) of sub-rule (1), of rule-4 on Inspectors and Sub-
Inspectors. 
(3) The Superintendent of Police may award any of the 
punishments mentioned in rule-4 on such police officers as are 
below the rank of Sub-Inspectors. 
(4) Subject to the provisions contained in these rules all 
Assistant 
Superintendents 
of 
Police 
and 
Deputy 
Superintendents of Police who have completed two years of 
service as Assistant Superintendents of Police and Deputy 
Superintendents of Police as the case may be, may exercise 
powers of Superintendent of Police except the powers to 
impose major punishments under rule-4. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules Reserve 
Inspector, Inspector of Station Officer may award the 
punishments of drill and fatigue duty to any constable under 
his charge for a period not exceeding three days, but he shall 
inform the Superintendent of Police concerned of his order 
immediately and in any case within 24 hours of passing the 
order. 
Rule 

- 
Procedure 
for 
concluding 
departmental 
proceedings 
(l) Subject to the provisions contained in these Rules, the 
departmental proceedings in the cases referred to in sub-rule 
(1) of rule 5 against the police officers may be conducted in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in Appendix-I. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1) 
punishments in cases referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 5 
may be imposed after informing the police officer in writing 
of the action proposed to be taken against him and of the 
imputations of act or omission on which it is proposed to 
be taken and giving him a reasonable opportunity of 
making such representation as he may wish to make 
against the proposal. 
(3) The charged police officer shall not be represented by 
Counsel in any proceeding instituted under these Rules.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

15. Rule 4 of the Rules, 1991 prescribes the punishments which 
can be awarded to the employees of the Police Department. Rules 
5 and 14 prescribes the procedure to be followed prior to the award 
of such punishment(s) and Rule 7 prescribes the authority 
competent to impose the punishments. A bare perusal of the Rules 
makes it clear that the minor penalties are provided in Rule 4(1)(b) 
of the Rules, 1991 which includes censure, as awarded to the 
appellant, and the procedure for awarding such minor penalties 
has been set out in Rule 14(2) read with Rule 5(2) of the Rules, 
1991. 
16. Rule 14(2) read with Rule 5(2) of the Rules, 1991 provides 
that the minor penalties as provided under Rule 4(1)(b) can be 
imposed only after informing the delinquent police officer in writing 
of the action proposed to be taken against him and of the 
imputations of act or omission on which it is proposed to be taken 
and giving him a reasonable opportunity of making such 
representation as he may wish to make against the proposal. 
17. At this juncture, it is pertinent to mention that in lieu of the 
directions issued by the Additional Chief Secretary, Home (Police) 
to prepare a report concerning the delinquent police officer(s) who 
were not completing the investigation of their cases within the 

specified time frame, the Circle Officer, Khadda, District 
Khushinagar issued a notice dated 25th September, 2021 to the 
appellant requiring him to furnish an explanation and show cause 
regarding a long list of cases pending investigation with him. In 
response to the above notice, the appellant furnished an 
explanation to the Circle Officer, Khadda, District Khushinagar on 
the very same day wherein he claimed that most of his time was 
consumed in managing VIP duties and other external duties 
assigned to him, and consequently, he could not complete the 
investigation of 13 cases pending with him. 
18. A detailed report with the names of three worst performing 
Investigating Officers including that of the appellant was 
forwarded to the Government through the Additional Director 
General of Police. After going through the report, the Additional 
Chief Secretary, Home (Police) issued the impugned order dated 
16th November, 2021 noting the conduct of the appellant and 
observing that he exhibited signs of gross negligence, indifference 
and selfishness while performing the duties and that such conduct 
was highly condemnable. The said order was forwarded to the 
Superintendent of Police who passed the consequential order 

dated 7th March, 2022 with a direction to record a censure entry 
on the personal file of the appellant. 
19. Rule 7(2) of the Rules, 1991, empowers the Superintendent 
of Police to award the punishments under sub-clause (iii) of clause 
(a) and clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 4 on Inspectors and Sub-
Inspectors. Therefore, without any doubt, the Superintendent of 
Police was having the jurisdiction to award minor penalty of 
censure to the appellant who was, at the relevant point of time, 
posted as the Sub-Inspector of Police at Police Station 
Hanumanganj, District Khushinagar, Uttar Pradesh. 
20. Apparently thus, the censure entry directed to be recorded 
vide letter dated 7th March, 2022, was awarded by the 
Superintendent of Police, District Khushinagar, who was 
competent to do so as per Rule 7(2) of the Rules, 1991. The order 
dated 16th November, 2021 was passed by the Additional Chief 
Secretary, Home (Police), after taking into consideration the entire 
material on record including the detailed factual report forwarded 
by the Additional Director General of Police which included the 
explanation of the appellant and assigned reasons for reaching the 
conclusion that the appellant did not show interest in the disposal 
of the investigations which was treated to be a sign of gross 

negligence, indifference and selfishness while performing duties 
and was thus highly condemnable. Therefore, the contention 
advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant that the censure 
entry was directed to be recorded by an Officer who was not 
competent and that the same suffers from the vice of non-
adherence to the rules/principles of nature justice is not tenable. 
21. Resultantly, we are of the view that the High Court committed 
no error whatsoever in rejecting the writ petition and writ appeal 
preferred by the appellant, assailing the censure entry. 
22. The appeal lacks merit and is dismissed. No order as to costs. 
23. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of...……..………….………………….……….J. 

(PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA) 

……………………………………………….J. 
(SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
September 27, 2024