IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

((Crl.) No. 6303 of 2019)
HARSHAD GUPTA...Appellant(s)
Vs.
THE STATE OF CHHATTISGARH...Respondent(s)
ORDER
Leave granted. 
2.
The appellant's grievance is against the Judgment
dated 13.05.2019 passed by the High Court of Chhattisgarh at
Bilaspur, whereby his prayer to re-open the judgment of his
conviction, hear the arguments afresh by the new Presiding
Officer, and then deliver a judgment of conviction or
acquittal, has been turned down. The facts may be noticed
briefly: 
3.
FIR No. 03/13 was registered on 28.05.2013 at
Police Station Jashpur under Sections 376 and 506 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 (in short, the “IPC”). The appellant is the
principal accused. His father was also named as accused of
threatening the victim with dire consequences if she would not
withdraw the complaint. The Trial Court framed charges under
Sections 376(1) and 506 of the IPC against the appellant, in
2013. The Sessions trial was conducted and the final hearing

was also concluded. The learned Additional Session’s Judge,
vide order dated 28.04.2015, adjourned the case for 30.04.2015
for pronouncement of judgment. The appellant was held guilty
and convicted vide judgment pronounced on 30.04.2015.
4.
Before he could be heard on the quantum of the
sentence, the appellant moved an application on 30.04.2015
under Section 317 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in
short, the “Cr.P.C.”) to exempt him from personal appearance
on the ground that he had met with an accident. In view of
that application, the matter was adjourned on a few occasions
to enable the appellant to recover from the accident. 
5.
In the meanwhile, the Presiding Officer of the
Court, namely, Mr. J. R. Banjara, who had convicted the
appellant, was transferred between 04.05.2015 and 15.05.2015.
A new Presiding Officer, namely, Mr. Mohammad Rizwan Khan was
posted in his place. 
6.
After that, the appellant approached the High Court
seeking a direction to the new Presiding Officer to re-hear the
case, including on the question of conviction. He relied upon
Sections 353 and 354 of the Cr.P.C. It was contended that the
new Presiding Officer was obligated not only to hear the
appellant on the question of sentence but also on the point of
conviction in terms of the above-mentioned provisions. The High
Court, vide interim order dated 19.06.2015, stayed the
proceedings before the Trial Court. Finally, vide the impugned
order dated 13.05.2019, the petition filed by the appellant was
dismissed, having found that:.(i) 
the judgment of conviction was duly pronounced
by learned Additional Sessions Judge, Mr. J.R. Ban-
jara; and.(ii) there was no illegality in the successor-in-of-
fice of the Court of Additional Sessions Judge to
hear and determine the quantum of the sentence, even
in a case where the judgment of conviction was pro-
nounced by his predecessor-in-office. 
7.
The High Court, consequently, directed the new
Presiding Officer to hear the appellant on the question of
sentence and pass an appropriate order in terms of Section
235(2) of the Cr.P.C. 
8.
The aggrieved appellant is before us. 
9.
We have heard learned Senior Counsel/counsel for
the parties and perused the record.
10.
Section 235 of the Cr.P.C. reads as follows: 
“ Judgment of acquittal or conviction
1.
After hearing arguments and points of law
(if any), the Judge shall give a judgment in
the case.
2. If the accused is convicted, the Judge
shall, unless he proceeds in accordance with
the provisions of section 360 hear the accused
on the question of sentence, and then pass
sentence on him according to law.”
11.
A plain reading of the provision leaves no room to
doubt that a judgment of conviction shall have two components;
namely,

Judgment on the point of conviction; and

Where the accused is convicted, a separate order
of sentence to be passed according to law, after
hearing the accused on the question of sentence.
12.
The aforesaid provision mandates that once the
judgment of conviction is delivered, the accused has a right to
be heard on the quantum of the sentence. This is so, in view of
the well-established principle of law that various relevant
factors, including mitigating circumstances, if any, are to be
kept in mind by the Court while awarding an adequate and
proportionate sentence.
13.
It is not in dispute that in deference to Section
235(1) of the Cr.P.C., the appellant was duly heard and a
judgment of conviction was recorded and pronounced on
30.04.2015. 
14.
Consequential thereto, the appellant was entitled
to be heard on the question of sentence. Since the appellant
himself had been seeking adjournments and exemption from
personal appearance due to the injuries suffered by him in a
road accident and meanwhile the Presiding Officer had been
transferred, it was but natural that the new Presiding Officer
was required to hear the appellant on the quantum of the
sentence, for faithful compliance with Section 235(2) of the
Cr.P.C. and then, to pass an appropriate order of sentence. 
 
15.
The process and procedure contemplated under

Section 235(2) of the Cr.P.C. cannot annul the judgment of
conviction recorded under sub-section (1) thereof. Both
clauses operate in their respective fields, though sub-section
(2) is contingent upon the outcome under sub-section (1) of
Section 235 of the Cr.P.C. The occasion to comply with sub-
section (2) of Section 235, thus, arises only when there is a
judgment of conviction passed under Section 235(1) of the
Cr.P.C. 
16.
The contention of the appellant, that with the
transfer of the Presiding Officer post his conviction, the new
Presiding Officer was obligated to hear him afresh even on the
question of conviction, is wholly misconceived and misdirected.
Once the judgment dated 30.04.2015 was pronounced, the
conviction of the appellant stood finalized within the meaning
of Section 235(1) of the Cr.P.C., whereupon the Trial Court
became functus officio for the purpose of sub-section (1) of
Section 235 of the Cr.P.C. The only issue that survived
thereafter was of the quantum of sentence for which, the
procedure contemplated under sub-section (2) was to be complied
with. The High Court has, thus, rightly held that the successor
officer would hear the appellant on the question of sentence
and pass an appropriate order. We see no legal infirmity in the
impugned order passed by the High Court.
17.
Learned senior counsel for the appellant vehemently
urges that the judgment of conviction, granted against the
appellant, does not satisfy the ingredients of Section 353 read
with Section 354 of the Cr.P.C. and hence, there is no

`judgment’ rendered in the eyes of law within the meaning of
sub-section (1) of Section 235 of the Cr.P.C.
18.
We are, however, not impressed by the submission. We
say so for the reason that the Trial Court delivered a self-
speaking judgment of conviction which satisfies all the
constituents illustrated in Section 354(1) of the Cr.P.C.
Further, the operative part of the Judgment as well as the
order passed on that very date for granting exemption from
personal appearance to the appellant, reveal that the said
judgment of conviction was read out by the Presiding Officer in
open court, in the presence of the appellant’s counsel, and it
was well understood by his pleader. The Presiding Officer
thus, followed the procedure envisaged under sub-section (1) of
Section 353 of the Cr.P.C. The next step to be taken by the
Presiding Officer, was to list the case to accord a hearing to
the appellant on the quantum of sentence. That is precisely
what has been done in the instant case. We are, thus, of the
view that there is not even a fragment of violation of Sections
353 or 354 of the Cr.P.C., as claimed on behalf of the
appellant. 
19.
There is thus no merit in this appeal which is
consequently dismissed. 
20.
The Presiding Officer, presently posted in the
concerned trial Court, is directed to hear the appellant on the
question of sentence as early as possible but not later than
one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this Order.
The necessary consequences will follow.

21.
The appellant is directed to surrender before the
Trial Court on 04.11.2024 at 10.00 a.m. for being taken into
judicial custody. He shall be produced before the Trial Court
on the date of hearing on the quantum of sentence as also the
date of pronouncement of the order on sentence. In case he
absents or absconds, the law must take its own course. The
Police Authorities are directed to ensure that the appellant
remains present before the Court to meet the necessary
consequences.
22.
Ordered accordingly.

New Delhi;
October 01, 2024.

ITEM NO.16 COURT NO.4 SECTION II-C
 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A
 RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No(s). 6303/2019
( impugned final judgment and order dated 13-05-2019
in CRLMP No. 444/2015 passed by the High Court of Chhatisgarh at
Bilaspur)
HARSHAD GUPTA Petitioner(s)
 VERSUS
THE STATE OF CHHATTISGARH Respondent(s)
(IA No. 106189/2019 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)
 
Date: 01-10-2024 This matter was called on for hearing today.
CORAM: 
 Justice SURYA KANT
 Justice UJJAL BHUYAN
For Petitioner(s) Dr. Rajesh Pandey, Sr. Adv.
 Mr. Prashant Kumar Umrao, AOR
 Ms. Nishi Prabha Singh, Adv.
 
For Respondent(s) Mr. Arjun D Singh, Adv.
 Ms. Ankita Sharma, AOR 
 UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
 ORDER
Leave granted. 
The appeal is dismissed in terms of signed 
order. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stands disposed of.
(NEETA SAPRA) (PREETHI T.C.)
COURT MASTER (SH) ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
(Signed order is placed on the file)