etc. 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE/ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

Chief Commissioner of Central Goods 
and Service Tax & Ors. … Appellants 
 
versus 

M/s Safari Retreats Private Ltd. & Ors. … Respondents 

with 
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NOS. 804 of 2022 & 1030 of 2022 
 
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NOS. 1036 of 2022 & 90 of 2023 
 
and 

JUDGMENT 

ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
The issues which broadly arise in this group of matters 
concern clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (5) of Section 17 of 

 etc. the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (“the CGST Act”). 
There is a challenge to the constitutional validity of the said 
provision. There is a prayer for reading down the said 
provision. 
2. 
In Civil Appeal Nos. 2948 and 2949 of 2023, the first 
respondent is engaged in the construction of a shopping mall 
for the purpose of letting out premises in the malls to different 
tenants. Vast quantities of material, inputs and services are 
required for the construction of the malls in the form of cement, 
sand, steel, aluminium, wires, plywood, paint, lifts, escalators, 
air-conditioning plants, electrical equipment, transformers, 
building automation systems etc., and also consultancy 
services, architectural services, legal and other professional 
services, engineering services and other services including the 
services of a special team of international designers specialised 
in the construction of Malls. These goods and services used in 
the construction of the mall are taxable under the CGST Act. It 
is the case of the first respondent that it has accumulated input 
credit of GST amounting to more than Rs. 34 crores by the 
purchase/supply of goods and services consumed and used in 
the construction of the shopping mall. At the same time, the 
first respondent's letting out of units in the shopping mall 
attracts CGST based on the rent received by the first 
respondent since it amounts to the supply of service under the 
CGST Act. Therefore, the first respondent was desirous of 
availing the Input Tax Credit (ITC) accumulated against the 
rental income received by it upon letting out the mall premises. etc. 

According to the first respondent, when it approached the 
concerned authorities, it was advised to deposit GST on rent 
without deducting ITC because of the exception carved out by 
Section 17(5)(d). 
3. 
The first respondent filed a writ petition before the High 
Court of Orissa seeking a declaration that Section 17(5)(d) of 
the CGST Act and the corresponding provisions of the Orissa 
Goods and Services Act, 2017 do not apply to the construction 
of immovable property intended for letting out on rent. A 
prayer in the alternative was made that in the event it is held 
that the bar under Section 17(5)(d) is applicable even to the 
construction of immovable property intended for letting out, a 
declaration be issued that Section 17(5)(d) is violative of 
Articles 14 and 19 (1)(g) of the Constitution of India. A 
consequential prayer was made to issue a writ of mandamus to 
enjoin the present appellants, who were respondents in the writ 
petition, to grant the benefit of ITC to the first and second 
respondents. 
4. 
By the impugned judgment dated 17th April 2019, the 
High Court held that in view of the decision of this Court in the 
case of Eicher Motors Limited & Anr. v. Union of India & 
Ors.1, Section 17(5)(d) was required to be read down as the very 
purpose of ITC is to benefit the assessee. The High Court held 
that if the assessee is required to pay GST on the rental income 
from the mall, it is entitled to ITC on the GST paid on the 
 
1 (1999) 

 etc. construction of the mall. It was held that the narrow 
interpretation given by the Department to Section 17(5)(d) 
would frustrate the very object of the Act. takes exception to the same judgment. 
5. 
In the Writ Petitions, the petitioners contend that due to 
the restrictions imposed by Section 17(5)(c) and Section 
17(5)(d) of the CGST Act, they are unable to avail the credit on 
GST paid on goods and services used in the construction of 
factory premises, buildings etc against the GST received by 
them for the renting/leasing/letting out etc. of the premises. 
GST is being recovered on the supply of goods and services 
used in the construction of commercial office buildings, and 
GST is also being recovered on rentals collected. Accordingly, 
several writ petitions have been preferred seeking the following 
reliefs: 
a. challenging clauses (c) 
and (d) of Section 17(5) of the CGST Act to the extent to 
which it excludes works contract services and goods from 
ITC. It is also prayed that the bar imposed by Section 
16(4) should not apply to the petitioner; 
b. challenging the validity 
of Section 17(5)(d) of the CGST Act; 
c. challenging the validity 
of clauses (c) and (d) of Section 17(5) of the CGST Act. 
There is another prayer to read down the provisions; 

 etc. d. challenging the 
constitutional validity of clauses (c) and (d) of Section 
17(5). There is a prayer to read down the clauses (c) and 
(d) of Section 17(5) and Section 16(4) of the CGST Act; 
e. challenging the 
constitutional validity of clauses (c) and (d) of Section 
17(5). There is a prayer to read down the clauses (c) and 
(d) of Section 17(5) and Section 16(4) of the CGST Act; 
and 
f. containing similar 
prayers 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF ASSESSEES 
6. 
Very detailed submissions have been made by the parties 
to the civil appeals, intervenors and parties to the writ 
petitions. We find that the submissions made by the learned 
counsel for the assessees and the intervenors are repetitive. 
There are a large number of decisions relied upon, whether 
relevant or irrelevant. Brevity is the hallmark of good advocacy. 
It would be ideal if parties on one side file joint written 
submissions. 
The 
Judges 
and 
lawyers 
are 
humans. 
Sometimes, bulky compilations and submissions can be 
counterproductive. 
7. 
Assessees have submitted that clauses (c) and (d) and 
sub-section (5) of Section 17 are violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(g) 
and 300A of the Constitution of India. The submissions 

 etc. concerning the challenge to constitutional validity can be 
summarised as follows: 
a. Section 17(5)(d) is violative of Article 14 since it classifies 
assessees engaged in the business of constructing 
immovable properties and then renting/leasing/letting 
out etc. premises within the said immovable properties 
on the same footing as assessees engaged in the business 
of constructing immovable properties and then selling the 
immovable properties or premises within the said 
immovable properties, by denying them ITC for their 
business expenditure, i.e., the expenditure incurred in 
constructing the immovable properties. Therefore, it is 
submitted that the provision treats unequals as equals 
and contravenes the principle of GST Law, i.e., to allow 
ITC for business expenditure. Therefore, the provisions 
are arbitrary, irrational and unreasonable. b. There is no intelligible differentia on the basis of which 
such classification is done. Creation of an immovable 
property is not a differentia. The contention is that works 
contracts, namely the contracts for the construction of 
immovable property wherein transfer of property is 
involved, are treated as a supply of services. Therefore, 
de jure, they are treated as a supply of services 
notwithstanding 
the 
immovable 
character 
of 
the 
deliverable. It is submitted that there are cases where a 
transaction may seemingly appear to involve a supply of 
goods, but in essence, it is a transaction involving 

 etc. something else. An illustration is given of a lawyer 
drafting a legal contract. In such a case, the deliverable 
may be in the form of documents handed over to the 
client and, therefore, apparently may appear to be a 
supply of goods. However, it is a legal service rendered, 
which is what the bargain was for. In short, the dominant 
intention test, as laid down in the case of Bharat 
Sanchar Nigam Limited & Anr. v. Union of India & 
Ors.2, must be applied. It is submitted that under the 
CGST Act, a works contract involving the creation of 
immovable property is treated as a supply of services. 
Thus, the nature of the deliverable, namely, building, 
etc., has no relevance to the levy of GST. Under the CGST 
Act, the immovable character of the deliverables, such as 
buildings, etc., under a works contract is entirely 
disregarded. Therefore, such immovable property cannot 
be said to exist under the architecture of GST. In short, 
the submission is that the differentia canvassed by the 
State, which is an immovable characteristic of the 
deliverable under the works contract, is artificial and 
non-existent in the eyes of the law. As intelligible 
differentia does not exist, the first condition of the twin 
test can be said to be satisfied; 
c. Break in the credit chain is also not a differentia, since, 
in the assessees’ case, unlike in the case of assessees 
selling immovable properties, there is no break in the 
 
2 (2006) 

 etc. credit chain. The break arises when the recipient uses the 
supplier's output to make non-taxable transactions for 
which GST is not payable by the recipient. In such a 
case, credit cannot be utilised in the subsequent leg of 
the transaction from where the break in the chain took 
place. Several illustrations have been given in support of 
this submission. It was submitted that there is no break 
in the chain at any of the levels, starting from the sub-
contractor to the main contractor and the petitioner, 
since all three entities are liable to output GST, and 
therefore, in such a case, denial of credit cannot be 
justified; 
d. It is submitted that even assuming that coming into 
existence of an immovable property is an intelligible 
differentia, it has no nexus with the objects of the CGST 
Act. The reason is that denying credit in such cases 
essentially perpetuates and continues the cascading 
effect of tax, contrary to the very object of the CGST Act 
of eliminating the cascading effect of tax and achieving 
tax neutrality. For example, if a manufacturer hires a 
contractor to build a factory building through a works 
contract, the manufacturer would have to pay GST for the 
services rendered by the contractor. If the manufacturer 
is not permitted to avail ITC for the GST so paid, the GST 
would be included in the cost of the output product price, 
upon which further GST would be levied, leading to tax 

 etc. on tax. If what is being supplied by the seller is a service, 
it has to be necessarily received as a service by the buyer; 
e. Section 17(5)(c) and (d) remain vague due to the absence 
of definitions of the expressions “on its own account” and 
“plant or machinery”. The distinction between the 
expression “plant and machinery” used in Section 17(5)(c) 
and the expression “plant or machinery” used in Section 
17(5)(d) has not been clarified by the Government. 
Therefore, the provisions suffer from vagueness. It is 
submitted that if a provision is very vague, it can be 
struck down, as held in the case of Shreya Singhal v. 
Union of India3. f. It is submitted that ITC is the bedrock of the GST 
framework. The right to avail of ITC is a statutory right 
in terms of Section 16 of the GST Act. The receipt of 
rental income and tax payable are direct consequences of 
the construction undertaken. By blocking the ITC on the 
rentals collected by the assessee who has constructed the 
building, the State is unjustly enriching itself and 
violating the right to avail ITC flowing from Section 300A 
of the Constitution of India. Reliance is also placed on a 
decision of this Court in the case of Union of India v. 
Bharti Airtel Limited & Ors.4; and 
 
3 (2015) 
4 (2021) SCC OnLine SC 1006 

 etc. g. Reliance has been placed on numerous decisions 
concerning 
the 
principles 
for 
examining 
the 
constitutional validity of taxation statutes. It is submitted 
that though, in the matters of taxing Statutes, the 
legislature enjoys a very wide latitude, and the Courts are 
expected to show deference to legislative choices, a 
decision of this Court in the case of Federation of Hotel 
& Restaurant Association of India, etc. v. Union of 
India and Ors.5 holds that wide latitude is also subject 
to exceptions, it is argued that “wide latitude” does not 
mean “wild latitude”. On the twin test of reasonable 
classification, reliance was placed on various decisions, 
including those in the case of R.K Garg v. Union of India 
and Ors.6, Twyford Tea Co. Ltd. and Anr. v. State of 
Kerala and Anr.7, Union of India and Ors. v. Nitdip 
Textile Processors Pvt. Ltd. and Anr.8. Varying 
standards of review under the doctrine of classification 
are typically applied to economic and non-economic 
legislation, with the rational basis test being applied to 
economic legislation. Various decisions were relied upon 
dealing with the wide latitude doctrine in relation to 
economic legislations. Reliance was placed on the 
Government of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. v. P. Laxmi 
Devi9, Assistant Commissioner of Urban Land Tax 
 
5 (1989) 
6 (1981) 
7 (1970) 
8 (2012) 
9 (2008) 

 etc. and Ors. v. Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd., 
Etc.10, Jindal Stainless Ltd. and Anr. v. State of 
Haryana and Ors.11 and State of Tamil Nadu and 
Anr. v. National South Indian River Interlinking 
Agriculturist Association12. The true import of the 
legislative provision is to be understood from the plain 
reading of the provision and not on the basis of affidavits 
or submissions of the State. A decision in the case of 
Sanjeev Coke Manufacturing Company v. M/s Bharat 
Coking Coal Ltd. & Anr.13 is relied upon. 
8. 
Assessees have submitted that clauses (c) and (d) and 
sub-section (5) of Section 17 must be read down to the extent 
that ITC is blocked for suppliers who procure taxable works 
contract services, goods or services on the input side and then 
provide taxable supplies on the output side. The submissions 
about reading down clauses (c) and (d) of Section 17(5) of the 
CGST Act can be summarised as follows: 
a. The statement of objects and reasons of the Constitution 
(122nd Amendment) Bill, 2014 shows that Articles 246A 
and 279A were introduced to simplify the indirect tax 
regime to prevent the cascading effect of multiplicity of 
taxes. The cascading effect of taxes can be removed only 
by introducing a system for allowance of ITC so that there 
would not be any missing link in the chain or series of 
 
10 (1969) 
11 (2017) 
12 (2021) 
13 (1983) 

 etc. transactions culminating into deliverable goods and 
services or both to the ultimate end-user, who is the 
customer. Reliance has been placed on the observations 
made by this Court in the case of Union of India & Anr 
v. Mohit Minerals Pvt. Ltd.14. The entire GST regime 
has been so designed that the credit of tax paid at every 
stage of value addition from the point of manufacture to 
the point of consumption could be availed at the next 
stage. It provides for seamless transfer of ITC from one 
stage to another. Moreover, GST is a destination-based 
tax on consumption, and accordingly, the final burden of 
the tax must be borne by the customers and not the 
businesses. If the entire scheme of the CGST Act is 
perused, except for clauses (c) and (d) of Section 17(5), 
the ITC is not denied when the transaction is from 
business to business. b. The 
assessees 
pay 
substantial 
amounts 
for 
the 
construction of immovable properties and are levied 
CGST on the same. However, since they are not permitted 
to avail of the CGST paid as ITC, it gets added to the price 
of services they supply, i.e., renting/leasing/letting out, 
etc. Further, CGST is leviable on the supply of these 
services, resulting in tax on tax or the cascading effect of 
tax. Moreover, due to the denial of ITC, the assessees 
have to bear the tax burden. Thus, the interpretation put 
by revenue to clauses (c) and (d) of Section 17(5), as per 
 
14 (2022) 

 etc. which ITC is denied to assessees on construction 
expenditure, results in the cascading effect of taxes and 
denial of credit for business expenditure, which is in 
direct contradiction of the objects of GST Law as 
elaborated previously. It is submitted that ITC cannot be 
denied solely because immovable properties are created 
in the assessee’s business. The primary condition for 
availing of ITC is the nexus between the assessee's input 
and output business activities, which exists in the 
assessee’s case. Direct corelation with input services or 
output services is not necessary to avail of the benefit of 
ITC. c. It is submitted that the phrase “on its own account” 
should be read down and given a purposive construction 
instead of a myopic one. The phrase should be deemed to 
mean when construction is done for personal use and not 
for services, i.e., credit should be denied only when goods 
and services are utilised for the construction of 
immovable property for his own purposes, like an office 
building or factory building. In such a case, no further 
GST on the sale of such a building occurs and, therefore, 
a chain of taxability breaks. However, when such 
immovable property is not being used by the assessee 
itself but is used for other supplies, such as renting 
property or supply of hotel accommodation services, etc., 
the same should not be covered by the expression ‘on his 
own account’. Therefore, when an immovable property 

 etc. itself is a means by which business is being carried out, 
like letting out for short-term purposes by a hotel, the 
embargo under Section 17(5)(d) on ITC will not apply as 
it cannot be construed on his own account. It is 
submitted that this manner of reading down will ensure 
that in cases where there is no breakage in the chain of 
taxable supply, ITC is available to a taxable person who 
pays output tax. Moreover, this interpretation will avoid 
the cascading effects of tax. d. In the submissions made by assessees, principles of 
reading down were sought to be invoked based on the 
decision of this Court in the case of Indian Social Action 
Forum (INSAF) v. Union of India15. Reliance was also 
placed on a decision of this Court in the case of Delhi 
Transport Corporation v. DTC Mazdoor Congress & 
Ors.16. 
9. 
Assessees have submitted that Section 17(5)(d) of the 
CGST Act can be interpreted in a manner that ITC is available 
to them for the construction of immovable property used for the 
purpose of further output supply. Shri Arvind P Datar, the 
learned senior counsel appearing in Writ Petition (C) No. 804 of 
2022 contended that the conclusion rendered by the Orissa 
High Court in the impugned judgment could have been reached 
 
15 (2021) 
16 (1991) Supp (1) SCC 600 

 etc. without reading down Section 17(5)(d). The contention is 
founded on a three-pronged argument: 
a. Firstly, it is submitted that Clause (d) exempts “plant or 
machinery” from blocked credit, which is distinct from 
the expression “plant and machinery” used in Clause (c). 
Therefore, the explanation to sub-section (6) of Section 
17, which defines “plant and machinery” is not applicable 
to the Clause (d). Revenue has opposed this contention 
by submitting that ‘or’ must be read as ‘and’ stating it to 
be the mistake of the legislature and contending that 
assigning distinct meaning to the two clauses would 
result in unequal treatment of works contract services for 
the construction of immovable properties under clause (c) 
and goods and services for the construction of immovable 
properties under clause (d). The submissions in relation 
to this can be summarised as follows: 
• 
Section 17, being an exception to the general rule 
under Section 16, must be construed strictly. The 
expression “plant and machinery” has been used at 
least ten times in Chapters V and VI of the CGST Act, 
and the expression “plant or machinery” occurs only 
once in Section 17(5)(d). Therefore, the intention of 
the legislature to treat the expression “plant or 
machinery” differently from the expression “plant and 
machinery” is apparent. etc. 

• 
In the model GST law, which the GST Council 
Secretariat circulated in November 2016 for inviting 
suggestions and comments, the expression “plant and 
machinery” was used both in clauses (c) and (d) of 
Section 17(5). However, while enacting the law, the 
legislature has advisedly used the expression “plant 
and machinery” in clause (c) and “plant or machinery” 
in clause (d) of Section 17(5). Therefore, the intention 
of the legislature cannot be brushed aside by 
contending that the use of the word “or” in Section 
17(5)(d) is a mistake of the legislature. 
• 
The expression “plant or machinery” has not been 
defined under the CGST Act. The definition of “plant 
and machinery” provided in the explanation to Section 
17 will not apply to the expression “plant or 
machinery”. Since the legislature has intentionally 
used two different expressions in clauses (c) and (d) of 
Section 17(5), different meanings will have to be 
assigned to these expressions. 
• 
Clauses (c) and (d) of Section 17(5) give unequal 
treatment to unequals. Though they may appear to 
be similar, they are quite different from each other. 
Besides using different expressions, clauses (c) and (d) 
use a completely different language. Clause (c) applies 
to the works contract, which will not per se apply to 
clause (d). The classes of cases covered by clauses (c) 

 etc. and (d) of Section 17(5) are two separate classes and 
the same cannot be treated equally. b. Secondly, it is submitted that malls, hotels, warehouses, 
etc., are ‘plants’ and, therefore, are exempted from the 
provision. The submissions in relation to this can be 
summarised as follows: 
• 
The word “plant” is not defined under the CGST Act or 
the General Clauses Act, 1897. It is also not defined 
in any of the State GST enactments. Reliance was 
placed on a decision of this Court in the case of 
Indcon Structurals (P) Ltd. v. Commissioner of 
Central Excise, Chennai17 in support of the 
proposition that the words and expressions in taxing 
statute unless defined in the statute itself, have to be 
understood in the sense that the person dealing with 
them 
understands 
them 
as 
per 
the 
trade 
understanding, commercial and technical practice 
and usage. Reliance was also placed on a decision of 
this Court in the case of CIT, Andhra Pradesh v. Taj 
Mahal Hotel, Secunderabad18 wherein this court 
held that the word “plant” means land, building, 
machinery, apparatus and fixtures employed in 
carrying on trade and other industrial business. 
 
17 (2006) 
18 (1971) 

 etc. 

• 
Functionality or essentiality tests must be applied to 
decide what a plant is. Ultimately, a plant is an 
apparatus used by a businessman for carrying on his 
business. It does not include his stock in trade, but it 
does include all goods and property, whether movable 
or immovable. Apart from holding that a generating 
station building, hospital, and pond are plants, this 
Court has also held that even a dry dock is a plant. A 
building or a warehouse must be considered a ‘plant’ 
within the meaning of Section 17(5)(d) if it serves as 
an essential tool of trade with which business is 
carried on. However, if it merely serves as a setting in 
which business is carried on, it will not qualify as a 
‘plant’. 
• 
Since buildings have been specifically excluded from 
the definition of “plant and machinery” in the 
explanation to sub-section (5) of Section 17, the word 
'plant' in the expression 'plant or machinery' must be 
taken in its natural sense, which will include 
buildings. 
• 
In support of the submission that a shopping mall 
could be treated as a plant, which will fall in the 
exception carved out to Section 17(5)(d), reliance was 
placed on the decision of this Court in the case of CIT, 
Trivandrum v. Anand Theatres19 wherein it was 
 
19 (2000) 

 etc. held that when a building is specially designed and 
constructed with some special features to attract the 
customers, the building could be treated as a plant. 
In the case of Commissioner of Income Tax, 
Karnataka v. Karnataka Power Corporation20, 
this Court held that an electricity power generating 
station building would have to be treated as a plant as 
it would satisfy the functional test or test of 
essentiality. This Court further held that the 
judgment in the case of Anand Theatres19 would be 
limited 
to 
buildings 
used 
for 
hotels 
or 
cinemas/theatres. Reliance was also placed on the 
decision in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax 
v. Victory Aqua Farm Ltd.,21 which holds that ponds 
specially designed for doing business of aquaculture 
of prawns should be treated as plants for the purposes 
of the Income Tax Act. 
• 
Reliance has been placed on numerous decisions 
concerning the principles for interpreting taxation 
statutes. Usually, a taxation Statute calls for strict 
interpretation, as held in the decision of this Court in 
the case of Commissioner of Customs (Import), 
Mumbai v. Dileep Kumar & Company & Ors.22 It 
is equally well settled that when two interpretations of 
a provision in a taxing Statute are possible, the Court 
 
20 (2002) 
21 (2016) 
22 (2018) 

 etc. would ordinarily interpret the provisions in favour of 
the assessee and against the revenue. Reliance was 
placed on this behalf in the case of Sneh Enterprises 
v. Commissioner of Customs, New Delhi23 and 
Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal 1, 
Calcutta v. M/s Vegetables Products Ltd.24 It is 
submitted that if one reads Section 17 objectively, it 
would be noticed that the restrictions on availing ITC 
are imposed on a reasonable basis. The benefit of ITC 
is excluded when the services are used for personal 
purposes or for providing exempted services, or if the 
supply is outside the ambit of levying GST. However, 
where the taxing chain continues, ITC is not 
restricted. It is submitted that the Court shall not 
interpret a statutory provision in such a manner that 
it would create an additional fiscal burden on a 
person. c. Thirdly, 
it 
is 
submitted 
that 
services 
of 
renting/leasing/letting out, etc., in relation to immovable 
property constitute supply. Clause 2 of Schedule II 
provides that any lease or letting out of the building, 
including a commercial, industrial or residential complex 
for business or commerce, is a supply of service. Clause 
5(a) of Schedule II provides that renting an immovable 
property is a supply of service. Clause 5(b) of Schedule II 
 
23 (2006) 
24 (1973) 

 etc. provides that the construction of a complex, building, 
civil structure or a part thereof intended for sale to a 
buyer, wholly or partly, is also a supply of service, except 
where the entire consideration has been received after 
issuance of the completion certificate or after its first 
occupation, whichever is earlier. Therefore, ITC accrued 
on construction of immovable property can be availed 
against these services. 
Miscellaneous Submissions 
10. It is submitted that even though sub-Section (5) of 
Section 17 starts with the non-obstante clause, it cannot be 
said that the legislature intended to override Section 16(1) in 
its entirety. It is submitted that the non-obstante clause in 
Section 17(5) cannot cut down the construction or restrict the 
scope of operation of Section 16(1). Reliance was placed on a 
decision of this Court in the case of R.S. Raghunath v. State 
of Karnataka & Anr.25; 
11. 
It is pointed out that Section 17(5)(c) carves out an 
exception only for works contracts, assuming that this is the 
only category of service where there is no breakage in the chain 
of taxable supplies. It is submitted that while Section 17(5)(c) 
allows ITC on works contracts for contractors, ITC has been 
blocked for other developers; 
 
12. 
The classification sought to be invoked by the Revenue 
leads to invidious discrimination within the provision in as 
 
25 (1992) 

 etc. much as credit has been allowed for the construction of 
immovable plant and machinery during the execution of a 
works contract and for the construction of a building during 
the execution of work by the sub-contractor under its work 
contract with the main contractor; 
 
13. 
It is submitted that Section 16(1) of the CGST Act is not 
pari materia with the provisions of the Tamil Nadu Value Added 
Tax Act, 2006. Therefore, the decisions relied upon by learned 
ASG will have no application. It is submitted that the decision 
of this Court in the case of Union of India & Ors v. VKC 
Footsteps India Pvt. Ltd.26 is not relevant as this Court did 
not have an occasion to consider the implications of statutory 
entitlement to ITC. 
SUBMISSIONS OF THE REVENUE 
14. 
Shri N. Venkataraman, learned Additional Solicitor 
General, has made detailed submissions. He brought our 
attention to provisions regarding taxation on goods and 
services in the pre-GST and post-GST eras. He submitted that 
in the GST regime, the taxable event is one common event, 
namely, the supply of goods and services. He invited the 
attention of the Court to the definition of goods and services in 
Article 366 of the Constitution. He submits that the distinction 
between goods and services has not been obliterated. He also 
pointed out the historical evolution of ITC, starting from 
 
26 (2022) 

 etc. 

MODVAT credit, which was made available to inputs and raw 
materials and later extended to capital goods. 
15. 
His submissions about the challenge to constitutional 
validity can be summarised as follows: 
a. Classification of the assessees on the same footing as 
assessees engaged in the business of constructing 
immovable properties and then selling the immovable 
properties 
is 
justified 
on 
the 
ground 
that 
the 
classification has been done on the basis of intelligible 
differentia which has rational nexus with the object of 
GST. The transactions lead to the creation of immovable 
property, which itself is the intelligible differentia based 
on 
which 
classification 
has 
been 
done. 
Such 
classification has a rational nexus since there is a break 
in the tax chain and therefore, the ITC is being denied; 
b. Denial of ITC was justified on the ground that it is not a 
fundamental or constitutional right. He submitted that 
ITC is a statutory right, and in the absence of the right 
under the statute, the Court cannot issue a mandamus 
to grant ITC. Reliance has been placed upon the decision 
of this Court in the case of ALD Automotive Pvt. Ltd. v. 
Commercial Tax Officer, now upgraded as Assistant 
Commissioner (CT) & Ors.27 and in particular, what is 
held in paragraphs 34, 37, 38 and 40. 
 
27 (2019) 

 etc. c. In response to the principles for examining the 
constitutional validity of taxation statutes, he submitted 
that the test of vice of discrimination in a taxing statute 
is less rigorous. He submitted that the Parliament is 
entitled to make policy choices and adopt appropriate 
classifications given the latitude that our Constitutional 
jurisprudence allows in the matters involving tax 
legislation. The principle of equality does not preclude the 
classification of property, credit, profession and events 
for taxation. He submitted that it is settled law, as held 
in the case of Hari Krishna Bhargav v. Union of India 
& Anr28 that a taxing statute is not open to challenge on 
the ground that the tax is harsh or excessive. He refuted 
a submission that clauses (c) and (d) of Section 17(5) are 
fraud on the Constitution or that they are manifestly 
arbitrary. He invited our attention to a decision of the 
Constitution Bench in the case of Joseph Shine v. Union 
of India29 and, in particular, what is held in paragraphs 
163 to 165. He submitted that considering the test laid 
down in the said decision, even assuming that clauses (c) 
and (d) are discriminatory, they are not manifestly 
discriminatory. He submitted that English decisions will 
not apply, as in India, there is a constitutional and 
statutory distinction between goods that are movables 
 
28 (1966) 
29 (2019) 

 etc. and immovables. This distinction is not available in 
England. 
16. 
His submissions about the interpretation of Section 
17(5)(d) can be summarised as follows: 
a. The expression “plant or machinery” must be read as 
“plant and machinery”. It is not uncommon to read “and” 
as “or” or “or” as “and”. He relied upon a decision of this 
Court in the case of Indore Development Authority v. 
Manoharlal & Ors.30 and, in particular, what is held in 
paragraph 105. He also relied upon another decision of 
this Court in the case of State of Bombay v. R.M.D. 
Chamarbaugwala & Anr.31. Further, he submitted that 
if “or” is not read as “and”, it would be discriminatory 
since ITC would be available on a mall or warehouse, but 
under clause (c), it would not be available on works 
contracts relating to the construction of a mall or 
warehouse. In this regard, he stated that Clauses (c) and 
(d) of Section 17(5) deal with the same subject matter, i.e., 
immovable property and therefore they cannot be treated 
unequally. 
Furthermore, 
he 
submitted 
that 
the 
explanation to Section 17(5) applies to Chapters V and VI 
and thus has to apply to clause (d). However, he accepted 
that the expression “plant and machinery” occurs ten 
times in Chapter V and Chapter VI and the expression 
“plant or machinery” occurs only once in Section 17(5)(d). 
 
30 (2020) 
31 (1957) SCC OnLine SC 12 

 etc. 

He invited our attention to Section 16(3) of the CGST Act, 
which bars the claim of depreciation on ‘plant and 
machinery’ if the assessees choose to avail of ITC. Thus, 
ITC is allowable only when depreciation is not claimed. 
He submitted that if the argument of the assessees is 
accepted, they would be entitled to take benefit of both 
ITC and depreciation simultaneously. In a similar vein, 
he submitted that if the submission is accepted, even 
Sections 18(6) and 29(5) will not apply to plant or 
machinery falling under Section 17(5)(d). b. For identifying what would constitute plant and 
machinery/plant or machinery, it is not necessary to 
refer to decisions under the Income Tax Act as the same 
have no relevance. There is no concept of ITC in the 
Income Tax Act. The scheme of the Act is completely 
different. He further submitted that if the assessee’s 
submission that a shopping mall or warehouse is treated 
as a plant is accepted, it would amount to hostile 
discrimination. c. Tax on goods cannot be extended to immovable property. 
However, taxation on services can be raised even on using 
immovable properties for rendition of services. He 
submitted that when it comes to sales tax or VAT on 
goods, a consistent view taken by this Court is that the 
sale would include the sale of goods and not the sale of 
immovables. He submitted that malls, hotels, office 
buildings, etc., are immovable properties; therefore, GST 

 etc. cannot be levied. He relied upon the earlier decisions of 
this Court the Central Excise Act, 1944. 
According to him, those plants and machinery which are 
deeply rooted in the earth and cannot be relocated 
without 
sufficient 
damage 
are 
immovable 
goods. 
However, he accepted that renting an immovable property 
amounts to a supply of service, which is taxable under 
the CGST Act. d. While dealing with the case of a shopping mall, he 
submitted that since a shopping mall is an immovable 
property, it is excluded from the GST. Therefore, it does 
not fall in Clause (5)(b) of Schedule II. He submitted that 
the entire purpose of ITC is to extend the ITC paid at the 
anterior stage to remove the cascading burden of taxation 
at a subsequent stage. As there is no GST payable on 
shopping malls, there is no need to grant ITC. He pointed 
out that if a shopping mall is sold as an immovable 
property immediately after the completion certificate is 
issued, no GST is payable at the time of sale of the 
immovable property. Therefore, ITC credit cannot be 
used. If the mall is used to render renting service for five 
years and then is sold after five years, no GST will be 
payable on the sale. However, if ITC is allowed as 
contended during these five years, ITC will be exhausted 
against GST payable on rental income. Thereafter, the 
mall would be sold without paying any tax, which would 
cause a substantial monetary loss. Learned ASG relied 

 etc. upon a decision of this Court in Union of India v. Shri 
Harbhajan Singh Dhillon32, and in particular, what is 
held in paragraphs 74 to 76 and 82. He also relied upon 
a decision in the case of India Cement Ltd. & Ors. v. 
State of Tamil Nadu & Ors.33 and State of W.B. v. 
Kesoram Industries Ltd. & Ors.34. He pointed out that 
the construction of a complex building intended for sale 
to a buyer will be treated as a supply of service except 
where the entire consideration has been received after the 
issuance of the commencement certificate. He pointed 
out that the supply of a constructed building complex or 
a civil structure before the issuance of the completion 
certificate can be construed as a supply of services and 
will be liable to GST. The dividing line is the issuance of 
a completion certificate. A supply prior to the issuance of 
the commencement certificate is treated as a supply of 
service, whereas a sale made after the issuance of the 
completion certificate is not treated as a supply of service. 
Miscellaneous Submissions 
e. He submitted that tax on works contracts is also a tax on 
movable goods, either as goods, or during the transfer of 
goods, or before accretion takes place, leading to their 
becoming immovable property. 
 
32 (1971) 
33 (1990) 
34 (2004) 

 etc. f. The learned ASG also dealt with the services on tax and 
work contracts in the pre-GST regime. Relying upon the 
definition of “works contract” in Article 366 (29A)(b) of the 
Constitution, he submitted that what is taxed cannot be 
a taxation on the immovable property. 
GIST OF REJOINDER 
17. 
By way of rejoinder, the learned counsel representing 
assessees submitted that the legislature intentionally used the 
expression “plant or machinery” in only one place, and the 
legislative intention has to be adhered to. 
18. 
It was submitted that in certain cases, CENVAT credit 
was allowed for the construction of buildings. That is the view 
taken by the Tribunals/High Courts. 
19. 
Concerning the apprehension of misusing GST expressed 
by the learned ASG, it was submitted that even if the argument 
of the assessees is accepted, the ITC on goods or services used 
to construct a warehouse or mall is only to a limited extent of 
GST payable on rental activity. It was, therefore, submitted 
that the definition of “plant or machinery” will not apply to 
“plant and machinery”. 
20. 
The learned counsel submitted that there is no conflict 
between Section 17(5)(d) and Section 16(3). He submitted that 
Section 16(3) applies to “plant and machinery” and not to 
“plant or machinery”. He submitted that even assuming that 
Section 16(3) applies to plant or machinery, the effect of the 
provision is that if the registered person claims depreciation on 

 etc. the tax component of the cost of capital goods and plant and 
machinery under the provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961, 
he cannot avail of the ITC on the said tax component. He 
submitted that there is no conflict between the provisions of 
Section 17(5)(d) and Section 29(5) of the CGST Act. Inviting 
our attention to Section 18(6), he submitted that the provision 
can be pressed into service only in case of supply of capital 
goods or plant and machinery on which ITC has been taken. 
He submitted that in the facts of the case, it is nobody’s case 
that the registered persons are supplying capital goods, plant 
or machinery. 
21. 
It was argued that the constitutional bar in Entry 49 of 
List II exists only against the levy of GST on land and buildings 
and not against the grant of ITC on movable goods and services 
used for the construction of buildings. In its wisdom, the 
legislature has allowed ITC on immovable property provided it 
meets the criteria of functionality or essentiality of a plant. It 
is submitted that GST is leviable on the activity of renting and 
the activity of selling buildings before the grant of completion 
certificate. The disallowance of ITC on goods and services used 
in the construction of buildings could be a logical corollary only 
if the buildings were intended to be sold as stock by the 
developer instead of being further used for providing taxable 
goods or services. There is no contradiction in promoting ITC 
on goods and services used for the construction of buildings 
when such buildings are deployed to provide taxable supplies 
on which GST is being discharged. Not permitting ITC in such 

 etc. a situation would lead to absurdness and the unintended 
consequence of breaking the ITC chain, which will amount to 
thwarting the seamless flow of tax credits. 
22. 
There is a deliberate intention to permit ITC on plant or 
machinery under Section 17(5)(d) even if the plant or 
machinery is immovable, and Section 17(5)(d) cannot be 
detracted by Section 16(3). He submitted that Sections 16(3) 
and 17(5) must be read harmoniously. 
REPLY TO REJOINDER 
23. 
We may note here that submissions in brief were made 
by learned ASG dealing with the arguments of Shri Arvind 
Datar, Senior Advocate. His submission is that the expression 
“capital goods” is intended to include “plant and machinery”. 
He submitted that what emerges from steel, cement, etc., are 
immovable goods, which would be excluded from GST. Since 
no GST is payable on immovable property, ITC is not available. 
BROAD ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION 
24. 
Considering the submissions made by the parties, the 
following main questions arise for consideration: 

Whether the definition of “plant and machinery” in the 
explanation appended to Section 17 of the CGST Act 
applies to the expression “plant or machinery” used in 
clause (d) of sub-section (5) of Section 17? etc. 

If it is held that the explanation does not apply to 
“plant or machinery”, what is the meaning of the word 
“plant”? and 

Whether clauses (c) and (d) of Section 17(5) and 
Section 16(4) of the CGST Act are unconstitutional? 
RULES REGARDING THE INTERPRETATION OF TAXING 
STATUTES 
25. 
Regarding the interpretation of taxation statutes, the 
parties have relied on several decisions. The law laid down on 
this aspect is fairly well-settled. The principles governing the 
interpretation of the taxation statutes can be summarised as 
follows: 
a. A taxing statute must be read as it is with no additions 
and no subtractions on the grounds of legislative 
intendment or otherwise; 
b. If the language of a taxing provision is plain, the 
consequence of giving effect to it may lead to some 
absurd result is not a factor to be considered when 
interpreting the provisions. It is for the legislature to 
step in and remove the absurdity; 
c. While dealing with a taxing provision, the principle of 
strict interpretation should be applied; 
d. If two interpretations of a statutory provision are 
possible, the Court ordinarily would interpret the 

 etc. provision in favour of a taxpayer and against the 
revenue; 
e. In 
interpreting 
a 
taxing 
statute, 
equitable 
considerations are entirely out of place; 
f. A taxing provision cannot be interpreted on any 
presumption or assumption; 
g. A taxing statute has to be interpreted in the light of 
what is clearly expressed. The Court cannot imply 
anything which is not expressed. Moreover, the Court 
cannot import provisions in the statute to supply any 
deficiency; 
h. There is nothing unjust in the taxpayer escaping if the 
letter of the law fails to catch him on account of the 
legislature’s failure to express itself clearly; 
i. If literal interpretation is manifestly unjust, which 
produces a result not intended by the legislature, only 
in such a case can the Court modify the language; 
j. Equity and taxation are strangers. But if construction 
results 
in 
equity 
rather 
than 
injustice, 
such 
construction should be preferred; 
k. It is not a function of the Court in the fiscal arena to 
compel the Parliament to go further and do more; 
l. When a word used in a taxing statute is to be construed 
and has not been specifically defined, it should not be 

 etc. interpreted in accordance with its definition in another 
statute that does not deal with a cognate subject. It 
should be understood in its commercial sense. Unless 
defined in the statute itself, the words and expressions 
in a taxing statute have to be construed in the sense in 
which the persons dealing with them understand, that 
is, as per the trade understanding, commercial and 
technical practice and usage. 
RELEVANT 
PROVISIONS 
OF 
THE 
CGST 
ACT 
AND 
INTERPRETATION THEREOF 
26. 
Firstly, we will deal with the issue of interpretation of the 
relevant statutory provisions. To deal with the first question, 
we must analyse the provisions of the CGST Act. The charging 
Section is Section 9, which reads as follows: 
“9. Levy and collection.— (1) Subject 
to the provisions of sub-section (2), 
there shall be levied a tax called the 
central goods and services tax on all 
intra-State 
supplies 
of 
goods 
or 
services or both, except on the supply 
of 
alcoholic 
liquor 
for 
human 
consumption, 
on 
the 
value 
determined under section 15 and at 
such rates, not exceeding twenty per 
cent., as may be notified by the 
Government on the recommendations 
of the Council and collected in such 
manner as may be prescribed and shall 
be paid by the taxable person. 
(2) The central tax on the supply of 
petroleum crude, high speed diesel, 
motor spirit (commonly known as petrol), 
natural gas and aviation turbine fuel 

 etc. shall be levied with effect from such date 
as may be notified by the Government on 
the recommendations of the Council. 

The 
Government 
may, 
on 
the 
recommendations of the Council, by 
notification, specify categories of supply 
of goods or services or both, the tax on 
which shall be paid on reverse charge 
basis by the recipient of such goods or 
services or both and all the provisions of 
this Act shall apply to such recipient as 
if he is the person liable for paying the 
tax in relation to the supply of such 
goods or services or both. 

The 
Government 
may, 
on 
the 
recommendations of the Council, by 
notification, specify a class of registered 
persons who shall, in respect of supply 
of specified categories of goods or 
services or both received from an 
unregistered supplier, pay the tax on 
reverse charge basis as the recipient of 
such supply of goods or services or both, 
and all the provisions of this Act shall 
apply to such recipient as if he is the 
person liable for paying the tax in 
relation to such supply of goods or 
services or both. 

The 
Government 
may, 
on 
the 
recommendations of the Council, by 
notification, specify categories of services 
the tax on intra-State supplies of which 
shall be paid by the electronic commerce 
operator if such services are supplied 
through it, and all the provisions of this 
Act shall apply to such electronic 
commerce operator as if he is the 
supplier liable for paying the tax in 
relation to the supply of such services: 

 etc. 

Provided 
that 
where 
an 
electronic 
commerce operator does not have a 
physical 
presence 
in 
the 
taxable 
territory, any person representing such 
electronic commerce operator for any 
purpose in the taxable territory shall be 
liable to pay tax: 
Provided further that where an electronic 
commerce operator does not have a 
physical presence in the taxable territory 
and 
also 
he 
does 
not 
have 
a 
representative in the said territory, such 
electronic 
commerce 
operator 
shall 
appoint a person in the taxable territory 
for the purpose of paying tax and such 
person shall be liable to pay tax.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
Thus, the GST is to be levied on supplies of goods or services 
or both, as provided in sub-section (1) of Section 9. Sub-
sections (3) and (4) provide for certain categories of cases where 
the tax on the supply of goods or services or both shall be paid 
on a reverse charge basis by the recipient of such goods or 
services. As per Section 2(98) of the CGST Act, ‘reverse charge’ 
means the liability to pay tax by the recipient of the supply of 
goods or services, or both, instead of the supplier. Therefore, 
when sub-sections (3) or (4) of Section 9 are applicable, the 
recipients of goods, services, or both are liable to pay tax as if 
they were the suppliers. 
27. 
Section 16 deals with ITC, which reads thus: 
“16. Eligibility and conditions for taking 
input tax credit—(1) Every registered 

 etc. person shall, subject to such conditions 
and restrictions as may be prescribed 
and in the manner specified in Section 
49, be entitled to take credit of input tax 
charged on any supply of goods or 
services or both to him which are used 
or intended to be used in the course or 
furtherance of his business and the said 
amount 
shall 
be 
credited 
to 
the 
electronic credit ledger of such person. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this section, no registered person shall be 
entitled to the credit of any input tax in 
respect of any supply of goods or services 
or both to him unless,— 
(a) he is in possession of a tax invoice 
or debit note issued by a supplier 
registered under this Act, or such 
other tax paying documents as may 
be prescribed; 
(aa) the details of the invoice or 
debit note referred to in clause 
(a) has been furnished by the 
supplier in the statement of 
outward supplies and such 
details 
have 
been 
communicated to the recipient 
of such invoice or debit note in 
the manner specified under 
Section 37; 
(b) he has received the goods or services or 
both; 
Explanation.—For the purposes of 
this clause, it shall be deemed that 
the registered person has received 
the goods or, as the case may be, 
services— 

 etc. 

(i) where the goods are delivered by 
the supplier to a recipient or any 
other person on the direction of such 
registered person, whether acting as 
an agent or otherwise, before or 
during movement of goods, either by 
way of transfer of documents of title 
to goods or otherwise; 
(ii) where the services are provided by 
the supplier to any person on the 
direction of and on account of such 
registered person. 
(ba) the details of input tax 
credit in respect of the said 
supply communicated to such 
registered 
person 
under 
Section 

has 
not 
been 
restricted; 
(c) subject to the provisions of Section 41 [* 
* *], the tax charged in respect of such 
supply has been actually paid to the 
Government, either in cash or through 
utilisation of input tax credit admissible in 
respect of the said supply; and 
(d) he has furnished the return under 
Section 39: 
Provided that where the goods against an 
invoice are received in lots or instalments, 
the registered person shall be entitled to 
take credit upon receipt of the last lot or 
instalment: 
Provided further that where a recipient fails 
to pay to the supplier of goods or services 
or both, other than the supplies on which 
tax is payable on reverse charge basis, the 
amount towards the value of supply along 
with tax payable thereon within a period of 

 etc. one hundred and eighty days from the date 
of issue of invoice by the supplier, an 
amount equal to the input tax credit 
availed by the recipient shall be paid by 
him along with interest payable under 
Section 50, in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided also that the recipient shall be 
entitled to avail of the credit of input tax on 
payment made by him to the supplier of the 
amount towards the value of supply of 
goods or services or both along with tax 
payable thereon. 
(3) Where the registered person has 
claimed depreciation on the tax component 
of the cost of capital goods and plant and 
machinery under the provisions of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), the 
input tax credit on the said tax component 
shall not be allowed. 
(4) A registered person shall not be entitled 
to take input tax credit in respect of any 
invoice or debit note for supply of goods or 
services or both after the thirtieth day of 
November following the end of financial 
year to which such invoice or debit note 
pertains or furnishing of the relevant 
annual return, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that the registered person shall be 
entitled to take input tax credit after the 
due date of furnishing of the return under 
Section 39 for the month of September, 
2018 till the due date of furnishing of the 
return under the said section for the month 
of March, 2019 in respect of any invoice 
or debit note for supply of goods or services 
or both made during the financial year 
2017-18, the details of which have been 
uploaded by the supplier under sub-

 etc. section (1) of Section 37 till the due date for 
furnishing the details under sub-section (1) 
of said section for the month of March, 
2019. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section (4), in respect of an invoice or 
debit note for supply of goods or services or 
both pertaining to the Financial Years 
2017-18, 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21, 
the registered person shall be entitled to 
take input tax credit in any return under 
section 39 which is filed up to the thirtieth 
day of November, 2021. 
(6) Where registration of a registered 
person is cancelled under Section 29 and 
subsequently 
the 
cancellation 
of 
registration is revoked by any order, either 
under Section 30 or pursuant to any order 
made by the Appellate Authority or the 
Appellate Tribunal or court and where 
availment of input tax credit in respect of 
an invoice or debit note was not restricted 
under sub-section (4) on the date of order 
of cancellation of registration, the said 
person shall be entitled to take the input 
tax credit in respect of such invoice or debit 
note for supply of goods or services or both, 
in a return under Section 39,— 
(i) filed up to thirtieth day of 
November following the financial year 
to which such invoice or debit note 
pertains or furnishing of the relevant 
annual return, whichever is earlier; 
or 
(ii) for the period from the date of 
cancellation of registration or the 
effective date of cancellation of 
registration, as the case may be, till 
the date of order of revocation of 

 etc. cancellation of registration, where 
such return is filed within thirty days 
from the date of order of revocation of 
cancellation 
of 
registration, 
whichever is later.” 
 (emphasis added) 
From sub-section (1) of Section 16, it is apparent that only a 
registered person, as defined by Section 2(94) of the CGST Act, 
can avail of ITC. A person who is registered under Section 25 
of the CGST Act becomes a registered person. The availability 
of ITC is subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be 
prescribed. The word “prescribed” is defined to mean 
prescribed by the rules made under the CGST Act. Therefore, 
the entitlement to ITC is subject to conditions and restrictions 
as may be provided in the Rules framed under the CGST Act. 
ITC has to be availed in the manner laid down by Section 49. 
Sub-section (2) of Section 49 and other sub-sections deal with 
how ITC can be availed. Under sub-section (1) of Section 16, a 
registered person is entitled to take credit of the input tax 
charged on any supply of goods or services or both to him, 
which are used or intended to be used in the course of or in 
furtherance of his business. Input tax is defined by Section 
2(62). In relation to a registered person, it means Central, 
State, Integrated or Union Territory tax charged on the supply 
of goods or services or both made to him. It includes the tax 
payable by him on a reverse charge basis under sub-sections 
(3) and (4) of Section 9. Further conditions for the use of ITC 
are prescribed by sub-section (2) of Section 16. etc. 

28. 
Sub-section (3) of Section 16 is of some relevance as it 
provides that if a registered person has claimed depreciation on 
the tax component of the cost of capital goods and plant and 
machinery under the provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961, 
he is disentitled to ITC on the said tax component. In short, a 
registered person will not be entitled to ITC on the tax 
component of the cost of capital goods and plant and 
machinery if he claims depreciation on the said tax component 
under the Income Tax Act. The object is that a registered 
person does not take advantage of both depreciation and ITC. 
29. 
Now we come to sub-Section (4) of Section 16. Before the 
amendment made by the Finance Act, 2022, the sub-section 
read thus: 
“16................... 
(4) A registered person shall not be entitled 
to take input tax credit in respect of any 
invoice or debit note for supply of goods or 
services or both after the due date of 
furnishing of the return under section 39 
for the month of September following the 
end of financial year to which such invoice 
or debit note pertains or furnishing of the 
relevant annual return, whichever is 
earlier. 
Provided that the registered person shall be 
entitled to take input tax credit after the 
due date of furnishing of the return under 
section 39 for the month of September, 
2018 till the due date of furnishing of the 
return under the said section for the month 
of March, 2019 in respect of any invoice or 
invoice relating to such debit note for 
supply of goods or services or both made 

 etc. during the financial year 2017-18, the 
details of which have been uploaded by the 
supplier under sub-section (1) of section 37 
till the due date for furnishing the details 
under sub-section (1) of said section for the 
month of March, 2019.” 
The Finance Act, 2022, substituted the words “due date of 
furnishing return under Section 39 for the month of 
September” with “thirtieth day of November” with effect from 
1st October 2022. Under Section 39(1), every registered person 
other than an Input Service Distributor is required to furnish 
for every calendar month or part thereof a return of inward and 
outward supplies of goods or services or both, ITC availed, tax 
payable, tax paid, etc. The meaning of sub-section (4) of 
Section 16 as amended is that a registered person can avail of 
ITC in respect of any invoice or debit note for the supply of 
goods or services before 30th day of November following the end 
of the financial year to which such invoice or debit note 
pertains, or furnishing of annual return, whichever is earlier. 
30. 
Section 17 deals with apportionment of credit and 
blocked credits. The provision regarding blocked credits is in 
sub-section (5) of Section 17. Sub-sections (5) and (6) of 
Section 17 read thus: 
“17................... 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in sub-section (1) of Section 16 and sub-
section (1) of Section 18, input tax 
credit shall not be available in respect of 
the following, namely:— 

 etc. 

(a) motor vehicles for transportation of 
persons having approved seating capacity 
of 
not 
more 
than 
thirteen 
persons 
(including the driver), except when they are 
used for making the following taxable 
supplies, namely:— 
(A) further supply of such motor 
vehicles; or 
(B) transportation of passengers; or 
(C) imparting training on driving 
such motor vehicles; 
(aa) vessels and aircraft except when 
they are used— 
(i) for making the following taxable 
supplies, namely:— 
(A) further supply of such 
vessels or aircraft; or 

transportation 
of 
passengers; or 

imparting 
training 
on 
navigating such vessels; or 
(D) imparting training on flying 
such aircraft; 
(ii) for transportation of goods; 

services 
of 
general 
insurance, 
servicing, repair and maintenance in so 
far as they relate to motor vehicles, 
vessels or aircraft referred to in clause (a) 
or clause (aa): 
Provided that the input tax credit in 
respect 
of 
such 
services 
shall 
be 
available— 

 etc. 

(i) where the motor vehicles, vessels 
or aircraft referred to in clause (a) or 
clause (aa) are used for the purposes 
specified therein; 
(ii) where received by a taxable 
person engaged— 
(I) in the manufacture of such 
motor 
vehicles, 
vessels 
or 
aircraft; or 
(II) in the supply of general 
insurance services in respect of 
such motor vehicles, vessels or 
aircraft insured by him; 
(b) the following supply of goods or 
services or both— 
(i) food and beverages, outdoor 
catering, beauty treatment, health 
services, 
cosmetic 
and 
plastic 
surgery, leasing, renting or hiring of 
motor vehicles, vessels or aircraft 
referred to in clause (a) or clause (aa) 
except when used for the purposes 
specified therein, life insurance and 
health insurance: 
Provided that the input tax credit in 
respect of such goods or services or 
both shall be available where an 
inward supply of such goods or 
services or both is used by a 
registered person for making an 
outward taxable supply of the same 
category of goods or services or both 
or as an element of a taxable 
composite or mixed supply; 
(ii) membership of a club, health and 
fitness centre; and 

 etc. travel 
benefits 
extended 
to 
employees on vacation such as leave 
or home travel concession: 
Provided that the input tax credit in 
respect of such goods or services or 
both shall be available, where it is 
obligatory for an employer to provide 
the same to its employees under any 
law for the time being in force. 
(c) works contract services when 
supplied 
for 
construction 
of 
an 
immovable property (other than plant 
and machinery) except where it is an 
input service for further supply of 
works contract service; 
(d) goods or services or both received 
by a taxable person for construction of 
an immovable property (other than 
plant or machinery) on his own 
account including when such goods or 
services or both are used in the course 
or furtherance of business. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of 
clauses (c) and (d), the expression 
“construction” 
includes 
re-
construction, renovation, additions or 
alterations or repairs, to the extent of 
capitalisation, to the said immovable 
property; 
(e) goods or services or both on which tax 
has been paid under Section 10; 
(f) goods or services or both received by a 
non-resident taxable person except on 
goods imported by him; 
(fa) goods or services or both received by 
a taxable person, which are used or 

 etc. intended to be used for activities relating 
to his obligations under corporate social 
responsibility referred to in Section 135 
of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); 
(g) goods or services or both used for 
personal consumption; 
(h) goods lost, stolen, destroyed, written 
off or disposed of by way of gift or free 
samples; and 
(i) any tax paid in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 74 in respect of any 
period up to Financial Year 2023-24. 
(6) The Government may prescribe the 
manner in which the credit referred to in 
sub-sections 

and 

may 
be 
attributed. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this 
Chapter 
and 
Chapter 
VI, 
the 
expression “plant and machinery” 
means apparatus, equipment, and 
machinery 
fixed 
to 
earth 
by 
foundation or structural support that 
are used for making outward supply of 
goods or services or both and includes 
such 
foundation 
and 
structural 
supports but excludes— 
(i) land, building or any other civil 
structures; 
(ii) telecommunication towers; and 
(iii) pipelines laid outside the 
factory premises.” 
 (emphasis added) 

 etc. 

Section 17(5) begins with a non-obstante clause. A non-
obstante clause is a device used by the legislature that is 
usually employed to give an overriding effect to certain 
provisions over some contrary provisions that may be found in 
the same or some other enactments. Such a clause is used to 
indicate that the said provision should prevail despite anything 
to the contrary in the provisions mentioned in the non-obstante 
clause. It is pertinent to note that in view of the non-obstante 
clause used at the beginning of sub-section (5), it seeks to 
override both sub-section (1) of Section 16 and sub-section (1) 
of Section 18. As noted earlier, sub-section (1) of Section 16 
lays down the eligibility and conditions for taking ITC. Sub-
section (1) of Section 18 deals with the availability of ITC in 
special circumstances. Therefore, in the cases covered by sub-
section (5), ITC is not available. In a sense, sub-section (5) of 
Section 17 carves out an exception to the provisions of sub-
section (1) of Sections 16 and 18, which confer the benefit of 
ITC. 
ANALYSIS OF CLAUSES (c) AND (d) 
31. 
Now, we analyse clauses (c) and (d) of Section 17(5). 
Clause (c) applies when works contract services are supplied 
for constructing immovable property. The definition of “works 
contract” under Section 2(119) is extensive. It reads thus: 
“2.Definitions:-.................... 
(119) “works contract” means a 
contract for building, construction, 
fabrication, completion, erection, 
installation, 
fitting 
out, 

 etc. improvement, modification, repair, 
maintenance, renovation, alteration 
or commissioning of any immovable 
property 
wherein 
transfer 
of 
property in goods (whether as goods 
or in some other form) is involved in 
the execution of such contract;” 
Thus, in the case of works contract services supplied for the 
construction of immovable property, the benefit of ITC is not 
available. However, there are exceptions to clause (c). First is 
when goods or services, or both, are received by a taxable 
person for the construction of “plant and machinery”, as 
defined in the explanation to Section 17. The second exception 
is where the works contract service supplied for the 
construction of immovable property is an input service for 
further supply of the works contract. 
32. 
Clause (d) of Section 17(5) is different from clause (c) in 
various aspects. Clause (d) seeks to exclude from the purview 
of sub-section (1) of Sections 16 and 18, goods or services or 
both received by a taxable person to construct an immovable 
property on his own account. There are two exceptions in 
clause (d) to the exclusion from ITC provided in the first part of 
Clause (d). The first exception is where goods or services or 
both are received by a taxable person to construct an 
immovable property consisting of a “plant or machinery”. The 
second exception is where goods and services or both are 
received by a taxable person for the construction of an 
immovable 
property 
made 
not 
on 
his 
own 
account. 
Construction is said to be on a taxable person’s “own account” 

 etc. when (i) it is made for his personal use and not for service or 
(ii) it is to be used by the person constructing as a setting in 
which business is carried out. However, construction cannot 
said to be on a taxable person’s “own account” if it is intended 
to be sold or given on lease or license. 
33. 
Section 17(5) incorporates an explanation which provides 
that the word “construction” used in clauses (c) and (d) 
includes reconstruction, renovation, additions, alterations or 
repairs, to the extent of capitalisation, to the immovable 
property. Thus, a very wide meaning has been assigned to the 
expression “construction” by the said explanation. 
34. 
There is hardly a similarity between clauses (c) and (d) of 
Section 17(5) except for the fact that both clauses apply as an 
exception to sub-section (1) of Section 16. Perhaps the only 
other similarity is that both apply to the construction of an 
immovable property. Clause (c) uses the expression “plant and 
machinery”, which is specifically defined in the explanation. 
Clause (d) uses an expression of “plant or machinery”, which is 
not specifically defined. 
35. 
Now, what is material is the explanation to Section 17, 
which reads thus: 
“Explanation.––For the purposes of 
this Chapter and Chapter VI, the 
expression ―plant and machinery 
means apparatus, equipment, and 
machinery 
fixed 
to 
earth 
by 
foundation or structural support 
that are used for making outward 
supply of goods or services or both 

 etc. and includes such foundation and 
structural supports but excludes— 

land, building or any other 
civil structures; 
(ii) telecommunication towers; 
and 
(iii) pipelines laid outside the 
factory premises.” 
The explanation defines the meaning of the expression “plant 
and machinery”. However, as stated earlier, the expression 
“plant or machinery” has not been defined under the CGST Act. 
It is pertinent to note that clauses (c) and (d) do not altogether 
exclude every class of immovable property from the 
applicability of ITC. In the case of clause (c), if the construction 
is of “plant and machinery” as defined, the benefit of ITC will 
accrue. Similarly, under clause (d), if the construction is of a 
“plant or machinery”, ITC will be available. 
36. 
The Union legislature cannot levy taxes on lands and 
buildings as it is exclusively a State subject at item no.49 in 
List II of Schedule VII of the Constitution of India. It is, 
therefore, necessary to consider the categories of services 
concerning land and buildings, which are within the purview 
of the CGST Act. Section 2(102) defines service as meaning 
anything other than goods, money and securities but includes 
activities relating to the use of money or its conversion by cash 
or by any other mode, from one form, currency or 
denomination, to another form, currency or denomination for 
which a separate consideration is charged. Under the CGST 
Act, the supply of service is taxable. The scope of supply of 

 etc. services or goods is laid down in Section 7 of the CGST Act, 
which reads thus: 
“7. Scope of supply.—(1) For the purposes 
of this Act, the expression “supply” 
includes— 
(a) all forms of supply of goods or 
services or both such as sale, 
transfer, barter, exchange, licence, 
rental, lease or disposal made or 
agreed 
to 
be 
made 
for 
a 
consideration by a person in the 
course or furtherance of business; 
(aa) the activities or transactions, by a 
person, other than an individual, to its 
members 
or 
constituents 
or vice-
versa, for cash, deferred payment or 
other valuable consideration. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this 
clause, it is hereby clarified that, 
notwithstanding anything contained 
in any other law for the time being in 
force or any judgment, decree or order 
of any Court, tribunal or authority, the 
person 
and 
its 
members 
or 
constituents shall be deemed to be two 
separate persons and the supply of 
activities or transactions inter se shall 
be deemed to take place from one such 
person to another; 

import 
of 
services 
for 
a 
consideration whether or not in the 
course or furtherance of business; and 

the 
activities 
specified 
in 
Schedule I, made or agreed to be 
made without a consideration; 

 etc. 

(1-A) where certain activities or 
transactions constitute a supply in 
accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section (1), they shall be treated 
either as supply of goods or supply 
of 
services 
as 
referred 
to 
in 
Schedule II. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section (1),— 
(a) activities or transactions specified 
in Schedule III; or 
(b) such activities or transactions 
undertaken 
by 
the 
Central 
Government, a State Government or 
any local authority in which they are 
engaged as public authorities, as may 
be notified by the Government on the 
recommendations of the Council, 
shall be treated neither as a supply of 
goods nor a supply of services. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-
sections (1), (1-A) and (2), the Government 
may, on the recommendations of the 
Council, 
specify, 
by 
notification, 
the 
transactions that are to be treated as— 
(a) a supply of goods and not as a 
supply of services; or 
(b) a supply of services and not as a 
supply of goods.” 
 (emphasis added) 
37. 
In view of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 7, a 
supply of services such as sale, transfer, licence, rental or lease 
made for consideration is a supply. Whether the activities or 
transactions covered by sub-section (1) of Section 7 constitute 

 etc. a supply has to be considered in light of Schedule II. Schedule 
II has a title: “Activities or transactions to be treated as supply 
of goods or supply of services”. The activities/transactions 
incorporated in Schedule II are treated as a supply of service. 
As far as lands and buildings are concerned, clauses (2) and (5) 
of Schedule II are relevant, which read thus: 
“2. Land and Building 
(a) any lease, tenancy, easement, licence 
to occupy land is a supply of services; 
(b) any lease or letting out of the building 
including a commercial, industrial or 
residential complex for business or 
commerce, either wholly or partly, is a 
supply of services......................................... 
5. Supply of services 
The following shall be treated as supply 
of services, namely:— 
(a) renting of immovable property; 
(b) construction of a complex, building, 
civil 
structure 
or 
a 
part 
thereof, 
including a complex or building intended 
for sale to a buyer, wholly or partly, 
except where the entire consideration 
has been received after issuance of 
completion certificate, where required, 
by the competent authority or after its 
first occupation, whichever is earlier. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this 
clause— 
(1) the expression "competent authority" 
means the Government or any authority 
authorised 
to 
issue 
completion 

 etc. certificate under any law for the time 
being in force and in case of non-
requirement of such certificate from 
such authority, from any of the following, 
namely:— 
(i) an architect registered with the 
Council 
of 
Architecture 
constituted 
under the Architects Act, 1972; or 
(ii) a chartered engineer registered with 
the Institution of Engineers (India); or 
(iii) a licensed surveyor of the respective 
local body of the city or town or village or 
development or planning authority; 

the 
expression 
"construction" 
includes 
additions, 
alterations, 
replacements or remodelling of any 
existing civil structure; 
(c) temporary transfer or permitting the 
use or enjoyment of any intellectual 
property right; 
(d) development, design, programming, 
customisation, adaptation, upgradation, 
enhancement, 
implementation 
of 
information technology software; 
(e) agreeing to the obligation to refrain 
from an act, or to tolerate an act or a 
situation, or to do an act; and 
(f) transfer of the right to use any goods 
for any purpose (whether or not for a 
specified period) for cash, deferred 
payment 
or 
other 
valuable 
consideration.” 
 
38. 
Clause 5(b) of Schedule II has to be read with the 
provisions of Schedule III, which has a title: “Activities or 

 etc. transactions which shall be treated neither as a supply of goods 
nor a supply of services”. Clause (5) of Schedule III reads thus: 
“5. Sale of land and, subject to 
clause 

of 
paragraph 

of 
Schedule II, sale of building.” 
 
39. 
Analysis of the provisions of Section 7 read with Schedule 
II and III shows that: 
a. Any lease, tenancy, easement or licence to occupy land is 
a supply of services. Clause 2(a) is not qualified by the 
purpose of the use. But the sale of a land is not a supply 
of service; 
b. Any lease or letting out of buildings for business or 
commerce, wholly or partly, is a supply of services. 
Clause 2(b) will not apply if the lease or letting out of a 
building is for a residential purpose; 
c. Renting of an immovable property is a supply of service; 
d. Construction of a complex, building, civil structure or a 
part thereof, including a complex, building or civil 
structure intended for sale to a buyer, wholly or partly, is 
a supply of service. However, the construction of a 
complex, building or civil structure, referred to above, is 
excluded from the category of supply of service if the 
entire consideration for sale is received after issuance of 
the completion certificate, wherever required or its first 
occupation, whichever is earlier. Broadly speaking, if a 
building or a part thereof to which clause 5(b) is 

 etc. applicable is sold before it is ready for occupation, the 
construction thereof becomes a supply of service. 
Therefore, if a building is sold by accepting consideration 
before issuance of a completion certificate or before its 
first occupation, whichever is earlier, the construction 
thereof becomes a supply of service; 
40. 
If there is a complex, building or civil structure 
constructed which is intended for sale to a buyer, wholly or 
partly, construction becomes a supply of service only if 
consideration for sale is received before the issuance of a 
completion certificate or after its first occupation, whichever is 
earlier. Thus, if the consideration for sale is paid after the 
competition certificate is issued or its first occupation, 
whichever is earlier, the sale transaction will not amount to the 
supply of service. However, no such distinction has been made 
in the case of lease, tenancy, or licence concerning land or 
letting of buildings. Even if the entire consideration for lease, 
tenancy or a licence to occupy land or a lease of a building is 
paid after the issuance of the completion certificate or its first 
occupation, whichever is earlier, it continues to be a supply of 
service. 
41. 
It is also necessary to bear in mind the philosophy of the 
GST regime, which is discussed in the case of Mohit 
Minerals14. This Court held that the philosophy of the GST is 
to incorporate a consumption and destination-based test. The 
emphasis is on taxing supplies of goods and services. If we 
apply the well-settled principles on the interpretation of taxing 

 etc. statutes, as discussed in the earlier part of this judgment, there 
is no scope to give any meaning to clause (c) of Section 17(5) 
other than its plain and natural meaning. The expression 
“plant and machinery” has been specifically defined in the 
explanation of Section 17. Works contract service has been 
defined under the CGST Act. We cannot add anything to clause 
(c) or subtract anything from clause (c). ITC is a creation of 
legislature. Therefore, it can exclude specific categories of 
goods or services from ITC. Exclusion of the category of works 
contracts by clause (c) will not, per se¸, defeat the object of the 
CGST Act. 
MEANING OF THE EXPRESSION “PLANT OR MACHINERY” 
IN CLAUSE (d) OF SECTION 17(5) 
42. 
The question is whether the explanation that lays down 
the meaning of the expression “plant and machinery” in Section 
17 will apply to the expression “plant or machinery” used in 
Section 17 (5)(d). 
43. 
Learned ASG himself accepted that the expression “plant 
and machinery” appears at ten different places in Chapters V 
(Input Tax Credit) and VI (Tax Invoice, Credit and Debit Notes) 
of the CGST Act. According to him, the expression “plant or 
machinery” appears only in clause (d) of Section 17(5). His 
submission is that the use of the word “or” in clause (d) is a 
mistake of the legislature. To counter this, it was submitted 
that in the Model GST Law, which the GST Council Secretariat 
circulated in November 2016 to invite suggestions and 
comments from the public, the expression ‘plant and 

 etc. machinery’ was used in clauses (c) and (d). However, while 
enacting the CGST Act, the legislature has consciously chosen 
to use the expression “plant or machinery” only in clause (d). 
The impugned judgment in the main Civil Appeal is more than 
five years old. The writ petition in which the impugned decision 
was rendered is a six-year-old writ petition. If it was a drafting 
mistake, as suggested by learned ASG, the legislature could 
have stepped in to correct it. However, that was not done. In 
such circumstances, it must be inferred that the legislature has 
intentionally used the expression “plant or machinery” in 
clause (d) as distinguished from the expression “plant and 
machinery”, which has been used in several places. As the 
expression “plant or machinery” appears to be intentionally 
incorporated, it is not possible to accept the contention of the 
learned ASG that the word “or” in clause (d) should be read as 
“and”. If the said contention is accepted, there will not be any 
difference between the expressions “plant and machinery” and 
“plant or machinery”. This will defeat the legislative intent. 
44. 
The explanation to Section 17 defines “plant and 
machinery”. The explanation seeks to define the expression 
“plant and machinery” used in Chapter V and Chapter VI. In 
Chapter VI, the expression “plant and machinery” appears in 
several places, but the expression “plant or machinery” is 
found only in Section 17(5)(d). If the legislature intended to 
give the expression “plant or machinery” the same meaning as 
“plant and machinery” as defined in the explanation, the 
legislature would not have specifically used the expression 

 etc. 

“plant or machinery” in Section 17(5)(d). The legislature has 
made this distinction consciously. Therefore, the expression 
“plant and machinery” and “plant or machinery” cannot be 
given the same meaning. It may also be noted here that the 
expression ‘plant or machinery’ is used in dealing with a 
peculiar case of goods or services being received by a taxable 
person for the construction of an immovable property on his 
own account, even when such goods or services or both are 
used in the course of furtherance of business. Therefore, if the 
expression “plant or machinery” is given the same meaning as 
the expression “plant and machinery” as per the definition 
contained in the explanation to Section 17, we will be doing 
violence to the words used in the statute. While interpreting 
taxing statutes, it is not a function of the Court to supply the 
deficiencies. 
45. 
Now, the question which arises is what meaning should 
be given to the expression “plant or machinery”. When the 
legislature uses the expression “plant and machinery,” only a 
plant will not be covered by the definition unless there is an 
element of machinery or vice versa. This expression cannot be 
read as “plant or machinery”. That is so clear from the 
explanation in Section 17, which says that plant and 
machinery means apparatus, equipment and machinery fixed 
to the earth by foundation or structural support that are used 
for making outward supply of goods or services or both. The 
expression includes such foundation and structural support 

 etc. fixed to the earth. However, the definition excludes land, 
buildings or any other civil structure. 
46. 
The expression “plant or machinery” has a different 
connotation. It can be either a plant or machinery. Section 
17(5)(d) deals with the construction of an immovable property. 
The very fact that the expression “immovable property other 
than “plants or machinery” is used shows that there could be 
a plant that is an immovable property. As the word ‘plant’ has 
not been defined under the CGST Act or the rules framed 
thereunder, its ordinary meaning in commercial terms will 
have to be attached to it. 
47. 
There are few decisions relied upon on this aspect. The 
first is Commissioner of Central Excise, Ahmedabad v. 
Solid and Correct Engineering Works & Ors.35. The case 
arose from the demand for duty and penalty under the Central 
Excise Act, 1944 (Excise Act). The assessee was manufacturing 
parts and components for road and civil construction 
machinery and equipment like Asphalt Drum/Hot Mix Plants, 
etc. One of the questions examined by the Tribunal was 
whether the plants so manufactured could be termed as goods. 
The issue before this Court was whether setting up an Asphalt 
Drum/Hot Mix Plant by using duty-paid components amounts 
to the manufacture of excisable goods within the meaning of 
the Excise Act. It was argued before this Court that the plants 
in question did not satisfy the test of marketability and 
 
35 (2010) 

 etc. movability. This Court referred to the definition of movable 
property in Section 3(36) of the General Clauses Act, 1897, 
which defines movable property as property of every 
description except immovable property. The same enactment 
defines immovable property in Section 3(26), which is an 
inclusive definition which includes land, benefits to arise out 
of land, and things attached to the earth or permanently 
fastened to anything attached to the earth. This Court 
considered the definition of the expression “attached to the 
earth” in Section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. In the 
facts of the case, it was held that the plants subject matter of 
the case, were not per se immovable property as the same 
cannot be said to get attached to the earth. This Court applied 
the movability test by holding that the setting up of the plant 
itself is not intended to be permanent at a given place. The 
plant can be removed or is indeed removed after the road 
construction or repair project is completed. The issue that we 
were called upon to decide about the meaning of the plant did 
not arise in this case. 
48. 
Another decision of this Court in the case of Taj Mahal 
Hotel18 was pressed into service. The assessee was running a 
hotel. The issue arose in a cognate enactment in the sense in 
the enactment providing for levy of income-tax. The issue 
referred to the opinion of the High Court was whether sanitary 
fittings and pipelines installed in the hotel constituted a ‘plant’ 
within the meaning of Section 10(5) of the Income Tax Act, 
1922. The definition of plant in Section 10(5) of the Income Tax 

 etc. 

Act, 1922 provided that ‘plant’ includes vehicles, scientific 
apparatus, surgical equipment, and books purchased for the 
purposes of business, profession or vocation. The Court 
considered whether the word plant should be given a broader 
meaning. In paragraph 6 of the said decision, this Court held 
thus: 
“6. Now it is well settled that where the 
definition of a word has not been given, 
it must be construed in its popular sense 
if it is a word of everyday use. Popular 
sense means “that sense which people 
conversant with the subject-matter with 
which the statute is dealing, would 
attribute to it”. In the present case, Section 
10(5) enlarges the definition of the word 
“plant” by including in it the words which 
have already been mentioned before. The 
very fact that even books have been included 
shows that the meaning intended to be given 
to “plant” is wide. The word “includes” is 
often used in interpretation clauses in order 
to enlarge the meaning of the words or 
phrases occurring in the body of the statute. 
When it is so used, those words and phrases 
must be construed as comprehending not 
only such things as they signify according to 
their nature and import but also those 
things which the interpretation clause 
declares that they shall include. The word 
“include” is also susceptible of other 
constructions which it is unnecessary to go 
into.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
Thereafter, in paragraphs 8 and 9, this Court held thus: 
“8. It cannot be denied that the business 
of a hotelier is carried on by adapting a 
building or premises in a suitable way to 

 etc. be used as a residential hotel where 
visitors come and stay and where there is 
arrangement 
for 
meals 
and 
other 
amenities are provided for their comfort 
and convenience. To have sanitary fittings 
etc. in a bathroom is one of the essential 
amenities 
or 
conveniences 
which 
are 
normally provided in any good hotel, in the 
present times. If the partitions in Jarrold 
case [(1887) 19 QB 647] could be treated as 
having been used for the purpose of the 
business of the trader, it is incomprehensible 
how sanitary fittings can be said to have no 
connection with the business of the hotelier. 
He can reasonably expect to get more custom 
and earn larger profit by charging higher 
rates for the use of rooms if the bathrooms 
have sanitary fittings and similar amenities. 
We are unable to see how the sanitary fittings 
in the bathrooms in a hotel will not be “plant” 
within Section 10(vi)(b) read with Section 
10(5) when it is quite clear that the intention 
of the legislature was to give it a wide 
meaning and that is why, articles like books 
and surgical instruments were expressly 
included in the definition of “plant”. In 
decided cases, the High Courts have rightly 
understood the meaning of the term “plant” 
in a wide sense. (See CIT v. Indian Turpentine 
and Rosin Co. Ltd. [(1970) 75 ITR 533]. 
 
9. If the dictionary meaning of the word plant 
were to be taken into consideration on the 
principle that the literal construction of a 
statute must be adhered to unless the 
context renders it plain that such a 
construction cannot be put on the words in 
question — this is what is stated in Webster's 
Third New International Dictionary: 

 etc. 

“Land, buildings, machinery, apparatus and 
fixtures employed in carrying on trade or 
other industrial business...” 
(emphasis added) 
49. 
The next decision in the line is in the case of Anand 
Theatres19. This was a case where the issue was whether a 
building which is used as a hotel or a cinema theatre can be 
considered as apparatus or a tool for running a business so 
that it can be termed as a plant and depreciation can be 
allowed on the same under the Income Tax Act, 1961. This 
Court dealt with Section 32, which provided for granting 
depreciation to buildings, machinery, and plants. This Court 
extensively referred to its earlier decision in the case of Taj 
Mahal Hotel18 and other decisions of this Court and High 
Courts. This Court decided the question of whether a building 
used for running a hotel or cinema business could be held to 
be a plant. This Court considered British decisions on the 
point. Paragraphs 61 to 63 of the decision are material, which 
read thus: 
“61. Further, there are hotels of all kinds and 
hotel business can be carried on in all kinds 
of buildings, may be pucca or kuccha 
constructions. A building intended to be used 
or in fact used earlier either as a residential 
accommodation or business purpose can be 
converted for running hotel business. Section 
32 itself contemplates a hotel business being 
carried on in a residential accommodation 
including an accommodation which is in the 
nature of guest house. On occasions hotel 
buildings may be constructed with a special 
design and features so as to attract and 
accommodate a certain class of tourist. etc. 

Similarly with regard to cinema business, it 
can be carried on in a specially-designed and 
constructed building and also in other 
buildings. Still, however, it would be difficult 
to draw a distinction and differentiate by 
holding that a building which is specially 
designed and constructed for running a hotel 
or cinema would be covered by a “plant” and 
other buildings used for the same purpose 
would not get depreciation as “plant”, even 
though such business is carried on in such 
premises. In our view, the Delhi High Court 
has 
in 
the 
case 
of R.C. 
Chemical 
Industry [(1982) 134 ITR 330 (Del)] rightly 
observed that mere fact that manufacture of 
saccharine would be better carried on in a 
building having atmospheric controls would 
not convert the building from “the setting” to 
“the means” for carrying the business. 
Similarly, the Rajasthan High Court also 
in Lake Palace Hotels and Motels [(1997) 226 
ITR 561 (Raj)] rightly observed that simply 
because some special fittings or controlling 
equipments are attached for the purpose of 
carrying on hotel business, it will not take it 
out of the category of building and make it a 
plant. In our view special fittings or 
equipments to control atmospheric effects 
would be plant, but not the building which 
houses such equipments. 
62. Further for running almost all industries 
or for carrying on any trade or business 
building is required. On occasions building 
may be designed and constructed to suit the 
requirement of a particular industry, trade or 
business. But that would not make such 
building a plant. It only shelters running of 
such business. For each and every business, 
trade or industry, building is required to 
carry on such activity. That means building 
plays some role and in other words, its 

 etc. function is to shelter the business, but it has 
no other function except in some rare cases 
such as dry dock where it plays an essential 
part in the operations which take place in 
getting a ship into the dock, holding it 
squarely and then returning it to the river. 
Building is more durable. If the contention of 
the assessee is accepted, virtually all such 
buildings would be considered to be a plant 
and the distinction which the legislature has 
made between “building” and “machinery” or 
“plant” would be obliterated. 
63. Learned 
counsel 
for 
the 
assessee 
submitted that the words “plant” and 
“building” are not mutually exclusive. “Plant” 
may include building in a certain set of 
circumstances and, therefore, applying the 
functional tests the assessee would be 
entitled to depreciation under the head “it is 
more beneficial to it”. He submitted that in 
the modern era, theatre building and hotel 
building are integral part of operation for 
carrying out such business and, therefore, 
such building should be considered as a 
“plant”. 
 
Ultimately, in paragraph 67, this Court held thus: 
“67. In the result, it is held that the 
building used for running of a hotel or 
carrying on cinema business cannot be 
held to be a plant because: 
(1) The scheme of Section 32, as 
discussed 
above, 
clearly 
envisages 
separate depreciation for a building, 
machinery and plant, furniture and 
fittings etc. The word “plant” is given 
inclusive meaning under Section 43(3) 
which nowhere includes buildings. The 

 etc. 

Rules 
prescribing 
the 
rates 
of 
depreciation specifically provide grant of 
depreciation on buildings, furniture and 
fittings, machinery and plant and ships. 
Machinery 
and 
plant 
include 
cinematograph films and other items 
and the building is further given 
meaning to include roads, bridges, 
culverts, wells and tubewells. 
(2) In the case of Taj Mahal Hotel [(1971): (1971) 82 ITR 44] this Court 
has observed that business of a hotelier 
is carried on by adopting building or 
premises in suitable way. Meaning 
thereby building for a hotel is not an 
apparatus or adjunct for running of a 
hotel. The Court did not proceed to hold 
that a building in which the hotel was 
run was itself a plant, otherwise the 
Court would not have gone into the 
question whether the sanitary fittings 
used in bathroom was plant. 
(3) For a building used for a hotel, 
specific provision is made granting 
additional depreciation under Section 
32(1)(v) of the Act. 
(4) Barclay, Curle & Co. case [(1969) 1 
WLR 675: (1969) 1 All ER 732: (1970) 
76 ITR 62: 1969 SC 30: 45 TC 221 (HL)] 
decided by the House of Lords pertains 
to a dry dockyard which itself was 
functioning as a plant, that is to say, 
structure for the plant was constructed 
so that dry dock can operate. It operated 
as an essential part in the operations 
which took place in getting a ship into 
the dock, holding it securely and then 
returning it to the river. The dock as a 
complete unit contained a large amount 

 etc. of equipment without which the dry dock 
could not perform its function. 
(5) Even in England, courts have 
repeatedly held that the meaning to the 
word “plant” given in various decisions is 
artificial and imprecise in application, 
that is to use the words of Lord Buckley, 
“it is now beyond doubt that the word 
‘plant’ is used in the relevant section in 
an artificial and largely judge-made 
sense”. Lord Wilberforce commented by 
stating that “no ordinary man, literate or 
semi-literate, would think that a horse, a 
swimming pool, moveable partitions, or 
even a dry dock was plant”. 
(6) For the hotel building and hospital in 
the case of Carr v. Sayer [65 TC 15: 
1992 CLY 2470: 1992 STC 396 (Ch D)] 
it has been observed that a hotel building 
remains 
a 
building 
even 
when 
constructed to a luxury specification and 
similarly 
a 
hospital 
building 
for 
infectious diseases which might require 
a special layout and other features also 
remains a premises and is not a plant. 
It is to be added that all these decisions 
are based upon the interpretation of the 
phrase “machinery or plant” under 
Section 41 of the Finance Act, 1971 
which was applicable and there appears 
no 
such 
distinction 
for 
grant 
of 
allowance on different heads as provided 
under Section 32 of the Income Tax Act. 
(7) To differentiate a building for grant of 
additional depreciation by holding it to 
be a “plant” in one case where the 
building 
is 
specially 
designed 
and 
constructed with some special features 
to attract the customers and a building 

 etc. not so constructed but used for the same 
purpose, namely, as a hotel or theatre 
would be unreasonable.” 
50. 
Another decision on the point is in the case of Victory 
Aqua Farm Ltd.21, wherein the issue before this Court was 
whether a natural pond used by the assessee, which was 
specially designed for rearing prawns, could be a plant within 
the meaning of Section 32 of the Income Tax Act, 1961. This 
Court heavily relied upon the decision of a three-judge Bench 
of this Court in the case of Karnataka Power Corporation20. 
In this case, the question was whether a power-generating 
station building is a plant. In the decision rendered by a Bench 
of three Hon’ble Judges, it was held that the decision in the 
case of Anand Theatres19 cannot be read broadly. In 
paragraphs 5 to 8 of the decision, it was held thus: 
“5. It was the case of the assessee that it was 
entitled 
to 
investment 
allowance 
as 
applicable to a plant in respect of its power-
generating station building. In a note filed 
before the Commissioner (Appeals) it stated 
that it had included for the purpose the value 
of its potential transformer foundation, cable 
duct system, outdoor yard structures and tail 
race channel. It explained that the process of 
generation started from letting in water from 
the reservoir into the penstocks and ducts 
which were the water conductor system into 
the turbines. Once electricity had been 
produced by generation, it had to be 
conducted, as it was not possible to store the 
same, 
and 
the 
process 
of 
generation 
continued until the electricity was led to the 
transmission towers. The water that was 
used for rotation of the turbines had to be 
removed and this was done through the tail 

 etc. race channel. For stepping up the electricity, 
transformers were used in the outdoor yard. 
The conduction of the electricity was through 
conductors held in ducts, called the cable 
duct system, which were specifically designed 
for the purpose. The case of the assessee, 
therefore, was that all these were part of the 
special engineering works that were an 
essential part of a generating plant and, 
therefore, it was entitled to have the same 
treated as a plant for the purposes of 
investment allowance. The Commissioner 
accepted the correctness of the assessee's 
case. He held that it was clear that the 
generating station buildings had to be treated 
as a plant for the purposes of investment 
allowance. These buildings could not be 
separated from the machinery and the 
machinery could not be worked without such 
special construction. He, therefore, allowed 
investment allowance on the generating 
station building, as claimed. The Tribunal 
affirmed this finding, as, indeed, did the High 
Court. 
6. We, therefore, have before us a finding of 
fact recorded by the fact-finding authority 
that the generating station building is an 
integral part of the assessee's generating 
system. 
7. Our attention has been drawn by learned 
counsel for the Revenue to the judgment of 
this Court in CIT v. Anand Theatres [(2000): (2000) 244 ITR 192]. He submits 
that, in that judgment, this Court has held 
that, except in exceptional cases, the building 
in which the plant is situated must be 
distinguished from the plant and that, 
therefore, the assessee's generating station 
building was not to be treated as a plant for 
the purposes of investment allowance. etc. 

8. It is difficult to read the judgment in 
the case of Anand Theatres [(2000): (2000) 244 ITR 192] so broadly. The 
question before the Court was whether a 
building that was used as a hotel or a 
cinema 
theatre 
could 
be 
given 
depreciation on the basis that it was a 
“plant” and it was in relation to that 
question that the Court considered a host 
of authorities of this country and England 
and came to the conclusion that a building 
which was used as a hotel or a cinema 
theatre could not be given depreciation on 
the basis that it was a plant. We must add 
that the Court said: (SCC p. 430, para 67) 
“67. (7) To differentiate a building 
for 
grant 
of 
additional 
depreciation by holding it to be a 
‘plant’ in one case where the 
building is specially designed and 
constructed with some special 
features to attract the customers 
and a building not so constructed 
but used for the same purpose, 
namely, as a hotel or theatre would 
be unreasonable.” 
This observation is, in our view, limited to 
buildings that are used for the purposes of 
hotels or cinema theatres and will not 
always apply otherwise. The question, 
basically, is a question of fact, and where 
it is found as a fact that a building has 
been so planned and constructed as to 
serve an assessee's special technical 
requirements, it will qualify to be treated 
as a plant for the purposes of investment 
allowance.” 
(emphasis added) 

 etc. 

51. 
We may note here that the decision in the case of Anand 
Theatres19 is by a Bench of two Hon’ble Judges. Thus, the 
decision of a larger Bench in the case of Karnataka Power 
Corporation20 limits the applicability of the decision in the 
case of Anand Theatres19 to hotels or cinema theatres. 
Therefore, the decision in the case of Anand Theatres19 cannot 
be applied while considering the question of whether a mall or 
warehouse or a building other than a hotel or a cinema theatre 
can be said to be a “plant”. 
52. 
This Court has laid down the functionality test. This 
Court held that whether a building is a plant is a question of 
fact. This Court held that if it is found on facts that a building 
has been so planned and constructed as to serve an assessee’s 
special technical requirements, it will qualify to be treated as a 
plant for the purposes of investment allowance. The word 
‘plant’ used in a bracketed portion of Section 17(5)(d) cannot 
be given the restricted meaning provided in the definition of 
“plant and machinery”, which excludes land, buildings or any 
other civil structures. Therefore, in a given case, a building can 
also be treated as a plant, which is excluded from the purview 
of the exception carved out by Section 17(5)(d) as it will be 
covered by the expression “plant or machinery”. We have 
discussed the provisions of the CGST Act earlier. To give a 
plain interpretation to clause (d) of Section 17(5), the word 
“plant” will have to be interpreted by taking recourse to the 
functionality test. etc. 

53. 
One of the submissions of the learned ASG is that as the 
Union legislature cannot levy tax on land and buildings, the 
chain is broken once a building comes into existence by using 
goods and services. As discussed earlier, Schedule II of the 
CGST Act recognises the activity of renting or leasing buildings 
as a supply of service. Even the activity of the construction of a 
building intended for sale is a supply of service if the total 
consideration is accepted before the completion certificate is 
granted. Therefore, if a building qualifies to be a plant, ITC can 
be availed against the supply of services in the form of renting 
or leasing the building or premises, provided the other terms 
and conditions of the CGST Act and Rules framed thereunder 
are fulfilled. Therefore, the argument regarding breaking the 
chain cannot be accepted in its entirety. However, if the 
construction of a building by the recipient of service is for his 
own use, the chain will break, and therefore, ITC would not be 
available. 
54. 
One of the arguments of learned ASG was that if different 
meanings were given to the words “plant and machinery” and 
“plant or machinery”, it could result in discriminatory 
treatment. Clause (c) of Section 17(5) operates in a completely 
different field, as it applies only to works contract services 
supplied for the construction of immovable property. Clause 
(d) deals with services received by a taxable person for the 
construction of an immovable property on his own account. As 
clauses (c) and (d) operate in substantially different areas, the 
argument of ASG relying on discrimination cannot be accepted. etc. 

55. 
Under the CGST Act, as observed earlier, renting or 
leasing immovable property is deemed to be a supply of service, 
and it can be taxed as output supply. Therefore, if the building 
in which the premises are situated qualifies for the definition 
of plant, ITC can be allowed on goods and services used in 
setting up the immovable property, which is a plant. 
56. 
In the main appeal, which is the subject matter of this 
group, the High Court has not decided whether the mall in 
question will satisfy the functionality test of being a plant. The 
reason is that the High Court has done the exercise of reading 
down the provision. Each mall is different. Therefore, in each 
case, fact-finding enquiry is contemplated. Thus, in the facts of 
the case, we will have to send the case back to the High Court 
to decide whether, on facts, the mall in question satisfies the 
functionality test so that it can be termed as a plant within the 
meaning of bracketed portion in Section 17(5)(d). The same 
applies to warehouses or other buildings except hotels and 
cinema theatres. A developer may construct a mall 
predominantly to sell the premises therein after obtaining an 
occupation certificate. Therefore, it will be out of the purview 
of clause 5(b) of Schedule II. Each case will have to be tested 
on merits as the question whether an immovable property or a 
building is a plant is a factual question to be decided. 
CONSTITUTIONAL VALIDITY CHALLENGE 
57. 
Now, we turn to the issue of constitutional validity 
challenge. While dealing with the issue of the constitutional 
validity of clauses (c) and (d) of Section 17(5) of the CGST Act, 

 etc. it is necessary to consider the law laid down by this Court in 
paragraphs 104 to 110 of the decision in the case of VKC 
Footsteps26 which read thus: 
“104. As a matter of first principle, it is not 
possible to accept the premise that the 
guiding principles which impart a measure of 
flexibility to the legislature in designing 
appropriate classifications for the purpose of 
a fiscal regime should be confined only to the 
revenue harvesting measures of a statute. 
The precedents of this Court provide 
abundant 
justification 
for 
the 
fundamental 
principle 
that 
a 
discriminatory 
provision 
under 
tax 
legislation is not per se invalid. A cause of 
invalidity arises where equals are treated 
as unequally and unequals are treated as 
equals. Both under the Constitution and 
the CGST Act, goods and services and 
input goods and input services are not 
treated as one and the same and they are 
distinct species. 
105. Parliament engrafted a provision for 
refund Section 54(3). In enacting such a 
provision, Parliament is entitled to make 
policy choices and adopt appropriate 
classifications, given the latitude which 
our constitutional jurisprudence allows it 
in matters involving tax legislation and to 
provide for exemptions, concessions and 
benefits 
on 
terms, 
as 
it 
considers 
appropriate. The consistent line of precedent 
of this Court emphasises certain basic 
precepts which govern both judicial review 
and judicial interpretation of tax legislation. 
These precepts are: 
105.1. Selecting the objects to be taxed, 
determining 
the 
quantum 
of 
tax, 

 etc. legislating for the conditions for the levy 
and the socio-economic goals which a tax 
must achieve are matters of legislative 
policy. M. Hidayatullah, C.J., speaking for 
the Constitution Bench in Commr. of Urban 
Land Tax v. Buckingham & Carnatic Co. 
Ltd. [Commr. of 
Urban 
Land 
Tax v. Buckingham & Carnatic Co. Ltd., 
(1969) ] held: (SCC p. 67, para 10) 
“10. … The objects to be taxed, the 
quantum of tax to be levied, the 
conditions subject to which it is 
levied and the social and economic 
policies which a tax is designed to 
subserve are all matters of political 
character and these matters have 
been entrusted to the legislature 
and not to the courts. In applying 
the test of reasonableness it is also 
essential to notice that the power of 
taxation is generally regarded as an 
essential attribute of sovereignty and 
constitutional provisions relating to 
the power of taxation are regarded 
not as grant of power but as 
limitation upon the power which 
would 
otherwise 
be 
practically 
without limit.” 
105.2. The 
same 
principle 
has 
been 
reiterated 
in Federation 
of 
Hotel 
& 
Restaurant 
Assn. of 
India v. Union 
of 
India [Federation of Hotel & Restaurant Assn. of India v. Union of India, (1989) ], 
where M.N. Venkatachaliah, J. (as the 
learned Chief Justice then was), speaking for 
the Constitution Bench held: (SCC pp. 658-
59, paras 46-47) 
“46. It is now well settled that 
though taxing laws are not outside 
Article 14, however, having regard 

 etc. to the wide variety of diverse 
economic criteria that go into the 
formulation of a fiscal policy 
legislature enjoys a wide latitude 
in the matter of selection of 
persons, subject-matter, events, 
etc. for taxation. The tests of the 
vice of discrimination in a taxing 
law are, accordingly, less rigorous. 
In examining the allegations of a 
hostile, 
discriminatory 
treatment 
what is looked into is not its 
phraseology, but the real effect of its 
provisions. A legislature does not, as 
an old saying goes, have to tax 
everything in order to be able to tax 
something. If there is equality and 
uniformity within each group, the 
law would not be discriminatory. 
Decisions of this Court on the matter 
have permitted the legislatures to 
exercise an extremely wide discretion 
in classifying items for tax purposes, 
so long as it refrains from clear and 
hostile 
discrimination 
against 
particular persons or classes. 
47. But, with all this latitude certain 
irreducible desiderata of equality 
shall 
govern 
classifications 
for 
differential treatment in taxation 
laws as well. The classification must 
be rational and based on some 
qualities and characteristics which 
are to be found in all the persons 
grouped together and absent in the 
others left out of the class. But this 
alone is not sufficient. Differentia 
must have a rational nexus with the 
object sought to be achieved by the 
law. The State, in the exercise of its 
governmental 
power, 
has, 
of 

 etc. necessity, to make laws operating 
differently in relation to different 
groups or classes of persons to attain 
certain ends and must, therefore, 
possess the power to distinguish and 
classify persons or things. It is also 
recognised that no precise or set 
formulae or doctrinaire tests or 
precise 
scientific 
principles 
of 
exclusion or inclusion are to be 
applied. The test could only be one of 
palpable arbitrariness applied in the 
context of the felt needs of the times 
and societal exigencies informed by 
experience.” 
105.3. In 
matters 
of 
classification, 
involving fiscal legislation, the legislature 
is permitted a larger discretion so long as 
there 
is 
no 
transgression 
of 
the 
fundamental 
principle 
underlying 
the 
doctrine 
of 
classification. 
In Hiralal 
Rattanlal [Hiralal Rattanlal v. State of U.P., 
(1973): 1973 SCC (Tax) 307], K.S. 
Hegde, J., speaking for a four-Judge Bench 
observed: (SCC p. 223, para 20) 
“20. It must be noticed that generally 
speaking the primary purpose of the 
levy of all taxes is to raise funds for 
public good. Which person should be 
taxed, what transaction should be 
taxed or what goods should be taxed, 
depends upon social, economic and 
administrative considerations. In a 
democratic set up it is for the 
legislature to decide what economic 
or social policy it should pursue or 
what administrative considerations it 
should 
bear 
in 
mind. 
The 
classification between the processed 
or split pulses and unprocessed or 

 etc. unsplit 
pulses 
is 
a 
reasonable 
classification. It is based on the use 
to which those goods can be put. 
Hence, in our opinion, the impugned 
classification is not violative of Article 
14.” 
105.4. More 
recently 
in Union 
of 
India v. Nitdip 
Textile 
Processors 

Ltd. [Union 
of 
India v. Nitdip 
Textile 
Processors (P) Ltd., (2012) ], a two-
Judge Bench observed: (SCC p. 255, para 67) 
“67. It has been laid down in a large 
number of decisions of this Court 
that a taxation statute, for the 
reasons of functional expediency 
and even otherwise, can pick and 
choose to tax some. A power to 
classify being extremely broad and 
based on diverse considerations of 
executive 
pragmatism, 
the 
judicature cannot rush in where 
even the legislature warily treads. 
All these operational restraints on 
judicial power must weigh more 
emphatically where the subject is 
taxation. Discrimination resulting 
from 
fortuitous 
circumstances 
 particular situations, 
in which some of the taxpayers 
find themselves, is not hit by 
Article 14 if the legislation, as 
such, is of general application and 
does not single them out for harsh 
treatment. 
Advantages 
or 
disadvantages 
to 
individual 
assessees 
are 
accidental 
and 
inevitable and are inherent in 
every taxing statute as it has to 
draw a line somewhere and some 

 etc. cases necessarily fall on the other 
side of the line.” 
106. The principles governing a benefit, by 
way of a refund of tax paid, may well be 
construed on an analogous frame with an 
exemption from the payment of tax or a 
reduction in liability (CCT v. Dharmendra 
Trading 
Co. [CCT v. Dharmendra 
Trading 
Co., (1988): 1988 SCC (Tax) 432]). 
107. In Elel 
Hotels 
& 
Investments 
Ltd. v. Union 
of 
India [Elel 
Hotels 
& 
Investments Ltd. v. Union of India, (1989) ], M.N. Venkatachaliah, J. (as the 
learned Chief Justice then was) held that: 
(SCC p. 708, para 20) 
“20. … It is now well settled that a 
very wide latitude is available to 
the legislature in the matter of 
classification of objects, persons 
and 
things 
for 
purposes 
of 
taxation. It must need to be so, 
having regard to the complexities 
involved in the formulation of a 
taxation policy. Taxation is not 
now a mere source of raising 
money to defray expenses of 
Government. It is a recognised 
fiscal tool to achieve fiscal and 
social objectives. The differentia of 
classification 
presupposes 
and 
proceeds on the premise that it 
distinguishes and keeps apart as a 
distinct class hotels with higher 
economic status reflected in one of 
the 
indicia 
of 
such 
economic 
superiority. 
The 
presumption 
of 
constitutionality 
has 
not 
been 
dislodged by the petitioners by 
demonstrating how even hotels, not 

 etc. brought into the class, have also 
equal or higher chargeable receipts 
and how the assumption of economic 
superiority of hotels to which the Act 
is applied is erroneous or irrelevant.” 
108. In Spences Hotel (P) Ltd. v. State of 
W.B. [Spences Hotel (P) Ltd. v. State of W.B., 
(1991) ], a two-Judge Bench, 
speaking through K.N. Saikia, J. revisited the 
precedents of this Court governing the 
principles of classification in tax legislation 
and held: (SCC pp. 168-69, para 24) 
“24. … The history of taxation is one 
of evolution as is the case in all 
human affairs. Its progress is one of 
constant growth and development in 
keeping with the advancing economic 
and social conditions; and the fiscal 
intelligence of the State has been 
advancing concomitantly, subjecting 
by new means and methods hitherto 
untaxed property, income, service 
and provisions to taxation. With the 
change of scientific, commercial and 
economic conditions and ways of life 
new 
species 
of 
property, 
both 
tangible 
and 
intangible 
gaining 
enormous values have come into 
existence and new means of reaching 
and 
subjecting 
the 
same 
to 
contribute towards public finance 
are being developed, perfected and 
put into practical operation by the 
legislatures 
and 
courts 
of 
this 
country, 
of 
course 
within 
constitutional limitations.” 
109. The Court held that the principle of 
equality does not preclude the classification 
of property, trade, profession and events for 

 etc. taxation — subjecting one kind to one rate of 
taxation and another to a different rate. The 
State may exempt certain classes of property 
from any taxation at all and impose different 
specific taxes upon different species which it 
seeks to regulate. The Court held: (Spences 
Hotel case [Spences Hotel (P) Ltd. v. State of 
W.B., (1991) ], SCC p. 171, para 
27) 
“27. ‘Perfect equality in taxation has 
been said time and again, to be 
impossible 
and 
unattainable. 
Approximation to it is all that can be 
had. Under any system of taxation, 
however, 
wisely 
and 
carefully 
framed, a disproportionate share of 
the public burdens would be thrown 
on certain kinds of property, because 
they are visible and tangible, while 
others are of a nature to elude 
vigilance. It is only where statutes are 
passed which impose taxes on false 
and unjust principle, or operate to 
produce gross inequality, so that 
they cannot be deemed in any just 
sense proportional in their effect on 
those who are to bear the public 
charges that courts can interpose 
and arrest the course of legislation by 
declaring such enactments void.’ 
‘Perfectly equal taxation’, it has been 
said, ‘will remain an unattainable 
good as long as laws and government 
and man are imperfect.’ ‘Perfect 
uniformity and perfect equality of 
taxation’, in all the aspects in which 
the human mind can view it, is a 
baseless dream.’ 
110. Parliament 
while 
enacting 
the 
provisions of Section 54(3), legislated within 

 etc. the fold of the GST regime to prescribe a 
refund. While doing so, it has confined the 
grant of refund in terms of the first proviso to 
Section 54(3) to the two categories which are 
governed by clauses (i) and (ii). A claim to 
refund is governed by statute. There is no 
constitutional entitlement to seek a refund. 
Parliament has in clause (i) of the first proviso 
allowed a refund of the unutilised ITC in the 
case of zero-rated supplies made without 
payment of tax. Under clause (ii) of the first 
proviso, Parliament has envisaged a refund of 
unutilised 
ITC, where the 
credit 
has 
accumulated on account of the rate of tax on 
inputs being higher than the rate of tax on 
output supplies. When there is neither a 
constitutional guarantee nor a statutory 
entitlement to refund, the submission that 
goods and services must necessarily be 
treated on a par on a matter of a refund of 
unutilised ITC cannot be accepted. Such an 
interpretation, 
if 
carried 
to 
its 
logical 
conclusion 
would 
involve 
unforeseen 
consequences, circumscribing the legislative 
discretion of Parliament to fashion the rate of 
tax, concessions and exemptions. If the 
judiciary were to do so, it would run the risk 
of encroaching upon legislative choices, and 
on policy decisions which are the prerogative 
of the executive. Many of the considerations 
which underlie these choices are based on 
complex balances drawn between political, 
economic and social needs and aspirations 
and are a result of careful analysis of the data 
and information regarding the levy of taxes 
and their collection. That is precisely the 
reason why courts are averse to entering the 
area of policy matters on fiscal issues. We are 
therefore unable to accept the challenge to 
the constitutional validity of Section 54(3).” 
(emphasis added) 

 etc. 

Paragraph 142 of the decision reads thus: 
“142. The above judicial precedents indicate 
that in the field of taxation, this Court has 
only intervened to read down or interpret a 
formula if the formula leads to absurd results 
or is unworkable. In the present case 
however, the formula is not ambiguous in 
nature or unworkable, nor is it opposed to the 
intent of the legislature in granting limited 
refund on accumulation of unutilised ITC. It 
is merely the case that the practical effect of 
the formula might result in certain inequities. 
The reading down of the formula as proposed 
by Mr Natarjan and Mr Sridharan by 
prescribing an order of utilisation would take 
this Court down the path of recrafting the 
formula and walk into the shoes of the 
executive 
or 
the 
legislature, 
which 
is 
impermissible. Accordingly, we shall refrain 
from replacing the wisdom of the legislature 
or its delegate with our own in such a case. 
However, given the anomalies pointed out by 
the assessees, we strongly urge the GST 
Council to reconsider the formula and take a 
policy decision regarding the same.” 
At this stage, it will be also necessary to consider the decision 
of this Court in the case of Nitdip Textiles8. In paragraph 66, 
this Court held thus: 
“66. To sum up, Article 14 does not prohibit 
reasonable classification of persons, objects 
and transactions by the legislature for the 
purpose of attaining specific ends. To satisfy 
the test of permissible classification, it must 
not be “arbitrary, artificial or evasive” but 
must be based on some real and substantial 
distinction bearing a just and reasonable 
relation to the object sought to be achieved 
by the legislature. The taxation laws are no 
exception to the application of this principle 

 etc. of equality enshrined in Article 14 of the 
Constitution of India. However, it is well 
settled that the legislature enjoys very wide 
latitude in the matter of classification of 
objects, persons and things for the purpose 
of taxation in view of inherent complexity of 
fiscal adjustment of diverse elements. The 
power of the legislature to classify is of 
wide range and flexibility so that it can 
adjust its system of taxation in all proper 
and reasonable ways. Even so, large 
latitude is allowed to the State for 
classification upon a reasonable basis and 
what is reasonable is a question of 
practical details and a variety of factors 
which the court will be reluctant and 
perhaps ill-equipped to investigate.” 
(emphasis added) 
Apart from these decisions, there are other binding decisions 
which hold that the laws relating to economic activities should 
be viewed with greater latitude than laws touching civil rights 
such as freedom of speech, religion, etc. In the present case, 
the legislature was dealing with a complex issue. Therefore, 
greater freedom and greater play in the joints has to be allowed 
to the legislature. 
58. 
Essentially, the challenge to constitutional validity is 
that, in the present case, the provisions do not meet the test of 
reasonable classification, which is a part of Article 14 of the 
Constitution of India. To satisfy the test, there must be an 
intelligible differentia forming the basis of the classification, 
and the differentia should have a rational nexus with the object 
of legislation. The Union of India rightly contends that 
immovable property and immovable goods for the purpose of 

 etc. 

GST constitute a class by themselves. Clauses (c) and (d) of 
Section 17(5) apply only to this class of cases. The right of ITC 
is conferred only by the Statute; therefore, unless there is a 
statutory provision, ITC cannot be enforced. It is a creation of 
a statute, and thus, no one can claim ITC as a matter of right 
unless it is expressly provided in the statute. It cannot be 
disputed that the legislature can always carve out exceptions 
to the entitlement of ITC under Section 16 of the CGST Act. 
59. 
Therefore, the cases covered by clauses (c) and (d) of 
Section 17(5) are entirely distinct from the other cases. This 
appears to be done to ensure the object of not encroaching 
upon the State's legislative powers under Entry 49 of List II. 
Therefore, it is not possible to accept the submission that the 
difference is not intelligible and has no nexus to the object 
sought to be achieved. Moreover, to decide why transactions 
covered by clauses (c) and (d) are separately classified, the 
Court will have to go into complex questions involving fiscal 
adjustments of diverse elements. The Court has no experience 
or expertise to embark upon the said exercise. 
60. 
We fail to understand the argument that the classification 
is underinclusive and creates discrimination. In this case, 
equals are not being treated as unequals. The test of vice of 
discrimination in taxing law is less rigorous. Ultimately, the 
legislature was dealing with a complex economic problem. By 
no stretch of the imagination, clauses (c) and (d) of Section 
17(5) can be said to be discriminatory. No amount of verbose 
and lengthy arguments will help the assessees prove the 

 etc. discrimination. In the circumstances, it is not possible for us 
to accept the plea of clauses (c) and (d) of Section 17(5) being 
unconstitutional. 
61. 
Though, violation of Articles 19(1)(g) and 300A has been 
alleged, it is not elaborated by the assessees how such a 
violation is made out. 
62. 
While dealing with a taxing statute, it can always be said 
that, ideally, a particular provision ought not to have been 
incorporated or ought to have been incorporated with a 
modification. Even if this can be said, per se, the particular 
provision does not become unconstitutional. The Court cannot 
impose its views on the legislature. 
63. 
Now, we come to the challenge to sub-section (4) of 
Section 16 of the CGST Act, which reads thus: 
“16. Eligibility and conditions for taking 
input tax credit.—.................................... 
(4) A registered person shall not be entitled to 
take input tax credit in respect of any invoice 
or debit note for supply of goods or services 
or both after the thirtieth day of November 
following the end of financial year to which 
such invoice or debit note pertains or 
furnishing of the relevant annual return, 
whichever is earlier: 
Provided that the registered person shall be 
entitled to take input tax credit after the due 
date of furnishing of the return under Section 
39 for the month of September, 2018 till the 
due date of furnishing of the return under the 

 etc. said section for the month of March, 2019 in 
respect of any invoice or debit note for supply 
of goods or services or both made during the 
financial year 2017-18, the details of which 
have been uploaded by the supplier under 
sub-section (1) of Section 37 till the due date 
for furnishing the details under sub-section 
(1) of said section for the month of March, 
2019.” 
The words “thirtieth day of November” were substituted with 
effect from 1st October 2022 for the words “due date of 
furnishing of the return under Section 39 for the month of 
September”. We fail to understand how sub-section (4) of 
Section 16 becomes discriminatory when the legislature says 
that a registered person shall not be entitled to take ITC in 
respect of any invoice or debit note for the supply of goods or 
services or both after the thirtieth day of November following 
the end of the financial year to which such invoice or debit note 
pertains or furnishing of the relevant annual return, whichever 
is earlier. It is not shown how the provision is arbitrary and 
discriminatory. The fact that the provisions could have been 
drafted in a better manner or more articulately is not sufficient 
to attract arbitrariness. 
64. As we are upholding the constitutional validity of clauses 
(c) and (d) of Section 17(5), and as held earlier, its plain 
interpretation does not lead to any ambiguity, the question of 
reading down the provisions does not arise. 
65. 
Some of our conclusions can be summarised as under: 

 etc. a. The challenge to the constitutional validity of 
clauses (c) and (d) of Section 17(5) and Section 16(4) 
of the CGST Act is not established; 
b. The expression “plant or machinery” used in 
Section 17(5)(d) cannot be given the same meaning 
as the expression “plant and machinery” defined by 
the explanation to Section 17; 
c. The question whether a mall, warehouse or any 
building other than a hotel or a cinema theatre can 
be classified as a plant within the meaning of the 
expression “plant or machinery” used in Section 
17(5)(d) is a factual question which has to be 
determined keeping in mind the business of the 
registered person and the role that building plays 
in the said business. If the construction of a 
building was essential for carrying out the activity 
of supplying services, such as renting or giving on 
lease or other transactions in respect of the building 
or a part thereof, which are covered by clauses (2) 
and (5) of Schedule II of the CGST Act, the building 
could be held to be a plant. Then, it is taken out of 
the exception carved out by clause (d) of Section 
17(5) to sub-section (1) of Section 16. Functionality 
test will have to be applied to decide whether a 
building is a plant. Therefore, by using the 
functionality test, in each case, on facts, in the light 
of what we have held earlier, it will have to be 

 etc. decided whether the construction of an immovable 
property is a “plant” for the purposes of clause (d) 
of Section 17(5). 
66. 
In the light of what we have held above, by setting aside 
the impugned judgment in Civil Appeal Nos. 2948 and 2949 of 
2023, the writ petitions are remanded to the High Court of 
Orissa for limited purposes of deciding whether, in the facts of 
the case, the shopping mall is a “plant” in terms of clause (d) of 
Section 17(5). Appeals are partly allowed in above terms. 
67. 
While deciding these cases, we cannot make any final 
adjudication on the question of whether the construction of 
immovable property carried out by the petitioners in Writ 
Petitions amounts to plant, and each case will have to be 
decided on its merit by applying the functionality test in terms 
of this judgment. The issue must be decided in appropriate 
proceedings in which adjudication can be made on facts. The 
petitioners are free to adopt appropriate proceedings or raise 
the issue in appropriate proceedings. 
68. 
The 
writ 
petitions 
are 
rejected 
subject 
to 
the 
interpretation of clause (d) of sub-section (5) of Section 17 of 
the CGST Act made by us. 
……………………..J. 

 (Abhay S Oka) 

……………………..J. 

 (Sanjay Karol) 
New Delhi; 
October 3, 2024.