IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

BAITULLA ISMAIL SHAIKH 
AND ANR. 

VERSUS 
 
KHATIJA ISMAIL PANHALKAR 

AND ORS. 

WITH 

JUDGMENT 
 ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J. 
The appellants before us are landlords and they assail a 
judgment delivered by a Single Judge of the Bombay High Court 
on 04.08.2015 exercising his revisional jurisdiction invalidating 
eviction decrees against two tenants in respect of two portions of 
the same building. The building in question carries House 
No.86 as per the municipal records, comprised in C.S. No. 111/b 
as per city survey records, located at Dr. Sobane Road in 

Mahabaleshwar, District-Satara within the State of Maharashtra. 
The arises out of Civil Suit No. 136 
of 2010 and the tenant/defendant in that suit is one Khatija 
Ismail Panhalkar. In this suit, two of his sons have also been 
impleaded as defendants. The premises involved in these 
proceedings comprise of two blocks within the aforesaid building. 
One block comprises of 10’×4’ structure made of ‘ita and tin shed’. arises out of Civil Suit No. 137 of 
2010 and the tenant whose eviction is sought for in this suit is 
one Vasant Mahadeo Gujar (since deceased). Before us, his legal 
representatives have contested the appeal. The property from 
which the appellants want them to be evicted comprises of two 
rooms comprising of an area of 10’×12’, which appears to be 
located in the middle of the said building. The two rooms, at the 
material point of time, were being used for residential purpose. 
The appellants purchased the subject-premises in the year 1992 
from its erstwhile owner. Both the tenants were inducted by the 
erstwhile owner of the building in question. 
2. On 23.01.2002, a demolition notice was issued by the 
Mahabaleshwar Giristhan Municipal Council for a part of the 
subject-building. This notice constituted one of the grounds on 

which the appellants wanted to evict the respondents under the 
Maharashtra Rent Control Act, 1999 (“the 1999 Act”). This notice 
was followed by three subsequent notices by the said Municipal 
Council on 03.12.2005, 13.07.2009 and 05.07.2010, almost on 
similar terms. The suit, however, was founded on, inter-alia, the 
notice dated 23.01.2002. This notice is of relevance so far as these 
appeals are concerned and we quote below the text thereof:- 
“ANNEXURE P- 1 
MAHABALESHWAR GIRISTHAN MUNICIPAL COUNCIL, 
MAHABALESHWAR, DIST. SATARA- 412806 
 
Municipal office no. 60220 Chief officer no. 60673 
 
President office no. 60232 
 Chief officer res. No 

V.S. NO. 15/527 

 Date; 23-1-2002 
 
Notice 
 
You are do hereby informed that on inspection of the 
property comprised in C.S. no. 111-b, house no. 86-
b situated within the municipal council, as on today 
that is 22-1-2002 it is found that the wall from the 
eastern side is swollen and there are cracks. It is 
also found that the wooden pillars, wood is 
damaged and ceiling also has turned out of shape. 
Due to this the danger to the house is apprehended. 
There is risk to the persons residing in the house as 
well as the persons coming and going. At anytime 
thre is possibility of collapsing the said dangerous 
building due to which there is possibility of fatalities 
and the financial loss. Hence vide this notice it is to 
inform you to demolish the said dangerous portion 
immediately on receipt of this notice otherwise if any 
fatality occurs or the financial loss occurs due to the 
said house then municipal council will not be 
responsible and the entire responsibility will lie in 
your part. And please note the same. 

Sd/- 
Chief officer 
Mahabaleshwar Giristhan 
Municipal council 
To, 
Baitulla lsmail sheikh and C.K. Aris. 
Vasant Mahadev Gujar 
Khatija lsmail Panhalkar” 
 
3. Notices for eviction were subsequently sent to the tenants in 
each appeal and both these notices are dated 04.02.2002. So far 
as the notice to the respondents in 
is concerned, the delivery of vacant possession was asked for on 
five main grounds. The first one was default in payment of rent. 
The next ground was erection of a permanent structure by the 
tenant without permission of the landlord. The third point was 
subletting and it was also stated in that notice that the landlords 
had decided to construct a building thereon for residential 
purpose as also for operating a hotel. Under Section 16(1)(i) of 
the 1999 Act, the erection of a new building could come within 
“reasonable and bona fide” requirement of landlord, subject to 
satisfaction 
of 
certain 
other 
stipulated 
conditions. 
The 
municipality’s demolition notice was also cited as a ground for 
eviction. We shall reproduce provisions of Sections 15 and 16 of 
the said enactment in subsequent paragraphs of this judgment. 
In the eviction notice to the respondent in Civil Appeal No. 1544 

of 2016, the grounds cited were, inter-alia, issue of the demolition 
notice by the municipality, default in payment of rent and also 
necessity of the tenanted portion for construction of a new 
building upon demolishing the structures on the land. 
4. As the eviction notices did not yield any result, the two suits 
were instituted on the same date, i.e. 07.08.2002. These suits 
appear to have had been tried simultaneously and they were 
decreed by the Trial Court, which was sustained by the Appellate 
Court. In the Civil Revision Petition, the tenants succeeded as the 
judgment and decree were set aside. 
5. In course of the proceeding before the Trial Court, a 
Commissioner was appointed. He was an architect. His opinion, 
however, was not accepted by the Trial Court. He had given his 
opinion that a portion referred to as “C” in his report was 
dangerous and was required to be demolished. This portion, 
however, was in possession of the plaintiffs only, but adjacent to 
the suit property (in ). Though his 
report dated 08.12.2008 carries the caption of suit no. (239 of 
2002) 136 of 2010, the report was examined by the Trial Court in 
connection with both the suits. His report on the necessity of 
urgent demolition of the tenanted portions was not fully 

conclusive but his view was that the entire building was about 97 
years old and life of the building was over. His opinion has been 
referred to and dealt with by the Trial Court in the following 
terms:- 
“16) In this respect I have perused evidence of D.W.1 Vivek 
and his commission report at Exh.122. It is pertinent to note 
that in the commission report Exh.122, the commissioner 
has given actual position of every room situated in 
C.T.S.No.111/B. In his conclusion he has opined that, the 
building is approximately 96 to 97 years old and the life of 
building is over. Considering all the material he opined that 
the portion shown as 'C' in the map is dangerous and is 
required to be demolished. It is important to note that, said 
portion shown as 'C' is the room which is in possession of 
plaintiffs and adjacent to suit property. The commissioner 
has also filed number of photographs showing the position 
of property at Exh. 135 to Exh. 148. Further, if D.W.1 Vivek's 
deposition is perused it is clear that he has supported his 
commission report. In cross examination, he admitted that, 
if the cementing strength of soi! used for construction is gone 
then there may be cracks to the wall ·and to reconstruct the 
said wall the previous wall is required to be demolished, 
further, if the base of construction is not strong then new 
construction can also collapse. He further admitted that, if 
the portion shown by red ink in the map i.e. 'C' is 
demolished the entire roof on the property is also required 
to be removed and if said roof is removed it will create 
danger to the roof of the property on the western side and 
ta the roof on 'B' portion. Further, if total evidence of 
D.W.1 Vivek is considered it cannot be said that, he 
had opined that, suit property is in dilapidated 
condition though he had admitted that the life of suit 
property is over.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

6. It would be evident from this part of the judgment of the Trial 
Court that there was no specific finding that the portions in 
respect of which the respondents have tenancy required 
immediate demolition. It was a portion of the premises in 

possession of the landlords which, in the opinion of the 
Commissioner was dangerous. The Trial Court proceeded on the 
basis that it could not sit in appeal over the decision of Municipal 
Council requiring demolition. On plaintiffs’ plea of default, the 
Trial Court rejected that contention holding that the tenants were 
ready and willing to pay the rent of the suit property and during 
the pendency of the suit, they had deposited the rent. The Trial 
Court also rejected the landlord’s contention that the subject-
property was sublet or permanent structure was made without 
consent of the landlord. The Trial Court, however, opined that the 
landlord was the best judge of his own requirement and on that 
basis the issue of bona fide need was decided in favour of the 
appellants. 
7. The Appellate Court sustained the judgment and decree on 
the ground of bona fide need as also necessity to effect demolition 
of the subject-building. In addition, it overturned the Trial Court’s 
finding on there being no default in payment of rent on the ground 
that the provisions of Section 15(3) of the 1999 Act could not 
support the tenant’s case. On the question of permanent 
structure having been made by the respondent in Civil Appeal No. 

1543 of 2016 without permission of the landlord and question of 
sub-letting, the Trial Court’s decision was sustained. 
8. The Revisional Court on analysing the provisions of Sections 
15 and 16 of the said Statute set aside the judgment and decree 
and allowed the revision applications of the tenants. 
9. The provisions of Sections 15 and 16 of the 1999 Act 
stipulate:- 
“15. No ejectment ordinarily to be made if tenant pays or is 
ready and willing to pay standard rent and permitted 
increases. 
(1) A landlord shall not be entitled to the recovery of 
possession of any premises so long as the tenant pays, 
or is ready and willing to pay, the amount of the, 
standard rent and permitted increases, if any, and 
observes and performs the other, conditions of the 
tenancy, in so far as they are consistent with the 
provisions of this Act. 
(2) No suit for recovery of possession shall be instituted 
by a landlord against the tenant on the ground of non-
payment of the standard rent or permitted increases 
due, until the expiration of ninety days next after notice 
in writing of the demand of the standard rent or 
permitted increases has been served upon the tenant 
in the manner provided in section 106 of the Transfer 
of Property Act, 1882. 
(3) No decree for eviction shall be passed by the court 
in any suit for recovery of possession on the ground of 
arrears of standard rent and permitted increases if, 
within a period of ninety days from the date of service 
of the summons of the suit, the tenant pays or tenders 
in court the standard rent and permitted increases 
then due together with simple interest on the amount 
of arrears at fifteen per cent per annum; and thereafter 
continues to pay or tenders in court regularly such 
standard rent and permitted increases till the suit is 
finally decided and also pays cost of the suit as 
directed by the court. 

(4) Pending the disposal of any suit, the court may, out 
of any amount paid or tendered by the tenant, pay to 
the landlord such amount towards the payment of rent 
or permitted increases due to him as the court thinks 
fit. 
16. When landlord may recover possession. 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act but 
subject to the provisions of section 25, a landlord shall 
be entitled to recover possession of any premises if the 
court is satisfied- 
(a) that the tenant has committed any act contrary to 
the provisions of clause (o) of section 108 of the 
Transfer of Property Act, 1882; 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this clause, replacing 
of tiles or closing of balcony of the premises shall not 
be regarded as an act of a causing damage to the 
building or destructive or permanently injurious 
thereto; or 
(b) that the tenant has, without the landlord's consent 
given in writing, erected on the premises any 
permanent structure; 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this clause, the 
expression "permanent structure" does not include the 
carrying out of any work with the permission, 
wherever necessary, of the municipal authority, for 
providing a wooden partition, standing cooking 
platform in kitchen, door, lattice work or opening of a 
window necessary for ventilation, a false ceiling, 
installation of air-conditioner, an exhaust outlet or a 
smoke chimney; or 
(c) that the tenant, his agent, servant, persons inducted 
by tenant or claiming under the tenant or, any person 
residing with the tenant has been guilty of conduct 
which is a nuisance or annoyance to the adjoining or 
neighbouring occupier, or has been convicted of using 
the premises or allowing the premises to be used for 
immoral or illegal purposes or that the tenant has in 
respect of the premises been convicted of an offence of 
contravention of any of the provisions of clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) of section 394 or of section 394A of the 
Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, or of sub-section (1) 
or of section 376 or of section 376A of the Bombay 
Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949, or of 
section 229 of the City of Nagpur Municipal Corporation 
Act, 1948; or of section 280 or of section 281 of the 

Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats 
and Industrial Townships Act, 1965; or 
(d) that the tenant has given notice to quit and in 
consequence of that notice,the landlord has contracted 
to sell or let the premises or has taken any other steps 
as a result of which he would, in the opinion of the 
court, be seriously prejudiced if he could not obtain 
possession of the premises; or 
(e) that the tenant has,- 
(i) on or after the 1st day of February 1973, in the areas 
to which the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House 
Rates Control Act, 1947 applied; or 
(ii) on or after the commencement of this Act, in the 
Vidarbha and Marathwada, areas of the State, 
unlawfully sub-let or given on licence, the whole or part 
of the premises or assigned or transferred in any other 
manner his interest therein; or 
(f) that the premises were let to the tenant for use as a 
residence by reason of his being in the service or 
employment of the landlord, and that the tenant has 
ceased, whether before or after commencement of this 
Act, to be in such service or employment; or 
(g) that the premises are reasonably and bona fide 
required by the landlord for occupation by himself or 
by any person for whose benefit the premises are held 
or where the landlord is a trustee of a public charitable 
trust that the premises are required for occupation for 
the purposes of the trust; or 
(h) that the premises are reasonably and bona fide 
required by the landlord for carrying out repairs which 
cannot be carried out without the premises being 
vacated; or 
(i) that the premises are reasonably and bona fide 
required by the landlord for the immediate purpose of 
demolishing them and such demolition is to be made 
for the purpose of erecting new building on the 
premises sought to be demolished; or 
(j) that the premises let consist of a tenement or 
tenements on the terrace of a building such tenement 
or tenements being only in part of the total area of the 
terrace, and that the premises or any part thereof are 
required by the landlord for the purpose of the 

demolition thereof and erection or raising of a floor or 
floors on such terrace; 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause, if the 
premises let include the terrace or part thereof, or 
garages, servants quarters or out-houses (which are 
not on the terrace), or all or any one or more of them, 
this clause shall nevertheless apply; or 
(k) that the premises are required for the immediate 
purpose of demolition ordered by any municipal 
authority or other competent authority; or 
(l) that where the premises are land in the nature of 
garden or grounds appurtenant to a building or part of 
a building, such land is required by the landlord for the 
erection of a new building which a municipal authority 
has approved or permitted him to build thereon; or 
(m) that the rent charged by the tenant for the premises 
or any part thereof which are sublet is in excess of the 
standard rent and permitted increases in respect of 
such premises or part or that the tenant has received 
any fine, premium other like sum of consideration in 
respect of such premises or part; or 
(n) that the premises have not been used without 
reasonable cause for the purpose for which they were 
let for a continuous period of six months immediately 
preceding the date of the suit. 
(2) No decree for eviction shall be passed on the ground 
specified in clause (g) of subsection (1), if the court is 
satisfied that, having regard to all the circumstances of 
the case including the question whether other 
reasonable accommodation is available for the 
landlord or the tenant, greater hardship would be 
caused by passing the decree than by refusing to pass 
it. 
Where the court is satisfied that no hardship would be 
caused either to the tenant or to the landlord by 
passing the decree in respect of a part of the premises, 
the court shall pass the decree in respect of such part 
only. 
Explanation. - For the purposes of clause (g) of sub-
section (1), the expression "landlord" shall not include 
a rent-farmer or rent-collector or estate-manager. 
(3) A landlord shall not be entitled to recover possession of 
any premises under the provisions of clause (g) of sub-
section (1), if the premises are let to the Central Government 

in a cantonment area, and such premises are being used for 
residence by members of the armed forces of the Union. or 
their families. 
(4) The court may pass the decree on the ground specified 
in clause (h) or (i) of subsection (1) only in respect of a part 
of the premises which in its opinion it is necessary to vacate 
for carrying out the work of repair or erection. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, an assignment of a decree for 
eviction obtained on the grounds specified in clauses (g), (h), 
(i) and (j) of sub-section (1) shall be unlawful. 
(6) No decree for eviction shall be passed on the ground 
specified in clause (i) or (j) of sub-section (1), unless the court 
is satisfied- 
(a) that the necessary funds for the purpose of the erection 
of new building or for erecting or raising of a new floor or 
floors on the terrace are available with the landlord, 
(b) that the plans and estimates for the new building or new 
floor or floors have been properly prepared; 
(c) that the new building or new floor or floors to be erected 
by the landlord shall, subject to the provisions of any rules, 
bye-laws or regulations made by municipal authority 
contain residential tenements not less than the number of 
existing tenements which are sought to be demolished; 
(d) that the landlord has given an undertaking.- 
(i) that the plans and estimates for the new building or new 
floor or floors to be erected by the landlord include premises 
for each tenant with carpet area equivalent to the area of 
the premises in his occupation in the building sought to be 
demolished subject to a variation of five per cent in area; 
(ii) that the premises specified in sub-clause (i) will be 
offered to the concerned tenant or tenants in the re-erected 
building or, as the case may be, on the new floor or floors; 
(iii) that where the carpet area of premises in the new 
building or on the new floor or floors is more than the carpet 
area specified in sub-clause (i) the landlord shall, without 
prejudice to the liability of the landlord under sub-clause (i), 
obtain the consent 'in writing' of the tenant or tenants 
concerned to accept the premises with larger area; and on 
the tenant or tenants declining to give such consent the 
landlord shall be entitled to put the additional floor area to 
any permissible use; 

(iv) that the work of demolishing the premises shall be 
commenced by the landlord not later than one month, and 
shall be completed not later than three months, from the 
date he recovers possession of the entire premises; and 
(v) that the work of erection of the new building or new floor 
or floors shall be completed by the landlord not later than 
fifteen months from the said date: 
Provided that, where the court is satisfied that the work of 
demolishing the premises could not be commenced or 
completed, or the work of erection of the new building or, as 
the case may be, the new floor or floors could not be 
completed, within time, for reasons beyond the control of the 
landlord, the court may, by order, for reasons to be 
recorded. extend the period by such further periods, not 
exceeding three months at a time as may, from time to time, 
be specified by it, so however that the extended period shall 
not exceed twelve months in the aggregate. 
(7) Where the possession of premises is recovered on the 
ground specified under clause (g), (h), (i) or (j) of sub-section 
(1) and the premises are transferred by the landlord, or by 
operation of law before the tenant or tenants are placed in 
occupation, then such transfer shall be subject to the rights 
and interests of such tenants. 
(8) For the purposes of clause (m) of sub-section (1), the 
standard rent or permitted increase in respect of the part 
sub-let shall be the amounts bearing such proportion to the 
standard rent or permitted increases in respect of the 
premises as may be reasonable having regard to the extent 
of the part sub-let and other relevant considerations. 
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where 
the premises let to any person include- 
(i) the terrace or part thereof; or 
(ii) any one or more of the following structures, that is to say, 
tower-rooms, 
sitting-outrooms, 
ornamental 
structures, 
architectural features, landings, attics on the terrace of a 
building, or one or more rooms of whatsoever description on 
such terrace (such room or rooms being in the aggregate of 
an area not more than one-sixth of the total area of the 
terrace); or 
(iii) the terrace or part thereof and any such structure, 
and the court is satisfied that the terrace or structure or 
terrace including structure, as aforesaid, are required by the 
landlord for the purpose of demolition and erection or raising 
of a floor or floors on such terrace, the landlord shall be 

entitled to recover possession of the terrace including such 
tower-rooms, sitting-out-rooms, ornamental structures, 
architectural features, landings, attics or rooms, the court 
may make such reduction, if any, in the rent as it may deem 
just. 
(10) A suit for eviction on the grounds specified in clause (h), 
(i), (i) or (k) of sub-section (1) may be filed by the landlord 
jointly against all the tenants occupying the premises 
sought to be demolished.” 
 
10. The eviction proceeding was instituted in the suit giving rise 
to against the appellants, inter-alia, 
on the grounds of having made construction of permanent nature 
by extending the area of the shop premises, without the landlords’ 
consent, causing permanent damage to the property in question, 
causing nuisance and annoyance to the adjoining area and 
neighbouring occupiers as also inducting a relative as sub-
tenant. It was pleaded by the appellants that because of rusting 
of beams holding the tenanted structure, the roof of the rented 
property was damaged as a result of which it had become 
dangerous for the occupation of human beings. Demolition notice 
issued by Mahabaleshwar Giristhan Municipal Council to the 
landlords dated 23.01.2002 was relied upon in the plaint in this 
regard. So far as the suit forming the basis of Civil Appeal 
No.1544 of 2016 is concerned, the grounds for eviction were 
default in the payment of rent, demolition notice having been 

issued by the Municipal Council on 23.01.2002, as also for 
necessity of having the premises for the purpose of carrying out 
construction for residential purpose and hotel. This requirement, 
the appellant argued, constituted bona fide requirement by the 
landlord. On the finding of the Appellate Court that there was 
default in payment of rent, the High Court held:- 
“12(c) The Appeal Court has committed an error of law, 
apparent on face of record in interpreting Section 15 of the 
Rent Act, in the manner it has. The interpretation is contrary 
to both, the text as well as the rulings of this Court on the 
subject. This is a case where ·rents were regularly offered 
and dispatched by way of money orders. The rents were, 
however, refused by the landlords. In such circumstances, 
there is no obligation upon the tenants to comply with 
conditions prescribed in Section 15(3) of the Rent Act. It is 
always open to a tenant to establish and prove that the 
tenant was always ready and willing to pay rent and 
therefore, there was no cause of action to even initiate 
proceedings for eviction under Section 15(1) of the Rent Act. 
Besides, a careful perusal of the impugned orders would 
indicate that concurrently the two Courts have accepted that 
there was no default in payment of rents. There is, in any 
case, ample evidence on record to establish that there was 
no default in payment of rent;” 
 
11. The Revisional Court examining the question of reasonable 
and bona fide requirement of the landlords found eviction was 
sought for demolishing the suit premises and erecting a new 
building thereon. In the opinion of the High Court, it was 
incumbent on the part of the fact finding fora to come to a finding 
on that question and record satisfaction as required under sub-
sections (4), (5), (6) and (7) of Section 16 of the 1999 Act. We have 

quoted above Section 16 of the 1999 Act. The High Court appears 
to have connected the claim based on reasonable and bona fide 
requirement to Sections 16 (1)(h) and (i) of the said statute. 
Though these two provisions apply in different contexts, sub-
section (4) thereof requires the Court to carry out an exercise to 
determine which part of the rented-out premises ought to be 
vacated for carrying out the work of repair or erection. The first 
two fora did not address this question, which is a statutory 
requirement. A three-Judge Bench of this Court, in the case of P. 
ORR & Sons (P) Ltd. -vs- Associated Publishers (Madras) Ltd. 
[(1991) ] dealing with a provision similar to Section 
16(1)(i) contained in the rent legislation for the State of Tamil 
Nadu, Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 
opined that the condition of building had to be considered for 
determining the legitimacy of the demand for timely demolition by 
reason of extent of damage to the structure, apart from 
considering other factors. It was also pointed out in this judgment 
that there was no necessity of the building being in crumbling 
condition to invoke the said provision. This view was echoed in a 
Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Vijay 
Singh and Others -vs- Vijayalakshmi Ammal [(1996) 
 
475]. But these authorities do not clash with the reasoning of the 
High Court anchored on Section 16(4) of the 1999 Act. That 
provision lays down an entirely different test, and that is to 
ascertain if part-demolition could save the tenant’s interest. 
Dealing with claim based on Section 16(1)(h) and (i) of the 1999 
Act, the statutory mandate for the Court is to test the question of 
part vacating. Neither the Trial Court nor the Appellate Court 
chose to analyse this requirement before directing eviction. This 
provision becomes relevant as the initial demolition notice 
identifies a part of the premises requiring demolition and the 
Commissioner’s report is also on that line. Sub-section (2) of 
Section 16 relates to reasonable and bona fide need in terms of 
Section 16(1)(g) and if the requirement is in the aforesaid terms, 
then the Court has to be satisfied having regard to all the 
circumstances of the case including the question whether other 
reasonable accommodation is available to the landlord or the 
tenant. This provision essentially incorporates the principle of 
“comparative hardship”, as such a test has come to be known in 
tenancy jurisprudence. We have been taken through the 
judgments of the Trial Court and the Appellate Court on this 
point. The Appellate Court came to the finding that balance on 

this point tilts in favour of the landlord. The High Court rejected 
this finding, holding:- 
“54] However, the respondent-landlords, have not at all 
been candid with the Court insofar as the pleadings are 
concerned. In the course of evidence, it has come on record 
that the respondent-landlords have, besides the suit 
premises several other premises, which are being used by 
them for purposes of commerce as well as residence. Some 
of the premises, may have been acquired post the institution 
of the suit including in particular, the premises acquired by 
one of the sons of Baitullah Shaikh. Nevertheless, there 
were no disclosures volunteered in the course of 
examination-in-chief. Even if, the premises subsequently 
acquired are left out of consideration, there was a duty upon 
the respondent-landlords to fully and candidly make 
disclosure about the premises in their occupation, both for 
the purposes of residence as well as commerce and 
thereafter to explain, howsoever briefly, the subsistence of 
the need in respect of suit premises. The respondent-
landlords have completely failed in this aspect. Such non-
disclosure is a relevant consideration in the context of 
determining both the reasonability as well as bona fides. 
55] The tenants have managed to bring on record the 
material in the context of occupation and control of several 
premises by the respondent-landlords. Looking to the 
conduct of the respondent- 
landlords, there is no certainty as to whether the 
premises in respect of which the tenants have obtained 
and produced documents, are only premises which are 
in the occupation or control of the respondent-landlords 
or whether there are some others as well. 
However, even on basis of the existing material on 
record, there was no question of making any decree 
under Section 16(1) (g) of the Rent Act.” 
 
We affirm the view taken by the High Court that there was no 
satisfaction in the manner contemplated in Section 16 (2) of the 
1999 Act as far as bona fide need in terms of Section 16(1)(g) was 
concerned. In the impugned judgment, the High Court has dealt 

with in detail the list of properties which were with the landlords 
and on that basis gave its own finding in that regard. We do not 
find any perversity in such view taken by the High Court. 
12. Sub-section (6) of Section 16 also mandates satisfaction of 
the conditions stipulated in sub-clauses (a) to (d) thereof. Sub-
clause (d) in particular, contemplates the landlord to give 
undertaking in terms of paragraphs (i), (ii), (iv) and (v) of that sub-
clause, while dealing with landlord’s eviction claim based on 
Section 16(1)(i) of the said statute. These are all mandatory 
requirements and we cannot find any flaw with the judgment of 
the High Court to the extent it rejects the claim of the landlord for 
non-compliance of the aforesaid provisions. 
13. Section 16(1)(k) of the said Act permits recovery of possession 
of tenanted premises on the ground that the premises are 
required for immediate purpose of demolition ordered by any 
municipal or other competent authority. In the present case, the 
respective suits were instituted seeking recovery of possession, 
inter-alia, under this provision. We have already referred to the 
demolition notice issued by the municipal authority. The High 
Court opined that it was necessary to satisfy itself that the suit 
premises were required for immediate purpose of demolition. 

Contention of the appellants is that the Statute does not require 
the Court to come to a satisfaction on this point. In the event a 
tenant questions immediacy of demolition, then the proper course 
for him would be to question legality of the said notice. Section 
195 of the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats 
and Industrial Townships Act, 1965 (“1965 Act”) to which the 
High Court has also referred to, stipulates:- 
“195. (1) If it shall at any time appear to the Chief Officer 
that any building or other structure or anything affixed to 
such building or structure is in a ruinous condition or likely 
to fall, or in any way dangerous to any person occupying, 
resorting to or passing by such building or structure or any 
other structure or place in the neighbourhood thereof, the 
Chief Officer may, by written notice, require the owner or 
occupier of such building or structure to pull down, secure, 
remove or repair such building, structure or thing or do one 
or more such things and to prevent all causes of danger 
therefrom. 
(2) The Chief Officer may also, if he thinks fit, require the 
said owner or occupier, by the said notice, either forthwith 
or before proceeding to put down, secure, remove or repair 
the said building, structure or thing, to set up a proper and 
sufficient board or fence for the protection of passers by and 
other persons. 
(3) If it appears to the Chief Officer that the danger from a 
building, structure or thing which is ruinous or about to fall 
is of hourly imminence he shall, before giving notice as 
aforesaid or before the period of notice expires, fence of, 
take down, secure or repair the said structure or take such 
steps or cause such work to be executed as may be required 
to arrest the danger. 
(4) Any expenses incurred by the Chief Officer under sub-
section (3) shall be paid by the owner or occupier of the 
structure and shall be recoverable in the same manner as 
an amount due on account of a property tax.” 

14. The High Court found fault with the demolition notice as it 
carried no reference to the said provision (Section 195 of the 1965 
Act). This flaw, by itself would not make the notice unenforceable. 
Omission to label a notice with the provision under which it is 
issued would not make it nugatory, if substance thereof is clearly 
conveyed. But the High Court also found:- 
“76…Further, the notice is not directly in the context of suit 
premises occupied by the tenants, but rather pertains to 
certain portions of House No.86B. The notice, does not 
require demolition of the entire House No.86B, but rather 
requires removal of portions thereof, including in particular 
eastern wall, rafters and roofing. On basis of such notice, it 
is difficult to sustain an eviction order under Section 16(1)(k) 
of the Rent Act, particularly where no satisfaction 
whatsoever has been recorded by the two Courts on the 
aspect of 'immediate purpose of demolition', which 
satisfaction, was required to be recorded, both in terms of 
the context of Section 16(1)(k) of the Rent Act as also the 
decision of this Court in case of M.L Sonavane (supra). 
77] There is yet another significant aspect in the context of 
order of eviction under Section 16(1)(k) of the Rent Act. On 6 
August 2002, the tenants lodged the complaint to the 
Municipal Authorities that the landlord Baitulla Shaikh was 
deliberately indulging in weakening of the walls of the 
portion of House N0.86, in his possession, with the objective 
of weakening the entire structure. Based upon such 
complaint, on 29 August 2002, an inspection was held by 
the Municipal Authority. Upon finding some merit in the 
complaint of the tenants, the decision was taken to issue 
appropriate notice to the landlords Baitulla Shaikh and C.K. 
Aris, Hamid. Pursuant to such decision, the Municipal 
Authority, by notice dated 29 August 2002, notified the 
landlords that during inspection it was revealed that the 
landlords are illegally and unauthorisedly weakening the 
walls of House No. 86 and that in future, if the wall 
collapses and causes loss to the life and property of the 
tenants, then, it is the landlords, who will be entirely 
responsible for the same. The documents like compliant of 
the tenants, inspection report as well as notice dated 29 
August 2002 have been proved in the course of evidence 
and have been marked as Exhibits 223, 224 and 225. This 

vital material has been completely ignored by the two 
Courts. Exclusion of relevant and vital material, is also a 
species of perversity in the record of any finding of fact. The 
Court Commissioner was also appointed and even the 
Report of the Court Commissioner does not make out the 
case that the premises were required for immediate purpose 
of demolition. The evidence of the Municipal Engineers as 
well as the Court Commissioner, at the highest indicates 
that certain portions of House No.86 are in need of repairs. 
But the evidence does not make out any case that the suit 
premises were required for the immediate purpose of 
demolition. By virtually ignoring such material, the two 
Courts have proceeded to make a decree of eviction under 
Section 16(1)(k) of the Rent Act. This is an exercise in excess 
of jurisdiction. There is both illegality as well as material 
irregularity in the record of findings of fact, inasmuch as the 
Courts have failed to ask itself correct question in the 
context of 'immediate purpose' and further failed to consider 
relevant circumstances, rather the two Courts have allowed 
themselves to be persuaded by irrelevant circumstances.” 
(quoted verbatim from the paperbook) 

15. Scope of Section 195 of the 1965 Act has been examined by 
the Bombay High Court in its judgment in the case of M.L. 
Sonavane -vs- C.G. Sonar [1981 (1) All India Rent Control 
Journal 466]. It is recorded in this judgment:- 
“25. The more pertinent question however, is, whether the 
satisfaction of a local authority can be a substitute for the 
satisfaction of a court. The court must be satisfied as the 
section says of two things. It must be satisfied that a decree 
for possession has to be passed against a tenant and 
secondly, “premises are required for the immediate 
purposes of demolition.” Unless the court is satisfied about 
the existence of both these things, it would be difficult to see 
how a court can pass a decree for eviction against a tenant. 
The satisfaction must relate to the requirement of passing a 
decree for possession against the tenant, and the immediate 
necessity of demolition. The satisfaction of the court is not a 
substitute for the satisfaction of the local authority. Nor is it 
that the court must itself inquire that the premises are in 
such a ruinous condition that they are required to be 
demolished. That satisfaction is relegated to the local 
authority. But, even apart from that satisfaction, an area of 

satisfaction is still reserved for the court by the terms of the 
section, which deals with that satisfaction with regard to 
the passing of a decree for possession against the tenant, 
such satisfaction has also to be with regard to the 
immediate purpose of demolition. It is there and under those 
circumstances that the subsequent events and actions enter 
into the considerations of the court. If the court is satisfied 
on a consideration of the subsequent events that the 
premises are not required “for the immediate purposes of 
demolition,” then, notwithstanding the order passed, upon 
a bona fide exercise of the power by the local authority, the 
court may still refuse to pass a decree. To my mind, that is 
the decision and principle laid down in 72 Bombay Law 
Reporter 569 and the judgment of Justice Patel referred 
earlier.” 
 
16. After holding that the satisfaction contemplated in the 
aforesaid provision is that of the local authority in a suit for 
eviction, it has been held that an area of satisfaction is still 
reserved for the Court. Court has to examine if there is immediacy 
of the need for demolition. Broadly, the same view has been taken 
by the Bombay High Court in a later judgment, in the case of 
Manohar Prabhumal Rajpal -vs- Satara City Municipal 
Corporation, Satara and Another [(1993) 1 All India Rent 
Control Journal 81]. In this judgment, the Court dealt with an 
eviction suit filed under the provisions of Section 13(1)(hhh) of the 
Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 
(“1947 Act”). The said provision is near identical to the provisions 
of Section 16(1)(k) of the Rent Control Act, 1999. While analysing 
the said provision of the 1947 Act, the High Court had held that 

the Trial Court while examining a plea for decree under similar 
statutory provision cannot sit in appeal over the decision of the 
local authority once the latter had exercised its power after taking 
into relevant factors into consideration. In our opinion, these two 
decisions lay down the correct principles of law for construing the 
provisions of Section 16(1)(k) of the 1999 Act. We accept the 
appellant’s argument that the Court trying an eviction proceeding 
under the aforesaid provision has very limited role in determining 
as to whether demolition is really necessary or not, but it does not 
automatically follow therefrom that the Court would mechanically 
adopt the view of municipal authority of there being urgent need 
of demolition. The conditions under which a landlord can bring 
an eviction action under clauses (i) and (k) of Section 16(1) are 
different in their operations. In respect of an eviction proceeding 
founded on the former provision, it contemplates a lesser degree of 
immediacy or urgency, as held in the Constitution Bench 
judgment which we have referred to above. But the latter 
provision requires a greater degree of urgency and it is within the 
jurisdiction of the Court to test this factor, as held in the cases of 
M.L. Sonvane (supra) and Manohar P. Rampal (supra). Both the 
fact finding fora failed on this count. 

17. On behalf of the appellants, it was brought to our notice that 
after the first demolition notice on 23.01.2002, three other notices 
were issued. Obviously the two fact finding Courts did not 
consider these notices as they did not form part of cause of action 
and it also does not appear that the said facts were admitted to 
be brought on the record by way of amendment of plaint or 
otherwise. These notices would run their own course and we also 
do not want to take cognizance of these subsequent notices as it 
would be up to the authorities to take such steps as may be 
permissible in law in respect of the subsequent notices. The 
tenants shall also be entitled to question the legality thereof, if so 
advised. 
18. We are conscious that the Revisional Court was examining a 
judgment and decree already tested by the Appellate Forum and 
on facts, decree was made. Ordinarily the Revisional Court ought 
not to interfere with findings on fact. But in the judgment under 
appeal, we find that the Revisional Court has fitted the facts with 
the legal provisions and found that there was mismatch on the 
basis of which the judgment and decree were set aside. We have 
been taken through the judgment of the Revisional Court and do 

not find any flaw that needs re-appreciation. We accordingly 
dismiss both the appeals. 
19. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

……………………………….J. 
(ANIRUDDHA BOSE) 

……………………………….J. 
(BELA M. TRIVEDI) 
 
New Delhi; 
30th January, 2024