IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

Sukanya Shantha 

…Petitioner 

Versus 
 
Union of India & Ors. 

 …Respondents 

JUDGMENT 

Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 

Contents 
I. 
The Writ Petition... 4 
II. Submissions... 4 
III. Constitutional Interpretation... 6 
IV. The Constitution of Emancipation, Equality, and Dignity... 9 
V. The Contours of Article 14... 17 
VI. 
Non-Discrimination under Article 15... 23 
VII. 
The Ban on Untouchability in Article 17... 33 
VIII. Article 21: Of Life and Dignity... 38 
IX. 
Article 23: Prohibition of Forced Labour and Human Trafficking... 45 
X. A History of Discrimination in the Pre-Colonial Era... 57 
XI. The Colonial Suppression of Marginalized Castes and Tribes... 60 
i. 
Criminal Tribes Acts... 61 
ii. 
Caste Discrimination in Colonial India... 70 
iii. Repeal of Criminal Tribes Act... 74 
XII. 
Jurisprudence on Social Protection in Post-Independence India... 77 
XIII. Impugned Provisions... 88 

XIV. Prison Manuals and the Legacy of Discrimination... 105 
XV. 
Model Prison Manual 2016: Whether Adequate?... 125 
XVI. Model Prisons and Correctional Services Act, 2023... 132 
XVII. The Continued Targeting of Denotified Tribes... 134 
XVIII. 
The Role of Legal Service Authorities in Prisons... 138 
XIX. The Future of Substantive Equality & Institutional Discrimination... 144 
XX. 
Conclusion and Directions... 146 

PART I & II 

I. 
 The Writ Petition 

The petitioner, Sukanya Shantha, a journalist, wrote an article “From 
Segregation to Labour, Manu’s Caste Law Governs the Indian Prison System”, which 
was published on 10 December 2020. The article highlighted caste-based 
discrimination in the prisons in the country. The petitioner has sought directions for 
repeal of the offending provisions in State prison manuals. By an order dated 10 July 
2024, judgment was reserved. We have heard a broad diversity of viewpoints from 
across India. Besides counsel for the petitioner and the intervenor, the Additional 
Solicitor General (ASG) of India appeared for the Union of India. The States of 
Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Maharashtra, Orissa, Karnataka, Andhra 
Pradesh, and Tamil Nadu appeared through counsel. 
 
II. 
Submissions 

Dr. S. Muralidhar, Senior Advocate, appearing for the petitioner highlighted the 
issue of caste-based discrimination in the prisons in India. It was argued that various 
State prison manuals sanction blatantly unconstitutional practices, which are violative 
of Articles 14, 15, 17, 21, and 23 of the Constitution of India. Ms. Disha Wadekar 
referred to a chart of provisions from different State prison manuals/rules to highlight 
various forms of discrimination in the prisons. She highlighted that caste-based 
discrimination continues to persist in the prisons in the country with respect to: (i) The 
division of manual labour; (ii) Segregation of barracks; and (iii) Provisions that 
discriminate against prisoners belonging to Denotified tribes and “habitual offenders”. 
She further argued that the Model Prison Manual, 2016 does not address the 
impugned provisions related to caste discrimination inside prisons other than the 

PART II 

discrimination in kitchens, and that it is not “model” when it comes to addressing caste 
discrimination. In the written submissions, the petitioner’s side has further submitted 
that the Home Departments of the Respondent States may also be directed to clarify 
the definition of “Habitual Offenders” in their respective prison manuals so as to 
prevent its misuse against the denotified tribes in prisons. 

Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, Learned ASG, submitted a written note arguing that the 
Ministry of Home Affairs prepared the Model Prison Manual for the Superintendence 
and Management of Prisons in India, 2003 and The Model Prison Manual, 2016, and 
circulated it to all States and Union Territories (UTs) in May 2016 explicitly prohibiting 
caste and religion based discrimination practices. She also referred to the Advisory 
dated 26 February 2024 issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs, through the Deputy 
Secretary (PR & ATC) to the Principal Secretary (Home/Jails) of all states and UTs and 
the DG/IG Prisons of all States and UTs to ensure that the State Prison Manual/Prison 
Act should not contain any discriminatory provisions. She further argued that “prisons, 
reformatories, Borstal institutions and other institutions of a like nature, and persons 
detained therein” as a subject fall under the domain of the States under Entry 4, List II 
of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. 

Ms. Ashtha Sharma, counsel for the State of West Bengal, stated that the 
discrimination on the basis of caste/creed/ religion as envisaged in the provisions of 
West Bengal Jail Code Rules, 1967 (Rules No. 741, 793, 860 and 1117) are not in 
force/ practice within the Correctional Homes of West Bengal since long, and that a 
proposal for deletion/alteration/ amendment of the four Rules has been already sent 
to the appropriate authority. Mr. Anuj Saxena, counsel for the intervenor, has prayed 

PART III 

for deletion of “caste” column and any references to caste in undertrial and/or convicts’ 
prisoners’ registers. 
III. 
Constitutional Interpretation 

As we deal with the present petition, we must refer to the values of the 
Constitution and the interpretation we must adopt. After all, the impugned provisions 
of the various prison manuals, highlighted in this petition, demonstrate that the values 
of the Constitution are at stake. 

The Constitution reflects the vision of its founders to give India a collective 
future based on the values of liberty, equality, and fraternity. The Constitution 
mandates a more just and inclusive society, where every citizen has the opportunity 
to thrive. It envisages that the values embedded in its provisions are not just 
aspirations but lived realities. Any interpretation of the Constitution must be reflective 
of the blueprint laid down by its founders. The Constitution is – as Granville Austin put 
it— a “social document” and a “modernizing force”, with its provisions embodying 
“humanitarian sentiments”.1 

The interpretation of the Constitution is not static. It has evolved with time to 
give recognition to a broader spectrum of rights to the citizens, as well as to impose 
additional safeguards against excesses of the State or even private entities, as the 
case may be. Over the last seventy-five years, the Supreme Court has recognized 
new rights such as the right to education,2 the right to privacy,3 and the right against 
the adverse impact of climate change,4 among others. These rights, though not 
 
1 Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation, Oxford University Press (1999), at pages 50, 
xii-xiii 
2 Unni Krishnan v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1993) 
3 Justice (Retd.) K.S. Puttaswamy v. Union of India, (2017) 
4 K Ranjitsinh v. Union of India, 

PART III 

explicitly mentioned in the original text, have been interpreted as inherent to the 
broader principle of the right to life which the Constitution enshrines. The Constitution 
must serve as a robust framework for safeguarding the rights of citizens and 
maintaining the delicate balance between authority and individual freedom. 

The Constitution recognizes the dignity and individual autonomy inherent in all 
citizens and their right to life and personal liberty. Liberty and autonomy advance the 
cause of human dignity.5 Individual autonomy is the ability to make decisions on 
matters that impact one’s life.6 When individuals are granted the freedom to make 
choices about their own lives, they are empowered to take control of their destinies, 
and express their identities, in the “pursuit of happiness”7 without undue interference. 
This freedom fosters a sense of self-worth and respect, thereby recognizing individual 
dignity. By safeguarding these principles, we ensure that the intrinsic worth of every 
human being is recognized and upheld. The right to life cannot be restricted except 
through a law which is “substantively and procedurally fair, just and reasonable”.8 

Our interpretation of the Constitution must fill the silences in its text. The framers 
of the Constitution could not have anticipated every situation that might arise in the 
future. They also intentionally left certain decisions to the discretion of future 
generations. However, the choices we make today must align with the broader 
constitutional framework and values. In filling the gaps, whenever they arise, our 
interpretation must enhance the foundational values of the Constitution such as 
equality, dignity, liberty, federalism and institutional accountability. Our interpretation 
must adhere to the postulate that “civil and political rights and socio-economic rights 
 
5 Common Cause v. Union of India, (2018) 4 SCALE 1 
6 Justice (Retd.) K S Puttaswamy v. Union of India (2017); Common Cause v. Union of India (2018). 
7 American Declaration of Independence, original transcript available at https://www.archives.gov/founding-
docs/declaration-transcript 
8 Shafin Jahan v. Asokan K.M., (2018) 

PART III 

do not exist in a state of antagonism.”9 Our analysis must be based on a holistic 
reading of the provisions of the Constitution.10 

The Constitution envisages that courts act as institutions which discharge the 
responsibility of protecting constitutionally entrenched rights. Courts are neutral 
institutions, whose primary function is to apply the law fairly and consistently. 
Transparency in processes also enhances public confidence in the system.11 In their 
role as neutral institutions, courts also act as a check on the other branches of 
government, ensuring that their actions conform to constitutional and legal standards. 

The Constitution mandates that laws enacted in the colonial era should align 
with its provisions.12 Constitutional interpretation emphasizes the “need to reverse the 
philosophy of the colonial regime, which was founded on the subordination of the 
individual to the state”.13 The “assumptions which lay at the foundation of colonial rule 
have undergone a fundamental transformation for a nation of individuals governed by 
the Constitution”.14 By recognizing the injustices in the colonial and pre-colonial era, 
“we can certainly set the course for the future”.15 “In the transformation of society” 
against colonial and pre-colonial ideology, the Constitution “seeks to assure the values 
of a just, humane and compassionate existence to all her citizens”.16 

Criminal laws of the colonial era continue to impact the postcolonial world. As 
a scholar noted, “while the pre-determined and codified nature of the diverse criminal 
 
9 Justice (Retd.) K S Puttaswamy v. Union of India (2017) 
10 Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, 1978 INSC 16 
11 CPIO, Supreme Court of India v. Subhash Chandra Agarwal, 2019 (16) SCALE 40 
12 Article 13(1) of the Indian Constitution provides: “All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall, to the 
extent of such inconsistency, be void.” 
13 Kalpana Mehta v. Union of India, [2018] 4 S.C.R. 1 
14 Ibid 
15 Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India, 2018 INSC 790 [Justice Chandrachud] 
16 Ibid 

PART IV 

justice rules provided the moral superiority and political legitimacy to colonial rule, the 
Imperial power was safeguarded by their coercive content, particularly in procedural 
matters.”17 Criminal laws in modern times thus, as “the strongest expression of the 
State’s power” must “ensure that they do not deny equality before the law and the 
equal protection of laws”.18 Criminal laws must not endorse colonial or pre-colonial 
philosophy. 

In a post-constitutional society, “the law must take affirmative steps to achieve 
equal protection of law to all its citizens”.19 Any discussion on the Constitution must 
therefore take a conscious view of the lived realities of citizens. It requires evaluating 
how constitutional provisions translate into meaningful outcomes in their lives. We 
must discuss this aspect of the Indian Constitution further, before we examine the 
impugned provisions. 
IV. 
The Constitution of Emancipation, Equality, and Dignity 

The Constitution of India is an emancipatory document. It provides equal 
citizenship to all citizens of India. The Constitution is not just a legal document, but in 
India’s social structure, it is a quantum leap. In one stroke, it gave a dignified identity 
to all citizens of India. On 26 January 1950, the Constitution eliminated the legality of 
caste-based discrimination, thereby raising the human dignity of our marginalised 
communities. 

Describing the vision of the framers, constitutional historian Granville Austin 
stated: 

B.B. 
Pande, 
“Expanding 
Horizons 
of 
Criminal 
Procedure 
Law”, 
SCC 
Journal 
(2021), 
https://www.scconline.com/blog/post/2021/07/07/expanding-horizons-of-criminal-procedure-law/ 
18 Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India, 2018 INSC 790 [Justice Chandrachud] 
19 Ibid 

PART IV 

“India’s founding fathers and mothers established in 
the Constitution both the nation's ideals and the 
institutions and processes for achieving them. The 
ideals were national unity and integrity and a 
democratic and equitable society. The new society 
was to be achieved through a social-economic 
revolution pursued with a democratic spirit using 
constitutional, democratic institutions. I later came to 
think of unity, social revolution, and democracy as 
three strands of a seamless web. The founders 
believed that none of these goals was to be pursued, 
nor could any be achieved, separately. They were 
mutually dependent and had to be sought 
together.”20 
Marc Galanter noted in this regard: 
“Independent India embraced equality as a cardinal 
value against a background of elaborate, valued and 
clearly perceived inequalities. Her constitutional 
policies to offset these proceeded from an 
awareness of the entrenched and cumulative nature 
of group inequalities.”21 
The Constitution mandates the replacement of fundamental wrongs with fundamental 
rights.22 Through its provisions, it displaced a centuries-old caste-based hierarchical 
social order “that did not recognize the principle of individual equality”.23 It negated the 
ideals of social hierarchy. The Constitution is the embodiment of the aspirations of the 
millions of caste-oppressed communities, which hoped for a better future in 
independent India. To summarize, the “Constitution, by its very existence, was a social 
revolutionary statement.”24 
 
20 Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation, Oxford University Press (1966), p. xi 
21 Marc Galanter, Law and Society in Modern India, Oxford University Press (1989), 2018 Reprint, p. 185 
22 Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation, Oxford University Press (1966), p. xii 
23 Granville Austin, Working A Democratic Constitution: The Indian Experience, Oxford University Press (1999), p. 

24 Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation, Oxford University Press (1966), p. xii 

PART IV 

Some of the speeches in the Constituent Assembly give expression to this 
vision. On behalf of the Adivasi community, Jaipal Singh Munda shared the following 
sentiments and expectations from the Constitution: 
“Mr. Chairman, Sir, I rise to speak on behalf of 
millions of unknown hordes-yet very important-of 
unrecognised warriors of freedom, the original 
people of India who have variously been known as 
backward tribes, primitive tribes, criminal tribes and 
everything else, Sir, I am proud to be a Jungli, that is 
the name by which we are known in my part of the 
country... Sir, if there is any group of Indian people 
that has been shabbily treated it is my people. They 
have been disgracefully treated, neglected for the 
last 6,000 years… You cannot teach democracy to 
the tribal people; you have to learn democratic ways 
from them. They are the most democratic people on 
earth… We want to be treated like every other 
Indian.”25 
H.J. Khandekar, a leader from the Dalit community, raised the plight of the so-called 
“criminal tribes”: 
“We have been given according to this Constitution 
freedom of speech and freedom of movement and 
so on. But there is no freedom of movement for one 
crore of unfortunate people in this country. That is, 
the Criminal Tribes. Nothing is said about them in 
this Constitution. Will the Government repeal the 
Criminal Tribes Act and give every freedom to the 
Criminal Tribes?”26 
Dakshayani Velayudhan, the lone Dalit woman in the Constituent Assembly, noted: 
“The working of the Constitution will depend upon 
how the people will conduct themselves in the future, 
not on the actual execution of the law. So I hope that 
in course of time there will not be such a community 
known as Untouchables and that our delegates 
abroad will not have to hang their heads in shame if 
 
25 Constituent Assembly Debates (19 December 1946) 
26 Constituent Assembly Debates (21 November 1949) 

PART IV 

somebody raises such a question in an organisation 
of international nature.”27 
Dr Ambedkar, as Chairman of the Drafting Committee, remarked in his last address to 
the Constituent Assembly: 
“On the 26th of January 1950, we are going to enter 
into a life of contradictions. In politics we will have 
equality and in social and economic life we will have 
inequality. In politics we will be recognizing the 
principle of one man one vote and one vote one 
value. In our social and economic life, we shall, by 
reason of our social and economic structure, 
continue to deny the principle of one man one value. 
How long shall we continue to live this life of 
contradictions? How long shall we continue to deny 
equality in our social and economic life? If we 
continue to deny it for long, we will do so only by 
putting our political democracy in peril. We must 
remove this contradiction at the earliest possible 
moment or else those who suffer from inequality will 
blow up the structure of political democracy which 
this Assembly has so laboriously built up.”28 

The vision laid down by Dr. Ambedkar, Jaipal Singh Munda, H.J. Khandekar, and 
Dakshayani Velayudhan, among others, emphasizes that there shall be no 
discrimination in the country. The Constitution envisions a society where there is no 
room for anyone to feel superior to another citizen. 

The chapter on fundamental rights places the provisions on equality, non-
discrimination, equality of opportunity, affirmative action, abolition of untouchability, 
freedom of speech and expression, right to life, and prohibition of forced labour 
together. This has been done for a special reason. The framers of the Constitution 
conceptualized that without the provisions on the prohibition of discrimination, abolition 
of untouchability, and prohibition on forced labour, the imagination of broader rights 
 
27 Constituent Assembly Debates (29 November 1948) 
28 Constituent Assembly Debates (25 November 1949) 

PART IV 

such as equality before law, freedom of speech and expression, and the right to life 
would remain incomplete. The Constitution thus complements the basic principles of 
constitutionalism with provisions designed specifically to address India’s social 
problems. 

This underlying philosophy of the Constitution has been highlighted by this 
Court in several judgments. Chief Justice S.M. Sikri, in his opinion in Kesavananda 
Bharati v. State of Kerala,29 held that the objective of various provisions of the 
Constitution is to build “a welfare State and an egalitarian social order in our country”, 
and “to bring about a socio-economic transformation based on principles of social 
justice”. Referring to Part III of the Constitution, the judgment stated that the founders 
were “anxious that it should be a society where the citizen will enjoy the various 
freedoms and such rights as are the basic elements of those freedoms without which 
there can be no dignity of individual”. 

Justice Krishna Iyer in his concurring opinion in State of Kerala v. N.M. 
Thomas30 called the Constitution “a great social document, almost revolutionary in its 
aim of transforming a medieval, hierarchical society into a modern, egalitarian 
democracy”. In Indian Medical Association v. Union of India,31 the Court held that 
“various aspects of social justice, and an egalitarian social order, were also inscribed, 
not as exceptions to the formal content of equality but as intrinsic, vital and necessary 
components of the basic equality code itself”. 
 
29 (1973) 
30 (1976) 
31 (2011) 6 SCALE 86 

PART IV 

This Court held in Justice K.S. Puttaswamy v. Union of India32 that the “vision 
of the founding fathers was enriched by the histories of suffering of those who suffered 
oppression and a violation of dignity both here and elsewhere”. One of us (Justice DY 
Chandrachud) authored the plurality opinion, holding that the interpretation of the 
Constitution must keep evolving to facilitate justice for the citizens. 

In Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India,33 the Court while dealing with the 
validity of a colonial provision (Section 377 of the Penal Code), held that the 
Constitution envisages that “every person enjoys equal rights which enable him/her to 
grow and realize his/her potential as an individual”.34 The Court also acknowledged 
that “throughout history, socio-cultural revolts, anti-discrimination assertions, 
movements, literature and leaders have worked at socializing people away from 
supremacist thought and towards an egalitarian existence.”35 In that backdrop, the 
Indian Constitution “was an attempt to reverse the socializing of prejudice, 
discrimination, and power hegemony in a disjointed society”.36 

The Court, in Indian Young Lawyers Association v. State of Kerala,37 
described the anti-caste vision of the Constitution. One of us (Justice DY 
Chandrachud) wrote a concurring opinion, noting that: 
“Besides the struggle for independence from the 
British rule, there was another struggle going on 
since centuries and which still continues. That 
struggle has been for social emancipation. It has 
been the struggle for the replacement of an unequal 
social order. It has been a fight for undoing historical 
injustices and for righting fundamental wrongs with 
fundamental rights. The Constitution of India is the 
 
32 (2017) 
33 2018 INSC 790 
34 Ibid [Chief Justice Dipak Misra and Justice Khanwilkar] 
35 Ibid [Justice Chandrachud] 
36 Ibid 
37 (2019) 

PART IV 

end product of both these struggles. It is the 
foundational document, which in text and spirit, aims 
at social transformation, namely, the creation and 
preservation of an equal social order. The 
Constitution represents the aspirations of those, who 
were denied the basic ingredients of a dignified 
existence. It contains a vision of social justice and 
lays down a roadmap for successive governments to 
achieve that vision. The document sets out a moral 
trajectory, which citizens must pursue for the 
realisation of the values of liberty, equality, fraternity 
and justice. It is an assurance to the marginalised to 
be able to rise to the challenges of human 
existence...” 
 
The Court emphasized the need to scrutinize social practices to keep them in 
consonance with the egalitarian values of the Constitution: 
“The Constitution embodies a vision of social 
transformation. It represents a break from history 
marked by the indignation and discrimination 
attached to certain identities and serves as a bridge 
to a vision of a just and equal citizenship. In a deeply 
divided society marked by intermixing identities such 
as religion, race, caste, sex and personal 
characteristics as the sites of discrimination and 
oppression, the Constitution marks a perception of a 
new social order. This social order places the dignity 
of every individual at the heart of its endeavours… 
Existing structures of social discrimination must be 
evaluated through the prism of constitutional 
morality. The effect and endeavour is to produce a 
society marked by compassion for every individual.” 
(emphasis added) 

The Constitution thus stands as a testament to the fight against historical 
injustices and for the establishment of an egalitarian social order. It aims to prevent 
caste-based discrimination. This commitment is not limited to preventing 
discriminatory actions by the State alone. It extends to the actions of citizens and 
private entities as well. It empowers the State to enact appropriate legislation or take 

PART IV 

executive measures to tackle caste-based discrimination. At the same time, it 
mandates the decision-makers to take every step to end discrimination in Indian 
society. The pervasive influence of caste necessitates continuous efforts to ensure 
equality and justice for all citizens. The manifestations of caste are too numerous to 
exhaustively enumerate.38 They can manifest in various forms and across different 
sectors of society, from education and employment to social interactions and access 
to resources. As has been observed: 
“Continued to be attributed typically to the rural 
hinterlands and assumed to be limited only to the 
discussions on reservation policy and electoral 
politics, caste has mutated and diversified during the 
past three decades. Today, its presence is visible in 
urban housing, its markets and businesses, higher 
educational institutions, and public sector offices as 
well as the private sector working spaces, which 
were projected to be secular and privilege class over 
caste, and the various socio-economic and political 
institutions that interface with everyday lived 
experiences.”39 
The fight against caste-based discrimination is not a battle that can be won overnight; 
it requires sustained effort, dedication, and the willingness to confront and challenge 
societal norms that perpetuate inequality. When faced with practices of caste-based 
discrimination, this Court must take an active stand. In entertaining the current petition, 
this Court is making its contribution to the ongoing struggle to dismantle caste-based 
discrimination. 

Based on this constitutional philosophy, we shall now refer to constitutional 
provisions under which the impugned provisions have been challenged.
 
38 Isabel Wilkerson, Caste: The Origins of Our Discontents, Penguin Random House (2020), p. 167 
39 Rahul Choragudi, et al, Caste Matters in Public Policy: Issues and Perspectives, Routledge (2024), Reprint, p. 2 

PART V 

V. 
The Contours of Article 14 

Article 14 guarantees that the “State shall not deny to any person equality 
before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.” Equality 
is a crucial aspect of the constitutional vision. Immediately after the adoption of the 
Constitution, this Court laid down the standard to test the validity of laws against Article 
14. In a Constitution Bench decision in Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri v. Union of India,40 
Justice B.K. Mukherjea articulated that a classification under Article 14 “should never 
be arbitrary”. It was held that such classification must always “rest upon some real and 
substantial distinction bearing a reasonable and just relation to the things in respect to 
which the classification is made”. If a classification is “made without any substantial 
basis”, it should be “regarded as invalid”. The principle of classification was reiterated 
in a subsequent Constitution Bench decision in State of Bombay v. F. N. Balsara.41 

Later, a seven-judge Bench decision in State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali 
Sarkar42 solidified the requirement of the twin test under Article 14. Speaking for the 
Court, Justice S.R. Das held: 
“In order to pass the test, two conditions must be 
fulfilled, namely (1) that the classification must be 
founded 
on 
an 
intelligible 
differentia 
which 
distinguishes those that are grouped together from 
others, and (2) that that differentia must have a 
rational relation to the object sought to be achieved 
by the Act. The differentia, which is the basis of the 
classification, and the object of the act are distinct 
things, and what is necessary is that there must be 
a nexus between them. In short, while the Article 
forbids class legislation in the sense of making 
improper discrimination by conferring privileges or 
imposing liabilities upon persons arbitrarily selected 
out of a large number of other persons similarly 

42 (1952) 

PART V 

situated in relation to the privileges sought to be 
conferred or the liability proposed to be imposed, it 
does not forbid classification for the purpose of 
legislation, provided such classification is not 
arbitrary in the sense I have just explained..” 

Adding to the above principles, Justice S.R. Das, in Ram Krishna Dalmia v. 
Justice S.R. Tendolkar,43 held that the classification “may be founded on different 
bases, namely, geographical, or according to objects or occupations or the like”, but it 
needs to have a reasonable nexus with the object of the statute. It was held that “Article 
14 condemns discrimination not only by a substantive law but also by a law of 
procedure”. Furthermore, the Court “may take into consideration matters of common 
knowledge, matters of common report, the history of the times and may assume every 
state of facts which can be conceived existing at the time of legislation”. The Court 
further reiterated that: 
“A statute may direct its provisions against one 
individual person or thing or to several individual 
persons or things but no reasonable basis of 
classification may appear on the face of it or be 
deducible from the surrounding circumstances, or 
matters of common knowledge. In such a case the 
court will strike down the law as an instance of naked 
discrimination…” 

Subsequently, in E.P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu,44 a Constitution Bench 
of this Court added a crucial principle of non-arbitrariness to the discourse of equality 
under Article 14. The Court was adjudicating the validity of an administrative order. 
The Court held that: 
“Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects 
and dimensions and it cannot be “cribbed, cabined 
and confined” within traditional and doctrinaire limits. 

44 (1974) 

PART V 

From a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic 
to arbitrariness. In fact equality and arbitrariness are 
sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a 
republic while the other, to the whim and caprice of 
an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is 
implicit in it that it is unequal both according to 
political logic and constitutional law and is therefore 
violative of Article 14…” 

The principle of non-arbitrariness and reasonableness was then emphasized in 
the seven-judge Bench decision in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India.45 It was held: 
“Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness in State action and 
ensures fairness and equality of treatment. The 
principle of reasonableness, which legally as well as 
philosophically, is an essential element of equality or 
non-arbitrariness, pervades Article 14 like a brooding 
omnipresence and the procedure contemplated by 
Article 21 must answer the test of reasonableness in 
order to be in conformity with Article 14. It must be 
“right and just and fair” and not arbitrary, fanciful or 
oppressive; otherwise, it would be no procedure at all 
and the requirement of Article 21 would not be 
satisfied.” 

To test the validity of laws, the twin test of intelligible differentia and reasonable 
nexus held ground. Whether the test of arbitrariness is a valid principle under Article 
14 led to a conflicting set of decisions.46 In Shayara Bano v. Union of India,47 in 
testing the validity of Section 2 of the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 
1937 which validates the triple talaq, Justice R.F. Nariman endorsed the test of 
manifest arbitrariness. It was held: 
“The test of manifest arbitrariness, therefore, as laid 
down in the aforesaid judgments would apply to 
invalidate legislation as well as subordinate 
legislation under Article 14. Manifest arbitrariness, 
 
45 (1978) 
46 The conflicting judgments have been summarized in Association for Democratic Reforms v. Union of India, 2024 
INSC 113 
47 (2017) 

PART V 

therefore, must be something done by the legislature 
capriciously, irrationally and/or without adequate 
determining principle. Also, when something is done 
which is excessive and disproportionate, such 
legislation would be manifestly arbitrary. We are, 
therefore, of the view that arbitrariness in the sense 
of manifest arbitrariness as pointed out by us above 
would apply to negate legislation as well under 
Article 14.” 

A formalistic understanding of the classification test was then critiqued by this 
Court in Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India.48 The Court was dealing with a 
challenge to the constitutionality of Section 377 of the Indian Penal Act, 1860, to the 
extent that it criminalized consensual sexual conduct between adults. In his concurring 
opinion, one of us (Justice DY Chandrachud) held: 
“Equating 
the 
content 
of 
equality 
with 
the 
reasonableness of a classification on which a law is 
based advances the cause of legal formalism. The 
problem with the classification test is that what 
constitutes a reasonable classification is reduced to a 
mere formula: the quest for an intelligible differentia and 
the rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved. 
In doing so, the test of classification risks elevating form 
over substance. The danger inherent in legal formalism 
lies in its inability to lay threadbare the values which 
guide the process of judging constitutional rights. Legal 
formalism 
buries 
the 
life-giving 
forces 
of 
the 
Constitution under a mere mantra. What it ignores is 
that Article 14 contains a powerful statement of 
values—of the substance of equality before the law and 
the equal protection of laws. To reduce it to a formal 
exercise of classification may miss the true value of 
equality as a safeguard against arbitrariness in State 
action. As our constitutional jurisprudence has evolved 
towards recognising the substantive content of liberty 
and equality, the core of Article 14 has emerged out of 
the shadows of classification. Article 14 has a 
substantive content on which, together with liberty and 
dignity, the edifice of the Constitution is built. Simply put, 
in that avatar, it reflects the quest for ensuring fair 
treatment of the individual in every aspect of human 
 
48 (2018) 

PART V 

endeavour and in every facet of human existence.” 
 
The judges declared that Section 377 is manifestly arbitrary. The doctrine of manifest 
arbitrariness was also adopted in the Constitution Bench decision in Joseph Shine v. 
Union of India.49 

Referring to the decisions in Shayara Bano, Navtej Johar, and Joseph Shine, 
a Constitution Bench in Association for Democratic Reforms (ADR) v. Union of 
India50 summarized the doctrine of manifest arbitrariness in the following words: 
“Courts while testing the validity of a law on the ground 
of manifest arbitrariness have to determine if the 
statute is capricious, irrational and without adequate 
determining 
principle, 
or 
something 
which 
is 
excessive and disproportionate. This Court has 
applied the standard of “manifest arbitrariness” in the 
following manner: 
a. A provision lacks an “adequate 
determining principle” if the purpose 
is 
not 
in 
consonance 
with 
constitutional values. In applying this 
standard, Courts must make a 
distinction between the “ostensible 
purpose”, that is, the purpose which 
is claimed by the State and the “real 
purpose”, the purpose identified by 
Courts based on the available 
material such as a reading of the 
provision; and 
b. A provision is manifestly arbitrary 
even if the provision does not make 
a classification.” 
The Constitution Bench further elucidated the standards of manifest arbitrariness to 
test the validity of a plenary legislation with those of subordinate legislation: 
 
49 (2019) 

PART V 

“The above discussion shows that manifest 
arbitrariness of a subordinate legislation has to be 
primarily tested vis-a-vis its conformity with the 
parent statute. Therefore, in situations where a 
subordinate legislation is challenged on the ground 
of manifest arbitrariness, this Court will proceed to 
determine whether the delegate has failed “to take 
into account very vital facts which either expressly or 
by necessary implication are required to be taken 
into consideration by the statute or, say, the 
Constitution.” In contrast, application of manifest 
arbitrariness to a plenary legislation passed by a 
competent legislation requires the Court to adopt a 
different standard because it carries greater 
immunity than a subordinate legislation. We concur 
with Shayara Bano (supra) that a legislative action 
can also be tested for being manifestly arbitrary. 
However, we wish to clarify that there is, and ought 
to be, a distinction between plenary legislation and 
subordinate legislation when they are challenged for 
being manifestly arbitrary.” 

The Court recently in State of Punjab v. Davinder Singh51 dealt with whether 
sub-classification among the Scheduled Castes is permissible under Article 14. The 
seven-judge bench reiterated that the State is allowed to classify in a manner that is 
not discriminatory. The Court summarized the twin-test of classification as follows: 
“The Constitution permits valid classification if two 
conditions are fulfilled. First, there must be an 
intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons 
grouped together from others left out of the group. 
The phrase “intelligible differentia” means difference 
capable of being understood. The difference is 
capable of being understood when there is a 
yardstick to differentiate the class included and 
others excluded from the group. In the absence of 
the yardstick, the differentiation would be without a 
basis and hence, unreasonable. The basis of 
classification must be deducible from the provisions 
of the statute; surrounding circumstances or matters 
of common knowledge. In making the classification, 
the State is free to recognize degrees of harm. 
Though the classification need not be mathematical 

PART VI 

in precision, there must be some difference between 
the persons grouped and the persons left out, and 
the difference must be real and pertinent. The 
classification is unreasonable if there is “little or no 
difference”. Second, the differentia must have a 
rational relation to the object sought to be achieved 
by the law, that is, the basis of classification must 
have a nexus with the object of the classification.” 

The constitutional standards laid down by the Court under Article 14 can be 
summarized as follows. First, the Constitution permits classification if there is 
intelligible differentia and reasonable nexus with the object sought. Second, the 
classification test cannot be merely applied as a mathematical formula to reach a 
conclusion. A challenge under Article 14 has to take into account the substantive 
content of equality which mandates fair treatment of an individual. Third, in undertaking 
classification, a legislation or subordinate legislation cannot be manifestly arbitrary, i.e. courts must adjudicate whether the legislature or executive acted capriciously, 
irrationally and/or without adequate determining principle, or did something which is 
excessive and disproportionate. In applying this constitutional standard, courts must 
identify the “real purpose” of the statute rather than the “ostensible purpose” presented 
by the State, as summarized in ADR. Fourth, a provision can be found manifestly 
arbitrary even if it does not make a classification. Fifth, different constitutional 
standards have to be applied when testing the validity of legislation as compared to 
subordinate legislation. 
VI. 
Non-Discrimination under Article 15 

Clauses 1 and 2 of Article 15 provide that: 
“Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of 
religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.— 
(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen 
on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of 

PART VI 

birth or any of them. 
 
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, 
caste, sex, place of birth or any of them, be subject to 
any disability, liability, restriction or condition with 
regard to— 

access 
to 
shops, 
public 
restaurants, hotels and places of 
public entertainment; or 
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing 
ghats, roads and places of public 
resort maintained wholly or partly out 
of State funds or dedicated to the use 
of the general public.” 
 
Article 15(1) imposes an enforceable obligation on the State to not discriminate against 
citizens on any of several grounds, including “caste”. If the State itself discriminates 
against a citizen under any of the mentioned grounds, then it is discrimination of the 
highest form. After all, the State is expected to prevent discrimination, not perpetuate 
it. That is why our Constitution prohibits the State from discriminating against any 
citizen. Besides, Article 15(2) was adopted to specifically prohibit the discrimination 
faced by certain marginalized communities in accessing public services and 
resources. Historically, the so-called untouchable community was not allowed to use 
public resources such as water tanks and wells. This provision has a unique imprint of 
Dr Ambedkar, as he consistently advocated for such a provision for decades.52 Not 
only does Article 15(2) prohibit the State from discriminating, it also restricts the 
citizens or private entities from discriminating against other citizens on the grounds 
mentioned therein. 

Discrimination is prohibited, because it has several repercussions on human 
lives. Discrimination arises due to a feeling of superiority/inferiority, bias, contempt, or 
 
52 Anurag Bhaskar, The Foresighted Ambedkar: Ideas that Shaped Indian Constitutional Discourse, Penguin 
(2024), pp. 68-87. 

PART VI 

hatred against a person or a group. In history, such feelings have led to the genocide 
of certain communities. Discrimination also lowers the self-esteem of the person being 
discriminated against. It can lead to unfair denial of opportunities and constant 
violence against a set of people. Discrimination can also be done by continuously 
ridiculing or humiliating someone, who is on the weaker side of the social spectrum. It 
can cause trauma to a person with which they may be affected their entire life. 
Discrimination also includes stigmatizing the identity or existence of a marginalized 
social group. Discrimination can also happen based on certain stereotypes against a 
marginalized group. As a society that divided people into a hierarchy, we must remain 
conscious of the forms and kinds of discrimination against marginalized groups. 
Discriminatory laws enacted before the Constitution of India came into force need to 
be scrutinized and done away with. 

In India, there have been several instances of laws being enacted based on 
certain stereotypes against certain groups of people. Our citizens have brought 
challenges before the constitutional courts against the validity of such laws. In Anuj 
Garg v. Hotel Association of India,53 the validity of Section 30 of the Punjab Excise 
Act, 1914 was challenged. The provision prohibited the employment of women and 
men under the age of 25 years in premises where liquor or other intoxicating drugs 
were consumed by the public. In adjudicating the case, this Court applied the principle 
that “[l]egislation should not be only assessed on its proposed aims but rather on the 
implications and the effects”. It struck down the provision, holding that it “suffers from 
incurable fixations of stereotype morality and conception of sexual role.” It was held 
 
53 (2008) 

PART VI 

that “[n]o law in its ultimate effect should end up perpetuating the oppression of 
women”. 

In National Legal Services Authority v. Union of India,54 this Court 
recognised hijras, eunuchs, apart from binary gender, as “third gender” and extended 
the protection of Articles 15 and 16 to them. It was held that discrimination on the 
ground of “sex” under Articles 15 and 16 includes “discrimination on the ground of 
gender identity”. The Court declared that the expression “sex” used in Articles 15 and 
16 “is not just limited to the biological sex of male or female, but intended to include 
people who consider themselves to be neither male or female.” This Court concluded 
that “discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity includes any 
discrimination, exclusion, restriction or preference, which has the effect of nullifying or 
transposing equality by the law or the equal protection of laws guaranteed under our 
Constitution”. 

However, the judgment of a two-judge bench in Rajbala v. State of Haryana55 
rejected a challenge founded on the claim of discriminatory impact. A state legislation 
introduced conditions to contest panchayati elections, as a result of which, a significant 
section of Scheduled Castes was debarred from contesting elections. The Bench held 
that a statute cannot be held unconstitutional on the ground that it is “arbitrary”. The 
Court held, “If it is constitutionally permissible to debar certain classes of people from 
seeking to occupy the constitutional offices, numerical dimension of such classes, in 
our opinion should make no difference for determining whether prescription of such 
disqualification is constitutionally permissible unless the prescription is of such nature 
as would frustrate the constitutional scheme by resulting in a situation where holding 
 
54 (2014) 
55 2015 INSC 912 

PART VI 

of elections to these various bodies becomes completely impossible”. However, this 
reasoning prima facie is contrary to the decisions in Shayara Bano, Navtej Singh 
Johar, and Joseph Shine, which upheld manifest arbitrariness as a ground to strike 
down a law. At the same time, the impact of the law on the Scheduled Caste population 
is an example of “indirect discrimination”, a constitutional test which has been applied 
by the Court in subsequent decisions. 

In Karma Dorjee v. Union of India,56 the Court emphasized that “[t]he 
Governments, both at the centre and the states have a non-negotiable obligation to 
take positive steps to give effect to India's commitment to racial equality”. The Court 
was hearing a public interest petition seeking guidelines to be set down to curb acts 
of discrimination against persons from the north-eastern states. It directed the Union 
Government to take “proactive steps to monitor the redressal of issues pertaining to 
racial discrimination faced by citizens of the nation drawn from the north-east”. 

A Constitution Bench in Navtej Singh Johar57 gave a broader interpretation to 
Article 15, while striking down Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code insofar as it 
decriminalizes homosexual intercourse amongst consenting adults, on the ground that 
it was discriminatory. In a concurring opinion written by one of us (Justice DY 
Chandrachud), it was held that discrimination, whether direct or indirect, “founded on 
a stereotypical understanding of the role of the sex” is prohibited by Article 15. The 
Court held, “If certain characteristics grounded in stereotypes, are to be associated 
with entire classes of people constituted as groups by any of the grounds prohibited in 
Article 15(1), that cannot establish a permissible reason to discriminate.” It was further 
held that a provision challenged as being ultra vires the prohibition of discrimination 
 
56 (2017) 
57 (2018) 

PART VI 

on the grounds only of sex under Article 15(1) “is to be assessed not by the objects of 
the State in enacting it, but by the effect that the provision has on affected individuals 
and on their fundamental rights”. The Court discussed the principle that even if the law 
or action by the State is facially neutral, it “may have a disproportionate impact upon 
a particular class”. Though facially neutral, the effect of Section 377 was seen to target 
members of the LGBTQIA+ community. 

Another Constitution Bench in Joseph Shine58 struck down Section 497 of the 
Indian Penal Code, which related to adultery. It was held that the premise of “Section 
497 is a gender stereotype that the infidelity of men is normal, but that of a woman is 
impermissible”, and hence, it violates the non-discrimination principle embodied in 
Article 15. The provision, the Court held, “builds on existing gender stereotypes and 
bias and further perpetuates them”, by giving “legal recognition to socially 
discriminatory and gender-based norms”. The Court held that a “provision of law must 
not be viewed as operating in isolation from the social, political, historical and cultural 
contexts in which it operates”. 

In Indian Young Lawyers Association v. The State of Kerala59, this Court 
dealt with the validity of a rule excluding menstruating women between the ages of 10 
and 50 from entry in a temple in Kerala, based upon a custom. In his concurring 
opinion, Justice Nariman held that the said rule is hit by Article 15(1), as it 
“discriminates against women on the basis of their sex only”. One of us (Justice DY 
Chandrachud) who was also a part of the judgment held, “Exclusion of women 
between the age groups of ten and fifty, based on their menstrual status, from entering 
 
58 (2019) 
59 2018 INSC 908 

PART VI 

the temple in Sabarimala can have no place in a constitutional order founded on liberty 
and dignity”. 

In Secretary, Ministry of Defence v. Babita Puniya,60 a two-judge Bench 
upheld the claims of women engaged on Short Service Commissions in the Army to 
seek parity with their male counterparts in obtaining Permanent Commissions. It was 
held that “Arguments founded on the physical strengths and weaknesses of men and 
women and on assumptions about women in the social context of marriage and family 
do not constitute a constitutionally valid basis for denying equal opportunity to women 
officers.” The Court gave several directions to the Union Government to grant 
Permanent Commission to women officers in the Army and consequential benefits. 

The issue of Permanent Commissions to women officers once again came 
before the Court in Lt. Col. Nitisha v. Union of India.61 The petitioners challenged 
the evaluation criteria applied by the Army as unjust and arbitrary as “the women 
officers who are in the age group of 40-50 years of age are being required to conform 
to the medical standards that a male officer would have to conform to at the age of 25 
to 30 years, among other factors”. In deciding the case, the Court discussed the 
principles of substantive equality, indirect discrimination, and anti-stereotyping under 
Articles 14 and 15(1). The Court defined indirect discrimination as follows: 
“We must clarify here that the use of the term 
‘indirect 
discrimination’ 
is 
not 
to 
refer 
to 
discrimination which is remote, but is, instead, as 
real as any other form of discrimination. Indirect 
discrimination is caused by facially neutral criteria by 
not taking into consideration the underlying effects of 
a provision, practice or a criterion.” 
 
60 2020 INSC 198 
61 (2021) 

PART VI 

The Court distinguished between direct and indirect discrimination in the following 
formulation: 
“… as long as a court’s focus is on the mental state 
underlying the impugned action that is allegedly 
discriminatory, we are in the territory of direct 
discrimination. However, when the focus switches to 
the effects of the concerned action, we enter the 
territory of indirect discrimination. An enquiry as to 
indirect discrimination looks, not at the form of the 
impugned conduct, but at its consequences. In a 
case of direct discrimination, the judicial enquiry is 
confined to the act or conduct at issue, abstracted 
from the social setting or background fact-situation 
in which the act or conduct takes place. In indirect 
discrimination, on the other hand, the subject matter 
of the enquiry is the institutional or societal 
framework within which the impugned conduct 
occurs. The doctrine seeks to broaden the scope of 
antidiscrimination law to equip the law to remedy 
patterns of discrimination that are not as easily 
discernible.” 
The Court however held that “[i]n order to conceptualize substantive equality, it would 
be apposite to conduct a systemic analysis of discrimination that combines tools of 
direct and indirect discrimination”, and not just the claim of either of the two. To evaluate 
the claim of discrimination, the Court laid down the following test: 
“A particular discriminatory practice or provision 
might often be insufficient to expose the entire gamut 
of discrimination that a particular structure may 
perpetuate. Exclusive reliance on tools of direct or 
indirect discrimination may also not effectively 
account for patterns multiple axles of 
discrimination. Therefore, a systemic view of 
discrimination, 
in 
perceiving 
discriminatory 
disadvantage as a continuum, would account for not 
just unjust action but also inaction. Structures, in the 
form of organizations or otherwise, would be probed 
for the systems or cultures they produce that 
influence day-today interaction and decision-
making. The duty of constitutional courts, when 

PART VI 

confronted with such a scheme of things, would not 
just be to strike down the discriminatory practices 
and compensate for the harm hitherto 
them; but also structure adequate reliefs and 
remedies that facilitate social redistribution by 
providing for positive entitlements that aim to negate 
the scope of future harm… 
Therefore, an analysis of discrimination, with a view 
towards its systemic manifestations (direct and 
indirect), would be best suited for achieving our 
constitutional 
vision 
of 
equality 
and 
antidiscrimination. 
Systemic 
discrimination 
on 
account of gender at the workplace would then 
encapsulate the patriarchal disadvantage that 
permeates all aspects of her being from the outset, 
including reproduction, sexuality and private choices 
which operate within an unjust structure.” 
Applying the above principles, the Court concluded that the process adopted by the 
Army to grant Permanent Commissions to women officers “did not redress the harms 
of gendered discrimination that were identified by this Court in Babita Puniya”. The 
Court found the evaluation process to be an instance of “indirect discrimination” and 
“systemic 
discrimination”, 
which 
“disproportionately 
affects 
women”. 
“This 
discrimination”, it was held, “has caused an economic and psychological harm and an 
affront to their dignity”. 

The petitioner in Nipun Malhotra v. Sony Pictures Films India (P) Ltd,62 was 
aggrieved by the manner in which persons with disabilities have been portrayed in a 
movie and approached the Court seeking directions for the inclusion of an expert on 
disability within the Central Board of Film Certification and its advisory panel 
constituted under Sections 3 and 5 of the Cinematograph Act, among other reliefs. 
This Court recapitulated “the impact of stereotypes on discrimination and the 
enjoyment of fundamental rights”. It reiterated that the anti-discrimination code under 

PART VI 

Article 15 prevents stereotyping. Regarding the safeguards against stereotyping of 
persons with disabilities, the Court held: 
“… 
language 
that 
disparages 
persons 
with 
disabilities, 
marginalises 
them 
further 
and 
supplements the disabling barriers in their social 
participation, without the redeeming quality of the 
overall message of such portrayal must be 
approached with caution. Such representation is 
problematic not because it offends subjective 
feelings but rather, because it impairs the objective 
societal treatment of the affected groups by society. 
We believe that representation of persons with 
disabilities must regard the objective social context 
of their representation and not marginalise persons 
with disability…” 

The jurisprudence evolved by this Court shows that discriminatory laws have 
no place in our democracy. Discriminatory laws based on stereotypes against a social 
group were stuck down in judgments like Anuj Garg, Navtej Johar, Joseph Shine, 
and Indian Young Lawyers Association. Through judgments like NALSA and 
Babita Puniya, this Court recognized the dignity and aspirations of social groups 
which have traditionally faced exclusion from equal rights. This Court recognized 
indirect discrimination and systemic discrimination in Lt. Col. Nitisha, emphasized the 
responsibility of the State to curb discrimination in Karma Dorjee, and provided 
safeguards against discriminatory stereotypes in Nipun Malhotra. 

Based on the analysis of the judgments, certain anti-discrimination principles 
emerge under Article 15(1). First, discrimination can be either direct or indirect, or both. 
Second, facially neutral laws may have an adverse impact on certain social groups, 
that are marginalized. Third, stereotypes can further discrimination against a 
marginalized social group. Fourth, the State is under a positive obligation to prevent 
discrimination against a marginalized social group. Fifth, discriminatory laws based on 

PART VII 

stereotypes and causing harm or disadvantage against a social group, directly or 
indirectly, are not permissible under the constitutional scheme. Sixth, courts are 
required to examine the claims of indirect discrimination and systemic discrimination; 
and seventh, the test to examine indirect discrimination and systemic discrimination 
has been laid down in judgments of the Court such as Lt. Col. Nitisha. 
VII. 
The Ban on Untouchability in Article 17 

Article 17 of the Constitution provides that: ““Untouchability” is abolished and 
its practice in any form is forbidden. The enforcement of any disability 
“Untouchability” shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.” This provision 
has a special place in the Constitution. It puts an end to the socially discriminatory 
practice of “untouchability”. 

Dr Ambedkar described the impact of “untouchability” as follows: 
“The word untouchable is an epitome of their ills and 
sufferings. Not only has untouchability arrested the 
growth of their personality but also it comes in the 
way of their material well-being. It has also deprived 
them of certain civil rights… The untouchable is not 
even a citizen.”63 
Untouchability and caste discrimination led to “severe social and economic disabilities 
and cultural and educational backwardness” of the untouchables.64 Throughout 
history, “the oppressive nature of the caste structure has denied to those 
disadvantaged castes the fundamentals of human dignity, human self-respect and 
even some of the attributes of the human personality”.65 As a system, it enforced 
 
63 B.R. Ambedkar, “Evidence Before the Southborough Committee”, in Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and 
Speeches, Vol. 1, p. 256 
64 Soosai v. Union of India, 1985 Supp SCC 590 
65 Ibid 

PART VII 

“disabilities, restrictions, conditions and prohibitions on Dalits for access to and the 
use of places of public resort, public means, roads, temples, water sources, tanks, 
bathing ghats, etc., entry into educational institutions or pursuits of avocation or 
profession which are open to all and by reason of birth they suffer from social 
stigma.”66 Article 17 is a constitutional sanction against discrimination. It “strikes at 
caste-based practices built on superstitions and beliefs that have no rationale or 
logic.”67 

Article 17 has several components.68 It abolishes the practice of 
“untouchability”. At the same time, it prohibits “its practice in any form”. Furthermore, 
“enforcement of any disability” “Untouchability”” is a criminal offense as 
per the “law”. The meaning of “law” is any legislation enacted to tackle any practice or 
disability “untouchability”.69 It is a provision that can be implemented both 
against the State and non-state actors such as the citizens.70 Moreover, the framers 
of the Constitution did not refer to any religion or community in the text of the 
provision.71 “The injunction against untouchability under Article 17” is further 
“strengthened by taking away the subject-matter from State domain and placing it as 
an exclusive legislative head to Parliament.”72 

In his concurring opinion in State of Karnataka v. Appa Balu Ingale,73 Justice 
K. Ramaswamy discussed the basis of Article 17. “The thrust of Article 17”, it was held, 
“is to liberate the society from blind and ritualistic adherence and traditional beliefs 
 
66 State of Karnataka v. Appa Balu Ingale, 1995 Supp (4) SCC 469 
67 Adi Saiva Sivachariyargal Nala Sangam v. State of Tamil Nadu, (2016) 
68 Indian Young Lawyers Association v. State of Kerala, (2019) [Justice Chandrachud] 
69 Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, (1973) 
70 Kaushal Kishor v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2023) 
71 Janhit Abhiyan v. Union of India, (2023) [Dissenting opinion of Justice Ravindra Bhat on behalf of Chief 
Justice Lalit and himself] 
72 Ibid 
73 1994 SCC (Cri) 1762 

PART VII 

which lost all legal or moral base”. Furthermore, Article 17 “seeks to establish a new 
ideal for society — equality to the Dalits, on a par with general public”, which would 
give them “a sense of being a participant in the mainstream of national life”.74 

The constitutional vision behind Article 17 and its impact was extensively 
discussed in the concurring opinion authored by one of us (Justice DY Chandrachud) 
in Indian Young Lawyers Association v. State of Kerala.75 It was held that Article 
17 was made a part of fundamental rights to fulfil the constitutional mandate of 
equality: 
“Article 17 is the constitutional promise of equality 
and justice to those who have remained at the lowest 
rung of a traditional belief system founded in graded 
inequality… It has been placed on a constitutional 
pedestal of enforceable fundamental rights, beyond 
being only a directive principle, for two reasons. 
First, “untouchability” is violative of the basic rights 
of socially backward individuals and their dignity. 
Second, the Framers believed that the abolition of 
“untouchability” is a constitutional imperative to 
establish an equal social order. Its presence 
together and on an equal footing with other 
fundamental rights, was designed to “give vulnerable 
people the power to achieve collective good”. Article 
17 is a reflection of the transformative ideal of the 
Constitution, 
which 
gives 
expression 
to 
the 
aspirations of socially disempowered individuals and 
communities, and provides a moral framework for 
radical social transformation.” 
The judgment stated that “untouchability” is “a symptom” of the “caste system” and the 
interconnected notions of “purity and pollution”, which are rejected by Article 17. It was 
noted: 
“While the top of the caste pyramid is considered 
pure and enjoys entitlements, the bottom is 
considered polluted and has no entitlements. Ideas 
 
74 1994 SCC (Cri) 1762 
75 (2019) 

PART VII 

of “purity and pollution” are used to justify this 
distinction which is self-perpetuality. The [so-called] 
upper castes perform rituals that, they believe, 
assert and maintain their purity over lower castes. 
Rules of purity and pollution are used to reinforce 
caste hierarchies. The notion of “purity and pollution” 
influences who people associate with, and how they 
treat and are treated by other people.” 
Article 17 rejects such notions of purity and pollution. It strikes at the heart of the caste 
system, which manifests in discriminatory practices based on the notions of purity and 
pollution. It was further held: 
“The incorporation of Article 17 into the Constitution 
is symbolic of valuing the centuries’ old struggle of 
social reformers and revolutionaries. It is a move by 
the Constitution makers to find catharsis in the face 
of historic horrors. It is an attempt to make 
reparations to those, whose identity was subjugated 
by society. Article 17 is a revolt against social norms, 
which subjugated individuals into stigmatised 
hierarchies. By abolishing “untouchability”, Article 17 
protects them from a repetition of history in a free 
nation. The background of Article 17 thus lies in 
protecting the dignity of those who have been victims 
of discrimination, prejudice and social exclusion. 
Article 17 must be construed from the perspective of 
its position as a powerful guarantee to preserve 
human dignity and against the stigmatization and 
exclusion of individuals and groups on the basis of 
social hierarchism.” 
 
The concurring opinion examined the Constituent Assembly Debates to conclude that 
the framers deliberately left the term “untouchability” in Article 17 undefined, as they 
wanted to give the provision a broad scope: 
“The Constitution has carefully eschewed a 
definition of “untouchability”. The draftspersons 
realised that even a broadly couched definition may 
be restrictive. A definition would become restrictive if 
the words used or the instances depicted are not 
adequate to cover the manifold complexities of our 
social life through which prejudice and discrimination 

PART VII 

is manifest. Hence, even though the attention of the 
Framers was drawn to the fact that “untouchability” 
is not a practice referable only to the lowest in the 
caste ordering but also was practised against 
women (and in the absence of a definition, the 
prohibition would cover all its forms), the expression 
was designedly left undefined… The Constitution as 
a constantly evolving instrument has to be flexible to 
reach out to injustice based on untouchability, in any 
of its forms or manifestations. Article 17 is a powerful 
guarantee against exclusion. As an expression of 
the anti-exclusion principle, it cannot be read to 
exclude women against whom social exclusion of 
the worst kind has been practised and legitimised on 
notions of purity and pollution.” 
Article 17 was interpreted broadly to declare that the practice of excluding menstruating 
women from visiting the temple is based on the notions of purity and pollution, which 
arise from the caste system, and the practice was thus unconstitutional. 

Article 17 enunciates that everyone is born equal. There cannot be any stigma 
attached to the existence, touch or presence of any person. By way of Article 17, our 
Constitution strengthens the equality of status of every citizen. From time to time, to 
implement the mandate of Article 17, Parliament has enacted several legislations such 
as the Untouchability (Offenses) Act, 1955 (later renamed as Protection of Civil Rights 
Act, 1955), Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 
1989 (hereinafter “PoA Act”), Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of 
Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993, and Prohibition of Employment as Manual 
Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 2013. This Court, in a number of cases, has 
upheld the validity of these laws.76 It has held that offences enumerated under PoA 
 
76 State of M.P. v. Ram Kishna Balothia, (1995); State of Maharashtra v. Union of India; 
Prathvi Raj Chauhan v. Union of India, (2020) 

PART VII 

Act “arise out of the practice of ‘untouchability’.”77 The Court also held that the practice 
of “manual scavenging” prohibited under the 2013 Act is “squarely rooted in the 
concept of the caste-system and untouchability.”78 The laws enacted under Article 17 
aim to provide dignity to the affected individuals. 
VIII. 
Article 21: Of Life and Dignity 

Article 21 provides that “[n]o person shall be deprived of his life or personal 
liberty except according to procedure established by law”. In a number of judgments, 
the Court has expanded the meaning of “life”. It has been held that the right to life 
enshrined in Article 21 “cannot be restricted to mere animal existence” and “means 
something much more than just physical survival”.79 It includes the right to live with 
dignity.80 In fact, dignity forms a part of the basic structure of the Constitution.81 The 
“references” to dignity are “found in the guarantee against arbitrariness (Article 14), 
the lamps of freedom (Article 19) and in the right to life and personal liberty (Article 
21).”82 Thus, dignity is the “core” which “unites the fundamental rights because the 
fundamental rights seek to achieve for each individual the dignity of existence”.83 In 
that sense, human dignity is a constitutional value and a constitutional goal.84 

The Court has authoritatively ruled, “[t]o live is to live with dignity”.85 Human 
dignity is intrinsic to and inseparable from human existence.86 Implicit in this right 
under Article 21 is “the right to protection against torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading 
 
77 State of M.P. v. Ram Kishna Balothia, (1995) 
78 Safai Karamchari Andalon v. Union of India, [2014] 4 S.C.R. 19; See also Balram Singh v. Union of India, 2023 
INSC 950 
79 Francis Coralie Mullin v. Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi, (1981) 
80 Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India, (1984) 
81 Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, (1973) 
82 K.S. Puttaswamy v. Union of India, (2017) (Privacy-9J.) 
83 Ibid 
84 Jeeja Ghosh v. Union of India, (2016) 
85 Ibid 
86 M. Nagaraj v. Union of India [M. Nagaraj v. Union of India, (2006) 

PART VIII 

treatment”.87 There also exists “a close relationship between dignity and the quality of 
life”.88 Dignity of human existence is fully realized only when one leads a quality life.89 

Dignity under Article 21 is an integral aspect of life, which requires sustenance 
of one’s being to the fullest.90 One can truly embrace their identity, whether on the 
basis of caste, race, gender, sexual orientation, or ethnicity, only if they are given 
dignity. An individual’s dignity is fundamental to their sense of self and autonomy. Thus, 
the right to dignity “encapsulates the right of every individual to be treated as a self-
governing entity having intrinsic value”.91 Above all, “there is a growing recognition that 
the true measure of development of a nation is not economic growth; it is human 
dignity.”92 A nation must prioritize human dignity—ensuring that every person, 
regardless of their background or identity, is able to live with respect, equality, and 
freedom. Thus, human dignity forms the bedrock of social justice and a just, 
compassionate society. 

The right to live with dignity extends even to the incarcerated. Not providing 
dignity to prisoners is a relic of the colonizers and pre-colonial mechanisms, where 
oppressive systems were designed to dehumanize and degrade those under the 
control of the State. Authoritarian regimes of the pre-constitutional era saw prisons not 
only as places of confinement but as tools of domination. This Court, focusing on the 
changed legal framework brought out by the Constitution, has recognized that even 
prisoners are entitled to the right to dignity. 
 
87 Francis Coralie Mullin v. Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi, (1981) 
88 Common Cause v. Union of India, (2018) [Justice Chandrachud] 
89 Ibid 
90 Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India, (2018) 
91 X2 v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2023) 
92 National Legal Services Authority v. Union of India, (2014) 

PART VIII 

A Constitution bench of this Court in Sunil Batra (I) v. Delhi Administration93 
took serious note of the treatment meted out to undertrials, convicts, and those 
awaiting the death penalty. Justice Krishna Iyer, in his opinion, expounded: “The 
humane thread of jail jurisprudence that runs right through is that no prison authority 
enjoys amnesty for unconstitutionality, and forced farewell to fundamental rights is an 
institutional outrage in our system where stone walls and iron bars shall bow before 
the rule of law.” He emphasized the need to re-look at the prison conditions: 
“A prison is a sound-proof planet, walled from view 
and visits regulated, and so, rights of prisoners are 
hardly visible, checking is more difficult and the 
official position of the repository of power inspires 
little credibility where the victims can be political 
protesters, unpopular figures, minority champions or 
artless folk who might fail to propitiate arrogant 
power of minor minions.” 
Justice Krishna Iyer advocated for a humane system within prisons: 
“In every country, this transformation from cruelty to 
compassion within jails has found resistance from 
the echelons and the Great Divide between pre-and-
post Constitution penology has yet to get into the 
metabolism of the Prison Services. And so, on the 
national agenda of prison reform is on-going 
education for prison staff, humanisation of the 
profession and recognition of the human rights of the 
human beings in their keep.” 
The Court admonished the usage of iron fetters and held that the practice of solitary 
confinement and cellular segregation as inhuman and irrational: 
“I hold that bar fetters are a barbarity generally and, 
like whipping, must vanish. Civilised consciousness 
is hostile to torture within the walled campus. We 
hold that solitary confinement, cellular segregation 
and marginally modified editions of the same 
process are inhuman and irrational. More dangerous 
are these expedients when imposed by the unturned 
and untrained power of a jail superior who has, as 
 
93 (1978) 

PART VIII 

part of his professional equipment, no course in 
human psychology, stressology or physiology, who 
has to depend on no medical or psychiatric 
examination prior to infliction of irons or solitary, who 
has no obligation to hear the victim before harming 
him, whose “reasons” are in English on the history-
tickets and therefore unknowable and in the Journal 
to which the prisoner has no access… The law is not 
abracadabra but at once pragmatic and astute and 
does not surrender its power before scary 
exaggerations of security by prison bosses... Social 
justice cannot sleep if the Constitution hangs limp 
where its consumers most need its humanism.” 

In Charles Sobraj v. Supdt., Central Jail,94 this Court upheld the 
constitutionally guaranteed fundamental rights of prisoners against the undue 
harshness of prison practices. Justice Krishna Iyer observed: 
“a prison system may make rational distinctions in 
making assignments to inmates of vocational, 
educational and work opportunities available, but is 
constitutionally impermissible to do so without a 
functional classification system. The mere fact that a 
prisoner is poor or rich, high-born or ill-bred, is 
certainly irrational as a differentia in a ‘secular, 
socialist republic’... The reason is, prisoners retain 
all rights enjoyed by free citizens except those lost 
necessarily as an incident of confinement. Moreover, 
the rights enjoyed by prisoners under Articles 14, 19 
and 21, though limited, are not static and will rise to 
human heights when challenging situations arise.” 

In Sunil Batra (II) v. Delhi Administration,95 this Court emphasized that a 
person in prison does not cease to be a human being or lose all human rights, and 
that it is the duty of the State to take care of justifiable needs and requests. It was held 
that “in the eye of law, prisoners are persons, not animals”, and that courts must 
“punish the deviant ‘guardians’ of the prison system where they go berserk and defile 
the dignity of the human inmate”. Speaking for the Court, Justice Krishna Iyer held: 
 
94 (1978) 
95 (1980) 

PART VIII 

“Prison houses are part of Indian earth and the 
Indian Constitution cannot be held at bay by jail 
officials “dressed in a little, brief authority”, when Part 
III is invoked by a convict. For when a prisoner is 
traumatized, the Constitution suffers a shock… 
Whether inside prison or outside, a person shall not 
be deprived of his guaranteed freedom save by 
methods “right, just and fair”… 
Prisoners are peculiarly and doubly handicapped. 
For one thing, most prisoners belong to the weaker 
segment, in poverty, literacy, social station and the 
like. Secondly, the prison house is a walled-off world 
which is incommunicado for the human world, with 
the result that the bonded inmates are invisible, their 
voices inaudible, their injustices unheeded. So it is 
imperative, as implicit in Article 21, that life or liberty, 
shall not be kept in suspended animation or 
congealed into animal existence without the 
freshening flow of fair procedure.” 
The Court also noted down various injustices which may be committed against a 
prisoner: 
“Inflictions may take many protean forms, apart from 
physical assaults. Pushing the prisoner into a 
solitary cell, denial of a necessary amenity, and, 
more dreadful sometimes, transfer to a distant prison 
where visits or society of friends or relations may be 
snapped, allotment of degrading labour, assigning 
him to a desperate or tough gang and the like, may 
be punitive in effect. Every such affliction or 
abridgment is an infraction of liberty or life in its wider 
sense and cannot be sustained unless Article 21 is 
satisfied.” 

The Court in Kishore Singh Ravinder Dev v. State of Rajasthan96 reiterated 
that the infliction of physical torture on the undertrial prisoner is a violation of Article 
21. It was held that “the State must re-educate the constabulary out of their sadistic 
arts and inculcate a respect for the human person — a process which must begin more 
by example than by precept if the lower rungs are really to emulate”. The Court ruled 
 
96 (1981) 

PART VIII 

that if any escort policemen are found guilty of misconduct, the authorities must not 
allow a sense of police solidarity or internal camaraderie to shield the wrongdoing. 
There is no greater harm to our constitutional values than a State official acting 
recklessly and violating fundamental rights. The Court expressed hope that the root 
causes enabling police brutality will be addressed by the government with the 
seriousness it deserves. The Court posed the question: “Who will police the police?” 

In Francis Coralie Mullin v. Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi,97 the 
Court struck down a rule which regulated the right of a detenu to have interviews with 
a legal adviser of his choice as violative of Articles 14 and 21. The Court held that “as 
part of the right to live with human dignity” and “as a necessary component of the right 
to life”, a detenu “would be entitled to have interviews with the members of his family 
and friends” and “to have interview with his legal adviser at any reasonable hour during 
the day after taking appointment from the Superintendent of the Jail”. Such 
appointment, it was held, “should be given by the Superintendent without any 
avoidable delay.” Correspondingly, when Sheela Barse,98 a freelance journalist, 
sought permission to interview prisoners, this Court held that the press and citizens 
are entitled to interview prisoners in order to ensure the availability of their rights under 
Article 21, subject to reasonable restrictions. It was noted, “Prison administrators have 
the human tendency of attempting to cover up their lapses and so shun disclosure 
thereof… Interviews become necessary as otherwise the correct information may not 
be collected but such access has got to be controlled and regulated.” 
 
97 (1981) 
98 Sheela Barse v. State of Maharashtra, (1987) 

PART VIII 

In Nilabati Behera v. State of Orissa,99 this Court emphasized “great 
responsibility on the police or prison authorities to ensure that the citizen in its custody 
is not deprived of his right to life”. While confinement inherently restricts a person’s 
liberty, the limited freedom they retain becomes all the more valuable. The State has 
a strict duty of care in such situations, without exception. This Court declared that if a 
person in police custody is deprived of life, except according to the procedure 
established by law, the wrongdoer is held accountable, and the State is ultimately 
responsible. 

This Court laid down guidelines on arrest and detention in D.K. Basu v. State 
of West Bengal,100 while highlighting the constitutional violations caused due to 
custodial violence and deaths in police lock-ups. It noted, “If the functionaries of the 
Government become law-breakers, it is bound to breed contempt for law and would 
encourage lawlessness and every man would have the tendency to become law unto 
himself thereby leading to anarchism”. In Mehmood Nayyar Azam v. State of 
Chhattisgarh,101 it was noted that a person in custody has “his basic human rights” 
and human dignity, and that the police officers cannot treat him in an inhuman manner. 
It was held that even “any treatment meted out to an accused while he is in custody 
which causes humiliation and mental trauma corrodes the concept of human dignity”. 

In Shabnam v. Union of India,102 this Court elucidated the principle that human 
dignity should be preserved even when a prisoner is sentenced to death. The Court 
held, “the process/procedure from confirmation of death sentence by the highest court 
till the execution of the said sentence, the convict is to be treated with human dignity 
 
99 (1993) 
100 (1997) 
101 (2012) 
102 (2015) 

PART IX 

to the extent which is reasonable and permissible in law”. Similarly, in ‘X’ v. State of 
Maharashtra,103 the Court while holding that “post conviction severe mental illness 
will be a mitigating factor” in commuting the death sentence, emphasized that the “right 
to dignity of an accused does not dry out with the Judges’ ink, rather, it subsists well 
beyond the prison gates and operates until his last breath”. 

Thus, the jurisprudence which emerges on the rights of prisoners under Article 
21 is that even the incarcerated have inherent dignity. They are to be treated in a 
humanely and without cruelty. Police officers and prison officials cannot take any 
disproportionate measures against prisoners. The prison system must be considerate 
of the physical and mental health of prisoners. For instance, if a prisoner suffers from 
a disability, adequate steps have to be taken to ensure their dignity and to offer 
support. 
IX. 
Article 23: Prohibition of Forced Labour and Human Trafficking 

Article 23 provides that: 
“Prohibition of traffic in human beings and 
forced 
labour.— 
(1) Traffic in human beings and begar and other 
similar forms of forced labour are prohibited and any 
contravention of this provision shall be an offence 
punishable in accordance with law. 
 
(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from 
imposing compulsory service for public purposes, 
and in imposing such service the State shall not 
make any discrimination on grounds only of religion, 
race, caste or class or any of them.” 
Article 23(1) provides an enforceable fundamental right against social and economic 
exploitation. It aims to prohibit human trafficking, “begar”, and “other similar forms of 
 
103 (2019) 

PART IX 

forced labour”. Like Articles 15(2) and 17, it is enforceable both against the State and 
non-state actors. At the same time, the scope of the provision is wide, as it has left the 
term “begar” undefined, and supplemented by the phrase “other similar forms of forced 
labour”. The “other similar forms” can be many. The framers of the Constitution 
consciously left the terms undefined so that future interpretation is not restrictive. 

Interestingly, the foundations of Article 23 were laid even prior to the 
discussions in the Constituent Assembly. In his work titled “States and Minorities” 
(1947),104 Dr Ambedkar conceptualized the interlinkages between one’s economic 
condition and their ability to exercise fundamental rights. He wrote, “The fear of 
starvation, the fear of losing a house, the fear of losing savings if any, the fear of being 
compelled to take children away from school, the fear of having to be a burden on 
public charity, the fear of having to be burned or buried at public cost are factors too 
strong to permit a man to stand out for his Fundamental Rights.”105 In his view, “The 
unemployed are thus compelled to relinquish their Fundamental Rights for the sake of 
securing the privilege to work and to subsist.”106 Dr. Ambedkar proposed that the rights 
of individuals should be protected from exploitation by adopting a favourable 
constitutional framework.107 The intellectual background of Article 23 lies in what Dr 
Ambedkar was explaining – to facilitate the citizens in exercising their fundamental 
rights.108 Exploitative socio-economic practices can hinder the right to live a dignified 
life. 
 
104 B.R. Ambedkar, “States and Minorities”, in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches, Vol. 1, p. 393, 
https://www.mea.gov.in/Images/CPV/Volume1.pdf [See Article II, Section I, Clause 9]. 
105 Ibid, pp. 409-410 
106 Ibid, p. 410 
107 Ibid 
108 Anurag Bhaskar, The Foresighted Ambedkar: Ideas That Shaped Indian Constitutional Discourse, Penguin 
(2024), pp. 176-191. 

PART IX 

In adopting Article 23(1) in the Constitution, the framers were conscious of 
oppressive practices such as Slavery in the United States as well as domestic 
practices of exploiting labour of the Bahujan castes and poor sections of society.109 
Several members of the Constituent Assembly, who came from the Scheduled Caste 
communities expressed their support for Article 23, as they believed that such a 
provision would prevent economic exploitation of their community. V.I. Muniswamy 
Pillai stated, “If there is any labour required for common purposes in the village, this 
most unfortunate fellow, the Harijan [Scheduled Caste], is always caught hold of to do 
all menial and inferior service.”110 By the provision, he was confident that the country 
would be “elevating a community that has been outside the pale of society”. S. 
Nagappa gave examples of how “begar” was imposed on the Scheduled Castes: 
“Sir, whenever cattle die; the owner of the cattle 
wants these poor Harijans to come and remove the 
dead cattle, remove the skins, tan them and make 
chappals and supply them free of cost. For this, what 
do they get? Some food during festival days. Often, 
Sir, this forced labour is practised even by the 
government. For instance, if there is any murder, 
after the postmortem, the police force these people 
to remove the dead body and look to the other 
funeral processes. I am glad that hereafter this sort 
of forced labour will have no place. Then, Sir, this is 
practised in zamindaries also. For instance, if there 
is a marriage in the zamindar’s family, he will ask 
these poor people, especially the Harijans, to come 
and white wash his whole house, for which they will 
be given nothing except food for the day… 
… whenever the big zamindar’s lands are to be 
ploughed, immediately he will send word for these 
poor people, the Harijans, the previous day, and say: 
“All your services are confiscated for the whole of 
tomorrow; you will have to work throughout the day 
and night. No one should go to any other work.” In 
return, the zamindar will give one morsel of food to 
these poor fellows. Sir, this sort of forced labour is in 
 
109 B. Shiva Rao, Framing of India’s Constitution, Vol. 5, pp. 249-257. 
110 Constituent Assembly Debates (8 November 1948) 

PART IX 

practice in the 20th century in our so called civilised 
country.”111 
(emphasis added)

Another member from the Scheduled Caste community, H.J. Khandekar, 
expressed his happiness “to see in the Constitution that begar and forced labour are 
abolished and the curse on untouchables from whom the begar and forced labour 
were taken has gone”.112 Raj Bahadur also gave examples how “begar” was practiced: 
“I know how some of the Princes have indulged in 
their pomp and luxury, in their reckless life, at the 
expense of the ordinary man, how they have used 
the down-trodden labourers and dumb ignorant 
people for the sake of their pleasure. I know for 
instance how for duck shooting a very large number 
of people are roped in forcibly to stand all day long 
in mud and slush during cold chilly wintry days. I 
know how for the sake of their game and people 
have been roped in large numbers for beating the 
lion so that the Princes may shoot it. I have also seen 
how poor people are employed for domestic and 
other kinds of labour, no matter whether they are 
ailing or some members of their family are ill. These 
people are paid nothing or paid very little for the 
labour extorted from them.” 
He stated that Article 23 will free “downtrodden millions” from the handcuffs of 
exploitation. T.T. Krishnamachari said that “some form of forced labour does exist in 
practically all parts of India, call it ‘begar’ or anything like that and in my part of the 
country, the tenant often times is more or less a helot attached to the land and he has 
certain rights and those are contingent on his continuing to be a slave.” 

While the framers did not define the term “begar”, they largely referred to those 
practices, where the workers were either unpaid or paid very little for their jobs. “Begar” 
 
111 Constituent Assembly Debates (3 December 1948) 
112 Constituent Assembly Debates (21 November 1949) 

PART IX 

or bonded labour was entrenched in India’s social system, against which Article 23 
makes a blow. Over the years, this Court has taken a strict view against bonded labour 
in existence in society. 

The Court in People’s Union for Democratic Rights v. Union of India113 
considered the scope of the terms “begar” and “forced labour” under Article 23(1). The 
Court entertained a letter as a writ petition, which sought compliance with the 
provisions of labour laws in relation to workmen employed in the construction work of 
projects connected with the Asian Games. The petitioner contended that the labourers 
were also not paid their minimum daily wages, and were not provided with proper living 
conditions. The Court observed that the issue related to a “breach of a fundamental 
right” under Article 23. 

The judgment noted that the framers of the Constitution adopted Article 23 to 
put an enforceable obligation on the State to end bonded labour, which was “the relic 
of feudal exploitative society” and “incompatible with the new egalitarian socio-
economic order”. It was further stated that the term “begar” is of Indian origin, referring 
loosely to “labour or service which a person is forced to give without receiving any 
remuneration for it”. The judgment held that the phrase “forced labour” is of wide 
amplitude and would cover instances “where a person provides labour or service to 
another for remuneration which is less than the minimum wage”. “Forced labour” may 
manifest in many forms. It was held that labour provided as a result of any kind of force 
or compulsion would be counted as “forced labour” under Article 23(1). It was held: 
“What Article 23 prohibits is “forced labour” that is 
labour or service which a person is forced to provide 
and “force” which would make such labour or service 
“forced labour” may arise in several ways. It may be 
 
113 (1982) 

PART IX 

physical force which may compel a person to provide 
labour or service to another or it may be force 
exerted through a legal provision such as a provision 
for imprisonment or fine in case the employee fails 
to provide labour or service or it may even be 
compulsion arising from hunger and poverty, want 
and destitution. Any factor which deprives a person 
of a choice of alternatives and compels him to adopt 
one particular course of action may properly be 
regarded as “force” and if labour or service is 
compelled as a result of such “force”, it would be 
“forced labour”. Where a person is suffering from 
hunger or starvation, when he has no resources at 
all to fight disease or to feed his wife and children or 
even to hide their nakedness, where utter grinding 
poverty has broken his back and reduced him to a 
state of helplessness and despair and where no 
other employment is available to alleviate the rigour 
of his poverty, he would have no choice but to accept 
any work that comes his way, even if the 
remuneration offered to him is less than the 
minimum wage. He would be in no position to 
bargain with the employer; he would have to accept 
what is offered to him. And in doing so he would be 
acting not as a free agent with a choice between 
alternatives but under the compulsion of economic 
circumstances and the labour or service provided by 
him would be clearly “forced labour”. 
It was held that non-payment of minimum wage to workmen in the Asian Games 
project was a violation of their fundamental right under Article 23. The judgment also 
laid down an important constitutional principle that when fundamental rights such as 
under Articles 17 or 23 are violated by private individuals, then “it is the constitutional 
obligation of the State to take necessary steps for the purpose of interdicting such 
violation and ensuring observance of the fundamental right by the private individual 
who is transgressing the same”. 

The interpretation of Article 23 laid down in PUDR was relied upon in a 
subsequent decision in Sanjit Roy v. State of Rajasthan.114 A writ petition was filed 
 
114 (1983) 

PART IX 

seeking payment of minimum wages to women workers belonging to Scheduled 
Castes, who were engaged in a construction project of the Rajasthan government, 
under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948. It was argued by the State government that the 
construction project was a famine relief work, and payment of minimum wages in such 
projects was exempted by the Rajasthan Famine Relief Works Employees (Exemption 
Act from Labour Law) Act, 1964. The Court declared the Exemption Act, in so far as it 
excluded the applicability of the Minimum Wages Act 1948 to workmen employed on 
famine relief work and permitted the payment of less than the minimum wage to such 
workmen as violative of Article 23. It was held: 
“The State cannot be permitted to take advantage of 
the helpless condition of the affected persons and 
extract labour or service from them on payment of less 
than the minimum wage. No work of utility and value 
can be allowed to be constructed on the blood and 
sweat of persons who are reduced to a state of 
helplessness on account of drought and scarcity 
conditions. The State cannot under the guise of 
helping these affected persons extract work of utility 
and value from them without paying them the 
minimum wage.” 
Justice Pathak wrote a concurring opinion, holding the Exemption Act to be violative 
of Article 14. The Court directed the State government to pay the arrears of the 
difference between the minimum wage and the actual wage paid to the construction 
workers. 

It was pointed out to this Court in Labourers Working on Salal Hydro Project 
v. State of Jammu & Kashmir115 that a large number of migrant workmen from 
different States working on a hydro-electric project were denied the benefit of labour 
laws and were exploited by the contractors. This Court directed the Union government 
 
115 (1983) 

PART IX 

to ensure that its senior officers carry out thorough inspections of the project at regular 
intervals to verify whether the labour laws are being properly followed, particularly 
concerning workmen employed, either directly or indirectly, by the contractors or sub-
contractors. 

In Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India,116 the petitioner had highlighted 
the issue of bonded labourers in stone quarries of Faridabad district and and their 
inhuman living conditions. Referring to the provisions of the Bonded Labour System 
(Abolition) Act 1976, the judgment discussed the meaning of “bonded labour”. 
According to the Act, a bonded labourer is someone who has incurred or is presumed 
to have incurred a bonded debt.117 A bonded debt refers to an advance received or 
presumed to have been received by a bonded labourer under or in pursuance of the 
bonded labour system.118 The inference of this definition, according to the State 
government, was that bonded labourers must first prove that they are providing forced 
labour in consideration of an advance or other economic consideration received by 
them. The Court rejected this reasoning, stating that it would be “cruel to insist” that a 
bonded labourer “should have to go through a formal process of trial with the normal 
procedure for recording of evidence.” It was further observed that “a bonded labourer 
can never stand up to the rigidity and formalism of the legal process due to his poverty, 
illiteracy and social and economic backwardness and if such a procedure were 
required to be followed, the State Government might as well obliterate this Act from 
the statute book”. The Court also noted that statistically, “most of bonded labourers 
are members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes or other backward classes”. 
 
116 (1984) 
117 Section 2(f), Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act 1976 
118 Section 2(d), Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act 1976 

PART IX 

The judgment held that whenever a labourer is made to provide forced labour, 
the presumption would be that it is consideration of an advance or other economic 
consideration received by him, and he is thus a bonded labourer. This presumption 
may, however, be rebutted by the employer or the State Government by providing 
satisfactory material. The Court reiterated the constitutional obligation of the Union 
government and the State government to ensure observance of various social welfare 
and labour laws enacted for the benefit of the workmen. The State government was 
directed “to take up the work of identification of bonded labour as one of their top 
priority tasks and to map out areas of concentration of bonded labour”. The concurring 
opinion regarded Article 23 as “a vital constituent of the Fundamental Rights”. 

Pursuant to this Court’s decision in Bandhua Mukti Morcha, 135 bonded 
labourers were released from bondage in stone quarries of Faridabad district, under 
the provisions of the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976. However, they were 
not rehabilitated even after a lapse of several months. This inaction of the State 
government was brought before this Court in Neeraja Chaudhary v. State of Madhya 
Pradesh.119 The Court directed the State government to provide rehabilitative 
assistance to these 135 freed bonded labourers within one month. It noted with 
compassion, “They have waited too long; they cannot wait any longer”. This Court also 
directed the State government to ascertain within its territory whether there were any 
more bonded labourers or not, by applying the principle laid down in Bandhua Mukti 
Morcha. It was reiterated, “Whenever it is found that any workman is forced to provide 
labour for no remuneration or nominal remuneration, the presumption would be that 
 
119 (1984) 

PART IX 

he is a bonded labourer unless the employer or the State Government is in a position 
to prove otherwise by rebutting such presumption.” 

The issue of bonded labourers in stone quarries in several districts of Andhra 
Pradesh was highlighted before this Court in P. Sivaswamy v. State of Andhra 
Pradesh.120 The Court emphasized on “effective rehabilitation” of bonded labourers. 
It was stated, “Uprooted from one place of bonded labour conditions the persons are 
likely to be subjected to the same mischief at another place”. The Court appealed for 
“requisite social consciousness”, where it is “the obligation of every citizen to 
cooperate” to bring an end to bonded labour. 

In State of Gujarat v. Hon’ble High Court of Gujarat,121 a three-judge Bench 
dealt with the question whether prisoners, who are required to do labour as part of 
their punishment should be paid minimum wages for such work. This Court held that 
jail authorities are “enjoined by law to impose hard labour” on convicted prisoners who 
were sentenced to rigorous imprisonment, irrespective of “whether he consents to do 
it or not”. However, undertrials, detainees with simple imprisonment, or even detenus 
who are kept in jails as preventive measures cannot be “asked to do manual work 
during their prison term.” Justice KT Thomas, speaking for the Court, held that “a 
directive from the court under the authority of law to subject a convicted person (who 
was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment) to compulsory manual labour gets legal 
protection under the exemption provided in Clause (2) of Article 23 of the Constitution, 
as it “serves a public purpose” of reforming the convict and rehabilitating them in future 
with savings earned from such labour. The Court held that a prisoner “should be paid 
equitable wages for the work done by them”. It directed the State to fix the quantum of 
 
120 (1988) 
 SC 3164 

PART IX 

equitable wages payable to prisoners, which would be calculated after deducting the 
expenses incurred for food and clothes of the prisoners from the minimum wage rates. 

However, in his concurring opinion, Justice D.P. Wadhwa differed with Justice 
Thomas’ invocation of Article 23. According to him, “there will be no violation of Article 
23 if prisoners doing hard labour when sentenced to rigorous imprisonment are not 
paid wages”. He, however, observed that the State is free to enact legislation for 
granting wages to prisoners subject to hard labour under courts’ orders, for their 
beneficial purpose or otherwise. Justice M.M. Punchhi, in his concurrence with Justice 
Thomas, made no comment on the application of Article 23. 
The inference of this judgment, however, is not that imposing mandatory labour on 
convicts is entirely immune from the operation of Article 23. Reading Article 23 with 
Article 21 and the decision in Sunil Batra (II),122 a convict cannot be subjected to 
“allotment of degrading labour”. 

In Public Union for Civil Liberties v. State of Tamil Nadu,123 when the issue 
of bonded labourers and their exploitation was again brought to the notice of this Court, 
a two-judge Bench issued a fresh set of directives to the State. Among other directions 
the bench directed proper and effective implementation of the Minimum Wages Act, 
the Workmens’ Compensation Act, the Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, and the Child 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act. 

A three-judge Bench of this Court in Gujarat Mazdoor Sabha v. State of 
Gujarat124 adjudicated a challenge to two notifications issued by the Gujarat 
 
122 1979 INSC 271 
123 (2013) 
124 (2020) 

PART IX 

government under section 5 of the Factories Act, 1948, during the COVID19 
pandemic. These notifications exempted factories from observing some of the 
obligations which employers have to fulfil towards the workmen employed by them. 
According to the notifications, among other provisions, all factories registered under 
the Act were exempted “from various provisions relating to weekly hours, daily hours, 
intervals for rest, etc. for adult workers”. One of us (Justice DY Chandrachud) authored 
the judgment, declaring that the notifications issued by the government during the 
pandemic were ultra vires and against the fundamental rights of labourers. The Court 
stated that “[t]o a worker who has faced the brunt of the pandemic and is currently 
laboring in a workplace without the luxury of physical distancing, economic dignity 
based on the rights available under the statute is the least that this Court can ensure 
them.” It was held that “[t]he notifications, in denying humane working conditions and 
overtime wages provided by law, are an affront to the workers’ right to life and rights 
against forced labour that are secured by Articles 21 and 23 of the Constitution.” 

What emerges from the above discussion is that the broad scope of Article 23 
can be invoked to challenge practices where no wages are paid, non-payment of 
minimum wages takes place, social security measures for workers are not adopted, 
rehabilitation for bonded labour does not happen, and in similar unfair practices. The 
State shall be held accountable even in cases where the violation of fundamental 
rights such as Article 23 is done by private entities or individuals. Article 23 can also 
be applied to situations inside prisons, if the prisoners are subjected to degrading 
labour or other similar oppressive practices. 
86 Having analysed the philosophy of the Constitution and the principles under 
Articles 14, 15, 17, 21, and 23, we must now reflect on the patterns of discrimination 
against the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and Denotified Tribes. This exercise 

PART X 

is necessary to examine and understand the systemic discrimination based on caste 
against these communities, of which the impugned provisions are an instance. The 
counsel for the petitioner has argued that the impugned provisions are an example of 
State-sanctioned caste-based discrimination. Analysing the systemic discrimination 
not only requires looking at the colonial era, but also the pre-colonial era. Doing so will 
present before us the exact patterns of discrimination against Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes, and Denotified Tribes over the course of history, which the 
Constitution seeks to remedy. 
X. 
A History of Discrimination in the Pre-Colonial Era 

The history of India has witnessed centuries of discrimination towards the 
oppressed castes. Violence, discrimination, oppression, hatred, contempt, and 
humiliation, towards these communities were the norm. The caste system entrenched 
these social injustices deeply within society, creating an environment where the 
principles of natural justice were blatantly disregarded. In this hierarchical system, 
neutrality was virtually non-existent, and there was an inherent and pervasive bias 
against those belonging to the oppressed castes. This bias manifested in numerous 
ways, including exclusion from social, economic, and political opportunities. The caste 
system ensured that the oppressed castes remained marginalized and deprived of 
their basic rights and dignity. 

The foundational principle of equality for all individuals was absent in the social 
framework defined by caste. The caste system operated as a mechanism that thrived 
on the labour of Bahujan communities, ultimately eroding their identity. In other words, 
the story of the caste system is, therefore, a story of enduring injustice. It is a narrative 
of how millions of Indians, relegated to the bottom of the social ladder, faced relentless 

PART X 

discrimination and exploitation. The lower castes were systematically denied access 
to education, land and employment, further entrenching their disadvantaged position 
in society. 

The caste system led to harrowing practices of discrimination and subjugation, 
rooted in the notions of purity and pollution, where some communities were deemed 
impure, and their presence was considered contaminated. The penal sanctions and 
discriminatory practices under the caste system have been well-documented in 
several scholarly works. Dr. Ambedkar referred to this as the “law of caste” in his 
writings.125 

The caste system was based on four varnas or groupings. Dr. Ambedkar 
described the caste system in the following words: 
“One striking feature of the caste system is that the 
different castes do not stand as an horizontal series 
all on the same plane. It is a system in which the 
different castes are placed in a vertical series one 
above the other… the Brahmin is placed at the first 
in rank. Below him is the Kshatriya. Below Kshatriya 
is the Vaishya. Below Vaishya is the Shudra and 
Below Shudra is the Ati-Shudra (the Untouchables). 
This system of rank and gradation is, simply another 
way of enunciating the principle of inequality…. This 
inequality in status is not merely the inequality that 
one sees in the warrant of precedence prescribed for 
a ceremonial gathering at a King’s Court. It is a 
permanent social relationship among the classes to 
be observed— to be enforced—at all times in all 
places and for all purposes….”126 

125 B.R. Ambedkar, “Castes in India”, in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches, Vol. 1, p. 16; B.R. 
Ambedkar, “Annihilation of Caste”, in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches, Vol. 1, p. 54. 
126 B.R. Ambedkar, “Philosophy of Hinduism”, in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches, Vol. 3, pp. 25-
26. 

PART X 

In his classic “Annihilation of Caste”, Dr. Ambedkar stated that: 
“the Varnavyavastha is like a leaky pot or like a man 
running at the nose. It is incapable of sustaining itself 
by its own virtue and has an inherent tendency to 
degenerate into a caste system unless there is a 
legal sanction behind it which can be enforced 
against every one transgressing his Varna.”127 
 
Castes were considered “self-enclosed units”,128 which could not be changed. That is, 
was assigned to individuals at birth, with each caste linked to a specific profession, 
and all castes organized into a hierarchical structure. 

Dr Ambedkar also theorized that an essential aspect of the caste system was 
the control over the sexuality of women. In “Castes in India”, he stated: “Sati, enforced 
widowhood and girl marriage are customs that were primarily intended to solve the 
problem of the surplus man and surplus woman in a caste and to maintain its 
endogamy. Strict endogamy could not be preserved without these customs, while 
caste without endogamy is a fake.”129 

Scholars have also stated that “the idea of criminal tribe”130 existed even before 
the British colonisers. Anthropologist Anastasia Piliavsky noted, “while colonial uses 
of the stereotype add up to a lurid history of violence against people branded as 
congenital criminals in colonial law, the stereotype itself has a history stretching back 
far beyond British colonialism.”131 

127 B.R. Ambedkar, “Annihilation of Caste”, in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches, Vol. 
1, p. 86 
128 B.R. Ambedkar, “Castes in India”, in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches, Vol. 1, p. 18 
129 B.R. Ambedkar, “Castes in India”, in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches, Vol. 1, p. 14 
130 Anastasia Pilavsky, “The ‘Criminal Tribe’ in India before the British”, Comparative Studies in Society and History 
57, no. 2 (2015): 323–54, at p. 327 
131 Ibid, p. 325 

PART XI 

The caste system permeated itself in several ways. First, it was based on a 
hierarchy of four caste-based groupings, where the Shudras occupied the lowest level. 
Second, the castes outside these four groupings were treated as “untouchables”. 
Third, the caste system controlled the sexuality or agency of women to maintain the 
sanctity of caste. Fourth, the caste structure considered certain castes and tribal 
communities as professional criminals. Fifth, penal sanctions were imposed on those 
who violated the “law of caste”. 

The rules of caste continued in medieval history. The law of caste manifested in 
several ways– with each manifestation causing a form of violence against the 
oppressed communities. 
XI. 
The Colonial Suppression of Marginalized Castes and Tribes 

The colonial history indicates that the British reproduced the systems of social 
hierarchy in their legal framework. Following several revolts from indigenous 
communities in India, in particular their participation in the 1857 revolt, the British 
focused on restricting their activities. The British increased surveillance upon them by 
the Thuggee Act (XXX of 1836) and Dacoity Act (XXIV of 1843). 

 Reference must be drawn to the statement of J. F. Stephen, legal member of 
the Viceroy’s Council, who in the early 1870s, stated: 
“The caste system is India’s distinguishing trait. By 
virtue of this system, merchants are constituted in a 
caste, a family of carpenters will remain a family of 
carpenters for a whole century from now, or five 
centuries from now, if it survives that long. Let us 
bear that in mind and grasp quickly what we mean 
here by professional criminals. We are dealing here 
with a tribe whose ancestors have been criminals 
since the very dawn of time, whose members are 
sworn by the laws of their caste to commit crime... 

PART XI 

for it is his vocation, his caste, I would go to the 
extent of saying his faith, to commit crimes (from 
Fourcade 2003: 146).”132 
These caste-based stereotypes were given the form of the Criminal Tribes Act of 1871. i. 
Criminal Tribes Acts 

The legislation of 1871 empowered the government to declare any community 
as “criminal tribe”.133 The Act provided for the “registration, surveillance and control” 
of “criminal tribes” and “eunuchs”. The major part of the Act operated in the North-
Western province, Punjab and Oudh.134 The Act allowed the local government, with 
due permission of the Governor General in Council, to designate any “tribe, gang or 
class of persons” as “criminal tribes” if they were deemed to be “addicted to systematic 
commission of non-bailable offences”.135 The local government needed to give a 
comprehensive report to the Governor General giving reasons for declaring any tribe 
as criminal and also provide a manner in which these tribes would earn their 
livelihood.136 

The Act authorized the local government to term a “wandering tribe” having no 
fixed place of residence as criminals, except in cases where they can identify a “lawful 
occupation” of the tribe.137 The government was allowed to settle such tribes in a 
specified place.138 Subsequently, with the authorization of the Governor General, the 
local government will publish the declaration of criminal tribes in the local gazette in 
form of a notification.139 Such notification acted as conclusive proof of the applicability 
 
132 Anastasia Pilavsky, “The ‘Criminal Tribe’ in India before the British”, Comparative Studies in Society and History 
57, no. 2 (2015): 323–54, at p.326 
133 Section 2, Criminal Tribes Act 1871. 
134 Section 1, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
135 Section 2, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
136 Section 3, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
137 Section 4, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
138 Section 4, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
139 Section 5, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 

PART XI 

of the provisions of the Act on the tribe and debarred any judicial review irrespective 
of any procedural non-compliance.140 

Members of the designated criminal tribes were required to mark their presence 
in a register made by the magistrate, failing which they were subjected to penalties in 
accordance with the provision of the Indian Penal Code.141 Such a register was kept 
in the custody of the District Superintendent of Police.142 A person aggrieved by any 
entry in the register could request alteration by filing a complaint before the Magistrate, 
who had the final say.143 The designated criminal tribes were forced to either settle or 
move to another place chosen by the local government,144 or could be moved to any 
reformatory settlement.145 Headmen, village-watchmen and landowners or occupiers 
of the village were informed about the designated criminal tribes.146 They were 
subjected to frequent checks, and their movements were closely monitored.147 The 
local government could restrict their movement within a territorial limit.148 The 
designated criminal tribes required permission to move from one place to another.149 
They were mandated to carry “passes” which had permission to move to another 
specified place.150 The Act allowed the government to employ the individuals from 
designated criminal tribes “placed in a reformatory settlement”.151 

The Act included provisions for punitive measures against members of the 
criminal tribes, including rigorous imprisonment extending from six months (in first 
 
140 Section 6, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
141 Section 9, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
142 Section 10, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
143 Section 12, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
144 Sections 13, 14, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
145 Section 17, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
146 Section 18(ii), Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
147 Section 18 (viii), Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
148 Section 18 (iv), Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
149 Section 18(v), Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
150 Section 18(v), Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
151 Section 18(xii), Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 

PART XI 

breach) to one year (in second breach), whipping, or fine, if they were found violating 
the Act’s provisions.152 It gave extensive powers to any police officer, or village 
watchman to arrest without warrant a person of a designated criminal tribe, if they 
move beyond any prescribed limits of residence without a pass.153 The Act mandated 
“every village-headman and village-watchman”, and “every owner or occupied of land” 
to inform the police about the absence of a person from a designated criminal tribe or 
the arrival in the village of such persons “who may reasonably be suspected of 
belonging” to a criminal tribe.154 

The Act also mandated creation of “a register of the names and residence of all 
eunuchs residing” in the territorial jurisdiction of the Act, “who are reasonably 
suspected of kidnapping or castrating children, or of committing offences under section 
[377] of Indian Penal Code, or of abetting the commission of any of the said 
offences”.155 The “eunuchs” were required to give information of their property.156 The 
Act further provided for arrest and punishment, including imprisonment up to two 
years, or fine, or both, of a “eunuch”, “who appears dressed or ornamented like a 
woman, in a public street” or even in a private space visible from a public street, or 
“dances or plays music, or takes part in any public exhibition, in a public street or place 
of for hire in a private house”.157 The Act imposed a penalty on a “eunuch”, if a boy 
under 16 years of age was found in his house or “under his control”.158 The Act also 
prohibited “eunuchs” of “being or acting as guardian to any minor”, “making a gift”, 
“making a will”, or “adopting a son”.159 
 
152 Section 19, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
153 Section 20, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
154 Section 21, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
155 Section 24(a), Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
156 Section 24(b), Section 30, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
157 Section 26, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
158 Section 27, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 
159 Section 29, Criminal Tribes Act, 1871. 

PART XI 

The provisions of the CTA were based on a stereotype which considered 
several marginalized communities as born criminals. By declaring them as born 
criminals and assuming that they are addicted to the commission of a crime, the Act 
restricted their life and identity in a negative way. The Act imposed unnecessary and 
disproportionate restrictions on their movement. It also took away the opportunity from 
them to settle in a place, as it was prescribed that they could be forced to move to 
another place decided by the government. This was forced nomadism. The Act, 
further, subjected the criminal tribes to heightened surveillance, as their movements 
were frequently and closely monitored. It also led to social discrimination, as it imposed 
a stigma of born criminality. At the same time, it gave extensive powers to local village 
headmen (generally higher caste) to collaborate with the police to report their 
movements. The Act was also based on a stereotype and further reinforced that 
“eunuchs” are suspected of kidnapping or castrating children. Thus, the impact of CTA 
was discriminatory and punitive. 

The Act was first amended in 1876 to extend its operation to Bengal.160 The 
agents of landowners were also given the duty to inform the police about the presence 
or absence of any individual from a criminal tribe.161 The Act was then modified in 1897 
to make the penalties more stringent Penalties for second and third convictions of 
individuals from the designated criminal tribes for specified offenses were imposed.162 
The amendment also empowered the local governments “to separate children of the 
Criminal Tribes between the ages of 4 and 18 years from their irreclaimable parents” 
and “place them” in specially established “reformatory settlements”.163 
 
160 Criminal Tribes (Lower Provinces) Act Extension Act, 1876 
161 Ibid 

The 
Criminal 
Tribes 
Enquiry 
Committee 
Report 
(1949-50), 
https://ia802807.us.archive.org/11/items/dli.csl.944/944.pdf, p. 5 
163 Ibid 

PART XI 

In 1908, the Criminal Tribes Settlement Act was passed, “permitting the various 
provincial governments of India to make plans whereby tribes suspected of living by 
crime could be registered and supervised by the police, and those members of criminal 
tribes which had been convicted could be placed in settlements.”164 

The Criminal Tribes Act 1911 repealed the earlier Act of 1871 and the 
amendments of 1876 and 1897. The application of the Criminal Tribes Act was 
extended to the whole of British India.165 The Act amended the law relating to the 
registration, surveillance, and control of criminal tribes. It strengthened the power of 
the local government to declare any community as a “criminal tribe” without having to 
seek permission of any higher authority.166 However, the local government was still 
required to take orders from the Governor General if it wanted to restrict the 
movements of any criminal tribe to any specified area or settle them in any place of 
residence.167 

The 1911 amendment gave additional powers to the district magistrate or any 
officer to order finger-impressions of a registered member of the designated tribe.168 
The individuals belonging to such tribes were required to inform “any change or 
intended change of residence and any absence or intended absence from his 
residence”.169 Further, the 1911 Act reinforced the provisions for the registration of the 
members of the designated criminal tribes with the authorities170 and regular 
 
164 John Lewis Gillin, Taming the Criminal: Adventures in Penology, Macmillan Company (1931), p. 110 
165 Section 1(2), Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 
166 Section 3, Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 
167 Section 11, Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 
168 Section 5(c), Section 9, Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 
169 Section 10 (b), Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 
170 Section 5, Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 

PART XI 

reporting.171 Similarly, the Act reiterated the “duty” of “every village-headman and 
village-watchman” and landowners to check the activities of these individuals.172 

The Act also provided that the criminal tribes could be placed in any “industrial, 
agricultural, or reformatory settlements” to restrict their movements.173 The local 
government was also allowed to “separate and remove” children (between 6 and 18 
years of age) from their parents or guardians and place them in any “established 
industrial, agricultural or reformatory schools”.174 These children were deemed as 
“youthful offenders” under Reformatory Schools Act, 1897.175 Furthermore, the adults 
working in industries or children in reformatory schools could be transferred to any 
other similar establishment in any part of British India.176 A person of a criminal tribe 
found beyond the prescribed territorial limit or having escaped from an industrial, 
agricultural or reformatory settlement or school was liable for punishment.177 

Moreover, the Act introduced stringent penalties for non-compliance with its 
provisions as well as rules framed by the local government.178 This included 
imprisonment that extended to three years in certain cases, and fines extending to five 
hundred rupees, which was significantly high at that time. Additionally, in case of a 
previous conviction for offences under the Schedule of the Act, punishment could vary 
from seven years to transportation of life.179 The Act also prescribed punishment to an 
individual of a designated criminal tribe, if the court was satisfied that “he was about 
 
171 Section 14, Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 
172 Section 26, Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 
173 Section 16, Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 
174 Section 17 (3), Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 
175 Under the Reformatory Schools Act, 1897, “youthful offender” means any boy who has been convicted of any 
offence punishable with transportation or imprisonment and who, at the time of such conviction, was under the age 
of fifteen years. 
176 Section 19, Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 
177 Section 25, Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 
178 Section 21, 22, Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 
179 Section 23, Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 

PART XI 

to commit, or aid in the commission of, theft or robbery” or “was waiting for an 
opportunity to commit theft or robbery”.180 Like the previous Act, courts had no 
jurisdiction to decide on the validity of the notifications issued by the local 
government.181 

In 1919, based on the requests of local governments, the “Indian Jails 
Committee” was appointed by the Government of India to analyze the working of 
settlements constituted under the 1911 Act and make recommendations for better 
administration. The Committee stated that “the ultimate aim of the settlements should 
be the absorption of the settlers into the general body of the community”.182 Thereafter, 
the Act was amended in 1923 to make certain additions. The criminal tribes notified by 
the local government of a province could be restricted or settled in another province 
with the approval of the government of that province.183 Before the internment of any 
criminal tribe in a settlement, a formal enquiry was required to ascertain the necessity 
of restricting that tribe in the settlement.184 The amendment also empowered the local 
government to deport criminal tribes to any princely states, provided the states 
consented and appropriate arrangements were made to restrict the movements of the 
criminal tribes.185 

The law relating to criminal tribes was then consolidated as the Criminal Tribes 
Act of 1924.186 Another amendment to the Act happened in 1925 to clarify that if an 
individual from a designated criminal tribe moved to another district in the same 
 
180 Ibid. 
181 Section 28, Criminal Tribes Act, 1911. 

The 
Criminal 
Tribes 
Enquiry 
Committee 
Report 
(1949-50), 
https://ia802807.us.archive.org/11/items/dli.csl.944/944.pdf, 6 
183 Section 6, Criminal Tribes (Amendment) Act 1923 https://164.100.163.187/repealedfileopen?rfilename=A1923-
1.pdf 
184 Section 8, Criminal Tribes (Amendment) Act 1923 
185 Section 12, Criminal Tribes (Amendment) Act 1923 
186 Act No. 06 of 1924 

PART XI 

province or to another province, he shall still be treated as a criminal tribe in that district 
or province.187 

Several Indian States of pre-independent India had enacted their own local laws 
for the surveillance of criminal tribes. According to the Criminal Tribes Manual of 
Gwalior, an individual from a criminal tribe could be convicted with rigorous 
imprisonment up to one year, if he kept an arm or “means of locomotion such as 
horses, ponies, camels, donkeys, bicycles”.188 The general public was prohibited from 
selling any arms or means of locomotion to the criminal tribes, giving shelter to an 
individual from a criminal tribe not having a valid pass, or lending any cash to them.189 
Absence of an individual of a criminal tribe from his specified residence without a pass 
was punishable with rigorous imprisonment from one to two years or whipping with 20 
to 30 stripes.190 Other States’ manuals also prohibited criminal tribes from possessing 
any means of locomotion.191 The Rewa Wandering Criminal Tribes Act, 1925, applied 
in Vindhya Pradesh, required members of wandering criminal tribes to report at all 
nearest police stations in their way of travel.192 Failure to do so was punishable with 
whipping and rigorous imprisonment upto three months.193 The Bhopal government 
compelled both men and women from criminal tribes settled in different colonies to 
answer the roll call and give attendance to a police constable four times at night— 6 
PM, 12 midnight, 4 AM, ad 6 AM.194 
 
187 Criminal Tribes (Amendment) Act, 1925. 

The 
Criminal 
Tribes 
Enquiry 
Committee 
Report 
(1949-50), 
https://ia802807.us.archive.org/11/items/dli.csl.944/944.pdf, p. 71 
189 Ibid 
190 Ibid 
191 Ibid, 72-73. 
192 Ibid, 79 
193 Ibid 
194 Ibid, p. 80 

PART XI 

The Act notified around 150 tribes and castes in India as criminals. This 
provided an affirmation of the State that any person who belonged to such a tribe was 
born as a criminal. Between the period 1871 and 1949, a large number of communities 
were registered as “criminal tribes”. 

The separation of children from their families led to the destruction of their 
childhood and deprived them of their innocence. They were considered as young 
offenders. The criminal tribes were subjected to inhuman living conditions, as they 
were required to mark their attendance even during late nights. The idea of 
rehabilitation of the so-called criminal tribes also led to the exploitation of their labour. 
Ostensibly meant to “reform”, the settlements provided for institutionalized 
incarceration. The compulsive stay in “settlement camps” led to many nomadic groups 
leaving their traditional livelihoods involuntarily. These camps, created by the Act, 
distanced the criminal tribes from mainstream society. Harsh provisions on 
punishment for members of the criminal tribes were imposed. 

American sociologist John Lewis Gillin travelled across India to document the 
situation of settlement camps. He noted: 
“There are four types of settlements besides the 
institutions for children and loose women: (a) 
Industrial settlements near some large industrial 
plant such as a cotton mill, railroad shops, or a large 
tea plantation; (b) agricultural settlements. In these 
settlements lands are provided by the government 
which the settlers are allowed to cultivate at a certain 
rental; (c) forest settlements where the settlers work 
in the woods getting out timber and reforesting land 
either for the government or for private owners. So 
far as the Bombay Presidency and the Punjab are 
concerned, these are mostly government forests; (d) 
reformatory settlements. The last are intended for 
those who cannot be trusted and who attempt to 
escape… In 1919 all of British India had settlements 
for criminal tribes except Burma, Assam, the Central 

PART XI 

Provinces, and the Northwest Frontier Province. It is 
uncertain from the reports whether all of the native 
states have them. In the Punjab in 1919 there were 
twenty-six settlements besides the reformatory 
settlement at Amritsar. Of these, twelve were 
industrial, 
one 
semi-agricultural, 
three 
old 
agricultural, and seven new agricultural, together 
with three old settlements which had no supervising 
staffs.”195 
ii. 
Caste Discrimination in Colonial India 

Several leaders led the fight against caste discrimination in colonial India. 
These included Jotiba Phule, Babasaheb Ambedkar, E.V. Ramasami ‘Periyar’, 
Narayan Guru, among many others. They challenged the system of caste and 
exploitation from multiple fronts. 

In his submissions before the Southborough Committee in 1919, Dr Ambedkar 
highlighted how the “untouchables” faced the worst form of social disabilities: 
“The untouchables are usually regarded as objects 
of pity but they are ignored in any political scheme 
on the score that they have no interests to protect. 
And yet their interests are the greatest. Not that they 
have large property to protect from confiscation. But 
they have their very persona confiscated. The socio 
religious 
disabilities 
have 
dehumanized 
the 
untouchables and their interests at stake are 
therefore the interests of humanity. The interests of 
property 
are 
nothing 
before 
such 
primary 
interests.”196 

195 John Lewis Gillin, Taming the Criminal: Adventures in Penology, Macmillan Company (1931), pp. 115-16, 122. 
196 B.R. Ambedkar, “Evidence Before the Southborough Committee (1919)”, in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings 
and Speeches, Vol. 1, p. 255 

PART XI 

He described how “untouchability” is a form of slavery: 
“If one agrees with the definition of slave as given by 
Plato, who defines him as one who accepts from 
another the purposes which control his conduct, the 
untouchables are really slaves. The untouchables 
are so socialized as never to complain of their low 
estate. Still less do they ever dream of trying to 
improve their lot, by forcing the other classes to treat 
them with that common respect which one man 
owes to another. The idea that they have been born 
to their lot is so ingrained in their mind that it never 
occurs to them to think that their fate is anything but 
irrevocable. Nothing will ever persuade them that 
men are all made of the same clay, or that they have 
the right to insist on better treatment than that meted 
out to them.”197 
He then explained how “untouchability” led to the denial of civil and political rights of 
the caste-oppressed communities: 
“The right of representation and the right to hold 
office under the State are the two most important 
rights 
that 
make 
up 
citizenship. 
But 
the 
untouchability of the untouchables puts these rights 
far beyond their reach. In a few places they do not 
even possess such insignificant rights as personal 
liberty and personal security, and equality before law 
is not always assured to them. These are the 
interests of the untouchables. And as can be easily 
seen they can be represented by the untouchables 
alone. They are distinctively their own interests and 
none else can truly voice them.”198 

Before the Simon Commission in 1928, Dr Ambedkar raised the demand of 
representation of caste-oppressed communities in government services. Dr Ambedkar 
also confronted the British government in the Round Table Conferences during 1930-
32. He stated that there was no change in the material condition of the oppressed 
castes in the colonial period. He thundered: 
 
197 Ibid, pp. 255-256 
198 Ibid, p. 256 

PART XI 

“When we compare our present position with the one 
which it was our lot to bear in Indian society of the 
pre-British days, we find that, instead of marching 
on, we are only marking time. Before the British, we 
were in the loathsome condition due to our 
untouchability. Has the British Government done 
anything to remove it? Before the British, we could 
not enter the temple. Can we enter now? Before the 
British, we were denied entry into the Police Force. 
Does the British Government admit us in the Force? 
Before the British, we were not allowed to serve in 
the Military. Is that career now open to us? To none 
of these questions can we give an affirmative 
answer… there is certainly no fundamental change 
in our position. Indeed, so far as we were concerned, 
the British Government has accepted the social 
arrangements as it found them, and has preserved 
them faithfully... Our wrongs have remained as open 
sores and they have not been righted, although 150 
years of British rule have rolled away.”199 
 (emphasis added) 
In his classic “Annihilation of Caste”, he stated: 
“Caste System is not merely division of labour. It is 
also a division of labourers. Civilized society 
undoubtedly needs division of labour. But in no 
civilized society is division of labour accompanied by 
this unnatural division of labourers into water-tight 
compartments. Caste System is not merely a 
division of labourers which is quite different from 
division of labour—it is an heirarchy in which the 
divisions of labourers are graded one above the 
other.”200 

Like Dr Ambedkar, other scholars have documented how the British reinforced 
the caste system by not interfering in the matters of caste-based customs. While in 
enacting the Criminal Tribes Act, the British directly applied the logic of caste, in courts, 
 
199 “Dr. Ambedkar at the Round Table Conferences”, in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches, Vol. 2, 
p. 504 
200 B.R. Ambedkar, “Annihilation of Caste”, in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches, Vol. 1, p. 47 

PART XI 

they facilitated caste oppression directly or directly. In this regard, Marc Galanter 
noted: 
“… from the early days of the “British” legal system 
a group of matters that might roughly be described 
as family law - marriage and divorce, adoption, joint 
family, 
guardianship, 
minority, 
legitimacy, 
inheritance, and succession, religious endowments - 
were set aside and left subject to the laws of the 
various religious communities; i.e., the applicable 
law in these fields was “personal” rather than 
territorial. In these family and religious matters 
Hindus were ruled by dharmasastra not by the 
ancient texts as such, but as interpreted by the 
commentators accepted in the locality. At first the 
courts relied on Brahmin pundits or sastris to advise 
them 
on 
the 
applicable 
rules 
and 
their 
interpretation…”201 

He highlighted the practice of British non-interference as follows: 
“The cases show widespread acquiescence by local 
authorities in the enforcement of these disabilities 
and suggest that active governmental support of 
these practices at a local level was at least not 
uncommon. It should be emphasized however, that 
these prescriptive rights and disabilities received 
their greatest governmental support not from direct 
judicial enforcement but from the recognition of 
caste autonomy i.e., from the refusal of the courts to 
interfere with the right of caste groups to apply 
sanctions against those who defied these usage.”202

Galanter also highlighted how caste discrimination received direct support 
from British courts in certain cases: 
“Caste groups did enjoy active support of the courts 
in upholding their claims for precedence and 
exclusiveness. Courts granted injunctions to restrain 
members of particular castes from entering temples 
 
201 Marc Galanter, “Law and Caste in Modern India”, Asian Survey (1963), Vol. 3, No. 11, pp. 544–59, at p. 545. 
202 Ibid, at p. 548 

PART XI 

- even ones that were publicly supported and 
dedicated to the entire Hindu community. Damages 
were 
awarded 
for 
purificatory 
ceremonies 
necessitated by the pollution caused by the 
presence of lower castes; such pollution was 
actionable as a trespass on the person of the higher 
caste worshippers. It was a criminal offence for a 
member of an excluded caste knowingly to pollute a 
temple by his presence.”203 

British criminal law became intertwined with pre-colonial notions of who should be 
disciplined and punished. iii. 
Repeal of Criminal Tribes Act 

When the Objectives Resolution was placed in the Constituent Assembly, HJ 
Khandekar stated, on 21 January 1947: 
“One thing is wanting in the Resolution, and, if the 
mover agrees, it can be modified. The Resolution 
promises safeguards and rights to all the minorities. 
But unfortunately there are 10 million people in India 
who, without any fault on their part, are described as 
criminal tribes from their very birth. Hundreds of 
thousands of men and women in India were declared 
as criminal tribes according to the current law. To 
deprive them of their rights they are declared so. No 
matter whether they are criminals or not, from their 
very birth they are made criminals. Some provision 
to abolish this law must be embodied in this 
Resolution.” 
Khandekar raised the concerns of the persons who were declared as criminal tribes. 

In 1947, an amendment to the Act abolished the punishment imposed on 
criminal tribes for second and third convictions under specified offences.204 As some 
provinces had concurrent jurisdiction on this issue, they could amend or repeal the Act 
 
203 Marc Galanter, “Untouchability and the Law”, Economic and Political Weekly (1969), Vol. 4, No. 1/2, pp. 131–
170, at p. 131. 

The 
Criminal 
Tribes 
Enquiry 
Committee 
Report 
(1949-50), 
https://ia802807.us.archive.org/11/items/dli.csl.944/944.pdf, p. 7 

PART XI 

in its application to their territories.205 The Madras government enacted the Criminal 
Tribes (Madras Repeal) Act, 1947 to end the application of the Act in its territory. 
Similarly, the Bombay government also repealed the application of the Act to its 
territory in 1949.206 

By a resolution dated 28 September 1949, the Government of independent 
India appointed “The Criminal Tribes Act Enquiry Committee” under the chairmanship 
of Ananthasayanam Ayyangar. The resolution stated: 
“There has been a persistent demand in the Central 
Legislature in recent years that the Criminal Tribes 
Act, 1924, should be repealed as its provisions 
which seek to classify particular classes of people as 
Criminal Tribes, are inconsistent with the dignity of 
free India. Some of the Provinces have already 
repealed the Act in its application to their areas and 
replaced it by other legislation, e.g., Habitual 
Offenders’ Acts. The Government of India consider 
that the question whether the Act should be modified 
or repealed altogether on an all-India basis should 
be considered after an enquiry into the working of 
the Act in the Provinces.”207 

The Committee submitted its report in 1951, after the Constitution of India came 
into force. After doing field inspections of several regions, the Committee concluded 
that “[e]xcept a few hardened criminals the other persons, belonging to these tribes, 
are as good as the people belonging to other communities of the same economic and 
social status, and desire to live an honourable life.”208 The Committee further noted, 
“Wherever we went we heard one single cry from all the criminal tribes that whereas 
India obtained freedom, they continue to be in bondage and their demand for setting 
 
205 ibid 
206 Ibid, p. 8 
207 Ibid, p. 1 
208 Ibid, p. 81 

PART XI 

them free by repealing the Act was insistent”.209 The stigma attached to a community 
declared as a criminal tribe was highlighted.210 

The Committee noted that “criminality is not hereditary”.211 It was observed that 
the stigma and discrimination against communities declared as criminal by birth was 
violative of the equality framework adopted in the Indian Constitution in 1950. It was 
stated: 
“Untouchability proved oppressive and its practice is now made 
illegal under the Constitution, as it involves social injustice and 
perpetuates discrimination. More so is the stigma of criminality by 
birth. Under section 3 of the Criminal Tribes Act, 1924, any tribe, 
gang or class of persons or any part of a tribe, gang or class who 
is addicted to the systematic commission of non-bailable offences 
can be notified to be a Criminal Tribe. As a result of this, many 
tribes or parts of tribes including families who have never criminal, 
have been notified as criminal tribes. The children born in these 
notified tribes automatically become members of the criminal tribes 
so notified, and the members of such tribes, who may never have 
committed or aided in commission of any offence or even 
suspected of having done so, as well as newly born children of 
these people are thus branded as criminal and denied equality 
before the law and thus a discrimination is imposed against them 
on the ground that they belong to a tribe or a part of a tribe, which 
has been notified as a Criminal Tribe. In this respect, this section 
would appear to go against the spirit of our Constitution… 
Moreover, this section gives powers to the executive to declare any 
tribe, part of tribe or gang or part of gang or a class of persons as 
a Criminal Tribe and it is provided in section 29 of this Act that no 
court shall question the validity of any notification issued under 
section 3 and that every such notification shall be a conclusive 
proof that it has been issued in accordance with law. We feel that 
it is not proper to give such wide powers to the executive. The Act 
also gives powers to restrict the movements of the Criminal Tribes 
or to place them in settlements to the executive and by making 
suitable rules under the Act to take work from settlers on pain of 
punishment. This would virtually amount to “begar” or forced 
labour which is an offence under the Indian Penal Code and is 
opposed also to Article 23 of the Constitution.”212 
 
209 Ibid 
210 Ibid 
211 Ibid, p. 82 
212 Ibid, p. 82 

PART XII 

The Committee recommended the repeal of the Act: 
“The Criminal Tribes Act, 1924, should be replaced 
by a Central legislation applicable to all habitual 
offenders without any distinction based on caste, 
creed or birth and the newly formed States included 
in Parts B and C of the First Schedule of the 
Constitution, which have local laws for the 
surveillance of the Criminal Tribes, should be 
advised to replace their laws in this respect by the 
Central legislation for habitual offenders, when 
passed.”213 
The Act was repealed in 1952. The criminal tribes were then denotified, as a result of 
which they were known as “Denotified Tribes”. 

It must be noted under the Criminal Tribes Act, several marginalized “castes” 
were also declared as criminal “tribes”. It is for this reason Article 341(1) of the 
Constitution employs the words “castes” and “tribes” while defining the Scheduled 
Castes.214 After the repeal of the Act, some of the castes earlier declared as criminal 
tribes, have been accordingly notified as Scheduled Castes. 
XII. 
Jurisprudence on Social Protection in Post-Independence India 

Parliament enacted legislation to prevent discrimination and atrocities against 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. In State of Karnataka v. Appa Balu 
Ingale,215 Justice Ramaswamy noted that Parliament enacted the stringent provisions 
of the PoA Act, 1989 when “the mandate of Article 17 was being breached with 
impunity, and commission of atrocities on Dalits and Tribes continued unabated”. 
 
213 Ibid, p. 104 
214 Article 341(1) provides: “The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is a State, 
after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the castes, races or tribes or parts of or 
groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled 
Castes in relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may be.” 
 SC 1126 

PART XII 

The Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Ram Krishna Balothia216 held that 
the offences under PoA Act “constitute a separate class and cannot be compared with 
offences under the Penal Code”. These offences are “committed to humiliate and 
subjugate members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes with a view to keeping 
them in a state of servitude”, and “prevent them from leading a life of dignity and self-
respect”. The Court quoted the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act to 
highlight that “when members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes assert 
their rights and demand statutory protection, vested interests try to cow them down 
and terrorise them” if they are on anticipatory bail. For this reason, the Court dismissed 
a challenge to Section 18 of the PoA Act, which debarred the opportunity to seek 
anticipatory bail in respect of offences committed under the Act. 

In Safai Karamchari Andolan v. Union of India,217 the Court noted that “the 
practice of manual scavenging has to be brought to a close”. Making a “member of a 
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to do manual scavenging or employing or 
permiting the employment of such member for such purpose” is a criminal offence 
under the PoA Act.218 The Court took a step further, and held that “entering sewer lines 
without safety gears should be made a crime even in emergency situations”. The Court 
declared that for a death in sewer lines, “compensation of Rs. 10 lakhs should be given 
to the family of the deceased”. It was emphasized that “Persons released from manual 
scavenging should not have to cross hurdles to receive” compensation or rehabilitation 
“due under the law”. 
 
216 1995 INSC 99 
217 2014 (11) SCC 224 
218 Section 3(j), Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act 1989 

PART XII 

The Court showed a deep concern about non-implementation of the PoA Act in 
National Campaign on Dalit Human Rights v. Union of India.219 It remarked that 
“there has been a failure on the part of the authorities concerned in complying with the 
provisions” of the PoA Act. Calling out the “indifferent attitude of the authorities”, the 
Court directed the State and the Union governments to strictly do their role in 
implementing the Act. 

These rulings emphasized that the PoA Act is a significant legislative measure 
designed to protect the fundamental rights and freedoms of the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes, ensuring their dignity and safety against discrimination and 
violence. However, the subsequent judgment in Subhash Kashinath Mahajan v. 
State of Maharashtra220 marked a departure from this protective stance. 

Dealing with a criminal appeal, the judgment in Subhash Mahajan expressed 
a “concern that working of the Atrocities [PoA] Act should not result in perpetuating 
casteism which can have an adverse impact on integration of the society and the 
constitutional values”. It held that there is “no absolute bar against grant of anticipatory 
bail” by the concerned court “in cases under the Atrocities [PoA] Act if no prima facie 
case is made out or where on judicial scrutiny the complaint is found to be prima facie 
mala fide”. The Court issued the following guidelines: 
“(iii) In view of acknowledged abuse of law of arrest 
in cases under the Atrocities Act, arrest of a public 
servant can only be after approval of the appointing 
authority and of a non-public servant after approval 
by the S.S.P. which may be granted in appropriate 
cases if considered necessary for reasons recorded. 
Such reasons must be scrutinized by the Magistrate 
for permitting further detention; 
 
 SC 132 
220 2018 INSC 248 

PART XII 

(iv) To avoid false implication of an innocent, a 
preliminary enquiry may be conducted by the DSP 
concerned to find out whether the allegations make 
out a case under the Atrocities Act and that the 
allegations are not frivolous or motivated; 
(v) Any violation of direction (iii) and (iv) will be 
actionable by way of disciplinary action as well as 
contempt.” 

The directions in Subhash Mahajan were later recalled in the review petition 
in Union of India v. State of Maharashtra.221 In doing so, the Court noted that the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes “are still making the struggle for equality 
and for exercising civil rights in various areas of the country”. It remarked that there is 
“no presumption that the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
may misuse the provisions of law as a class”. Instead, “members of the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes due to backwardness hardly muster the courage to 
lodge even a first information report, much less, a false one”. The Court further 
declared that treating the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes as “prone to 
lodge false reports under the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Act for taking 
revenge” or monetary gain, especially when they themselves are victims of such 
offenses, contradicts fundamental principles of human equality. 

The review judgment also observed that guidelines issued in Subhash 
Mahajan “may delay the investigation of cases”. The judgment termed the directions 
as “discriminatory”, as “it puts the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes in a disadvantageous position”, compared to complaints lodged by members of 
upper castes, where no such preliminary investigation is required. The Court also 
found the directions to be “without statutory basis”, as they are in conflict with PoA Act, 
 
221 2019 INSC 1102 

PART XII 

and amounts to “encroaching on a field which is reserved for the legislature”. The 
Court however clarified that “if prima facie case has not been made out attracting the 
provisions” of PoA Act, “the bar created under section 18 on the grant of anticipatory 
bail is not attracted”. 

Before the review judgment was delivered, Parliament amended the PoA Act, 
undoing the effect of the guidelines issued in Subhash Mahajan. The amendment 
was unsuccessfully challenged in Prathvi Raj Chauhan v. Union of India.222 

The hurdles faced by the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes were 
highlighted by this Court in Hariram Bhambhi v. Satyanarayan.223 The Court 
cancelled the bail of an accused on the ground that the statutory requirement of 
Section 15A224 of PoA Act was not fulfilled in the case. Authoring the judgment, one of 
us (Justice DY Chandrachud) noted: 
“Scheduled 
Castes 
and 
Scheduled 
Tribes 
specifically suffer on account of procedural lapses in 
the 
criminal 
justice 
system. 
They 
face 
insurmountable hurdles in accessing justice from the 
stage of filing the complaint to the conclusion of the 
trial. Due to the fear of retribution from members of 
upper caste groups, ignorance or police apathy, 
many victims do not register complaints in the first 
place. If victims or their relatives muster up the 
courage to approach the police, the police officials 
are reluctant to register complaints or do not record 
allegations accurately. Eventually, if the case does 
get registered, the victims and witnesses are 
vulnerable to intimidation, violence and social and 
economic boycott. Further, many perpetrators of 
caste based atrocities get away scot-free due to 
shoddy investigations and the negligence of 
prosecuting advocates. This results in low conviction 
rates under the SC/ST Act giving rise to the 
 
222 (2020) 
223 2021 INSC 701 
224 Section 15A(5) of the Act provides: “A victim or his dependent shall be entitled to be heard at any proceeding 
under this Act in respect of bail, discharge, release, parole, conviction or sentence of an accused or any connected 
proceedings or arguments and file written submission on conviction, acquittal or sentencing.” 

PART XII 

erroneous perception that cases registered under 
the Act are false and that it is being misused. On the 
contrary, the reality is that many acquittals are a 
result of improper investigation and prosecution of 
crime, leading to insufficient evidence. This is 
evident from the low percentage of cases attracting 
the application of the provisions of the Penal Code 
relating to false complaints as compared to the rate 
of acquittals.” 
(emphasis added) 
The Court observed that the provisions of the PoA Act, in particular Section 15A, 
“enable a member of the marginalized caste to effectively pursue a case and 
counteract the effects of defective investigations”. 

In Patan Jamal Vali v. State of Andhra Pradesh,225 this Court expanded the 
scope of jurisprudence relating to Section 3(2)(v) of the PoA Act. The case dealt with 
the offence of rape of a woman from the Scheduled Caste community, who was blind 
by birth. Prior to the amendment in 2016, Section 3(2)(v) provided, “Whoever not being 
a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe … commits any offence under 
the Indian Penal Code punishable with imprisonment for a term of ten years or more 
against a person or property on the ground that such person is a member of a 
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or such property belongs to such member, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for life and with fine”. The Court observed that in 
such cases, “an intersectional lens enables us to view oppression as a sum of 
disadvantage resulting from multiple marginalized identities.” It was held that “A true 
reading of Section 3(2)(v) would entail that conviction under this provision can be 
sustained as long as caste identity is one of the grounds for the occurrence of the 
offence.” The Court observed: 
 
225 2021 INSC 272 

PART XII 

“To deny the protection of Section 3 (2) (v) on the 
premise that the crime was not committed against an 
SC & ST person solely on the ground of their caste 
identity is to deny how social inequalities function in 
a cumulative fashion. It is to render the experiences 
of the most marginalized invisible. It is to grant 
impunity to perpetrators who on account of their 
privileged social status feel entitled to commit 
atrocities 
against 
socially 
and 
economically 
vulnerable communities.” 

In Dr. Balram Singh v. Union of India,226 while dealing with the Prohibition of 
Employment as Manual Scavengers and Their Rehabilitation Act, 2013, the Court 
directed the Union government to take “appropriate measures” and “issue directions, 
to all statutory bodies, including corporations, railways, cantonments, as well as 
agencies under its control, to ensure that manual sewer cleaning is completely 
eradicated in a phased manner”. The Court also instructed that guidelines and 
directions should be issued to prevent the need for individuals to enter sewers, even 
when sewer cleaning work is outsourced or carried out by contractors or agencies. 
The Court held that “where minimum protective gear and cleaning devices are not 
provided to hazardous workers, the employment of hazardous workers amounts to 
forced labour”, prohibited under the Constitution. Hence, the Court held that “the 
provisions for protective gear and cleaning devices are not mere statutory rights or 
rules, but are entitlements” guaranteed under the Constitution. 

On a number of occasions, this Court has expressed concern about the non-
implementation of the PoA Act and the legislation prohibiting manual scavenging. The 
Court has also expressed concern about the false implication of people from 
nomadic/denotified tribes in criminal cases. In NALSA, the Court noted that the 
 
226 2023 INSC 950 

PART XII 

colonial-era Criminal Tribes Act “deemed the entire community of Hijras as innately 
‘criminal’”. In Ankush Maruti Shinde v. State of Maharashtra,227 the High Court 
confirmed the conviction and death penalty of six accused for the offence of rape and 
murder. Their appeal was previously dismissed by this Court. However, in a review 
petition, the Court restored the appeal and acquitted all the accused, finding that they 
were falsely implicated. Taking account of the fact that the accused belonged to 
nomadic tribes, the Court noted that “there was no fair investigation and fair trial” and 
the “serious lapse on the part of the investigating agency”. As five of the accused spent 
16 years in jail on false implication and all “were facing the hanging sword of death 
penalty”, the Court granted them monetary compensation for violating their rights 
under Article 21. 

In a recent decision in Amanatullah Khan v. The Commissioner of Police, 
Delhi,228 the petitioner sought “quashing of opening/approval of the History Sheet 
declaring him as bad character and consequential entries in the Surveillance Register 
being exercised” by the respondents. The Court reiterated that “History Sheet is only 
an internal police document and it shall not be brought in public domain”. Further, it 
emphasized that “extra care and precaution”, needs to be observed “by a police officer 
while ensuring that the identity of a minor child is not disclosed as per the law”. It 
directed that Delhi Police “shall periodically audit/review the contents of the History 
Sheets and will ensure confidentiality and a leeway to delete the names of such 
persons/juveniles/children who are, in the course of investigation, found innocent and 
are entitled to be expunged from the category of “relations and connections’” in a 
History Sheet”. 
 
227 2019 INSC 305 

PART XII 

The crucial aspect of the above decision is that the Court exercised its suo motu 
powers to give directions to the police in other states to not act arbitrarily against the 
marginalized communities. It noted: 
“Having partially addressed the grievance of the 
appellant, we now, in exercise of our suo motu 
powers, propose to expand the scope of these 
proceedings so that the police authorities in other 
States and Union Territories may also consider the 
desirability of ensuring that no mechanical entries in 
History Sheet are made of innocent individuals, 
simply because they happen to hail from the socially, 
economically and educationally disadvantaged 
backgrounds, along with those belonging to 
Backward Communities, Scheduled Castes & 
Scheduled Tribes. While we are not sure about the 
degree of their authenticity, but there are some 
studies available in the public domain that reveal a 
pattern of an unfair, prejudicial and atrocious 
mindset. It is alleged that the Police Diaries are 
maintained selectively of individuals belonging to 
Vimukta Jatis, based solely on caste-bias, a 
somewhat similar manner as happened in colonial 
times… We must bear in mind that these pre-
conceived notions often render them ‘invisible 
victims’ due to prevailing stereotypes associated 
with their communities, which may often impede 
their right to live a life with self-respect.” 
(emphasis added)

The Court expected that the State governments “take necessary preventive measures 
to safeguard such communities from being subjected to inexcusable targeting or 
prejudicial treatment”. It directed all the States/Union territories to revisit their policies 
to adopt a “periodic audit mechanism overseen by a senior police officer” to scrutinize 
the entries made in history sheets. It was noted that “[t]hrough the effective 
implementation of audits, we can secure the elimination of such deprecated practices 

PART XII 

and kindle the legitimate hope that the right to live with human dignity” will be 
protected. 

The Court has also warned the police on misusing the power to arrest. In 
Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar,229 a three-judge Bench adverted to the 
misapplication of the provision for arrest by the police. It was noted: 
“Arrest brings humiliation, curtails freedom and cast 
scars forever. Law makers know it so also the police. 
There is a battle between the law makers and the 
police and it seems that police has not learnt its 
lesson; the lesson implicit and embodied in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure. It has not come out of its 
colonial 
image 
despite 
six 
decades 
of 
independence, it is largely considered as a tool of 
harassment, oppression and surely not considered a 
friend of public. The need for caution in exercising 
the drastic power of arrest has been emphasized 
time and again by Courts but has not yielded desired 
result. Power to arrest greatly contributes to its 
arrogance so also the failure of the Magistracy to 
check it. Not only this, the power of arrest is one of 
the lucrative sources of police corruption. The 
attitude to arrest first and then proceed with the rest 
is despicable. It has become a handy tool to the 
police officers who lack sensitivity or act with oblique 
motive.” 
(Emphasis added) 

In Mallada K. Sri Ram v. State of Telangana,230 the Court, speaking through 
one of us (Justice DY Chandrachud), highlighted the constitutional mandate to prevent 
arbitrary exercise of prevention detention: 
“the personal liberty of an accused cannot be 
sacrificed on the altar of preventive detention merely 
because a person is implicated in a criminal 
proceeding. The powers of preventive detention are 
 
229 2014 INSC 463 
230 2022 INSC 386 

PART XII 

exceptional and even draconian. Tracing their origin 
to the colonial era, they have been continued with 
strict constitutional safeguards against abuse. Article 
22 of the Constitution was specifically inserted and 
extensively debated in the Constituent Assembly to 
ensure that the exceptional powers of preventive 
detention do not devolve into a draconian and 
arbitrary exercise of state authority.” 
The exercise of the power to arrest or detain may become reflective of a colonial 
mindset, if not exercised with caution. The misuse of the power of arrest not just 
violates rights, but it can prejudice generations of innocent citizens, especially 
marginalized communities such as the Denotified Tribes. Arrests can create a stigma 
of criminality if not done diligently. Innocent people, if arrested on the grounds of 
stereotypes and mere suspicion, may face barriers in securing employment and 
earning a dignified livelihood. Entering the mainstream becomes impossible when 
those who have suffered incarceration find themselves unable to secure livelihoods, 
housing, and the necessities of life. 

 Discrimination against the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and 
Denotified Tribes has continued in a systemic manner. Remedying systemic 
discrimination requires concrete multi-faceted efforts by all institutions. In discharge of 
their role, courts have to ensure that while there should be proper implementation of 
the protective legislation such as the PoA Act, there should not be unfair targeting of 
members from marginalized castes under various colonial-era or modern laws. With 
this nuanced approach, we shall now examine the prison manuals.

PART XIII 

XIII. 
Impugned Provisions 

Prison Act 

At the outset, we must clarify that the Prison Act 1984 is not under challenge. 
Accordingly, we shall not be dealing with the validity of the Act. We are referring to its 
provisions to understand the background of prison manuals/rules. 

The Act was enacted to amend the law relating to prisons and to provide for the 
regulation of prisons. The Statement of Objects and Reasons stated that four different 
Acts were in force for the regulation of prisons, which were different on important points 
such as the enumerated jail offences and their punishments, and were thus resulting 
in divergent jail management systems across provinces, non-uniform enforcement of 
sentences, and lack of administrative uniformity. 

The Act provided for various aspects of prison administration including 
maintenance of prisons, officers of prisons, duties of prison officers, admission, 
removal and discharge of prisoners, discipline, food and other amenities for civil and 
non-convicted prisoners, employment of prisoners, health of prisoners, visits to 
prisons, and prison offences. Chapter II provides for the duties of prison officers. All 
officers are supposed to obey the directions of the Superintendent and act in 
accordance with the directions of the Jailer (and sanctioned by the Superintendent) 
and in line with the rules under Section 59 of the Act. The officers are proscribed from 
dealing with the prisoners, or to have an interest in the contracts for supply of the 
prison. The Superintendent is responsible for managing the prison in matters relating 
to discipline, labour, expenditure, punishment and control, subject to the orders of the 
Inspector General.231 The Chapter further provides for provisions regarding jailers, 
 
231 Section 11, Prisons Act, 1894. 

PART XIII 

medical officers and subordinate officers, including convict officers. Chapter V of the 
Act contains provisions regarding ‘Discipline of Prisoners’. It provides for separation 
of prisoners based on gender, age, conviction and civil or criminal imprisonment232 
and the confinement of convicts in association or by segregation. The Act further 
provides for employment of prisoners under Chapter VII. It provides that civil prisoners 
may be permitted to follow any trade or profession and that certain safeguards need 
to be observed in engaging criminal prisoners in labour.233 Chapter VIII and IX pertain 
to the health of prisoners and visits to prisoners respectively. Chapter X and XI provide 
for offences in relation to prisons and prison offences respectively. The miscellaneous 
chapter contains provisions regarding extramural custody, control and employment of 
prisoners, confinement in irons for safe custody, and the power to make rules. 

In a constitutional set-up, the Act is governed by constitutional principles. 
Though the Act was enacted in the colonial era, its provisions and subsequent 
manuals/rules enacted therein are subject to constitutional provisions. 
(ii) Prison manuals/rules 

The impugned prison manuals and rules are listed below: 
The Uttar Pradesh Jail Manual, 2022 
● 158. Remission to convicts on scavenging duty - Subject to good 
work and conduct in jail, convicts of the scavenger class working 
as scavengers in jails, or convicts who on administrative grounds 
it is not found expedient to promote to the grades of convict 
officers, shall, though they may not be appointed convict officers, 
be titled to receive ordinary remissions at the scales sanctioned in 
the preceding paragraph for convict night watchmen and convict 
 
232 Ibid, Section 27 
233 Ibid, Section 34. 

PART XIII 

overseers, respectively, with effect from the first day of the month 
following the one on which they would, but for this rule, be eligible 
for promotion to those grades. 
● 267. Classification necessary in the case of every convict- The 
Superintendent shall see that every convicted prisoner has been 
classified as habitual or casual in accordance with the form of 
classification furnished by the convicting court. 
● 269. In a jail where prisoners of more than one class are confined, 
the Superintendent shall make arrangements, as far as possible, 
for the complete segregation of different classes in separate 
circles, enclosures or barracks in accordance with the 
requirements of section 27 of the Prisons Act, 1894 and the rules 
contained in this chapter. 
● 270. Segregation of casual from habitual prisoners - Casual 
convicts shall as far as possible, be kept separate from habitual 
convicts. 
● 271. There shall, as far as possible, be separate wards for 
nonprofessional and professional sub-categories of habitual 
prisoners. Prisoners belonging to the latter sub-category should 
be kept entirely separate from all other categories of prisoners. 
● 289. Rules for observance - A convict sentenced to simple 
imprisonment, -(a) shall rise and retire to rest at such hours as may 
be prescribed by the Superintendent;(b) shall be permitted to wear 
his own clothes, which if insufficient for decency or warmth shall 
be supplemented by such jail clothing, not exceeding the scale 
provided for convicts sentenced to rigorous imprisonment, as may 
be necessary to make up the deficiency, but shall wear the 
ordinary convict’s clothing if he elects to labour and is employed 
on extra-mural labour;(c) shall clean his own cell, barrack or yard 
and keep his bedding and clothing in a clean and orderly 
condition;(d) shall, with the approval of the Superintendent, be 
allowed to possess and use his own books and periodicals in 
addition to those available from the prison library;(e) shall not be 
allowed to purchase his own food;(f) shall not be shaved unless 

PART XIII 

he desires it or under the orders of the Medical Officer on grounds 
of health;(g) shall not be called upon to perform duties of a 
degrading or menial character unless he belongs to a class or 
community accustomed to perform such duties; but may be 
required to carry water for his own use provided he belongs to the 
class of society the members of which are accustomed to perform 
such duties in their own homes. 
 
The West Bengal Jail Code Rules for Superintendence and 
Management of Jail in West Bengal, 1967 
● 404. Qualification for eligibility of a convict overseer for 
appointment as a night guard – A convict overseer may be 
appointed to be a night guard provided— 
(a) that he has served as a convict overseer for three months; 
(b) that he does not belong to any class that may have a strong 
natural tendency to escape, such as men of wandering tribes and 
those 
whose 
homes 
are 
outside 
India; 
and 
(c) that his antecedents have been verified through the 
Superintendent of Police. 
● 694. Non-interference with religious practices or caste prejudices- 
(a) Interference with genuine religious practices or caste 
prejudices of prisoners should be avoided. But no relaxation of the 
working rules shall be allowed. Prisoners shall be permitted to 
perform their devotions at suitable times and in suitable places. 
Care should be taken to see that this principle is not made the 
cloak for frivolous complaints or for attempts to escape from jail 
labour or discipline. If the Superintendent feels any doubt as to the 
validity of any plea advanced by a prisoner on the grounds of caste 
or religion he should refer the matter for the orders of the Inspector 
General whose decision shall be final. 
● 741. Sickness in cells - In case of sickness immediate notice shall 
be given by the guard to the Head Warder on duty by passing the 
ward from sentry to sentry. The Head Warder shall at once report 

PART XIII 

the case to the Medical Subordinate, who shall visit the cell, and, 
if necessary, remove the prisoner to hospital, and inform the 
Superintendent, Medical Officer and Jailor of the circumstance at 
their next visit. Two prisoners shall, under no circumstances 
whatever, be confined in one cell except in the case of female 
prisoners condemned to death. If male condemned prisoners or 
dangerous lunatics have to be watched by convicts, they must 
remain outside the grated door of the cell. Convict sweepers, 
cooks and watermen may enter the cells when necessary, 
accompanied by a warder. Food shall be cooked and carried to the 
cells 
by 
prisoner-cooks 
of 
suitable 
caste, 
under 
the 
superintendence of a jail officer. 
● 793. percentage of prisoners employed as jail servants - The total 
number of prisoners employed regularly in essential jail services 
as cooks, barbers, water-carriers, sweepers, etc., shall not exceed 
10 per cent. of the whole number of prisoners in Central and 1st 
or 2nd class District jails and 12 percent. in 3rd class District jails. 
(For the proportion of cooks, sweepers and hospital attendants to 
the number of prisoners to be attended to, see Rule 789.) The 
appointment of cooks is regulated by Rule 1117. The barber should 
belong to the A class. Sweepers should be chosen from the Mether 
or Hari caste, also from the Chandal or other castes, if by the 
custom of the district they perform similar work when free, or from 
any caste if the prisoner volunteers to do the work. Hospital 
attendants should be selected from prisoners passed for light work 
or those who have completed at least half their sentences. 
Hospital attendants shall wear a plain square red badge, 5 cm. x 
5 cm., on the left breast of the kurta. Prisoners in the "convalescent 
and infirm" gang may be put to this duty under the Medical Officer's 
orders. If there is a large number of serious cases in hospital, the 
proportion of one attendant to 10 patients may be temporarily 
exceeded; with this exception, Superintendents must see that no 
more than the authorised percentage of prisoners is employed as 
jail servants or as convict officers. If any convict employed in an 

PART XIII 

essential jail service has not enough work to occupy his whole 
time, he should be placed upon some other work for the remainder 
of his time. 
● 1117. Selection of cooks - The cooks shall be of the A class except 
at the Presidency Jail where well-behaved 'B' class prisoners may 
be employed as such. Any prisoner in a jail who is of so high a 
caste that he cannot eat food cooked by the existing cooks shall 
be appointed a cook and be made to cook for the full complement 
of 
men. 
Individual 
convicted 
prisoners 
shall 
under 
no 
circumstances be allowed to cook for themselves exception being 
made in the cases of Hindu widows who, if they desire it, may be 
allowed, at the discretion of the Superintendent, to cook for 
themselves if it does not interfere with their work and discipline. 
 
Madhya Pradesh Jail Manual, 1987 
● 36. Latrine Parade - While the latrine parade is being carried out, 
the mehtars attached to each latrine shall be present, and shall 
call the attention of the convict overseer to any prisoner who does 
not cover up his dejecta with dry earth. The mehtars shall empty 
the contents of the small receptacle into large iron drums and 
replace the receptacles in the latrine after having cleaning them. 
● 411. Habitual and non-habitual criminals - 411. All convicted 
criminal prisoners shall be classified and placed in one or other of 
the following categories, namely:- (a) Habitual Criminals. (b) Non-
habitual Criminals. Note.-For Convenience of reference, prisoner 
falling in the first of the above categories are referred to as 
"habitual'', and those falling in the second category are described 
as "non-habitual" or "casuals". The following persons shall be 
liable to be classified habitual criminals-(i) Any person convicted 
of an offence whose previous conviction, or convictions under 
Chapters XII, XVI, XVII or XVIII of the lndian Penal Code taken by 
themselves or with the facts of present case show that he 
habitually commits in offence or offences punishable under any or 

PART XIII 

all of those Chapters; 
(ii) Any person committed to or detained in prison under section 
123 (read with section 109 or section 110) of the Code or Criminal 
Procedure; 
(iii) Any person convicted of any of the offences specified in (i) 
above when it appears from the facts of the case. Even although 
no previous conviction has been proved that he is by habit member 
of a gang of dacoits, or of thieves or a dealer in slaves or in stolen 
property. 
(iv) Any member of denotified tribe subject to the discretion of the 
State Government concerned. 
 
(v) Any person convicted by a Court or tribunal acting outside India 
under the general or special authority of the Government of India 
of an offence which should have rendered him liable to be 
classified as a habitual criminal if he had been convicted in a court 
established in India. 
 
Explanation.- For the purpose of these definition the word 
"conviction" shall include an order made under section 118 read 
with section 110 of the Criminal Procedure Code. 
● 563. Cooking of food, cleanliness of vessels etc. – The cooks shall 
perform all preparations and processes necessary after issue of 
the daily supplied to them, and shall cook the food with due care 
and attention. The dough for chapaties shall be 'slowly and 
thoroughly kneaded and then rolled to a uniform thickness on a 
table by a rolling pin, not patted by hands; a circular curter shall be 
used to make the cakes of one size; and the cooking must be done 
slowly on a gently heated plate; so as not to burn the outside whilst 
the inner part remains Uncooked. All cooking utensils must be kept 
scrupulously clean and bright, and the cook-house and feeding 
places as clean and tidy as it is possible to make them. Any breach 
of this rule shall subject the cooks to such punishment, within the 
limits fixed by these rules, as the Superintendent may after due 
and proper enquiry award. 

PART XIII 

Andhra Pradesh Prison Rules, 1979 
● 217. Definition of habitual – The following persons shall be liable 
to be classified as "habitual criminals", namely:— (i) Any person 
convicted of an offence punishable under chapters XII, XVII and 
XVIII of the Indian Penal Code whose previous conviction or 
convictions, taken in conjuction with the facts of the present case, 
show that he is by habit a robber, housebreaker, dacoit, thief or 
receiver of stolen property or that he habitually commits extortion, 
cheating, counterfeiting coin, currency notes or stamps or forgery; 
ii) Any person convicted of an offence punishable under Chapter 
XVI of the Indian Penal Code, whose previous conviction or 
convictions taken in conjunction with the facts of the present case, 
show that he habitually commits offences against the person; 
(iii) Any person committed to or detained in prison under section 
122 read with section 109 or section 110 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure; 
(iv) Any person convicted of any of the offences specified in i) 
above when it appears from the facts of the case, even though no 
previous conviction has been proved, that he is by habit a member 
of a gang of dacoits, or of thieves or a dealer in stolen property; 
(v) Any habitual offender as defined in the Andhra Pradesh 
Habitual Offenders Act, 1962; 
(vi) Any person convicted by a court or tribunal acting outside India 
under the general or special authority of the Central Government 
or any State Government of by any court or tribunal which was 
before the commencement of the constitution acting under the 
general or special authority of an offence which would have 
rendered him liable to be classified as a habitual criminal if he had 
been 
convicted 
in 
a 
court 
established 
in 
India. 
EXPLANATION:- For the purpose of this definition the word 
"conviction" shall include an order mate under section 117, read 
with section 110 of the Criminal Procedure Code. 

PART XIII 

● 440. Allowance for caste prejudice – The prison tasks including 
conservancy work shall be allotted at the discretion of the 
Superintendent with due regard to capacity of the prisoner, his 
education, intelligence and attitude and so far as may be 
practicable with due regard to his previous habits. 
● 448. Restrictions on extramural employment of convicts– 
(1) Without the sanction of the Inspector General, no convict shall, 
at any time, be employed on any labour outside the walls of the 
prison, or be permitted to pass out of the prison for employment of 
the purpose of being so employed:— 
(a) Unless he has undergone not less than one-fourth of the 
substantive term of imprisonment to which he has been 
sentenced; 
 
(b) If the unexpired term of substantive sentence together with 
imprisonment (if any) awarded in lieu of fine, still to be undergone, 
exceeds two years; 

If 
his 
appeal 
(if 
any) 
is 
undisposed 
of: 
d) If any other charge or charges are pending against him or he 
has to undergo a period of police surveillance on the expiry of his 
sentence; 

If 
he 
is 
a 
resident 
of 
foreign 
territory; 
and 
(f) If he is a member of a wandering or criminal tribe, or is of a bad 
or dangerous character, or has, at any time, escaped of attempted 
to escape from lawful custody. 
 
(2) Not withstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1) of this rule, 
every prisoner, who has not more than twelve months of sentence 
remaining, may be employed on extramural labour irrespective of 
the portion of sentence already passed in prison. 
(3) In every case in which a convict is employed on any labour 
outside the walls of the prison or is permitted to pass out of the 
prison for the purpose of being so employed, it shall be subject to 
the condition that the Superintendent has sanctioned his 
employment outside the prison and recorded the fact of his having 
done so in the Prisoner's History Ticket. 

PART XIII 

NOTE:- When there are more prisoners eligible, for employment 
outside the prison than are actually required, casuals and men with 
the shortest unexpired terms should be selected in preference to 
others. 
● 1036. Classes of convicted prisoners and their treatment – (1): As 
mentioned in rule 216 supra, convicted prisoners are divided into 
three divisions namely classes A, B and C. 
(2) Prisoners shall be treated as “A” Class if- 
 
(i) They are non-habitual prisoners of good character; 
 
(ii) They by social status, education and habit of life have been 
accustomed to a superior mode of living; and 
 
(iii) They have not been convicted of- (a) Offenses involving 
elements of cruelty, moral degradation or personal greed; 
 
(b) Serious or premeditated violence; 
 
(c) Serious offences against women and children; 
(d) Serious offences against property; 
 
(e) Offences relating to the possession of explosives, fire-arms 
and other dangerous weapons with the object of committing an 
offence or of enabling an offence to be committed; 
(f) Abetment or incitement of offences falling within these sub-
rules. 
 
(3) Prisoners shall be treated as “B” Class if —(i) They, by social 
status, education and habit of life have been accustomed to 
superior mode of living; and 

They 
have 
not 
been 
convicted 
of: 
(a) Offences involving elements of cruelty, moral degradation or 
personal greed; 
(b) Serious or premeditated violence; 
 
(c) Serious offence against women and children; 
(d) Serious offences against property; 
 
(e) Offences relating to the possession of explosives, firearms and 
other dangerous weapons with the object of committing an offence 
or of enabling an offence to be committed 
(f) Abetment or incitement of offences falling within these sub-

PART XIII 

rules. 
NOTE:— Habitual prisoners may be included under this class or 
grounds of character and antecedents. 
 
(4) (i) If no orders about classification are passed by the 
sentencing court, it should be assumed that a prisoner belongs to 
“C” Class. A reference should be made in doubtful cases but it 
should not be presumed in the absence of specific orders that the 
prisoner belongs to a class higher than “C”. 
 
Odisha Model Jail Manual Rules for the Superintendence 
and Management of Jails in Odisha, 2020 
● 3. Definitions - (t) “Habitual offender” means an offender who has 
been convicted in a particular offence for more than one occasion. 
● 4. Criteria for establishment of prisons.— (1) The State 
Government shall as far as possible establish sufficient numbers 
of prisons and provide minimum needs essential to maintain 
standards of living in consonance with human dignity. 
(2) Prison administration shall ensure that the prisoners human 
rights are respected. 
 
(3) Prison administration shall ensure separation of the following 
categories of prisoners, namely:-- (a) Civil Prisoners; (b) Under-
trials; (c) Female Prisoners; (d) Convicted Prisoners; (e) Young 
Offenders; (f) First Offenders; (g) Habitual Offenders; (h) High 
Security Prisoners; (i) Detenue; (j) Geriatric and infirmed 
prisoners;(k) Transgender Prisoners; (l) Psychiatric Prisoners;(m) 
Higher Division Prisoners; and(n) Political Prisoners 
 
(4) There shall be a separate prison for hig security prisoners. 
(5) The prisons' regime shall take care to prepare prisoners to lead 
a law-abiding, self supporting, reformed and socially rehabilitated 
life. 
● 515. Division of Police registered prisoners into two classes.— 
(1)The first class consists of prisoners who are to be transferred 
before release to the Jails of the districts in which their homes are 

PART XIII 

situated. 
(2) This class shall be described in the Admission Register 
provided in Form No.17 and Release Diaries provided in Form No 
23 as P.R./T Prisoners. 
Explanation:— The letter P.R. standing for “Police Registered”, 
and the letter T, signifying ‘transfer’. 
(3) The prisoners stated in sub-rule (2) shall include prisoners in 
respect of whom the sentencing court may have recorded an order 
under section 565 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974)and any such prisoner shall be described in the Admission 
Register and Release Diaries as “Police Registered Transfer -565” 
prisoners. 
(4) The second class consists of prisoners who are not to be 
transferred, but are to be released from the jails in which they are 
confined at the time of the expiry of their sentences and this class 
shall be described in the Admission Registers and Release Diaries 
as Police Registered prisoners. 
 
(5) If any prisoner known to be a member of a criminal tribe is not 
police-registered, his case shall be brought to the notice of the 
Superintendent of Police. 
 
(6) When intimation respecting a prisoner’s Police-registration is 
received from the police after his name has been entered in 
Admission Register and Release Diaries, the letter Police-
Registered, 
Police-Registered/Transfer, 
Police 
Registered 
Transfer “565”, as the case maybe, shall be added in red ink. 
 
(7) Entries on the back of the P.R. form relating to the Finger 
Impression, viz., “F.I. taken” or “tested” shall be similarly added. 
(8) The police P.R. form intimating the fact that a prisoner is on the 
police register shall be attached to and kept with, the warrant, and 
sent with him to the jail to which he may be transferred. 
(9) On the death or escape of a Police Registered Prisoner of 
either class, the Police P.R. form attached to his warrant shall be 
returned to the Superintendent of Police of his district with an 
endorsement, showing the date of his death or escape. 

PART XIII 

(10) All other P.R. slips shall be sent to the Superintendent of 
Police of the district, a fortnight before the release is due. 
Note:— The number and name of P.R./T and P.R.T/565 prisoners 
shall be noted in red ink in the Release Diaries four months before 
the date of probable release, any remission likely to be earned 
being taken into account. 
● 784. Prison Industries and Work Programmes.— (1) The work 
programmes shall also include essential institutional maintenance 
services like culinary, sanitary and hygienic services, prison 
hospital, other prison services, repairs and maintenance 
services… (25) Prisoners who have shown, or are likely to have, 
a strong inclination to escape or are members of a wandering or 
criminal tribe, even though eligible, shall not be employed on 
extramural work. 
 
The Kerala Prison Rules 1958 
● 201. Definition of habitual criminals — The following persons shall 
be liable to be classified as "Habitual Criminals" namely:- 
(1) any person convicted of an offence punishable under Chapters 
XII, XVII and XVIII of the Indian Penal Code, whose facts of the 
present case, show that he is by habit a robber, house breaker, 
dacoit, thief or receiver of stolen property or that he habitually 
commits extortion, cheating, counterfeiting coin, currency notes or 
stamps or forgery; 
 
(2) any person convicted of an offence punishable under Chapter 
XVI of the Indian Penal Code, whose previous conviction or 
convictions taken in conjunction with the facts of the present case 
show that he habitually commits offences against the person; 
 
(3) any person committed to or detained in prison under Section 
123 (read with Section 109 or Section 110) of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure; 
(4) any person convicted of any of the offence specified in (i) above 
when it appears from the facts of the case, even though no 

PART XIII 

previous conviction has been proved, that he is by habit a member 
of a gang of dacoit, or of thieves or a dealer in slaves or in stolen 
property; 
(5) any person of a Criminal tribe subject to the discretion of the 
Government. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of the definition the word 
"conviction" shall include an order made under Section 118,.read 
with Section 110 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
 
The Tamil Nadu Prison Rules, 1983 
● 214. Separation of categories – Subject to the availability of 
accommodation, the prisoners; shall be segregated as follows: 
(a) "A" class prisoners from "B" class prisoners; 
 
(b) Civil prisoner from Criminal prisoners; 
 
(c) Female prisoners from male prisoners; 
(d) Adult prisoners from adolescents; 
 
(e) Convicted prisoners from undertrial prisoners; 
(f) Habitual prisoners from non-habitual prisoners; 
(g) Prisoners suffering from communicable diseases; 
 
(h) Prisoners suspected to be suffering from mental disorders; 
(i) Homosexuals; 
 
(J) Sex perverts; 
 
(k) Drug addicts and traffickers in narcotics; 
(l) Inmates having suicidal tendencies; 
 
(m) Inmates exhibiting violent and aggressive tendencies; 
 
(n) Inmates having escape discipline risks; and 
 
(o) known bad characters. 
● 219. Definition of habitual criminal – The following persons shall 
be liable to be classified as habitual criminals, namely: 
(i) Any person convicted of an offence punishable under chapters 
XII, XVII, XVIII of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act XIIV of whose 
previous conviction or convictions taken in conjunction with the 
facts of the present case shows that he is by habit a robber, dacoit 

PART XIII 

thief or receiver of stolen property or that he habitually commits 
extortion cheating, counterfeiting coin, currency notes or stamps 
or forgery. 
 
(ii) Any person convicted of an offence punishable under Chapter 
XVI of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act XIV (1860) or under the 
Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956 
(Central Act 104 of 1956) whose previous conviction or 
convictions, taken in conjunction with the facts of the present case, 
show that he habitually commits offences against the person or is 
habitually engaged in immoral traffic in women or girls; 
 
(iii) Any person committed to or detained in prison under section 
122 read with sections 109 or 110 of the Code or Criminal 
Procedure,1973 (Central, Act 2 of 1974); 
 
(iv) Any person convicted of any of the offences specified in 
clauses (1) and (2) above when at appears from the facts of the 
case, even though no previous conviction has been, proved, that 
he is by habit a member of a gang of dacoits, or of thieves or a 
dealer in stolen property, or a tracker in women or girls for immoral 
purposes; 
(v) Any person convicted of an offence and sentenced to 
imprisonment under the corresponding sections of the Indian 
Penal Code (Central Act XIV of 1860) and the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974). 
(vi) Any person convicted by a Court or tribunal acting outside 
India, of an offence which would have rendered him liable to be 
classified as a habitual offender if he had been convicted in a Court 
established in India. 
 
(vii) Any person who is a habitual offender under the Tamil Nadu 
Restriction of Habitual Offenders Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act VI of 
1948) 
or 
other 
corresponding 
Acts: 
(viii) If a prisoner was previously classified as habitual prisoner by 
a court he shall be continued to be classified as habitual prisoner 
whatever be the nature of offences for which he is later convicted. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this definition the word 

PART XIII 

conviction shall include an order made under section 117 read with 
110 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,1973 (Central Act 2 of 
1974). 
● 225. Classes of prisoners: (1) As mentioned in rule 217, convicted 
prisoners are divided into two divisions or classes, A and B. 
(i) prisoners shall be eligible for class A, if they by social status, 
education or habit of life have been accustomed to a superior 
mode of living, Habitual prisoners may at the discretion of the 
classifying authority, be included under this class on grounds of 
character and antecedents. 
 
(ii) Class B shall consist of prisoners who ate not classified in Class 
A. 
(iii) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (i), any person 
convicted of an offence involving gross indecency or exhibiting 
grave depravity of character may not be placed in class A. 
 
The Rules for the Superintendence and Management of Jails 
in the Bombay State, 1954 
● Chapter XLI, Section II: Rule 3: Habitual women prisoners; 
prostitutes and procuress and young women prisoners shall be 
segregated. 
 
The Karnataka Prisons and Correctional Services Manual - 

● 418. Classification of convicted prisoners – Convicted prisoners 
are divided into two classes as Class I(Class-A)and Class II(Class-
B).– 
i. 
Prisoners 
will 
be 
eligible 
for 
Class 
I(Class-A) 
if.– 
a) They are non-habitual prisoners of good character; 
 
b) They by social status, education and habit of life have been 
accustomed to a superior mode of living; and 
 
c) They have not been convicted of.– 
 
1) Offences involving elements of cruelty moral degradation or 

PART XIII 

personal greed; 
2) Serious premeditated violence; 
 
3) Serious offence against women and children; 
 
4) Serious offences against property; 
 
5) Offences relating to the possession of explosives, fire arms and 
other dangerous weapons with the object of committing an offence 
or of enabling an offence to be committed; 
6) An offence under the suppression of immoral traffic Act; 
 
7) Abetment or incitement of offences; 
 
ii. Class II(Class-B) will consist of prisoners who are not classified 
as Class I (Class-A) 
 
iii. Notwithstanding anything contained in any person convicted of 
an offence involving gross indecency or exhibiting gross depravity 
of character may not be placed in Class I (Class-A). 
 
Rajasthan Prisons Rules, 2022 
● 681. Prison Industries and Work Programmes. Rule (22) Prisoners 
who have shown, or are likely to have, a strong inclination to 
escape or are members of a wandering or criminal tribe, even 
though eligible, shall not be employed on extramural work. 
 
Prison Manual 2021 for the Superintendence and 
Management of the Jails in Himachal Pradesh 
● 26.69. State Government shall lay down dietary scales for women 
prisoners keeping in view their calorie requirements as per 
medical norms. The diet shall be in accordance with the prevailing 
dietary preferences and tastes of the local area in which the prison 
is located. Cooked food shall be brought to the female enclosure 
by a convict-cook accompanied by a warder and placed outside 
the enclosure gate from where it shall be taken inside by the 
female warder or a female prisoner. The menial during shall, 
whenever possible, be performed by the female prisoners and the 
refuse etc., placed outside the enclosure, to be removed by paid 

PART XIV 

sweeper. If there are no females of suitable caste for conservancy 
work paid-sweepers shall be taken into the enclosure in charge of 
a wander and under the conditions laid down in paragraph 214. 

XIV. 
Prison Manuals and the Legacy of Discrimination 

We shall begin the analysis of the manuals/rules by examining whether caste 
was a ground of classification before the Constitution came into force. 

History of “Caste” in Prison Manuals 

According to the Committee on Prison Discipline 1836-38, to force a man of 
‘higher caste’ to work at any trade would ‘disgrace him’ and his family, and would be 
viewed as cruelty.234 Convicts from communities lower in the caste hierarchy were 
expected to continue with their customary occupations in jail. The caste hierarchy 
outside the prison was replicated within the prison. 

The Committee’s recommendations for including a common mess instead of 
food allowances for prisoners to cook their own meals, which was greater 
accommodation of caste, were shelved. In the 1840s, prisoners were granted food 
allowances and they could prepare their own meals, duly observing their caste 
practices. To replace this, a stricter mess system was introduced in some prisons. 
However, prisoners were divided along caste lines and each group was assigned a 
different prisoner cook. Among Europeans outside the prison system, “there was 
bewilderment, even rage, at the extent to which caste had been ‘basely and indecently 
succumbed to in our Indian jails’”.235 
 
234 Committee on Prison Discipline to the Governor General of India in Council, 1838, page 106. 
235 David Arnold and David Hardiman (eds.), Subaltern Studies VIII: Essays in Honour of Ranajit 
Guha, Oxford University Press (1994), pp. 148-187, at p. 172 

PART XIV 

But the British prison administration broadly agreed that caste must be 
respected even inside prisons. An 1862 Report of the Inspector of Prisons in Oudh 
showed that in Lucknow Central Jail, these prejudices were entertained to the extent 
that Brahmin inmates would be allowed to bathe before they ate and to mark out a 
designated area where they would receive their food and where no one would be 
allowed to enter.236 David Arnold wrote about the complexity of managing caste in 
Indian prisons and the administration’s fears: 
“With regard to caste and community, the issue was 
more complex. Physical labour was the mark of the 
lowest Hindu castes (and their Muslim counter parts), 
while such ritually polluting tasks as shoemaking, 
which involved handling leather, or the removal of 
human urine and excrement, were regarded as the 
stigmatising occupations of the very lowest castes, the 
untouchables. Was it, therefore, legitimate penal 
practice to force high-caste Hindus, or well-born 
(ashraf) Muslims, to toil as if they were from labouring 
or untouchable castes? Was denial of caste status a 
morally justified attribute of prison life, even a fitting 
deterrent against further criminal acts? The British 
were particularly wary on this score because of the 
intense resistance to common messing in north Indian 
jails in the 1840s and 1850s, which, by denying high-
caste prisoners the right to cook their own food, 
provoked 
fierce 
prison 
demonstrations 
and 
contributed to the rash of jailbreaks during the opening 
phase of the 1857–58 uprising. Colonial authorities 
also recognized the strength of Indian feeling against 
any measures (whether in the jails, the army, or the 
courts) that appeared to attack caste or favour the 
imposition of Christianity.”237 

In line with their overall approach, the colonial administrators linked caste with 
prison administration of labour, food, and treatment of prisoners. They emboldened 
the occupational hierarchy with legal policy and imported the vice of caste-based 
 
236 Report of the Inspector of Prisons, Oudh, 1826, p. 33 as cited in David Arnold (1994), p. 172. 
237 David Arnold, “Labouring for the Raj: Convict Work Regimes in Colonial India, 1836–1939”, in Christian G Vito 
and Alex Lichtenstein (eds), Global Convict Labour, Brill (2015), pp. 199-221, at p. 209. 

PART XIV 

allocation of labour into the prison, due to pressure from the oppressor castes. 
Responding to the doubts raised by Inspector General of Madras in 1871, the 
Government of India responded that prisoners shall not be put into labour that “really 
causes the loss of caste” and that the management should not give an impression that 
the government wished to destroy caste of the native inmates.238 Similarly, the Madras 
Jail Manual, 1899 stated that “In allotting labour to convicts reasonable allowance shall 
be made for caste prejudice, e.g., no Brahmin or caste Hindu shall be employed in 
chucklers’ [cobblers’] work. Care shall, however, be taken that caste prejudice is not 
made an excuse for avoiding heavy forms of labour”.239 

Thus, the supposedly polluting occupations were allocated to the communities 
placed lower in the caste hierarchy. Not only were certain communities expected to 
carry out their “hereditary trades” within prisons, the supposed higher caste prisoners’ 
caste privileges were preserved. 

The 1919-1920 Indian Jail Committee Report suggested classification in 
prisons should ensure that the young and inexperienced offenders were not 
contaminated by the influence of the more experienced, habitual offenders. This 
classification and resultant segregation were deemed essential primarily as a means 
of achieving sound prison administration.240 

Caste was used as a ground for differentiating prisoners. The nature of the 
Manuals could be seen from Rule 825 of the Uttar Pradesh Jail Manual, 1941 which 
 
238 Secretary, India, Home (Judicial), to Chief Secretary, Madras, 8 July 1871, Madras Judicial Proceedings, no. 
98, 24 October 1871] – as cited in David Arnold (2015), p. 210. 
239 As cited in David Arnold (2015), p. 210 
240 Report of The Indian Jails Committee, 1919-1920, at p. 34: “We are satisfied as to the evil influence which can 
be exercised in a prison by the habitual or professional criminal, and we regard the adoption of proper methods of 
classification and the provision of adequate means of separation as the third essential factor in sound prison 
administration.” See 
 
https://jail.mp.gov.in/sites/default/files/Report%20of%20the%20%20Indian%20Jail%20Committee,%201919-
1920.pdf 

PART XIV 

provided: “The Superintendent shall not inflict the punishment of whipping on a 
superior class convict except with previous permission of the State Government.” Rule 
719 provided, “Reasonable respect shall be paid to religious scruples and caste 
prejudices of the prisoners in all matters as far as it is compatible with discipline.” 

Even after independence, Rule 37 of the Rajasthan Prison Rules 1951, until 
recently, provided as follows: “Separate receptacles shall be provided in all latrines for 
solid and liquid excreta, and the use of them shall be fully explained to all prisoners by 
the members. The Mehtars shall put a layer of dry earth at least 1 inch thick Into each 
receptacle for solid excreta before it is used, and every prisoner after he uses a 
receptacle shall cover his dejecta with a scoopful of dry earth. Vessels for urine shall 
be one-third filled with water.” Rule 67 provided, “The cooks shall be of the non-
habitual class. Any Brahmin or sufficiently high caste Hindu prisoner from this class is 
eligible for appointment as cook. All prisoners who object on account of high caste to 
eat food prepared by the existing cooks shall be appointed a cook and be made to 
cook for the full complement of men. Individually criminal prisoners shall, under no 
circumstances, be allowed to cook for themselves”. 

In 1987, the RK Kapoor Committee made observations about the inadequacy 
of classification and segregation in prisons. It noted that while women, young 
offenders, criminal lunatics, and prisoners suffering from infectious diseases and even 
prisoners with ‘better socio-economic background’ were duly segregated, the rest of 
the prisoners were huddled together. The report noted that the classification into 
smaller groups was not along systematic lines.241 It underlined the objective of 
classification as follows: 
 
241 Report of The Group of Officers on Prison Administration, 1987, p. 156 (“RK Kapoor Committee”). 

PART XIV 

“11.4 … The objective of classification should be not 
only 
to prescribe 
and 
pursue 
individualised 
treatment 
programmes 
for 
reformation 
and 
rehabilitation of inmates, but also to ensure effective 
management from the angle of security and 
discipline. 
11.5 A prisoner should not be classified merely by his 
physical appearance or by the nature of the crime 
committed by him or the information/data, if any, 
furnished by the police about his activities. It is 
necessary to know and understand, as thoroughly as 
possible, each prisoner as an individual, soon after 
his admission. An in-depth study of his total 
personality is required. Personality means the whole 
background of the prisoner, i.e. his entire life history, 
and what he thinks, feels and acts by natural instinct 
and by habit of social conditioning. Hence, it is 
essential that each prisoner should be studied 
separately by a team consisting of experienced hail 
officials 
and 
of 
experts 
like 
psychiatrists, 
psychologists, trained social workers and medical 
officers. 
The 
officer-in-charge 
of 
industries, 
education and vocational training should also join 
this team which should be called the Classification 
Committee. 
11.7 The recommendations of the classification 
committee should broadly fall under two heads: (a) 
classification in respect of security and control, and 
(b) classification from the point of view of correction, 
reformation and rehabilitation. After studying a 
prisoner, in detail, and making its assessment the 
classification 
committee 
should 
make 
recommendations on the following points in regard 
to his needs.”242 
 
The Report thus suggested that first, the purpose of classification in prisons must be 
two-fold: prison security/discipline as well as reformation of the prisoner; second, 
classification should be based on the individual needs of the prisoner based on a 
studied assessment of their personality. 
 
242 Ibid, pp. 157-160 

PART XIV 

It is clear from the above discussion that caste was used as a factor of 
classification in prisons. However, this does not have any effect on examining the 
validity of the impugned provisions. In fact, it suggests that the colonial administrators 
were open to even adopting discriminatory social practices to not upset the oppressor 
castes. The upholding of caste differences by the British inside the prisons reflected 
their overall support to legitimizing the law of caste. However, this Court cannot adopt 
the approach taken by the colonial administrators. The impugned provisions shall be 
examined on the basis of principles laid under the Constitution. 

Can Caste be a Basis in Classification? 

The petitioner has averred that the Prison Manuals violate Article 14 of the 
Constitution of India in so far as they privilege a particular section of the society based 
entirely on its caste identity. They cast disparate burdens on prisoners based on their 
caste-identity. 

A valid classification under Article 14 presupposes a definite yardstick to 
distinguish the classes created, and the difference must be real, pertinent and 
discernible.243 The State is free to recognise degrees of harm as long as the basis of 
classification is not arbitrary, artificial, or evasive. The line between the two classes 
must be clear and not illusory, vague, and indeterminate. 

The impugned rules are challenged on the ground that first, they directly identify 
caste as a means to allocate intramural labour, food-duties; second, by using vague 
terms such as “suitable caste” or “superior method of living” and similar terms, they 
tend to advantage the so-called higher castes; and third, they target the members of 
denotified tribes. We will now discuss whether caste is an intelligible and rational 
 
243 Murthy Match Works v. Asst Collector of Central Excise, 1974. 

PART XIV 

principle of classification and whether it has a rational nexus with the object of the 
classification. 

Caste can be an intelligible principle of classification as it has been used to 
create protective policies for the marginalized castes. The Constitution recognises 
caste as a proscribed ground of discrimination under Article 15(1), and envisions a 
society free from caste-prejudices. Furthermore, the Constitution provides for the 
enumeration of certain castes and tribes as Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
in order to facilitate protective discrimination and overall promote equitable distribution 
of resources. Article 15(4) allows the state to make special provisions for the 
advancement of socially and educationally backward classes of citizens, which 
includes Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. In that sense, caste can be ground 
for classification, as long as it is used to grant benefits to the victims of caste-
discrimination. 

However, as evident from the language of Article 15(1), caste cannot be a 
ground to discriminate against members of marginalized castes. Any use of caste as a 
basis for classification must withstand judicial scrutiny to ensure it does not perpetuate 
discrimination against the oppressed castes. While caste-based classifications are 
permissible under certain constitutional provisions, they are strictly regulated to ensure 
they serve the purpose of promoting equality and social justice. 

In the context of prisons, valid classification must be a functional 
classification.244 The classification of prisoners has been considered both from the 
point of view of security and discipline as well as reform and rehabilitation.245 This has 
been the objective. However, there is no nexus between classifying prisoners based 
 
244 Charles Sobraj v. Supdt., Central Jail, 1978 INSC 149 
245 RK Kapoor Committee, pp. 157-160. 

PART XIV 

on caste and securing the objectives of security or reform. Limitations on inmates that 
are cruel, or irrelevant to rehabilitation are per se unreasonable, arbitrary and 
constitutionally suspect.246 Inmates are entitled to fair treatment that promotes 
rehabilitation, and classification of any kind must be geared towards the same. Courts 
have been enjoined with the duty “to invigorate the intra-mural man-management so 
that the citizen inside has spacious opportunity to unfold his potential without overmuch 
inhibition or sadistic overseeing”.247 Segregating prisoners on the basis of caste would 
reinforce caste differences or animosity that ought to be prevented at the first place. 
Segregation would not lead to rehabilitation. 
167 The petitioner’s counsel have brought to the notice the observations made by 
the Madras High Court in C. Arul v. The Secretary to Government.248 One of the 
prayers in the writ petition was “not to discriminate the prisoners on the basis of the 
caste and forbearing the jail authority from confining Palayamkottai prison inmates 
on caste basis”. The writ petition was not entertained, as the High Court accepted the 
explanation of the State government that “the inmates belonging to different castes 
are housed in different blocks, in order to avoid any community clash, which is 
prevailing common in Tirunelveli and Tuticorin Districts”. It was also noted that “there 
is rivalry between two groups on account of caste feeling, which is regular in the 
District and in order to avoid any untoward incident and put an end to such rivalry, 
the Prison Authority is compelled to house the inmates of different communities in 
different blocks”. We cannot agree with the position taken by the High Court. It is the 
responsibility of the prison administration to maintain discipline inside the prison 
without resorting to extreme measures that promote caste-based segregation. 
 
246 Sunil Batra (I) v. Delhi Administration, (1978) 
247 Hiralal Mallick v. State of Bihar, (1977). 
248 W.P.(MD) No. 6587 of 2012 (Madras High Court, Order dated 28 October 2014) 

PART XIV 

Adopting the logic accepted by the High Court is similar to the argument which was 
given in the United States to legalize race-based segregation: separate but equal.249 
Such a philosophy has no place under the Indian Constitution. Even if there is rivalry 
between individuals of two groups, it does not require segregating the groups 
permanently. Discipline cannot be secured at the altar of violation of fundamental 
rights and correctional needs of inmates. The prison authorities ought to be able to 
tackle perceived threats to discipline by means that are not rights-effacing and 
inherently discriminatory. 

Furthermore, the differentia between inmates that distinguishes on the basis of 
“habit”, “custom”, “superior mode of living”, and “natural tendency to escape”, etc. is 
unconstitutionally vague and indeterminate. These terms and phrases do not serve as 
an intelligible differentia, that can be used to demarcate one class of prisoners from 
the other. These terms have resultantly been used to target individuals from 
marginalized castes and denotified tribes. 
169 The objective of classification for labour for treatment and for conferment of 
entitlements such as remissions has to be maximisation of the reformatory potential 
of prisons. Such classification should be based solely on the correctional needs of the 
individual prisoner. An objective assessment of these needs prior to the classification 
is a constitutional imperative. Only such classification that proceeds from an objective 
inquiry of factors such as work aptitude, accommodation needs, special medical and 
psychological needs of the prisoner would pass constitutional muster. Classification 
based on caste reduces the individual prisoner to a group identity and does not leave 
room for an objective assessment of their correctional needs. Their reformation is 
 
249 For a broader history, see Michael Klarman, Unfinished Business: Racial Equality in American History, Oxford 
University Press (2007). 

PART XIV 

stultified by the burdens of their group-identity and thereby, their presumed ability to 
discharge stereotypical occupational tasks. This classification bears no nexus with 
individual qualifications, abilities and needs. Such a classification does not aid 
reformation. It rather effaces the prisoner’s individuality and deprives them of 
individualised assessment of their correctional needs. Such classification bears no 
rational nexus with either prison discipline or prison reform. It is also opposed to 
substantive equality within prisoners as a class as it deprives some of them of equal 
opportunity to be assessed for their correctional needs, and consequently, opportunity 
to reform. The classification on obsolete understanding of caste, based on pre-
constitutional legislations and practices, lacks a rational nexus with the correctional 
objectives of classification in prisons. 

Thus, Rules that discriminate among individual prisoners on the basis of their 
caste specifically or indirectly by referring to proxies of caste identity are violative of 
Article 14 on account of invalid classification and subversion of substantive equality. 
(iii) The discriminatory manuals 

On a reading of the impugned provisions, it is clear that the provisions 
discriminate against marginalized castes and act to the advantage of certain castes. 
By assigning cleaning and sweeping work to the marginalized castes, while allowing 
the high castes to do cooking, the Manuals directly discriminate. This is an instance of 
direct discrimination under Article 15(1). 

The manuals/rules suffer from indirect discrimination by using broad terms 
which act to the disadvantage of the marginalized castes. Phrases such as “menial” 
jobs to be performed by castes “accustomed to perform such duties” may appear to 
be facially neutral, but refer to marginalized communities, given the history of systemic 

PART XIV 

discrimination against them. Such indirect usages of phrases, which target the so-
called ‘lower castes’, cannot be permitted in our constitutional framework. The 
phrases, though neutral on their face, carry an embedded bias that disadvantages 
marginalized communities by reinforcing historical patterns of labour based on caste. 
Even if caste is not explicitly mentioned, phrases like “menial” and “accustomed” 
indirectly uphold traditional caste roles. These provisions disproportionately harm 
marginalized castes, perpetuate caste-based labour divisions and reinforce social 
hierarchies. 

The manuals/rules are also based on and reinforce stereotypes against the 
marginalized castes. These stereotypes not only demean and stigmatize marginalized 
communities but also serve to maintain and legitimize a social hierarchy that goes 
against the constitutional values of equality. The persistence of such associations in 
official documents like the Manuals/Rules normalizes the idea that these tasks are 
somehow natural for marginalized communities, reinforcing harmful societal 
hierarchies. By assigning specific types of work to marginalized castes based on their 
supposed "customary" roles, the Manuals perpetuate the stereotype that people from 
these communities are either incapable of or unfit for more skilled, dignified, or 
intellectual work. 

The manuals/rules also reinforce stereotypes against denotified tribes. Rule 
404 of the West Bengal Manual provides that a convict overseer may be appointed to 
be a night guard provided that “he does not belong to any class that may have a strong 
natural tendency to escape, such as men of wandering tribes”. The Madhya Pradesh 
Manual permits the classification of habitual and non-habitual criminals, where 
habitual criminals are described as someone who “is by habit member of a gang of 

PART XIV 

dacoits, or of thieves or a dealer in slaves or in stolen property”, even if no previous 
conviction has been proved. Furthermore, any member of a denotified tribe may be 
treated as a habitual criminal, subject to the discretion of the State Government.250 
Similarly, Rule 217 of the Andhra Pradesh Manual, Rule 219 of the Tamil Nadu Manual, 
and Rule 201 of the Kerala Manual classify as “habitual criminals” those who are by 
“habit” a “robber, housebreaker, dacoit, thief or receiver of stolen property” or that he 
“habitually commits extortion, cheating, counterfeiting coin, currency notes or stamps 
or forgery”, even if “no previous conviction has been proved, that he is by habit a 
member of a gang of dacoits, or of thieves or a dealer in stolen property”. The Andhra 
Manual also paints “a member of a wandering or criminal tribe” with the same brush 
of being “a bad or dangerous character, or has, at any time, escaped of attempted to 
escape from lawful custody”, and prohibits their employment on any labour outside the 
walls of the prison, or to be permitted to pass out of the prison for employment of the 
purpose of being so employed.251 The Manual also describes “non-habitual prisoners 
of good character” as someone who “by social status, education and habit of life have 
been accustomed to a superior mode of living”. Conversely, habitual prisoners are 
accustomed to an inferior mode of living.252 The Odisha Manual and Rajasthan Manual 
also prohibit employment on extramural work of “Prisoners who have shown, or are 
likely to have, a strong inclination to escape or are members of a wandering or criminal 
tribe”. The Odisha Rules253 and Tamil Nadu Rules254 prescribe the separation of 
habitual offenders from other prisoners. The Maharashtra Rules state that “Habitual 
 
250 Rule 411, Madhya Pradesh Manual 1987 
251 Rule 448, Andhra Pradesh Manual 1979 
252 Rule 1036, Andhra Pradesh Manual 1979 
253 Rule 4, Odisha Rules 2020 
254 Rule 214, Tamil Nadu Prison Rules 1983 

PART XIV 

women prisoners; prostitutes and procuress and young women prisoners shall be 
segregated.”255 

The tendency to treat members of denotified tribes as habitual to crime or 
having bad character reinforces a stereotype, which excludes them from meaningful 
participation in social life. When such stereotypes become a part of the legal 
framework, they legitimize discrimination against these communities. Members of the 
denotified tribes have faced the brunt of colonial caste-based undertones of 
discriminating against them, and the prison Manuals are reaffirming the same 
discrimination. Discrimination against denotified tribes is prohibited under the ground 
of “caste” in Article 15(1), as the colonial regime considered them as belonging to 
separate hereditary castes. 

Whether a “practice” of untouchability? 

At the risk of repetition, we must reproduce some of the impugned provisions. 
Rule 289(g) of the Uttar Pradesh Manual provides: “A convict sentenced to simple 
imprisonment,… shall not be called upon to perform duties of a degrading or menial 
character unless he belongs to a class or community accustomed to perform such 
duties; but may be required to carry water for his own use provided he belongs to the 
class of society the members of which are accustomed to perform such duties in their 
own homes.” Rule 158 states: “Remission to convicts on scavenging duty - Subject to 
good work and conduct in jail, convicts of the scavenger class working as scavengers 
in jails…” 
 
255 Chapter XLI, Section II: Rule 3, Maharashtra Rules 

PART XIV 

Rule 694 of West Bengal Manual provides: “… Interference with genuine 
religious practices or caste prejudices of prisoners should be avoided”. Rule 741 
states: “Food shall be cooked and carried to the cells by prisoner-cooks of suitable 
caste, under the superintendence of a jail officer…” Rule 793 provides: “The barber 
should belong to the A class. Sweepers should be chosen from the Mether or Hari 
caste, also from the Chandal or other castes, if by the custom of the district they 
perform similar work when free, or from any caste if the prisoner volunteers to do the 
work.” Rule 1117 states: “Any prisoner in a jail who is of so high a caste that he cannot 
eat food cooked by the existing cooks shall be appointed a cook and be made to cook 
for the full complement of men.” 

Rule 36 of the Madhya Pradesh manual states: “While the latrine parade is 
being carried out, the mehtars attached to each latrine shall be present, and shall call 
the attention of the convict overseer to any prisoner who does not cover up his dejecta 
with dry earth. The mehtars shall empty the contents of the small receptacle into large 
iron drums and replace the receptacles in the latrine after having cleaned them.” Rule 
26.69 of the Himachal Pradesh Manual states, “If there are no female of suitable caste 
for conservancy work, paid-sweepers shall be taken into the enclosure in charge of a 
warder and under conditions laid down in paragraph 214”. 

The notion that an occupation is considered as “degrading or menial” is an 
aspect of the caste system and untouchability. The caste system rigidly assigns certain 
tasks to specific communities based on birth, with the lowest castes, being relegated 
to tasks considered impure or unclean, such as manual scavenging, cleaning, and 
other forms of physical labour. That a person belonging to such a community is 
accustomed to performing menial tasks is a mandate of the caste system. Similarly, 

PART XIV 

the reference to “scavenger class” is a practice of the caste system and untouchability. 
No social group is born as a “scavenger class”. They are forced to undertake certain 
jobs that are considered ‘menial’ and polluting based on the notions of birth-based 
purity and pollution. 

Refusal to check caste practices or prejudices amounts to cementing of such 
practices. If such practices are based on the oppression of the marginalized castes, 
then such practices cannot be left untouched. The Constitution mandates an end to 
caste discrimination and untouchability. The provision that food shall be cooked by 
“suitable caste” reflects notions of untouchability, where certain castes are considered 
suitable for cooking or handling kitchen work, while others are not. Besides, the 
division of work on the basis of caste is a practice of untouchability prohibited under 
the Constitution. 

As discussed, prison manuals allot tasks of a barber to individuals from a 
certain caste, while sweeping work is allowed to Mehtar/Hari/Chandal or similar 
castes. It is also provided that work shall be allotted on the basis of “attitude and sofar 
as may be practicable with due regard to his previous habits.” This is a caste-based 
delegation of work based on the perceptions of the caste system that certain castes 
are meant to do jobs of “sweeping”. The rule that a prisoner of a high caste be allowed 
to refuse the food cooked by other castes is a legal sanction by the State authorities 
to untouchability and the caste system. 

Let us refer again to the impugned provisions which deal with “habits” of certain 
communities. Rule 440 of the Andhra Pradesh Manual states: “The prison tasks 
including conservancy work shall be allotted at the discretion of the Superintendent 
with due regard to capacity of the prisoner, his education, intelligence and attitude and 

PART XIV 

so far as may be practicable with due regard to his previous habits.” Rule 784 of the 
Odisha Manual states, “Prisoners who have shown, or are likely to have, a strong 
inclination to escape or are members of a wandering or criminal tribe, even though 
eligible, shall not be employed on extramural work.” Rule 201 of Kerala Manual defines 
“habitual criminals” as follows: “(1) any person convicted of an offence punishable 
under Chapters XII, XVII and XVIII of the Indian Penal Code, whose facts of the 
present case, show that he is by habit a robber, house breaker, dacoit, thief or receiver 
of stolen property or that he habitually commits extortion, cheating, counterfeiting coin, 
currency notes or stamps or forgery”; “(4) any person convicted of any of the offence 
specified in (i) above when it appears from the facts of the case, even though no 
previous conviction has been proved, that he is by habit a member of a gang of dacoit, 
on of thieves or a dealer in slaves or in stolen property”; “(5) any person of a Criminal 
tribe subject to the discretion of the Government.” 

The provisions that “men of wandering tribes” or “criminal tribes” have a “strong 
natural tendency to escape” or are by “habit” accustomed to theft reflects a stereotype 
that has its basis in the colonial understanding of India’s caste system. These 
stereotypes not only criminalize entire communities but also reinforce caste-based 
prejudices. They resemble a form of untouchability, as they assign certain negative 
traits to specific groups based on identity, perpetuating their marginalization and 
exclusion. By marking them as “criminal by birth,” the law institutionalized a prejudiced 
view of these tribes, treating them as inherently dishonest and prone to theft. This 
stereotype—echoing elements of untouchability—reduced their humanity to a set of 
negative traits and perpetuated their exclusion from mainstream society. Once labelled 
a criminal tribe, individuals from these communities faced systematic discrimination in 

PART XIV 

employment, education, and social services. The stigma attached to these labels 
extended beyond legal frameworks and became a part of social consciousness 

The provision that a “non-habitual” prisoner is “by social status” and “habit of 
life… accustomed to a superior mode of living” is another caste-based construct. This 
hierarchical view of social status plays into the caste-based division of labour and 
morality that has long been entrenched in Indian society. While those from higher 
castes or classes were perceived as refined and deserving of more lenient treatment 
(even within the colonial criminal justice system), those from lower castes or 
marginalized communities were viewed as having a natural tendency towards 
criminality or immorality. This was not only an injustice but also reinforced existing 
power structures, ensuring that marginalized groups were trapped in cycles of poverty 
and discrimination, unable to transcend the stigmatization they faced. 

The right to overcome caste prejudices under Article 21 

The impugned rules foster the antiquated notions of fitness of a particular 
community for a certain designated job. These rules reinforce occupational immobility 
of prisoners who belong to certain castes. For instance, rules assigning sweeping work 
which stipulate that “sweepers shall be chosen from the Mehtar or Hari caste, also 
from the Chandal or other low castes, if by the custom of the district they perform 
similar work when free, or from the caste if the prisoner volunteers to do the work” 
designate the enumerated castes for the work in issue. The three castes enumerated 
in the Rule are Scheduled Castes and have historically been compelled to do manual 
scavenging. The only link between the caste so designated and the work in question 
is their historical, caste-based link with the profession. It does not regard their work 
capacity, health, education, and ability, based on an individualised assessment of the 

PART XIV 

individual. Effectively, such rules obviate any inquiry into the correctional needs of the 
inmate and how, if at all they may be furthered by the assignment of work. 

Such rules are indifferent to the potential of the individual prisoner to reform. 
Such a state of affairs is entirely opposed to substantive equality, as it contributes to 
institutional discrimination, depriving inmates of an opportunity to reform, at par with 
the others over whom the pall of caste does not hang. 

 Article 21 envisages the growth of individual personality. Caste prejudices and 
discrimination hinder the growth of one’s personality. Therefore, Article 21 provides for 
the right to overcome caste barriers as a part of the right to life of individuals from 
marginalized communities. The protection provided by Article 21 can be seen as a 
constitutional guarantee that individuals from marginalized communities should have 
the freedom to break free from these traditional social restrictions. It extends beyond 
mere survival to ensure that they can flourish in an environment of equality, respect, 
and dignity, without being subjected to caste-based discrimination which stifles their 
personal growth. 

When caste prejudices manifest in institutional settings, such as prisons, they 
create further restrictions on the personal development and reformation of individuals 
from marginalized communities. When Prison Manuals restrict the reformation of 
prisoners from marginalized communities, they violate their right to life. At the same 
time, such provisions deprive prisoners from marginalized groups of a sense of dignity 
and the expectation that they should be treated equally. When prisoners from 
marginalized communities are subjected to discriminatory practices based on caste, 
their inherent dignity is violated. 

PART XIV 

Caste-based division of labour/work: Whether forced labour? 

Several provisions of different Prison Manuals impose a restriction on labour of 
certain communities. That is, these communities are allowed to undertake only one 
kind of labour. “Menial” jobs are prescribed to be performed by those communities who 
have been “accustomed” to performing such duties. The language used in such 
Manuals/Rules is rooted in a caste-based societal structure, where traditionally, certain 
communities were relegated to tasks considered impure or inferior, such as cleaning, 
manual scavenging, or other forms of servitude. 

Again, at the risk of repetition, let us now refer to these impugned provisions. 
Rule 289 of the Prison Manual of Uttar Pradesh provides that a convict “shall not be 
called upon to perform duties of a degrading or menial character unless he belongs to 
a class or community accustomed to perform such duties”. Rule 741 of the West 
Bengal Prison Manual provides “Food shall be cooked and carried to the cells by 
prisoner-cooks of suitable caste, under the superintendence of a jail officer”. Rule 793 
provides, “The barber should belong to the A class. Sweepers should be chosen from 
the Mehther or Hari caste, also from the Chandal or other castes, if by the custom of 
the district they perform similar work when free, or from any caste if the prisoner 
volunteers to do the work”. Rule 36 of the Madhya Pradesh Jail Manual 1987 provides, 
“While latrine parade is being carried out, the mehtars attached to each latrine shall 
be present. The Mehtars shall empty the small receptacles into large iron drums and 
replace the receptacles after having cleaned them”. Rule 563 provides, “The cook shall 
be of non-habitual class”. Rule 26.69 of the Himachal Pradesh Manual states, “If there 
are no female of suitable caste for conservancy work, paid-sweepers shall be taken 

PART XIV 

into the enclosure in charge of a warder and under conditions laid down in paragraph 
214”. 

Such provisions often lead to an unfair distribution of labour within the prison 
system, with persons from specific communities performing honourable tasks, while 
those from marginalized communities are forced into undesirable work. It perpetuates 
the idea that some individuals are inherently suited to low-status labour based solely 
on their birth, reinforcing deep-rooted caste inequalities. 

The provision that “food” shall be cooked by prisoner-cooks of “suitable caste” 
empowers the jail officer to discriminate against the marginalized castes. At the same 
time, it takes away the opportunity from them to cook food. The imposition of cleaning 
latrines and sweeping work to only “Mehtar, Hari caste or Chandal” or similar castes 
is forcing only a type of work, which is considered low-grade, upon them. Imposing 
labour or work, which is considered impure or low-grade, upon the members of 
marginalized communities amounts to “forced labour” under Article 23. The Court in 
Sunil Batra (II)256 had also held that “degrading labour” cannot be forced upon 
prisoners. 

Being forced to undertake the menial tasks simply because of their caste 
background robs prisoners of the element of choice that other prisoners enjoy. Forcing 
marginalized caste inmates to perform tasks like cleaning latrines or sweeping, without 
providing them any choice in the matter and based purely on their caste, constitutes a 
form of coercion. These prison rules assign them degrading labour that other inmates 
are not required to perform. Prisoners from lower castes are systematically exploited 
 
256 1979 INSC 271 

PART XV 

and their vulnerability as marginalized individuals is used as justification for assigning 
them low-grade tasks. 

This type of labour assignment, based on their caste, cannot be classified as 
voluntary. Forcing the members of oppressed castes to selectively perform menial jobs 
amounts to forced labour under Article 23. Dr Ambedkar had articulated that the socio-
economic situation of oppressed communities should not be used to exploit their 
labour. Article 23 strikes at this philosophy. The said article is not a caste-ignorant 
provision, but a caste-conscious provision. 

Article 23 was incorporated into the Constitution to protect the members of 
oppressed castes from exploitative practices, where their labour is taken advantage 
of, and without any adequate return. This is evident from the Constituent Assembly 
Debates. However, the prison rules, by exploiting the labour of the oppressed castes, 
perpetuate the same injustice to guard against which Article 23 was inserted into the 
Constitution. Assigning labour based on caste background strips individuals of their 
liberty to engage in meaningful work, and denies them the opportunity to rise above 
the constraints imposed by their social identity. 

We therefore find that the impugned provisions are violative of Articles 14, 15, 
17, 21, and 23. We shall now refer to the Model Prison Manual 2016, which has been 
cited by the Union government as a modern manual addressing all concerns. 
XV. 
Model Prison Manual 2016: Whether Adequate? 

Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned ASG, has submitted a brief note referring to the 
Model Prison Manual for the Superintendence and Management of Prisons in India, 
2003, and The Model Prison Manual, 2016. It is argued that the 2016 Manual explicitly 

PART XV 

prohibits caste and religion-based discrimination practices. The note refers to some of 
the relevant provisions: 
2003 Manual 
a. The 2003 Manual in Para 2.15.1 states that “Management of 
kitchen or cooking of food on caste or religious places will be 
totally banned in prisons.” 
b. In Para 15.22 the Manual states that “any special treatment 
to a group of prisoners belonging to a particular caste or religion 
is strictly prohibited.” 
c. In Chapter XXIV, Para 24.02 Note (ii) states that “No 
classification of prisoners shall be allowed on grounds of socio-
economic status, caste or class.” 
d. Para 24.35 states that “Management of kitchen or cooking of 
food on caste or religious places will be totally banned in prisons 
for women.” 
2016 Manual 
a. The 2016 Manual in Para 2.12.4 states that “Management of 
kitchen or cooking of food on caste or religious places will be 
prohibited in prisons.” 
b. In Para 17.22 the Manual states that “any special treatment 
to a group of prisoners belonging to a particular caste or religion 
is strictly prohibited.” 
c. In Para 17.25 Note (ii) states that “No classification of 
prisoners shall be allowed on grounds of socio-economic 
status, caste or class.” 

PART XV 

d. Para 24.35 states that “Management of kitchen or cooking of 
food on caste or religious places will be strictly banned in 
prisons for women.” 

The note submitted by Ms. Bhati also refers to the Advisory dated 26 February 
2024 issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs, through the Deputy Secretary (PR & ATC) 
to the Principal Secretary (Home/Jails) of all states and UTs and the DG/IG Prisons of 
all States and UTs to ensure that the State Prison Manual/Prison Act should not 
contain any discriminatory provisions. The advisory further states that: 
“It may be noted that the Constitution of India 
prohibits any kind of discrimination on the grounds of 
religion, race, caste, place of birth etc. The Model 
Prison Manual, 2016 prepared by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs and circulated to all States and UTs in 
May 2016 explicitly prohibits caste and religion-
based discrimination of prisoners in management of 
kitchen or cooking of food on caste or religious basis. 
The manual also provides that any special treatment 
to a group of prisoners belonging to a particular 
caste or religion is strictly prohibited. It further 
provides that no classification of prisoners shall be 
allowed on grounds of socio-economic status, caste 
or class.” 

To the contrary, Ms. Disha Wadekar counsel for the petitioner, has argued that 
the Model Prison Manual 2016 is not adequate and that it does not address issues of 
caste-based division of labour, segregation, and discrimination against denotified 
tribes. A reference was made to the definition of “habitual offenders” to argue that it is 
misused against persons from denotified tribes in prison. It has been submitted that 
the Ministry of Home Affairs may be directed to incorporate and reform the Model 
Prison Manual, 2016, to address the highlighted issues. 

The Model Prison Manual 2016 was prepared “to reflect the understanding 
behind constitutional provisions, Supreme Court directions on prison administration 

PART XV 

and international instruments”.257 It covers a range of aspects relating to prisons, 
including institutional framework, custodial management, medical care, education and 
training of prisoners, maintenance of prisoners, emergency situations, remission, 
parole, premature releases and inspection of prisons, among other things. The Model 
Prison Manual 2016 also focuses on “prison computerization, special provisions for 
women prisoners, focus on after care services, rights of prisoners sentenced to death, 
repatriation of prisoners from abroad, enhanced focus on prison correctional staff”.258 
New chapters on legal aid and inspection of prisons have been incorporated. 

The Model Prison Manual 2016 suffers from several lacunae. The first issue to 
be noted with reference to the Manual is its classification of “habitual offenders”. The 
Manual defines “habitual offender” as “a prisoner classified as such in accordance with 
the provisions of applicable law or rules”.259 “Casual prisoner” is defined as “a prisoner 
other than a habitual offender”.260 The Manual provides for “the setting up of separate 
institutional facilities for different categories of prisoners”, including “maximum security 
prisons/annexes/yards for high-risk prisoners and hardened or habitual offenders”.261 
The Manual mandates the classification of undertrial prisoners in three categories, 
wherein habitual offenders are tagged along with “Gangsters, hired Assassins, dacoits, 
serial killers/rapists/violent robbers, drug offenders, communal fanatics and those 
highly prone to escapes/ previous escapees/attack on police and other dangerous 
offenders/including those prone to self-harm/posing threat to public order”.262 The 
habitual offenders are tagged in the same category in relation to classification of high 
 
257 Model Prison Manual 2016, p. 4, https://www.mha.gov.in/sites/default/files/PrisonManual2016.pdf 
258 Ibid 
259 Para 13 of Chapter I, Model Prison Manual 2016 
260 Para 3 of Chapter I, Model Prison Manual 2016 
261 Para 2.03 of Chapter II, Model Prison Manual 2016 
262 Ibid, Para 24.01 

PART XV 

risk offenders and for determination of the level of security for effective surveillance.263 
Similarly, regarding the women prisoners, it has been provided that “Habitual offenders 
shall be separated from casual prisoners”264 and that “Habitual offenders, prostitutes 
and brothel keepers must also be confined separately”.265 

In a previous section of this judgment, we highlighted that the phrase “habitual 
offender” in several prison manuals refers to people from denotified or wandering 
tribes. Therefore, this definition cannot be left to be interpreted and applied “in 
accordance with the provisions of applicable law or rules”. Otherwise, what it will end 
up doing is to classify and separate people from denotified tribes in prisons without 
any basis. 

Second, the Manual does not explicitly prohibit physical caste-based 
segregation of prisoners, except in prisons for women. Only the chapter on “Women 
Prisoners” provides that “[n]o classification of prisoners shall be allowed on grounds 
of socioeconomic status, caste or class”.266 This is concerning, as the Manual was 
prepared in 2016, when prison manuals in different States mandated caste-based 
division of prisoners, as indicated in our analysis in the previous section. The Manual 
of 2016 therefore should have adopted a specific provision prohibiting the 
classification of prisoners on the basis of caste for all prisoners, as it does in the case 
of women prisoners. 

Third, the Manual does not prohibit division of work on the basis of caste, except 
in cooking. Para 2.12.4 provides that “Management of kitchen or cooking of food on 
 
263 Ibid, Para 25.02 
264 Ibid, Para 26.04 (ii) 
265 Ibid, 26.04 (iii) 
266 Ibid, Para 26.04 Note (ii) 

PART XV 

caste or religious basis shall be prohibited in prisons”. Similarly, for women prisons, 
para 26.45 provides “Management of kitchens or cooking food on caste or religious 
basis should be strictly banned in prisons for women”. In effect, prohibition of caste 
discrimination in kitchens shall also apply to allotment of work to cooks.267 However, 
the Manual does not prohibit discrimination on the allotment of work other than 
cooking. As analysed, various prison manuals in different States specify different work 
to people on the basis of caste. The Model Manual 2016 should have taken into 
account such practices and provided specifically for their prohibition. 

Instead, the Manual empowers the jail superintendent “for the execution of all 
orders regarding the labour of prisoners” and that they “shall assign to each prisoner 
his work on the recommendation of the classifying Committee constituted in each 
Central Prison for the purpose”.268 Furthermore, the medical officer shall “examine all 
newly admitted prisoners and record in the admission register and medical sheets 
particulars regarding their health, and the kind of labour they can perform in view of 
their health conditions”.269 If the medical opinion states that “the health of any prisoner 
suffers from employment of any kind or class of labour, he shall record such opinion 
in the prisoner's sheet and the prisoner shall not be employed on that labour”.270 
Besides, the Manual penalizes any resistance by the prisoners to perform labour 
allotted to them. “Wilfully disabling himself from labour” is listed as a prison offence.271 

The above provisions prima facie may be essential to maintain prison discipline, 
but absent any provision prohibiting caste-based allotment of work, these provisions 
may be used to target prisoners from marginalized castes. It may create a scenario 
 
267 See Paras 6.30 and 6.31. 
268 Ibid, Para 4.08. 
269 Ibid, Para 7.45 (xxiii). 
270 Ibid, Para 7.67. 
271 Ibid, Para 21.09 (xxxv). 

PART XV 

where a prisoner from a marginalized caste may not be able to deny the work allotted 
to them on the basis of their caste, which would also be violative of the Articles 21 and 
23 of the Constitution of India, which protects individual dignity and prohibits forced 
labour. In this regard, we may again refer to Sunil Batra (II)272 which held that 
“allotment of degrading labour” in prisons is “an infraction of liberty or life in its wider 
sense and cannot be sustained” unless the procedure under Article 21 is satisfied. No 
such procedure which divides labour on the basis of caste can be sustained. This 
prohibition shall also apply to labour done in prison industries and skill development 
programmes under paras 15.30 and 15.31, work done by undertrial prisoners under 
paras 24.43 and 24.44, work done by high-risk offenders under paras 25.19, work 
done by women prisoners under paras 26.106 to 26.109, and labour done by young 
offenders under paras 27.32 and 27.33. 

Fourth, the counsel for the petitioner have argued that the Manual does not 
refer to the provisions of the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and 
their Rehabilitation Act, 2013, which prohibit manual scavenging. Clauses 2.10 and 
6.79 deal with toilets. We clarify that the Act has a binding effect even on prisons. In 
relation to toilets, manual scavenging273 or hazardous cleaning274 of a sewer or a 
septic tank inside a prison shall not be permitted. 

Fifth, it has also been argued that caste-based privileges provided to certain 
prisoners are not forbidden, except in para 17.22. The said para states, “The main 
festivals of all religions should be celebrated. In these, every prisoner should be 
encouraged to participate. Any special treatment to a group of prisoners belonging to 
 
272 1979 INSC 271 
273 Sections 2(1)(g) and 5, The Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and Their Rehabilitation Act, 

274 Ibid, Section 7 

PART XVI 

a particular caste or religion is strictly prohibited”. In addition, prison offences include 
“wilfully hurting other’s religious feelings, beliefs and faiths”275 and “agitating or acting 
on the basis of caste or religious prejudices”.276 We clarify that no special treatment 
shall be given to any group of persons or individuals on the basis of caste in any 
scenario. 
XVI. 
Model Prisons and Correctional Services Act, 2023 

We now refer to the provisions of the “Model Prisons and Correctional Services 
Act, 2023”. The Ministry of Home Affairs, in consultation with various stakeholders, 
prepared this draft legislation and forwarded it to all States and Union Territories in 
May 2023 for adoption in their respective jurisdictions.277 The vision behind the 
preparation of the Model Act was to replace the previous colonial legislations, which 
have been “found to be outdated and obsolete”, with “a progressive and robust Act 
which is in tune with contemporary modern day needs and correctional ideology”.278 
According to the Ministry, the Model Act is “a comprehensive document which covers 
all relevant aspects of prison management, viz. security, safety, scientific & 
technological interventions, segregation of prisoners, special provision for women 
inmates, taking appropriate action against criminal activities of prisoners in the prison, 
grant of parole and furlough to prisoners, their education, vocational training and skill 
development, etc.”279 The Ministry also indicated that as “Prison” is a “State” subject, 
“it is for the respective State Governments to make use of the guidance provided in 
 
275 Para 21.09 (xxxvii), Model Prison Manual 2016 
276 Ibid, Para 21.09 (xxxviii) 

Unstarred 
Question 
No. 

(Lok 
Sabha, 
dated 

August 
2023), 
available 
at 
https://www.mha.gov.in/MHA1/Par2017/pdfs/par2023-pdfs/LS-08082023/3007.pdf 
278 Letter dated 10 May 2023 from Home Secretary, Government of India to Chief Secretaries, all States and UTs, 
available at https://www.mha.gov.in/sites/default/files/advisory_10112023.pdf 

Unstarred 
Question 
No. 

(Lok 
Sabha, 
dated 

August 
2023), 
available 
at 
https://www.mha.gov.in/MHA1/Par2017/pdfs/par2023-pdfs/LS-08082023/3007.pdf 

PART XVI 

the Model Prisons and Correctional Services Act, 2023 and enact a suitable legislation 
on Prisons in their jurisdictions for bringing improvement in prison management and 
administration of prisoners.”280 

The Model Act does not contain a reference to the prohibition of caste-based 
discrimination. This is concerning because the Act empowers the officer-in-charge of 
the prison to “utilize the services of prisoners” for “administration and management of 
the prisons”.281 Further, disabling from labour and continuously refusing to work is a 
prison offence.282 The officer-in-charge should not be given the liberty to discriminate 
against any group of prisoners on the basis of caste. While the Model Prison Manual 
2016 refers to the prohibition of caste discrimination in prisons in several provisions, 
the Model Act of 2023 has completely avoided any such mention. A provision to that 
effect should be inserted in the Model Act. It should ban segregation or division of work 
based on caste. 

The definition of “Habitual Offender” under Section 2(12) is also problematic. It 
states that, “Habitual Offender means a prisoner who is committed to prison repeatedly 
for a crime”. The phrase “committed to prison repeatedly” is vague and over-broad. It 
can be used to declare anyone as a habitual offender, even if they have not been 
convicted for a crime. The Model Act also provides that “habitual offenders” may be 
housed in a high security prison.283 In addition to the category of habitual offender, the 
Act creates a category of “recidivist”, which means “any prisoner who is convicted for 
 
280 Ibid 
281 Section 60, Model Prisons and Correctional Services Act, 2023 
282 Ibid, Section 39(v) and (vi) 
283 Section 2(15), Model Prisons and Correctional Services Act, 2023 

PART XVII 

a crime more than once”.284 “Habitual/recidivist prisoners” may be classified separately 
and segregated in prisons.285 

Chapter IX of the Model Act, dealing with “Protection of Society from Criminal 
Activities of High-Risk Prisoners, Habitual Offenders and Hardened Criminals”, also 
seems to be over-broad. Section 27(1) states that the society needs to be protected 
from “habitual offenders, along with high-risk prisoners, and hardened criminals. The 
said category is prohibited for “parole, furlough, or any kind of prison leave in the 
normal course”.286 The Act provides that “the release of a high-risk/hardened/habitual 
offender convict on completion of sentence or an under-trial on bail or an inmate 
released temporarily on parole/furlough, etc. shall be informed to the Superintendent 
of Police of the concerned district, who shall keep a watch on the activities of such 
prisoners”.287 This provision gives wide powers to the police, which may be misused. 
XVII. 
The Continued Targeting of Denotified Tribes 

The impugned provisions are also an instance of existing discrimination and 
targeting of the members of the Denotified Tribes. In a previous section of this 
judgment, we held that the impugned provisions discriminate against the Denotified 
Tribes. Dr. Muralidhar argued that the classification of “habitual offender” needs to be 
completely done away with. At this stage, it is necessary to discuss how the 
classification of “habitual offender” was initially conceptualized. 

The classification of “habitual offender” emerged prior to the repeal of the 
Criminal Tribes Act. Several Provinces had enacted their habitual offender laws. The 
 
284 Ibid, Section 2(29) 
285 Ibid, Sections 5(3), 5(5), 6(3), 26(2), 26(3) 
286 Ibid, Section 27(3) 
287 Ibid, Section 28(5) 

PART XVII 

Madras Restriction of Habitual Offenders Act, 1948 applied to individual habitual 
offenders.288 The Act neither required a notified offender to attend roll call to any 
authority nor provided for taking finger impressions of such offender.289 However, once 
a person was notified under the Act to be a habitual offender, “no opportunity” was 
given to him “to defend himself against orders of restriction or internment in a 
settlement”. Contrary to the Criminal Tribes Act or the Madras Restriction of Habitual 
Offenders Act, the Bombay Habitual Offenders Restriction Act, 1947 granted power to 
only competent courts to pass restrictive orders after necessary legal proceedings. 
Under the Madras law, such orders could be passed by government or officers 
authorised by them.290 

The Rajasthan Habitual Criminals (Registration and Regulation) Act, 1950 
defined “habitual criminal” as “a person who being a member of a notified tribe” who 
within the prescribed period, has not “been declared by an order in writing of the 
District Magistrate as no longer a habitual criminal”. Further, it included “a person, who 
whether he was a member of a notified tribe or not, has within any period of ten years 
following the aforesaid date, been convicted not less than thrice of any of the offences 
specified”.291 The Rajasthan Act gave “too much discretion” to the District 
Magistrate.292 A biased officer may never declare any members of a Criminal Tribe as 
“no longer habitual criminals” even if they may not have any convictions at all.293 The 
Rajasthan Act was “hardly any improvement” from the Criminal Tribes Act.294 

The 
Criminal 
Tribes 
Enquiry 
Committee 
Report 
(1949-50), 
https://ia802807.us.archive.org/11/items/dli.csl.944/944.pdf, p. 92 
289 Ibid, p. 93 
290 Ibid, p. 94 
291 Ibid 
292 Ibid 
293 Ibid 
294 Ibid, p. 95 

PART XVII 

The Criminal Tribes Enquiry Committee, while recommending the repeal of the 
Criminal Tribes Act, suggested enactment of a central habitual offender legislation. 
However, it stated that “a person should not be branded as a habitual offender merely 
on grounds of suspicion”.295 In his oral evidence before the Committee, a deputy 
inspector general rank officer from Bihar stated, “In some of the democratic countries 
of the world, the surveillance kept over even hardened criminals is not done in the way 
in which we do it India, and a time should come when no criminal should know that he 
is really being followed or pursued”.296 The Committee recommended that “a person 
who has been convicted twice for any non-bailable offences under Chapters XII, XVI 
and XVII of the Indian Penal Code including an order under section 118 of the Criminal 
Procedure Code should be considered a habitual offender for the purposes of the new 
Act”.297 The Committee was of the view that provisions similar to sections 23, 24, 26, 
and 27 of the Criminal Tribes Act should not be included in the new Act.298 

After the repeal of the Criminal Tribes Act, several States enacted new habitual 
offender laws in their jurisdictions. Significantly, most States adopted an identical 
definition of “habitual offenders”, referring to a person who has been sentenced on 
conviction for at least three occasion to “a substantive term of imprisonment” for any 
of more of the specified offences.299 Similarly, the respective State legislations 
conferred power on the government to direct the District Collector to make a register 
of habitual offenders within his district by entering the names and prescribed 
 
295 Ibid, p. 96 
296 Ibid, p. 97 
297 Ibid 
298 Ibid, p. 100 
299 Tamil Nadu Restriction of Habitual Offenders Act, 1948 (previously Restriction of Habitual Offenders Act1948); 
Madhya Bharat Vagrants, Habitual Offenders and Criminals (Restrictions and Settlement) Act, 1952; Orissa 
Restriction of Habitual Offenders Act, 1952; Uttar Pradesh Habitual Offenders Act, 1952; Rajasthan Habitual 
Offenders Act, 1953; Jammu and Kashmir Habitual Offenders (Control and Reform) Act, 1956; Bombay Habitual 
Offenders Act, 1959; Gujarat Habitual Offenders Act, 1959; Kerala Habitual Offenders Act, 1960; Karnataka 
Habitual Offenders Act, 1961; Andhra Pradesh Habitual Offenders Act, 1962; Himachal Pradesh Habitual Offenders 
Act, 1969; Goa, Daman and Diu Habitual Offenders Act, 1976; 

PART XVII 

particulars of such offenders.300 These Acts also oust the jurisdiction of courts to 
review the validity of any direction or order issued under the Acts.301 Furthermore, the 
District Collector or any officer authorised by him in this behalf may at any time order 
the finger and palm impressions, foot-prints and photographs of any registered 
offender to be taken.302 Several of these Acts require the notified offenders to share 
their residential details, and may also restrict their movements. 

The “habitual offender” legislations were enacted to replace the Criminal Tribes 
Act. However, in States such as Rajasthan, they were used to refer to members 
belonging to criminal tribes/denotified tribes. Applying that logic, several Prison 
Manuals/Rules have also referred to “habitual offender” to mean members of 
Denotified Tribes or wandering tribes. This cannot be accepted. A whole community 
ought not to have either been declared a criminal tribe in the past or a habitual offender 
in the present. It would not be wrong to say that the classification of “habitual offender” 
has been used to target members of Denotified Tribes. 

Various habitual offender laws enacted by States are not under challenge 
before us in the present. Hence, we shall not deal with their validity. However, the 
classification is constitutionally suspect, given the vague and broad language various 
laws and rules have employed, which is used to target the members of Denotified 
Tribes. The Criminal Tribes Enquiry Committee had noted that no person can be 
 
300 Ibid 
301 Section 19, Andhra Pradesh Habitual Offenders Act, 1962; Section 15, Tamil Nadu Habitual Offenders Act, 1948; 
Section 22, Goa, Daman and Diu Habitual Offenders Act, 1976; Section 22, Gujarat Habitual Offenders Act, 1959; 
Section 22, Bombay Habitual Offenders Act, 1959; Section 21, Himachal Pradesh Habitual Offenders Act, 1969; 
Section 23, Jammu and Kashmir Habitual Offenders (Control and Reform) Act, 1956; Section 18, Karnataka 
Habitual Offenders Act, 1961; Section 18, Kerala Habitual Offenders Act, 1960; Section 12, Orissa Restriction of 
Habitual Offenders Act, 1952; Section 14, Rajasthan Habitual Offenders Act, 1953 
302 Section 6, Andhra Pradesh Habitual Offenders Act, 1962; Section 6, Goa, Daman and Diu Habitual Offenders 
Act, 1976; Section 6, Gujarat Habitual Offenders Act, 1959; Section 6, Bombay Habitual Offenders Act, 1959; 
Section 6, Himachal Pradesh Habitual Offenders Act, 1969; Section 9, Jammu and Kashmir Habitual Offenders 
(Control and Reform) Act, 1956; Section 6, Karnataka Habitual Offenders Act, 1961; Section 6, Kerala Habitual 
Offenders Act, 1960; Section 4, Rajasthan Habitual Offenders Act, 1953; 

PART XVIII 

declared as a habitual offender merely on ground of suspicion. But the same has 
happened, as the vague language employed leaves the discretion for the authorities 
to declare persons as habitual offenders merely on the ground of suspicion. We urge 
the State governments to reconsider the usage of various habitual offender laws, i.e. whether such laws are needed in a constitutional system. In the meantime, the 
definition of “habitual offender” in the prison manuals/rules shall be in accordance with 
the definition provided in the habitual offender legislation enacted by the respective 
State legislature, subject to any constitutional challenge against such legislation in the 
future. In case, there is no habitual offender legislation in the State, the references to 
habitual offenders directly or indirectly, as discussed in this judgment, are struck down 
as unconstitutional. The Union and the State governments are directed to make 
necessary changes in the prison manuals/rules in line with this judgment. 
XVIII. 
The Role of Legal Service Authorities in Prisons 

In order to ensure that the fundamental rights of prisoners are not violated, the 
role of legal services authorities is crucial. The importance of free legal aid has been 
emphasized by this Court in several judgments. 

Right to Free Legal Aid 

The Court, in Hussainara Khatoon v. Home Secretary, State of Bihar, 
recognized the “right to free legal services” as “an essential ingredient” of “reasonable, 
fair and just” procedure under Article 21 for a person accused of an offence.303 It is “a 
constitutional right of every accused person who is unable to engage a lawyer and 
secure legal services on account of reasons such as poverty, indigence or 
 
303 Hussainara Khatoon v. Home Secretary, State of Bihar [1979] 3 S.C.R 

PART XVIII 

incommunicado situation”.304 Later, in Sheela Barse v. State of Maharashtra,305 
regarding the plight of women prisoners in the jails of Maharashtra, the Court, while 
emphasizing free legal assistance, expressed its concern on “the helpless condition 
of a prisoner who is lodged in a jail who does not know to whom he can turn for help 
in order to vindicate his innocence or defend, his constitutional or legal rights or to 
protect himself against torture and ill-treatment or oppression and harassment at the 
hands of his custodians”. 

The Court declared in Mohd. Hussain v. The State (Govt. of NCT) Delhi306 
that Article 39A “casts duty on the State to ensure that justice is not denied by reason 
of economic or other disabilities in the legal system and to provide free legal aid to 
every citizen with economic or other disabilities”. In Mohammed Ajmal Mohammad 
Amir Kasab bu Mujahid v. State Of Maharashtra,307 the Court held that the right 
to access to legal aid “flows from Articles 21 and 22(1) of the Constitution and needs 
to be strictly enforced”. The Court directed all the magistrates in the country to inform 
a person accused of committing a cognizable offence produced before their court, that 
it is his right to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner and, in case he has no 
means to engage a lawyer of his choice, that one would be provided to him from legal 
aid at the expense of the State. The Court clarified that “any failure to fully discharge 
the duty would amount to dereliction in duty and would make the concerned magistrate 
liable to departmental proceeding”. 

304 Ibid 
305 Sheela Barse v. State of Maharashtra, 1983 INSC 9 
 SC 750 
307 2012 INSC 357 

PART XVIII 

Inspection by Legal Services Authorities 

Section 12 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, provides that all 
“persons in custody” are entitled to free legal aid. In 2015, NALSA wrote a letter to all 
State Legal Services Authorities (SLSAs) to constitute a prison legal aid clinic (PLAC) 
in every prison under their jurisdiction.308 To further strengthen the functioning of 
PLACs, NALSA formulated the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) on Access to 
Legal Aid Services to Prisoners and Functioning of the Prison Legal Aid Clinics, 2022. 

Under this SOP, there are provisions for two types of inspection visits to the 
prisons. One shall be undertaken by the secretary of the DLSA, and the other is to be 
done by the chairperson of the DLSA, i.e., the district and sessions judge: 
“4. Monitoring of functioning of PLAC by DLSA 
4.1 Periodicity of visits by DLSA Secretary: DLSA 
Secretary will visit and inspect the Prison Legal Aid 
Clinics at least once a month. 
4.2 Role of the DLSA Secretary during prison visits: 
The following is the role: 
a) 
To ensure that legal aid 
lawyers have been appointed to 
represent 
all 
undertrials. 
In 
circumstances where any prisoner is 
found without legal representation 
during the visit by the DLSA, 
immediate steps to be taken towards 
ensuring appointment. b) 
To verify whether panel 
lawyers are meeting and interacting 
with prisoners including legal aid 
beneficiaries. 
In 
circumstances 
where 
panel 
lawyers 
are 
not 
interacting and communicating with 
the prisoners, the lawyer must be 
called to understand the concern and 
 
308 NALSA Standard Operating Procedures on Access to Legal Aid Services to Prisoners and Functioning of the 
Prison Legal Aid Clinics, 2022, https://nalsa.gov.in/acts-rules/guidelines/nalsa-sop-functioning-of-prison-legal-aid-
clinics-2022 

PART XVIII 

best respond to it. If need be, where 
deemed 
appropriate 
by 
the 
Secretary, DLSA, the concern lawyer 
may be removed from the panel, and 
a fresh appointment initiated. c) 
To 
check 
the 
prison 
conditions with respect to health, 
sanitation, food and hygiene in 
addition 
to 
access 
to 
legal 
representation. If any such concerns 
are raised, the same shall be shared 
with the Chairman of the DLSA, 
Member Secretary of SLSA as well 
as the Board of Visitors who have the 
authority to raise it to the appropriate 
authority. d) 
To track whether there are 
any instances of non-production at 
court hearings, be it physical or 
virtual. 
If 
such 
instances 
are 
reported, take immediate steps to 
rectify such misgivings. e) 
To ensure that concerns of 
vulnerable category of prisoners are 
heard and responded to. f) 
To ensure and check the 
documentation 
and 
reporting 
practices of the Clinic. g) 
To ensure that the PLVs and 
JVLs are able to perform their duties 
effectively, and have access to the 
prison at all times. They should 
ensure 
that 
no 
unnecessary 
hindrances are set forward from the 
prison officers, which may create 
hurdle in working of the PLAC. 
4.3 Periodicity of visits by the Chairman, DLSA 
(District & Sessions Judge): The Chairman, DLSA 
(District & Sessions Judge) shall visit the Prison 
Legal Aid Clinics at least once in three months. He 
would also visit the premises of the prison to 
understand 
any 
concerns 
regarding 
prison 
conditions, and also enquire into the functioning of 
the PLAC. They may also interact with prisoners to 
received feedback for services provided. 
4.4 Role of the Chairman, DLSA during prison visits: 
The Chairman DLSA would undertake to inspect the 
condition of the prisons, communicate with the 

PART XVIII 

inmates to understand their concerns with respect to 
their regimen, food, sanitation hygiene etc. in 
addition to access to legal representation. In 
circumstances where concerns are raised, the same 
may be raised in the meetings with the Secretary, 
DLSA to take measures to combat them. Specialized 
formats for documentation of prison visits by the 
Chairman may be prepared by the SLSA.”309 
 
The inspections have to be undertaken every month by the Secretary, DLSA, and 
quarterly by the Chairperson, DLSA. During these inspections, the authority inspecting 
is supposed to look at the overall condition of the prisons. 

Apart from this, a Board of Visitors is constituted, as per the Model Prison 
Manual 2016, at a district level. The Board comprises of: 
“29.03 The Board of Visitors shall comprise the 
following official members: 
a) The District Judge at the District level, or the Sub-
Divisional Judicial Magistrate exercising Jurisdiction, 
at Sub-Division level 
b) The District Magistrate, at the District level or Sub-
Divisional officer at Sub- Divisional level 
c) District Superintendent of Police 
d) The Chief Medical Officer of the Health 
Department, at the District level or the Sub-Divisional 
Medical Officer at Sub-Division level 
e) The Executive Engineer, PWD at the District level, 
or Assistant Engineer PWD at Sub-Divisional level 
f) The District Education Officer dealing with literacy 
programmes. g) District Social Welfare Officer 
h) District Employment Officer 
i) District Agricultural Officer 
j) District Industrial Officer 

The Board shall make at least one visit per quarter and 
for this purpose, presence of three members and the 
chairman shall constitute quorum. 

309 Rule 4, NALSA Standard Operating Procedures on Access to Legal Aid Services to Prisoners and Functioning 
of the Prison Legal Aid Clinics, 2022, https://nalsa.gov.in/acts-rules/guidelines/nalsa-sop-functioning-of-prison-
legal-aid-clinics-2022 

PART XVIII 

29.04 The Board of Visitors shall also comprise the 
following Non-Official Members:- 
a) Three Members of the Legislative Assembly of the 
state of which one should be a woman. b) A nominee of the State Human Rights Commission 
c) Two social workers of the District/Sub-Division; 
one of them shall be a woman having an interest in 
the administration of prisons and welfare of prisoners.

29.05 The District Judge shall be the Chairman of the 
Board of visitors at District level and the Sub-
Divisional Judicial Magistrate shall be the Chairman at 
Sub-Division level. The Non-official visitors after their 
appointment must be sensitised and trained about 
their duties, roles and responsibilities.” 

The duties of the Board have been provided as follows: 
“29.22 All Visitors, official and non-official, at every 
visit shall: 

(a) examine the cooked food; 

(b) inspect the barracks, wards, work-sheds and 
other buildings of the prison generally; 
(c) ascertain whether considerations of health, 
cleanliness and security are attended to, whether 
proper management and discipline is maintained in 
every respect and whether any prisoner is illegally 
detained, or is detained for undue length of time 
while awaiting trial; 
 
(d) examine prison registers and records, except 
secret records and records pertaining to accounts;
 
(e) hear and attend to all representation and 
petitions made by or on behalf of the prisoners; 
(f) direct, if deemed advisable, that any such 
representation or petition be forwarded to the 
Government; 

(g) suggest new avenues for improvement in 
correctional work.”310 
The comments of the Board of Visitors are recorded in the visitors’ book of the prison 
and are forwarded to the Inspector General (IG) of Prisons. Any action on the 
comments is at the discretion of the IG Prisons. 
 
310 Rule 29.22, Model Prison Manual, 2016. 

PART XIX 

The Model Prisons and Correctional Services Act, 2023 also envisages 
inspection of prisons, including by a Board of Visitors headed by the district 
judge/additional district judge/sub-divisional judicial magistrate.311 It also includes the 
provision for “free legal aid to the prisoners in accordance with the provisions of the 
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987” and the relevant standard operating 
procedure.312 
XIX. 
 The Future of Substantive Equality & Institutional Discrimination 

What does the future hold for India? Dr Ambedkar had expressed this concern 
in his last address to the Constituent Assembly. The concern holds true even today. 
More than 75 years since independence, we have not been able to eradicate the evil 
of caste discrimination. We need to have a national vision for justice and equality, 
which involves all citizens. As Jamal Greene noted: 
“There is also such a thing as rights. Those individual 
people and families have hopes and fears that 
matter but that conflict with the fears and hopes of 
their fellow human beings. Their aspirations and 
worries don’t depend on what Framers believed, or 
how Madison phrased the Bill of Rights, or whether 
some judicial opinion says “strict scrutiny” applies to 
a case. They depend on what people’s expectations 
are, how they are treated by others, and why. We are 
bound to experience the rights we have differently 
than anyone else does—this is what makes them 
ours. The central challenge for any system of justice 
has always been that we dream alone but we live 
together.”313 
 
311 Section 54 
312 Section 56 
313 Jamal Greene, How Rights Went Wrong: Why Our Obsession with Rights is Tearing America Apart, Mariner 
Books, 2022, p. 248 

PART XIX 

Therefore, we need real and quick steps to identify the instances of existing inequalities 
and injustices in our society. Words, without action, would mean nothing for the 
oppressed. As Paulo Freire noted in the “Pedagogy of the Oppressed”: 
“The oppressor is solidary with the oppressed only 
when he stops regarding the oppressed as an 
abstract category and sees them as persons who 
have been unjustly dealt with, deprived of their voice, 
cheated in the sale of their labor— when he stops 
making pious, sentimental, and individualistic 
gestures and risks an act of love. True solidarity is 
found only in the plenitude of this act of love, in its 
existentiality, in the praxis. To affirm that men and 
women are persons and as persons should be free, 
and yet to do nothing tangible to make this 
affirmative a reality, is a farce.”314 
We need a compassionate approach, as Alan Paton had described: 
“It is my own belief that the only power which can 
resist the power of fear is the power of love. It’s a 
weak thing and a tender thing; men despise and 
deride it. But I look for the day when […] we shall 
realize that the only lasting and worth-while solution 
of our grave and profound problems lies not in the 
use of power, but in that understanding and 
compassion without which human life is an 
intolerable bondage, condemning us all to an 
existence of violence, misery and fear.”315 

We need an institutional approach where people from marginalized 
communities could share their pain and anguish about their future collectively.316 We 
need to reflect and do away with institutional practices, which discriminate against 
citizens from marginalized communities or treat them without empathy. We need to 
identify systemic discrimination in all spaces by observing patterns of exclusion. After 
all, the “bounds of caste are made of steel”– “Sometimes invisible but almost always 
 
314 Paulo Freire, Pedagogy of the Oppressed (translated by Myra Bergman Ramos), Penguin 2017, p. 24 
315 Alan Paton, Cry, The Beloved Country, Vintage Books, 2002 
316 Bell Hooks, Salvation: black people and love, Harper Perennial, 2001; pp. 214-15 

PART XX 

inextricable”.317 But not so strong that they cannot be broken with the power of the 
Constitution. 

This petition highlighted an instance of institutional systemic discrimination. We 
appreciate the assistance provided by the lawyers in dealing with the issue. 
XX. 
Conclusion and Directions 

In light of the discussion, we issue the following directions: 

The impugned provisions are declared unconstitutional for being violative of 
Articles 14, 15, 17, 21, and 23 of the Constitution. All States and Union Territories 
are directed to revise their Prison Manuals/Rules in accordance with this 
judgment within a period of three months; 

The Union government is directed to make necessary changes, as highlighted in 
this judgment, to address caste-based discrimination in the Model Prison Manual 
2016 and the Model Prisons and Correctional Services Act 2023 within a period 
of three months; 

References to “habitual offenders” in the prison manuals/Model Prison Manual 
shall be in accordance with the definition provided in the habitual offender 
legislation enacted by the respective State legislatures, subject to any 
constitutional challenge against such legislation in the future. All other references 
or definitions of “habitual offenders” in the impugned prison manuals/rules are 
declared unconstitutional. In case, there is no habitual offender legislation in the 
State, the Union and the State governments are directed to make necessary 
 
317 Nusrat F. Jafri, This Land We Call Home: The Story of a Family, Caste, Conversions and Modern India, Penguin 
(2024), p. xv 

PART XX 

changes in the manuals/rules in line with this judgment, within a period of three 
months; 

The “caste” column and any references to caste in undertrial and/or convicts’ 
prisoners’ registers inside the prisons shall be deleted; 

The Police is directed to follow the guidelines issued in Arnesh Kumar v. State 
of Bihar (2014) and Amanatullah Khan v. The Commissioner of Police, Delhi 
(2024) to ensure that members of Denotified Tribes are not subjected to arbitrary 
arrest; 

This Court takes suo motu cognizance of the discrimination inside prisons on any 
ground such as caste, gender, disability, and shall list the case from now onwards 
as In Re: Discrimination Inside Prisons in India. The Registry is directed to 
list the case after a period of three months before an appropriate Bench; 

On the first date of hearing of the above suo motu petition, all States and the 
Union government shall file a compliance report on this judgment; 

The DLSAs and the Board of Visitors formed under the Model Prison Manual 
2016 shall jointly conduct regular inspections to identify whether caste-based 
discrimination or similar discriminatory practices, as highlighted in this judgment, 
are still taking place inside prisons. The DLSAs and the Board of Visitors shall 
submit a joint report of their inspection to the SLSAs, which shall compile a 
common report and forward it to NALSA, which shall in turn file a joint status 
report before this Court in the above-mentioned suo motu writ petition; and 

The Union government is directed to circulate a copy of this judgment to the Chief 
Secretaries of all States and Union territories within a period of three weeks from 
the date of delivery of this judgment. 

PART XX 

The writ petition is disposed of. 

Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of. 

…….……………………………………CJI 
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud].….…………………………………………J 
[J B Pardiwala]..….…………………………………………J 
[Manoj Misra] 

New Delhi; 
October 03, 2024