Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Civil Appeal Nos.3159-3160 of 2019 
 
Neelam Gupta & Ors. 

 …Appellant(s) 
 
Versus 
 
Rajendra Kumar Gupta & Anr. …Respondent(s) 
 
With 
 
Contempt Petition (C) Nos. 517-518 of 2020 
IN 
Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-3160 of 2019 

Rajendra Kumar Gupta 

…Appellant(s) 
 
Versus 
Neelam Gupta and Ors. 

…Alleged Contemnors/ 
Respondents 
 
JUDGMENT 

C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J. 
 
1. 
The legal representatives of original defendant 
No.1 viz., appellant Nos. 1 to 3 herein and original 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
defendant No. 2 in Civil Suit No.195A/95, are in appeal 
against the judgment dated 11.07.2014 passed by the 
High Court of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in Second Appeal 
No.401/2003, reversing the concurrent judgments of the 
Courts below and the consequently, drawn decree dated 
25.07.2014. 
 
2. 
The facts, in succinct, that led to the impugned 
judgment and decree are as follows:- 
“Respondent No.1 herein viz., Rajendra Kumar 
Gupta 
filed 
Civil 
Suit 
No.195A/95 
(evidently, 
renumbered) admittedly on 24.12.1986, against the 
original defendants, namely, Ashok Kumar Gupta and 
Rakesh Kumar Gupta for recovery of possession of suit 
schedule property based on title besides claiming 
damages to the tune of Rs. 10,500/- and future damages 
at the rate of Rs. 1000/- per acre and for costs. It was 
averred that he purchased the suit schedule property 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
admeasuring 7.60 acres comprised in Khasra No.867/1 
of Mowa village in Tehsil and District Raipur, as per 
registered sale deed dated 04.06.1968 from one Late Sh. 
Sitaram Gupta, who was the common cousin of himself 
and the original defendants. Furthermore, he averred 
that since its registration he had been enjoying peaceful 
possession of the suit schedule property under 
Bhumiswami Rights till he was dispossessed by the 
original defendants in the month of July, 1983.” 
 
3. 
The original defendants jointly filed a written 
statement on 04.04.1990 contending that their father, Sh. 
Ramesh Chandra Gupta, and father of the plaintiff, Sh. 
Kailash Chandra Gupta, purchased the suit schedule 
property in the name of their nephew Late Sh. Sitaram 
Gupta, on 15.03.1963. They further contended that 
Ramesh Chandra Gupta and Kailash Chandra Gupta had 
also purchased another land admeasuring 5 acres 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
comprised in Khasra No.924 of the same village. It was 
also contended by them that their father had installed 
electric pump and dug well besides constructing three 
rooms in the suit schedule property for dairy purpose. 
They averred, rather admitted, that upon the death of 
plaintiff’s father on 25.12.1967, the suit schedule 
property was transferred in the name of the plaintiff in 
the year 1968 and his name was recorded in the revenue 
records, albeit claimed that its possession still remained 
with them. They went on to contend that Ramesh 
Chandra Gupta and Kailash Chandra Gupta were 
members of joint family and they had joint business of 
bangles in Firozabad in the State of Uttar Pradesh and 
that in the year 1952 they started the business of bangles 
in Raipur by opening a shop in the name and style ‘Laxmi 
Bangles Store’. According to them, in the year 1973 their 
father had opened another shop of bangles at Dhamtari 
and on 31.03.1976 an oral partition had taken place 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
between their father viz., the original defendant No.1 and 
plaintiff’s family whereunder land in Khasra No.924 
admeasuring 5 acres and the bangle shop at Dhamtari 
were given to the plaintiff and his family and the suit 
schedule property and the bangle shop at Raipur were 
allotted to the share of defendant’s family. They had also 
contended that till the aforementioned partition effected 
on 31.03.1976, the plaintiff was a member of the Joint 
Hindu Family. In their joint written statement, they had 
also taken up the pleas of adverse possession and 
limitation, as special objections on the ground of being 
in possession of the suit schedule property for more than 
12 years. 
 
4. 
Based on the rival pleadings, the Trial Court had 
framed 11 issues as hereunder:- 
“1. Did the Plaintiff by purchasing the suit land 
through registered sale deed dated 04/06/1968 
get the possession of the suit land? 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
2. Whether the Plaintiff is Bhumiswami of the suit 
land? 
 
3. Did the father of the Defendants purchased the 
suit land in the name of his nephew in 1963 and 
1967, since then the Defendants are in possession 
of the suit land? 
 
4. Whether the Defendants within the knowledge 
of the Plaintiff have completed 12 years of 
continuous and uninterrupted possession on the 
suit land? 
 
5. Did the father of the Defendants transfer the suit 
land in the name of the Plaintiff on papers on 
04/06/1968 all the lands of Sitaram in which suit 
land is also included. 
 
6. Whether there is income of Rs. 1000 per year 
from the suit land? 
 
7. Is the claim of the Plaintiff is barred by 
Limitation? 
 
8. Did the Defendants in the year 1983 forcible 
take possession of the suit land. 
 
9. Is the Plaintiff entitled to get the possession of 
the suit land from the Defendants? 
 
10. Is the Plaintiff entitled to get damages of Rs. 
10500/- from the defendants/ 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
11. Reliefs and costs?” 
 
5. 
The Trial Court answered issue Nos.2 & 8 to 10 in 
the negative and issue Nos.6 & 7 in the affirmative. 
Furthermore, it was held that the evidence on record 
would reveal that prior to the year 1952, the father of the 
first 
respondent-plaintiff 
and 
father 
of 
original 
defendants were carrying on business in Bangles jointly 
and Bangle shops were opened in Raipur in the year 
1952, and thereafter, in Dhamtari in the year 1973 as joint 
business. 
 
Joint 
business 
would 
create 
strong 
presumption of joint family. The Trial Court also held 
that the age of the aforesaid Sitaram, the vendor who was 
the common cousin of the plaintiff and the original 
defendants, was shown in Ext.P1/C – sale deed dated 
04.06.1968, as 22 years and hence, at the time of 
purchase of the said suit schedule property, Sitaram 
must have been aged only 17 years. Consequently, it 
was held thus: - 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
“Till otherwise is not proved this evidence of age 
shows the incapacity of self earning and creates 
strong presumption that the suit land was 
purchased by the income of joint family. The 
defendants have also stated that on the suit land 
their father had in the year 1964 installed electric 
pump, dugged well and constructed gate, fencing 
and three rooms, which statement is unrebutted 
and that also clears that the suit land was joint 
family property. 
 
By the aforesaid analysis, it is clear that the suit 
land was purchased by the joint family in the name 
of Sitaram and after purchase suit land was the 
Joint Hindu Family Property which was purchased 
by father of the Defendants in the year 1963 jointly 
with his brothers in the name of Sitaram.” 
 
(underline supplied) 
 
6. 
After holding that the suit land was Joint Hindu 
Family property the Trial Court continued to consider 
the question whether by the purchase of the suit land 
under Ext.P1/C - sale deed dated 04.06.1968 the 
plaintiff–first respondent herein accrued any right in the 
suit land based on Ex-P-1C. In that regard, the Trial 
Court held that since the suit schedule property was 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
purchased in the year 1963, in the name of Sitaram out of 
the income of joint family, it became the joint family 
property and there was no evidence to show that Sitaram 
was then the head of the family. Consequently, the Trial 
Court held that Sitaram had no right to sell the suit land 
under Ext.P1/C – sale deed dated 04.06.1968 and, 
therefore, the execution of Ext.P1/C was without any 
authority or right and, therefore, it is void. That apart, 
the Trial Court upheld the contention of the original 
defendants that the suit was barred by limitation as the 
plaintiff–the first respondent was aware of the possession 
of defendant in the suit schedule property adverse to his 
interest since 1968. Based on such observations, 
conclusions and findings, the Trial Court dismissed the 
suit. 
 
7. 
Aggrieved by the dismissal of the suit, the plaintiff- 
first respondent challenged the judgment and decree of 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
the Trial Court in before 
the Third Additional District Judge, Raipur. 
 
8. 
The First Appellate Court as per the judgment 
dated 09.04.2003 dismissed the appeal and confirmed 
the dismissal of the suit. Nonetheless, on an analysis of 
the evidence on record, the First Appellate Court 
interfered with the finding of the Trial Court that the suit 
schedule property was a Joint Hindu Family property 
and held thus: - 
“The Trial Court had dismissed the suit by holding 
that the suit land was the Joint Hindu Family property 
and further that the suit was barred by time but I have 
after analysis of evidence held that the suit land was 
never the Joint Hindu Family property of the parties 
but have also held that the suit of the Plaintiff is barred 
by time. Under these circumstances, the finding 
recorded by the Trial Court against issue No. 7 for 
dismissing the suit is found to be in order. Hence, no 
case is made out to interfere with the judgment dated 
13/10/1999 passed by the Trial Court.” 
(underline supplied) 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 

9. 
 It is feeling aggrieved by the judgment and 
decree of the First Appellate Court dated 09.04.2003 to 
the extent it is adverse to him that the plaintiff-first 
respondent herein filed the S.A. No.401/2003 which 
culminated in the impugned judgment. As noted 
hereinbefore, as per the impugned judgment the High 
Court reversed the concurrent judgment and decree of 
dismissal of the suit and allowed the same after setting 
them aside. After allowing the appeal under the 
impugned judgment the suit of the plaintiff-first 
respondent herein was decreed on the following terms:- 
“(A) Plaintiff is entitled for recovery of possession 
of the suit land bearing Khasra No. 867/ 1, area 
7.60 acres situated at village Mowa, Tahsil and 
District Raipur from the defendants No. 1 and 2; 
and it is directed that defendants shall deliver the 
vacant and peaceful possession of the Schedule 
suit land to the plaintiff herein.” 
 
10. 
A scanning of the impugned judgment of the High 
Court would reveal that the High Court virtually found 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
that the appreciation of evidence by the courts below 
was perverse and on a proper appreciation of evidence 
on record felt that the plaintiff-first respondent herein 
had succeeded in establishing title over the suit land. 
Paragraphs 10 and 11 of the impugned judgment assume 
relevance in the context of the challenge made against 
the sale by the appellants herein and they read thus: - 
“10. The Commissioner, by its order dated 29th 
March, 1988 again confirmed the order of Sub 
Divisional Officer, Raipur by dismissing the appeal 
filed by the defendants herein and declined to 
direct mutation in name of the defendants in the 
suit land. Thus, the document Ex.P-4 clearly 
recites the admission on the part of the defendants 
that the suit land is held by the plaintiff in his 
bhumiswami rights and to whom they cultivated 
the suit land for two consecutive years i.e. 1973 and 
1974, not only this, defendants have clearly stated 
in document Ex.P-4 that they have cultivated the 
suit land only for more than two years. The date of 
the said document is 27.1.1981; and the instant civil 
suit has been filed on 24.12.1986. 
 
11. Coming back to the sale deed (Ex.P-1) dated 
4.6.1986 by which the plaintiff has purchased the 
suit land on 4.6.1986, which clearly recites that the 
delivery of possession by erstwhile owner Sitaram 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
Agrawal in favour of plaintiff coupled with the 
admission on the part of the defendants that the 
suit land was held by plaintiff only for the two 
consecutive years i.e. 1973 and 1974, they were in 
permissive possession of the suit land as 
Adhiyadar; therefore, it is held that the trial Court 
as well as first appellate Court have committed 
manifest illegality in holding that the plaintiff has 
failed to establish his title over the suit land. On 
the contrary it is held that the plaintiff has 
satisfactorily pleaded and established his title over 
the suit land and finding recorded by the two 
courts below with respect to the plaintiff’s title is 
liable to be set aside.” 
 
11. 
The contentions of the appellants 1, 2 & 3 herein, 
who are legal representatives of original defendant No.1 
as also appellant No.4 who was the original defendant 
No.2 is that the alleged sale effected as per Ext.P1/C – 
sale deed dated 04.06.1968 was merely on paper and 
was bogus and sham document. According to them, 
Sitaram, the common cousin of original defendants as 
also the plaintiff got no right to transfer the suit schedule 
property to the plaintiff as he himself had not accrued 
any right over the suit schedule property based on sale 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
deed registered in the year 1963. It is their contention 
that the said property was purchased in the name of 
Sitaram by father of original defendants along with his 
brothers for the joint family (and thus in sum-and-
substance) as their benami and hence, he was not the 
real owner of the suit schedule property. That apart, they 
would contend that they have perfected the title over the 
suit schedule property by way of adverse possession 
since they have been in continuous possession of the suit 
schedule property since the year 1968. That apart, it is 
contended that as rightly held by the Trial Court as also 
the First Appellate Court, the suit filed by the plaintiff-
first respondent was barred by limitation as it was not 
filed within 12 years from the date of alleged sale. 
 
12., the learned counsel appearing for the 
first respondent would contend that the High Court was 
perfectly justified in interfering with the judgments and 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
decree of the courts below as they were outcome of 
perverse appreciation of evidence. To buttress this 
contention, 
he 
relied 
on 
Section-4 
of 
Benami 
Transactions (Prohibitions) Act, 1988 and Article 65 of 
the Limitation Act, 1963 and the decisions rendered 
thereunder and relied on by the High Court. It is the 
contention that in Ex- P-4, the respondent – defendants 
categorically admitted that they were placed in 
possession of a suit land in 1973 and continued in 
possession up to 1974 as Adhiyadar (lessee) and hence, 
their possession could be termed only as permissive 
possession and it could never be said to be adverse 
possession except by proving that their possession is 
adverse to the title of the property to the knowledge of 
the true owner viz. the plaintiff for a period of 12 years or 
more. He would further contend that by no stretch of 
imagination possession of defendants as Adhiyadar 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
(lessee) could be said to be adverse and it could only be 
permissive possession. 
 
13. 
A careful analysis of the impugned judgment would 
reveal that while reversing the concurrent judgment of 
dismissal of the suit, the High Court found various 
perversities in the manner of appreciation of evidence. 
The High Court found that the defendants had never 
challenged the Ex- P- 1C sale deed dated 04.06.1968. 
Consequently, it was found that possession was 
transferred to the plaintiff in 1968 pursuant to the sale 
deed and Ex-P-2 and P-3, Khasra entries for the period of 
year 1971-1972 to 1977 and 1978 would further reveal the 
ownership and possession of the plaintiff over the suit 
schedule property. It was further found that though the 
defendants had contended that there occurred an oral 
partition of the properties in the year 1976 between the 
family of the plaintiff and the defendants whereunder, 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
the defendants received the suit schedule property and 
shop at Raipur and the plaintiff received shop at 
Dhamtari and land in Khasra No. 924, the First Appellate 
Court held that the said oral partition was not proved by 
the defendants/the appellants herein and the said 
finding of the First Appellate Court had become final. 
The High Court had also taken note of the fact that earlier 
the defendants filed Ex- P-4 application dated 27.01.1981 
(produced as Annexure P-13 in these proceedings) 
before Tahsildar, Raipur stating that they had been or 
they had cultivated the suit land for two years i.e. 1973 
and 1974 as Adhiyadar (lessee) and thereby acquired 
the rights of occupancy tenants and their names be 
recorded in revenue records. It was found that in the 
said application they had again admitted the ownership 
of plaintiff over the suit schedule property. Ex- P-4 
application was rejected by the Tahsildar as per order 
dated 22.06.1985 and the same was upheld by the Sub-

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
Divisional Officer and later by the Commissioner as per 
orders dated 29.10.1986 and 29.03.1988 respectively. 
The High Court also found that the contents of Ex-P-4 
application dated 27.01.1981 filed before Tahsildar, 
Raipur was admitted by defendant No. 1 while being 
cross-examined ultimately to arrive at the conclusion 
that such permissive possession could not be converted 
as adverse possession except by proving their 
possession adverse to the title of the plaintiff for a 
continuous period of 12 years or more. Obviously, the 
High Court found that the contentions raised to claim the 
occupancy tenancy before the Tahsildar and the 
contentions qua adverse possession before the Civil 
Court are contradictory in nature. The High Court relied 
on the decision of this court in Indira v. Arumugam and 
Anr.1 to hold that when the suit is one for possession 
based on title and when once title is established on the 
 
 SC 1549 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
basis of relevant documents and other evidence brought 
on record in such suit unless the defendant could prove 
adverse possession for the prescriptive period, the suit 
of the plaintiff could not be dismissed. Relying on the 
decision of this court in Saroop Singh v. Banto and Ors.2, 
the High Court held that in the light of Article 65 of the 
Limitation Act, the starting point of limitation would not 
commence from the date when the right of ownership 
arises to the plaintiff but would commence from the date 
the 
defendant’s 
possession 
became 
adverse. 
Furthermore, it was held that when plaintiff’s title and 
possession over the suit schedule property within twelve 
years from the date of institution of the suit is proved, it 
is for the defendants to prove title by adverse possession 
and in that regard, the starting point of limitation in terms 
of Article 65 of the Limitation Act would commence from 
the date of defendant’s possession becoming adverse 
 
2 (2005) 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
and not from the date when the right of ownership is 
acquired by the plaintiff. Suffice it to say, that the 
concurrent judgment of dismissal of the suit by the Trial 
Court and the First Appellate Court on the ground that 
the suit was barred by limitation was set aside by the 
High Court under the impugned judgment assigning 
such reasons. 
 
14. 
While considering the rival contentions raised 
before us to challenge/ sustain the impugned judgment 
indisputable facts based on evidence on record and 
certain well settled position qua the laws involved on the 
factual matrix involved in the case on hand require to be 
borne in mind. The Trial Court dismissed the suit mainly 
on two counts, firstly, holding that the suit schedule 
property is a Joint Hindu Family property and therefore, 
the common cousin Sitaram had no right to sell the 
property as per Ext.P1/C dated 04.06.1968 to the plaintiff 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
(First respondent herein) and secondly, that the suit was 
barred by limitation. The judgment dated 09.04.2003 
passed by the First Appellate Court in would reveal that after appreciating the 
evidence the First Appellate Court set aside the finding 
of the Trial Court that the suit schedule property is a Joint 
Hindu Family property. As a matter of fact, even after 
interfering with the said finding and holding it otherwise 
the First Appellate Court sustained the judgment of 
dismissal of the suit concurring with the finding of the 
Trial Court that the suit filed by the plaintiff was barred 
by limitation. Thus, it is evident that though, the Trial 
Court and the First Appellate Court are ad idem on the 
issue on limitation they were at issues upon the finding 
as to whether the suit schedule property is the Joint 
Hindu Family property. Despite the reversal of the 
finding of the Trial Court the defendants, who were 
respondents before the First Appellate Court, had not 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
chosen to file appeal and had allowed the finding that the 
suit schedule property is not a Joint Hindu Family 
property to become final, for reasons best known to 
them. The First Appellate Court, inter alia, considered, 
rather, re-appreciated the oral testimony of the original 
defendant No.1-Shri Ashok Kumar Gupta who was 
examined as DW-1 and also documentary evidence. On 
such appreciation, it was held that the suit schedule 
property is not a Joint Hindu Family property of the four 
sons of late Mangal Sen Gupta, viz., plaintiff’s father late 
Shri Ramesh Chand Gupta, defendant’s father Late Shri 
Ramesh Chand Gupta, Late Ram Prasad and Beniram 
Gupta. It is despite all such conclusions and finding that 
the respondents before the first appellate court viz., the 
appellants herein did not file cross-appeal or cross-
objection to challenge the adverse finding that the suit 
schedule property is not a Joint Hindu Family property 
before the High Court. Suffice it to say that in the said 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
circumstances the appellants cannot be permitted to 
canvass that suit schedule property is a Joint Hindu 
Family Property. 
 
15. 
That apart, a scanning of the impugned judgment 
would reveal that the High Court has picked up certain 
crucial perversities that infected the judgments of the 
courts below. In Stroud’s Judicial Dictionary of Words & 
Phrases, 4th Edn., the expression ‘perverse’ has been 
defined thus: - 
“Perverse. – A perverse verdict may probably 
be defined as one that is not only against the 
weight of evidence but is altogether against the 
evidence. 
 
In the decision in Arulvelu & Anr. v. 
State Rep. by Public Prosecutor & Anr.3 this 
Court held that ‘perverse finding’ would mean 
a finding which is not only against the weight of 
evidence but is altogether against the evidence 
itself. 
 
In the decision in General Manager (P), 
Punjab & Sind Bank and Others v. Daya Singh4, 
 
3 (2009) 
4 (2010) 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
this Court held perverse finding as one which 
is based on no evidence or one that no 
reasonable 
person 
would 
arrive 
at. 
Furthermore, it was held that unless it is found 
that some relevant evidence had not been 
considered 
or 
that 
certain 
inadmissible 
material had been taken into consideration the 
finding could not be said to be perverse.” 
 
16. 
Bearing the aforesaid position as to perverse 
finding we will proceed to consider whether the 
impugned judgment is to be sustained in view of the 
indisputable or undisputed facts and the decisions of 
precedential value applicable to such situations and 
circumstances revealed from the evidence on record. 
Before proceeding to undertake such a consideration it 
is not inappropriate to refer to the settled positions of law 
with respect to pleadings in civil proceedings before a 
civil court. 
 
17. 
The ordinary rule of law is that evidence can be 
permitted to be given only on a plea properly raised and 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
not in contradiction of the plea (see the decision in Mrs. 
Om Prabha Jain v. Abnash Chand & Anr.5). 
 
18. 
In the decision in Ram Sarup Gupta (dead) by LRs 
v. Bishun Narain Inter College and Others6, this Court 
held: - 
“….It is well settled that in the absence of 
pleading, evidence, if any, produced by the 
parties cannot be considered. It is also equally 
settled that no party should be permitted to travel 
beyond its pleading and that all necessary and 
material facts should be pleaded by the party in 
support of the case set up by it.” 
 
19. 
In Kashi Nath (Dead) through LRs. v. Jaganath7, 
this Court held that where the evidence is not in line with 
the pleadings and is at variance with it, the said evidence 
could not be looked into or relied on. In Damodhar 
Narayan Sawale (D) through LRs. v. Tejrao Bajirao 
Mhaske8, this Court held:- 
 
5 (AIR 1968 SC 1083) 
6 (1987) 
7 (2003) 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
“……the well neigh settled position of law is that 
one could be permitted to let in evidence only in 
tune with his pleadings. We shall not also be 
oblivious of the basic rule of law of pleadings, 
founded on the principle of secundum allegata et 
probate, that a party is not allowed to succeed 
where he has not set up the case which he wants to 
substantiate.” 
 
20. 
Now, for undertaking a consideration as mentioned 
above, we will firstly refer to the pleadings of the 
defendants in their jointly filed written statement. In 
paragraph 1-a, thereof it was averred thus: - 
“1-a… True and correct position is that plaintiff’s 
father late Kailash Chand; defendants’ father late 
Ramesh Chandra; late Ram Prasad Gupta; and Beni 
Ram Gupta, all sons of Mangal Sen Gupta, were 
members of Hindu Undivided Family and all of 
them were doing their business of manufacturing 
glass bangles in Firozabad (Uttar Pradesh) in the 
name and style of Ganesh Glass Bangles. In the 
year 1952, the father of the defendants and father 
of plaintiff opened a shop in Raipur City in the 
name of Lakshmi Bangle Stores. Thereafter 
Defendants’ Father Late Ramesh Chandra and 
Plaintiff’s 
father 
purchased 
suit 
lands 
on 
15.03.1963 in the name of their nephew late 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
Sitaram for a total price of Rs. 8,950/. Because late 
Sitaram was a member of the Joint Family…” 
 
“… In the year 1968, late Ram Prasad who was the 
brother 
of 
Defendant’s 
father 
requested 
Defendants’ father to transfer the suit lands and 
other lands which are in the name of his (Ram 
Prasad’s) son Sitaram in favour of any other 
member. Because Sitaram’s condition is not sound 
and he can ruin and fritter away suit lands under 
influence from anyone. Thereafter Defendants’ 
father transferred suit lands and other lands which 
were in the name of Sita Ram, in favour of the 
plaintiff on 4.6.1968 at an estimated price, 
although those lands were purchased for Rs. 
16,000/- and suitable amendments were made in 
the records also. But suit lands were always 
maintained and occupied by the defendants 
herein and their father. In the year 1973, brothers 
of Defendants’ father opened a bangle shop in 
Dhamtari and plaintiff and his brother Surinder 
used to sit in this shop. Later on, an oral partition 
was arrived at in between the Defendants’ father 
and Plaintiff’s family according to which the shop 
in Dhamtari and agricultural lands of khasra no. 
924 measuring 5.00 acres situated in Village Mowa 
were given to plaintiff and his family. Whereas suit 
lands herein and the shop in Raipur fell to the share 
of defendants.” 
 
21. 
In paragraph 1-b, thereof it was averred as under:- 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
“1-b. In fact suit lands were always and even today 
also are in possession of defendants and their 
father and after the aforesaid partition, defendants 
and their father and after the aforesaid partition, 
defendants and their father became absolute and 
exclusive owners of the suit lands and plaintiff has 
absolutely no right or interest in the suit lands.” 
 
22. 
It is true that in paragraphs 9 and 10 of the written 
statement special objections were taken as under: - 
“9. Even if it is presumed that defendants are not 
the owners of the suit lands described 
in 
paragraph 1 above, then also defendants have 
become owner of the suit lands due to their 
constant and uninterrupted possession thereof 
since last more than 12 years and which was within 
the full knowledge of the plaintiff. Therefore suit 
of the plaintiff is liable to dismissed on this ground 
alone.” 
 
“10. THAT Suit is beyond the prescribed limitation 
and as such is liable to be dismissed with costs.” 
 
23. 
Now, having noted the aforementioned specific 
averments in the written statement and the positions of 
law regarding pleadings referred above, we will refer to 
the oral evidence of original defendant No.1, who was 
examined as DW-1. The chief examination of DW-1 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
would reveal that in contradiction to the averment that 
the defendants’ father late Ramesh Chandra and 
plaintiffs’ father purchased suit lands on 15.03.1963, 
Ashok Kumar Gupta deposed that the disputed land 
were purchased in jointness by his father and his three 
brothers, namely, Beni Ram Gupta, late Ram Prashad 
Gupta and late Kailash Gupta and hence, it was a joint 
family. He would also depose that it was so purchased in 
the name of Sita Ram Gupta in the year 1963. It is to be 
noted that while being cross examined, he would 
depose: - 
“disputed lands were purchased by my father in 
the name of Sita Ram. But neither the original nor 
the copy of that sale deed has been filed. We did 
not give any application for mutation of our names 
on the disputed lands in the year 1976 after 
partition had been arrived at.” 
 
24. 
We have referred to the pleadings and the 
evidence adduced by the defendants not for the purpose 
of re-visiting the findings of the First Appellate Court that 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
the suit schedule property is not a joint family property. 
We will reveal the raison d’etre therefor, a little later. 
 
25. 
In view of the non-availability of the contention for 
the appellants that the suit schedule property is a Joint 
Hindu Family property. The next question is whether the 
finding of the High Court that the plaintiff is the owner of 
the suit schedule property is the correct conclusion on 
assimilation of facts and appreciation of evidence. We 
have no hesitation to answer it in the affirmative. The 
sale deed dated 04.06.1968 (Ext.P1/C) is a registered 
sale deed whereunder the plaintiff had purchased the 
suit land from late Shri Sita Ram Aggarwal. 
 
26. 
It is a fact that the Trial Court held Ext.P1/C-sale 
deed dated 04.06.1968 as void on twin grounds. As a 
matter of fact, the Trial Court held that in Ext.P1/C the 
age of Sh. Sitaram was shown as 22 years and hence, 
when the suit land was purchased in the name of Sitaram 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
on 15.03.1963, Sh. Sitaram must have been aged 17 
years. Further, it was held:- 
“Till otherwise is not proved this evidence of age 
shows the incapacity of self-earning and creates 
strong presumption that suit land was purchased 
by the income of joint family.” 
 
27. 
The Trial Court further held in paragraphs 16 and 
17 of its judgment thus:- 
“16. Now the analysis of the point that did the 
Plaintiff purchases the suit land through Exhibit P-
1 sale deed or whether any right on the suit land 
accrues to the Plaintiff on the basis of document 
Exhibit P-1 C. According to previous paragraph 
the burden to prove the illegality of Exhibit P-1C is 
on the Defendants and to prove Exhibit P-1 illegal 
Defendants have failed and in the previous 
concluded issue it is held that the suit land after 
being purchased in the name of Sitaram was the 
property of joint family. There is no evidence that 
shows that Sitaram was the head of the family 
therefore, it is held that Sitaram had no right to sell 
the suit land by the sale deed Exhibit P-1 C 
executed without any authority or right is void. 
 
17. Another ground for concluding that Exhibit P-1 
C is void is that when it is proved that the Plaintiff 
on the date of sale i.e. 04/06/1968 was one of the 
member of joint family and was minor at that time 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
then what was the need for which one member of 
the joint family to sell the Suit land to another 
member of the same joint family. On the date of 
sale the Plaintiff being the purchaser was minor 
and had no capacity of earning money on his own. 
The business of Plaintiff’s father was joint business. 
It appears that the intention of the joint family 
behind that action was to keep the suit land and 
other properties of sitaram in the name of the 
Plaintiff. But it is pertinent to mention that even 
after such intention Exhibit P-1 C is not transfer on 
papers only and therefore Exhibit P-1 does not 
bear any legal weightage.” 
 
28. 
It is to be noted that though the First Appellate 
Court reversed the finding of the Trial Court that suit land 
is a Joint Hindu Family property, it did not consider in 
detail and arrive at any positive finding as to the 
correctness or otherwise of the declaration of the Trial 
Court of Ext.P1/C as void. At any rate, the Frist Appellate 
Court did not set it aside. At the same time, it may be 
possible to infer from the following recital from 
paragraph 17 of the judgment of the First Appellate 
Court that it held the finding of the Trial Court that sale of 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
suit land by Sitaram in favour of the plaintiff did not 
confer any title to the plaintiff as not one in accordance 
with law: - 
“……But the Trial Court had treated the suit 
property as Joint Hindu Family property and has 
further held that sale of the suit land by the Sitaram 
in favour of the plaintiff does not confer any title on 
the plaintiff which finding is not in accordance with 
law.” 
 
29. 
In 
the 
contextual 
situation, 
especially 
with 
reference to the observation and finding of the Trial 
Court on the ground of minority at the time of purchase 
of suit land, be it that of Sitaram or plaintiff, we think it 
only appropriate to observe and hold thus, in the fitness 
of things: - 
 
Section 6(h) of the Transfer of Property Act 
provides inter alia, that no transfer can be made “to a 
person legally disqualified to be a transferee.” Section 7 
of the Transfer of Property Act deals with persons 
competent to transfer. It provides that every person 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
competent to contract is competent to transfer property 
to the extent and in the manner allowed and prescribed 
by any law for the time being in force. Section 11 of the 
Indian Contract Act, 1872, provides as to who are 
competent to contract and it provides that every person 
is competent to contract who is of the age of majority 
according to the law to which he is subject (of course the 
reference is to the Indian Majority Act, 1875) and who is 
of sound mind and is not disqualified from contracting by 
any law to which he is subject. 
 
30. 
Though an agreement to sell is a contract of sale, 
going by its definition under Section 54 of the Transfer of 
Property Act, a sale cannot be said to be a contract. Sale, 
going by the definition thereunder, is a transfer of 
ownership in exchange for a price paid or promised or 
part-paid and part-promised. The conjoint reading of all 
the aforesaid relevant provisions would undoubtedly go 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
to show that they would not come in the way of transfer 
of an immovable property in favour of a minor or in other 
words, they would invariably suggest that a minor can be 
a transferee though not a transferor of immovable 
property. In such circumstances, it can only be said that 
Sh. Sitaram had no legal disability or disqualification at 
the time of purchase of suit land on 15.03.1963 in his 
name as also the plaintiff, as a transferee, at the time of 
execution of Ext.P1/C - sale deed on 04.06.1968. It is 
nobody’s case that at the time of execution of Ext.P1/C 
Sitaram had not attained majority. 
 
31. 
Owing to the oscillative stand of the defendants/the 
appellants over the sale deed dated 15.03.1963 and 
04.06.1968, and on account of the disentitlement of the 
defendants to resurrect the contention that the suit land 
is a Joint Hindu family property coupled with the 
indisputable position obtained from the materials on 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
record that admittedly suit land was purchased in the 
name of Sh. Sita Ram, we find absolutely no reason to 
ascribe voidness to the said sale deed dated 15.03.1963 
as also Ext.P1/C sale deed dated 04.06.1968 or to hold 
that they did not have the effect of transfer of ownership. 
Though, the defendants did not raise a contention 
specifically on the ground that Sh. Sita Ram was a 
benami, the said question whether such a contention is 
available and can be sustained by the defendants to 
invalidate the said sale deeds have been gone into by 
the High Court taking note of the contention that though 
it was purchased in his name in the year 1963 he did not 
have right to transfer the suit land to the plaintiff as per 
Ext.P1/C-sale deed. In that regard, Section 4 of the 
Benami Transaction Act, 1988 was referred to by the 
High Court. After referring to Sub-sections 4 (1) and (2) 
thereof, the High Court held that no suit, claim or action 
to enforce a right in respect of any property held benami 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
shall lie against the person in whose name the property 
is held or against any other person shall lie by or on 
behalf of a person claiming to be the real owner of such 
property because of the prohibitory nature therefor. 
Relying on the decision of this Court in R. Rajagopal 
Reddy (D) by LRs. v. Padmini Chandrasekharan (D) by 
LRs.9 and in view of the prohibition contained in the 
aforesaid provisions, the High Court virtually held such 
a contention that Sh. Sita Ram was not the owner of the 
property with right to alienate, (of course, on attaining 
majority) as also the challenge against the right acquired 
by the plaintiffs pursuant to the purchase of the suit land 
under Ext.P1/C as meritless. Suffice it to say that in view 
of the reasons assigned by the High Court and given by 
us supra, there can be no doubt with respect to the 
transfer of the ownership of the suit land from Sh. Sita 
Ram to the plaintiff on the strength of Ext.P1/C sale deed. 
 
 SC 238 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 

32. 
The question that survives further consideration is 
whether the High Court was right in declining to accept 
the appellants’ contention that they perfected the title 
over the suit land by adverse possession. While being 
cross examined as DW-1, the original defendant No.1 
would depose thus: - 
“An application was given by me and my brother 
in the Court of Tehsildar for mutation of our names 
on the disputed lands on the ground of lease and 
our possession of the lands. Ext. P4 is that 
application and it bears my signature and portion 
A-A and signature of my brother at B-B.” 
 
33. 
During further cross examination, he would 
depose: - 
“Our name was not legally mutated on the 
disputed lands in the revenue court under 
Application Ext. P4.” 
 
34. 
We have already found that the High Court was 
perfectly correct in holding that the plaintiff had 
acquired ownership over the property on the strength of 
Ext.P1/C sale deed. In such circumstances, the claim put 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
forth as relates perfecting the title by adverse possession 
as also the suit being barred by limitation have to be 
considered with reference to the oral testimony of DW-1 
as extracted above and the other allied evidences and 
also the various decisions referred to and relied on by 
the High Court to negate the said claim based on adverse 
possession. The deposition of DW-1 himself would go to 
show that the original defendants applied for getting 
occupancy right over the said property and in that 
regard filed Ext.P4 and at the same time sought for 
entering their names in place of the plaintiff in respect of 
the suit land in revenue records. However, such a 
mutation had never happened. In fact, the evidence 
would reveal that the defendants made an application on 
27.01.1981 (Ext.P4) before the Tehsildar, Raipur, stating 
that they have taken the suit land on lease as a Adhiyadar 
from plaintiff in 1973-1974 and cultivated the same for 
more than two years and thereby they became the 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
absolute owners of the property in question. In the said 
application in paragraph (1) they stated specifically that 
they took agricultural lands on lease (patta) from the 
plaintiff Rajendra Kumar under his ownership. It is a fact 
borne out from the records that the said application was 
rejected by the Tehsildar vide order dated 22.06.1985 
and the appeal against the same was dismissed by Sub-
Divisional Officer, Raipur on 29.10.1986. Though, the 
matter was further taken up before the Commissioner, he 
confirmed the order of the SDO as per order dated 
29.03.1988. These evidence available on record were 
duly taken note of and dealt with by the High Court. The 
factum of submission of Ext.P4 application and the 
passing of orders thereon, as above, are indisputable 
and undisputed and hence, in the teeth of evidence, as 
above, the defendants/the appellants cannot claim 
adverse possession against the respondent/the plaintiff. 
In view of the above indisputable and undisputed facts 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
as also the rejection of the contention of voidness of the 
sale deeds referred above, the defendants would not be 
justified in claiming that they had perfected the title by 
adverse possession and at the same time the aforesaid 
position would reveal that their possession was 
permissive in nature. The conclusion so arrived by the 
High Court based on proper appreciation of the 
evidence, in detail, as is discernible from the impugned 
judgment is nothing but the outcome of correct 
appreciation of the materials on record. 
 
35. 
It is also a fact that the defendants earlier took up a 
contention that there occurred an oral partition of the 
properties between the family of plaintiff and defendants 
in the year 1976 whereunder they received the suit land 
and the bangle shop at Raipur. The First Appellate Court 
after considering the said case declined to accept the 
claim regarding oral partition and held the oral partition 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
as not proved and that finding of the First Appellate 
Court was also permitted to become final by the 
appellants herein. 
 
36. 
Now, we will revert back to the claim of adverse 
possession raised by the appellants. In this context, it is 
also relevant to refer to the decisions of this Court relied 
on by the High Court to reject their claim of the adverse 
possession. In Indira’s case (supra), whereunder this 
Court held that once the plaintiff proved his title, the 
defendant in order to claim ownership had to establish 
on the basis of relevant documents and other evidence 
to prove the plea of adverse possession for the 
prescriptive period and unless it is so proved, the 
plaintiff could not be non-suited. 
 
37. 
We have already taken note of the fact that the High 
Court had duly taken note of Ext.P4 application 
submitted by the defendants, and also the evidence of 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
DW-1, while being cross examined which were not given 
due weight by the Courts below. We have also found 
that the High Court has rightly reached the conclusion 
that the appellants herein had only permissive 
possession over the scheduled land and it was not 
adverse possession. In the contextual situation the 
following decisions including the one in Saroop Singh v. 
Banto10, relied on by the High Court, assume much 
relevance. Paragraphs 28, 29 and 30 of Saroop Singh’s 
decision read thus: - 
“28. The statutory provisions of the Limitation Act 
have undergone a change when compared to the 
terms of Articles 142 and 144 of the Schedule 
appended to the Limitation Act, 1908, in terms 
whereof it was imperative upon the plaintiff not 
only to prove his title but also to prove his 
possession within twelve years, preceding the date 
of institution of the suit. However, a change in legal 
position has been effected in view of Articles 64 
and 65 of the Limitation Act, 1963. In the instant 
case, the plaintiff-respondents have proved their 
title and, thus, it was for the first defendant to prove 
acquisition of title by adverse possession. As 
 
10 (2005) 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
noticed 
hereinbefore, 
the 
first 
defendant-
appellant did not raise any plea of adverse 
possession. In that view of the matter the suit was 
not barred. 
 
29. In terms of Article 65 the starting point of 
limitation does not commence from the date when 
the right of ownership arises to the plaintiff but 
commences from the date the defendant's 
possession becomes adverse. (See Vasantiben 
Prahladji 
Nayak v. Somnath 
Muljibhai 
Nayak [(2004) ].) 
 
30. “Animus possidendi” is one of the ingredients 
of 
adverse 
possession. 
Unless 
the 
person 
possessing the land has a requisite animus the 
period for prescription does not commence. As in 
the instant case, the appellant categorically states 
that his possession is not adverse as that of true 
owner, the logical corollary is that he did not have 
the 
requisite 
animus. 
(See Mohd. 
Mohd. 
Ali v. Jagadish Kalita [(2004) ])” 
 
38. 
The decision of this Court in M. Durai v. Muthu 
and Others11, reiterated the law laid down, as above in 
Saroop Singh’s case, and further held thus: - 
“7. The change in the position in law as regards 
the burden of proof as was obtaining in the 
Limitation Act, 1908 vis-à-vis the Limitation Act, 
 
11 (2007) 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
1963 is evident. Whereas in terms of Articles 142 
and 144 of the old Limitation Act, the plaintiff was 
bound to prove his title as also possession within 
twelve years preceding the date of institution of 
the suit under the Limitation Act, 1963, once the 
plaintiff proves his title, the burden shifts to the 
defendant to establish that he has perfected his 
title by adverse possession.” 
 
39. 
The law laid down in Saroop Singh’s case was 
again reiterated by this Court in the decision in 
Prasanna & Ors. v. Mudegowda (D) by LRs12 and 
Vasantha v. Rajalakshmi13. 
 
40. 
In the light of Saroop Singh’s case there can be no 
doubt that once the plaintiff proves his title over suit 
property it is for the defendant resisting the same 
claiming adverse possession that he perfected title 
through adverse possession and in that regard, in terms 
of Article 65 of the Limitation Act, 1963 the starting point 
of limitation would not commence from the date when the 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
right of ownership arises to the plaintiff but would 
commence only from the date the defendant’s becomes 
adverse. 
 
41. 
In the decision in Brij Narayan Shukla (D) through 
LRs. v. Sudesh Kumar alias Suresh Kumar (D) through 
LRs. and Ors.14, this Court while considering the 
question whether tenants of original owner could claim 
adverse possession against transferee of land lord held 
that tenants or lessees could not claim adverse 
possession against their landlord/lessor, as the nature of 
their possession is permissive in nature. 
 
42. 
In the contextual situation, especially in view of the 
nature of the evidence adduced by the defendants in 
setting up and supporting the claim of adverse 
possession, the decisions of this Court in Ravinder Kaur 
 
14 (2024) 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
Grewal and Ors. v. Manjit Kaur and Ors.15 and the 
decision of a Constitution Bench in M. Siddiq (D) through 
LRs (Ram Janmabhumi Temple case) v. Mahant 
Suresh Das and Ors.16 require reference. Paragraph 60 
of the decision in Ravinder Kaur Grewal’s case, in so far 
as it is relevant, reads thus: - 
 
“60. The adverse possession requires all the three 
classic requirements to co-exist at the same time, 
namely, nec vi i.e. adequate in continuity, nec clam 
i.e. adequate in publicity and nec precario i.e. adverse to a competitor, in denial of title and his 
knowledge. Visible, notorious and peaceful so that 
if the owner does not take care to know notorious 
facts, knowledge is attributed to him on the basis 
that but for due diligence he would have known it. 
Adverse possession cannot be decreed on a title 
which is not pleaded. Animus possidendi under 
hostile colour of title is required…...” 
 
43. 
In the case on hand, the evidence on the part of the 
defendants/appellants herein would reveal that instead 
of establishing ‘animus possidendi’ under hostile colour 
 
15 (2019) 
16 (2020) 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
of title they have tendered evidence indicating only 
permissive possession and at the same time failed to 
establish the time from which it was converted to 
adverse to the title of the plaintiff which is open and 
continuous for the prescriptive period. 
 
44. 
In M. Siddiq’s case (supra) paragraphs 1142 and 
1143 assume relevance and they, in so far as relevant to 
this case, run as under: - 
 
“1142. A plea of adverse possession is founded on 
the acceptance that ownership of the property 
vests in another against whom the claimant asserts 
a possession adverse to the title of the other. 
Possession is adverse in the sense that it is contrary 
to the acknowledged title in the other person 
against whom it is claimed. Evidently, therefore, 
the plaintiffs in Suit 4 ought to be cognizant of the 
fact that any claim of adverse possession against 
the Hindus or the temple would amount to an 
acceptance of a title in the latter. Dr Dhavan has 
submitted that this plea is a subsidiary or alternate 
plea upon which it is not necessary for the plaintiffs 
to stand in the event that their main plea on title is 
held to be established on evidence. It becomes 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
then necessary to assess as to whether the claim of 
adverse possession has been established. 
 
1143. A person who sets up a plea of adverse 
possession must establish both possession which is 
peaceful, open and continuous possession which 
meets the requirement of being nec vi nec claim 
and nec precario. To substantiate a plea of 
adverse 
possession, 
the 
character 
of 
the 
possession must be adequate in continuity and in 
the public because the possession has to be to the 
knowledge of the true owner in order for it to be 
adverse. These requirements have to be duly 
established first by adequate pleadings and 
second by leading sufficient evidence. Evidence, 
it is well settled, can only be adduced with 
reference to matters which are pleaded in a civil 
suit and in the absence of an adequate pleading, 
evidence by itself cannot supply the deficiency of 
a pleaded case.” 

45. 
Upon considering the evidence on the part of the 
appellants herein (the defendants), we have no 
hesitation to hold that the requirements to co-exist to 
constitute adverse possession are not established by 
them. So also, it can only be held that the reckoning of 
the period of limitation from the date of commencement 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
of the right of ownership of the plaintiff over the suit land 
instead of looking into whether they had succeeded in 
pleading and establishing the date of commencement of 
adverse possession and satisfaction regarding the 
prescriptive period in that regard, was rightly interfered 
with, by the High Court. 
 
46. 
There can be no doubt that being concurrent 
cannot be a ground for confirmation and as held by this 
Court in D.R. Rathna Murthy v. Ramappa17, concurrent 
findings could be set aside if perversity is found with the 
impugned decision. 
 
47. 
The upshot of the discussion as above is that the 
well-merited decision of the High Court in the impugned 
judgment invite no interference in exercise of appellate 
jurisdiction and the appeals are liable to be dismissed. 
 
17 (2011) 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
Hence, the captioned appeals are dismissed. No order 
as to costs. 
 
Contempt Petition (C) Nos. 517-518 of 2020 
IN 
Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-3160 of 2019 
 
48. 
The Contempt Petition arises out of an order 
passed on 27.03.2015 in Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-3160 of 
2019 when it was remaining only as SLP Nos. 6995-6996 
of 2015. This court, while issuing notice ordered thus: - 
“Status quo regarding possession, as it exists 
today, shall be maintained by the parties, till 
further orders.” 
 
On 27.10.2020 this court passed another order, 
wherein, inter-alia, it was ordered: 
“It is made clear that on the next occasion, the 
contempt petition as well as CA Nos. 3159-
3160/2019 shall be disposed of finally.” 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
49. 
The alleged contempt is that pending the Civil 
Appeal and after the passing of the order of status quo 
regarding possession, the respondents in the contempt 
petition viz., the appellants created third party rights in 
the property. Obviously, with the dismissal of the civil 
appeals the impugned judgment and decree of the High 
Court got confirmed and the declaration that the first 
respondent in the appeal – plaintiff is entitled to 
recovery of possession of the suit property mentioned 
specifically therein has become final. Therefore, 
indisputably, in terms of the judgment and decree the 
appellants herein are bound to deliver vacant and 
possession of the scheduled suit land to the plaintiff viz., 
the first respondent. 
 
50. 
Since the same is executable we do not propose to 
go into the contentions in the contempt petition and are 
inclined only to close the contempt petition in view of the 

Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-60 of 2019 
 
judgment in Civil Appeal Nos. 3159-3160 of 2019 and to 
discharge the notice issued to alleged contemnors and 
to leave the first respondent in the Civil Appeals viz., the 
plaintiff to execute the decree, in accordance with law. 
 
51. 
Accordingly, the contempt petition is closed as 
above. 

……………………, J. 
 (C.T. Ravikumar) 

……………………, J. 
 (Sanjay Kumar) 

New Delhi; 
October 14, 2024