IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

GULSHAN BAJWA...APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
REGISTRAR, HIGH COURT OF DELHI & ANR...RESPONDENT(S) 
With 
M.A. 256/2017 in CONTEMPT PETITION (C) No. 64/2007 
 
With 

With 
DIARY No. 44408/2018 
 
ORDER 
1. 
The arises out of the common 
judgment and order of the High Court of Delhi (“High Court”) 
dated 19.10.2006 in Criminal Contempt Case Nos. 16 of 2006 
and 17 of 2006. 
2. 
By virtue of the impugned order, the High Court exercising 
its suo motu contempt jurisdiction, convicted the sole 
appellant herein, a practising advocate and a former army 
personnel, under the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 (“Act”) 
and sentenced him to civil imprisonment of three months 
which was to run concurrently and a fine of Rs. 2,000, each 
in both the contempt cases. 

3. 
Facts in the lead matter: On 17.08.2006, in a writ petition 
before the High Court, the appellant, appearing as counsel, 
sought an adjournment. After granting an adjournment, the 
Court noticed the appellant’s conduct relating to giving 
threats to the lady counsel who was appearing for the other 
side. Thereafter, the High Court passed an order directing 
him to explain his conduct. The order is reproduced herein 
for ready reference:- 
“Learned Counsel for the petitioner states that he wishes to 
file some applications and requests for adjournment. Request 
is allowed. 
At this stage, after the request for filing the applications was 
allowed, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner while 
going back passed a comment on the lady Advocate opposing 
him in the case and appearing for the respondents. She 
brought it to the notice of the Court and we requested the 
Counsel appearing for the petitioner to come back, which he 
did. 
Learned Counsel for the petitioner made a threatening remark 
to her, saying that now she be prepared for the consequences. 
Shri Dipak Bhattacharya (Advocate), who was also present in 
the Court duly confirmed that he overheard this remark being 
made to the lady Advocate appearing for the respondents. 
We find this attitude of the Counsel appearing for the petitioner 
to be undesirable and needs to be deprecated and dealt with 
in accordance with law. It is unfair for any Counsel to give any 
threats to the Counsel appearing on the other side, as all of 
them appear as officers of the Court and assist the Court or 
their respective clients. However, before we direct any further 
action or issue notice for contempt, learned Counsel for the 
petitioner made a request and the case is directed to be listed 
for tomorrow. 
List on 18.8.2006.” 
 
4. 
On 18.08.2006, when the matter was called out, the 
appellant failed to appear. Therefore, the Bench adjourned 

the matter to 21.08.2006. In fact, a counsel standing in the 
courtroom at that time undertook to personally inform the 
appellant about the next date of hearing. Surprisingly, the 
appellant had filed an application seeking transfer of the said 
writ petition to a different bench of the High Court, even 
though he failed to physically appear in the matter. Later in 
the day, a counsel appearing on behalf the appellant made a 
request for an adjournment on the ground that the appellant 
was unwell. That said, the standing counsel for the Union of 
India, who was also present in the same court at that time, 
informed the Bench that the appellant was seen in the court 
premises earlier in the day. Nonetheless, in the interest of 
justice, the Bench adjourned the matter to 21.08.2006. 
5. 
Thereafter, even on 21.08.2006, the appellant failed to 
appear. However, he had filed applications in the same 
matter making reckless and unsubstantiated allegations 
against the judges of the High Court. Clearly, by failing to 
appear and filing baseless allegations, the appellant had 
disobeyed the orders of the Court. In fact, it also came to the 
knowledge of the High Court that the appellant herein has 
frequently filed transfer applications on behalf of his clients, 

without their knowledge. Therefore, by its order dated 
21.08.2006, a Division Bench of the High Court issued a 
notice to the appellant asking him to show cause as to why 
proceedings under the Act should not be initiated against him 
(Suo Motu Contempt Case No. 16 of 2006). 
6. 
Around the same time, another Division Bench of the Court 
had also initiated suo motu contempt action against the 
appellant after noticing that he had filed an application in a 
writ petition, where he had made certain improper allegations 
against the Judges. Even in this contempt proceeding as well 
as the writ petition, the appellant failed to appear. However, 
he was filing applications day-after-day making reckless 
allegations against the Judges. While issuing a show-cause 
notice on 08.08.2006 (Suo Motu Contempt Case No. 17 of 
2006), the High Court noted as follows: 
“We have looked into the statement made in the application, 
which is registered as CM No. 9695/2006. Having gone 
through the same, we direct for issuance of a notice to the 
petitioner to show cause why appropriate action under the 
provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act or otherwise shall not 
be initiated against him. Notice shall be issued to the petitioner 
by the registry of this Court without process fee and shall be 
served by the Process Serving Agency of this Court, returnable 
on 3rd October, 2006.” 

7. 
Both the suo motu contempt proceedings were tagged and 
listed for 22.08.2006. However, neither on that date nor on 
subsequent dates did the appellant appear. 
8. 
Multiple ways were adopted to secure the presence of the 
appellant, without any avail. The appellant was not to be 
found on the addresses mentioned and hence, service of 
notice under the Act could not be completed. As a last resort, 
the High Court issued bailable warrants against the 
appellant. Upon failure to secure the appellant’s presence 
even then, non-bailable warrants were issued. The said 
warrants could also not be executed since the appellant was 
not available on any of the addresses mentioned. 
9. 
After numerous attempts, the High Court directed the Deputy 
Commissioner of Police, New Delhi, to be present in Court. 
Upon his appearance in Court, the Deputy Commissioner of 
Police, New Delhi was directed to ensure the presence of the 
appellant in Court. Soon thereafter, on 18.09.2006, he was 
produced in Court. On the same day, while the Appeallant 
was released upon furnishing a personal bond, he was 
arrested by the Police of Uttarakhand in furtherance of 
another non-bailable warrant issued by a Family Court in a 

case filed by the appellant’s wife for execution of a decree. 
The High Court noted that even during this time, the 
appellant failed to appear before the Court, instead, he was 
filing applications challenging the jurisdiction of the Court in 
issuing such warrants. 
10. This is a long-drawn case in which the appellant has been 
committing successive acts of contempt. There are about 
seven instances which the High Court has taken into 
account, where the conduct of the appellant came under 
scrutiny in different proceedings. In all those cases, the 
egregious act of contempt of the appellant was recorded. 
These instances in short are as follows: 

In a case concerning his dismissal from service, 
the matter got carried up to this Court. While dismissing 
a review petition filed by him, this Court noted the 
allegations and insinuations made by the appellant 
against the conduct of the judges of this Court. While 
referring the matter to the Bar Council, this Court 
observed as under 
“We have carefully perused the review petition as well 
as the documents annexed therewith, but we find no 
merit in the review petition and the same is accordingly 
dismissed. 

Having regard to the allegations and insinuations 
contained in the review petition, there is justification for 
action under the Contempt of Courts Act, against the 
petitioner. However, considering his background as is 
apparent from the record of the case and the apparent 
frustration caused to the petitioner as a result of his 
losing his appeal before this Court, we do not propose to 
initiate any action under the said Act, since the 
respondent has preferred the review petition in-person. 
However, we notice that the petitioner is an Advocate 
and is practising as an Advocate-on-Record in this 
Court. The conduct of the petitioner in filing a review 
petition containing such baseless allegations and 
insinuations reflecting on the conduct of Judges of this 
Court does call for closer scrutiny, as to whether his 
conduct does no credit to the noble profession to which 
he belongs. However, since that matter is not within our 
jurisdiction and it is only the Bar Council of India which 
is empowered to take appropriate action, we refer this 
matter to the Bar Council of India for such action as it 
may consider appropriate.” 

In Suo Motu Contempt Case No. 16 of 2006, the 
appellant had filed transfer petitions seeking transfer of 
the underlying matter as well as the suo motu contempt 
proceeding before a different bench of the High Court. 
Admittedly, he had filed the transfer petition on grounds 
which were devoid of the writ petitioner’s knowledge. 
The transfer petitions filed by the appellant in this 
matter, along with the various other matters, were 
firstly placed before the then Acting Chief Justice of the 
High Court, and pursuant to his order dated 
24.08.2006, the matter was listed before the same 

Bench which issued notice in Suo Motu Contempt Case 
No. 16 of 2006 on 21.08.2006. It has to be stated here 
that the original writ petitioner in this writ petition was 
personally present in the Court on 29.08.2006 and 
stated that he had not read the content of the transfer 
petition nor did he sign the transfer petition. 

In a different writ petition before High Court, in 
which the appellant was appearing as a counsel, he had 
filed an application wherein he made allegations against 
the Judges of the High Court as well as this Court. He 
also alleged that the transfer petitions were never placed 
before the then Acting Chief Justice of the High Court, 
thus, causing injustice. 

In W.P. No. 245 of 1986 before the High Court, the 
appellant had filed a written submission, where he had 
made the following statement (we have deliberately 
redacted the names of the Hon’ble Judges of this Court 
and that of the High Court to maintain the decorum of 
these proceedings. The details are however, available in 
the order impugned before us): 

‘The following Hon'ble Judges declined to hear 
the personal matters of the petitioner— (1)... (2)... (3)... (4)... (5)... 
In addition, from time-to-time, the following 
Hon'ble Judges also declined to hear the 
petitioner's personal matters— (6)... (7) … (8) … 
(9) … (10)... (11)... (12)... (13)... The said 
refusal stemmed partly from the death of 
Justice …'s son and the death of 
Justice … as a result of the written 
curse (‘shrap’) made by the humble petitioner; 
Justice …'s son, too, died, and 
Justice … has been paralysed for 
life.’ 

Further, in W.P. No. 5183 of 2005 before the High 
Court, the appellant had filed a written submission, 
where he had made the following statement (we have 
deliberately redacted the names of the Hon’ble Judges 
of this Court and that of the High Court to maintain the 
decorum of these proceedings. The details are however, 
available in the order impugned before us): 
“Apparently, it is the ego of the judicial office and the 
accompanying 
powers—which 
can 
be 
used 
or 
mischievously abused/misused, which is making him 
ill-treat the Hon'ble Members of the Bar and to act in a 
whimsical, vengeant and harassing manner towards 
me, in particular. But the learned Judge overlooks the 
fact that he is not the Lord Almighty and there are 
Members of the Bar who are close to the real Lord 
Almighty—for example, I wrote to the then Hon'ble Chief 
Justice of India and therein cursed that the way justice 
had been delayed, there will be delay in medical aid 
and one son of Mr. Justice … shall die; his son died 
within 4 days. Again, I wrote to His Lordship that Mr. 
Justice … shall die—he died within 7 days. Similarly, 
Mr. Justice …. died, Mr. … (retired Judge) has been 

paralysed for life, Mr. Justice … is also suffering with 
medical problems, etc. Since then at least 13 Hon'ble 
Judges have declined to hear my personal matters—
including Mr. Chief Justice …” 

In CM 9695 of 2006 in WP (C) No. 9244 of 2006 
before the High Court, the appellant had filed a written 
submission, where he had made the following statement 
(we have deliberately redacted the names of the Hon’ble 
Judges of this Court and that of the High Court to 
maintain the decorum of these proceedings. The details 
are however, available in the order impugned before us): 
“3. 
That 
several 
Universal 
Legal 
Maxims/Principles/Premises—which are followed by 
all the civilised Nations, have been given a go-by in 
several legal cases (including the instant case) and the 
same is palpably apparent on the face of the record. 
Hence, the humble Applicant hereby curses that one 
son/child of each of the individuals who passed the 
motivated orders shall die prematurely—and so shall it 
happen soon. Bismillah! 
In this regard, it is pertinent to mention that it is 
on the written record of the Hon'ble Supreme Court that 
the applicant herein had stated in writing that one son 
of the then Mr. Justice … would die—he died within 4 
days, that the then Mr. Justice … would die—he, too, 
died within 7 days. And the then Mr. Justice …'s son 
also died, Mr. … (retired Judge) has been paralysed. 
Moreover, ACM … (the individual, who had tried to 
harass the humble Applicant) was not only himself 
paralysed, but his daughter also committed suicide and 
his son died in an air-crash. It is pertinent to mention 
that blatant and motivated abuse of their powers by 
certain public officials has occasioned miscarriage of 
justice against the ex-servicemen/servicemen, and their 
said acts are an open instigation to the ex-
servicemen/servicemen to abuse their powers, too in 
any case, this is a reason enough for lowering the 
morale of the Armed Forces personnel who may even 

refuse to fight against the intruders to save the lives of 
such corrupted individuals. Hence a copy of this 
Application is being sent to the Supreme Commander of 
the Armed Forces.” 
(vii) Lastly, the High Court noted that in a matter where 
the appellant was appearing before a Division Bench of 
the High Court, the appellant sought an adjournment 
in the matter and requested listing the matter a day 
after the next day owing to an out-station matter. While 
granting an adjournment, the Bench listed the matter 
for the next day. The next day when the matter was 
called for hearing, it was again adjourned. It is the claim 
of the appellant that the same was done out of 
vengeance since one of the Judges on the Bench had a 
pre-existing tiff with the appellant. 
Findings of the High Court: 
11. While analysing the conduct of the appellant, the High Court 
summarised his contemptuous acts in the following words: 
“(a) Use of undesirable language as afore-noticed with an 
intention to malign the Court and to lower the dignity of the 
Court. The intention is obvious i.e. transferring of the cases in 
which he is the petitioner himself or Counsel for the petitioner 
unless you are willing to pass favourable orders only in those 
cases, failing which the threats were extended to the various 
Courts with dire consequences resulting from the curse written 
or otherwise of the said person. This amounts to apparent 
interference with the administration of justice and extending 
undesirable threats to the Courts. 

(b) Wild allegations are made in the transfer petitions filed by 
the said person without getting them signed from the petitioner 
concerned and in fact even without bringing it to the notice of 
the client as to what application was filed, obviously with an 
intention to hamper the administration of justice and making 
allegations in other cases, wherein he was not a petitioner, to 
browbeat the Courts and filing applications even without the 
knowledge and contents of the application being known to the 
petitioners in those cases. 
(c) Extending threats in presence of the Court to Ms. Rekha 
Palli, Advocate for the respondents of facing dire consequences 
in the case filed by the petitioner. This was done in presence 
of the Court and the threats extended were even overheard by 
a senior member of the Bar Mr. Deepak Bhattacharya (Refer 
to order dated 17th August, 2006).” 
 
12. The High Court categorically noted that the appellant has 
prima facie committed criminal contempt of court and the 
magnanimity shown to him has resulted in doing acts and 
omissions of graver nature, thus, treating the tolerance as 
weakness of administration of justice. The High Court held 
that the acts are intentional, malicious and have persisted 
over a long period and are now clearly interfering with the 
administration of justice and lowering the dignity of the 
Court. 
13. Having recounted the above-referred incidents, the High 
Court through its judgment and order dated 19.10.2006 
found the appellant guilty of criminal contempt and awarded 
a punishment of simple imprisonment of 3 months along with 
a fine of Rs. 2000, in each contempt proceeding. It is basing 

this conviction and sentence that the appellant has filed the 
instant appeal. 
Proceedings before this Court: 
14. While admitting the appeal, this Court by order dated 
16.04.2007, granted a stay of the impugned order dated 
19.10.2006. Thereafter, the record of proceedings are replete 
with requests for adjournments, and finally, by order dated 
01.08.2023, one of us, vacated the interim order and directed 
that the case will be heard without any further adjournments. 
Thus, we heard the appellant and have also permitted him to 
file written submissions. The written submissions were filed. 
Submissions before this Court: 
15. The appellant made the following submissions: (i) notice in 
one of the connected matters was issued by a Judge who is 
still a member of this Court. Therefore, it is the submission 
of the appellant that these matters should be heard by a 
bench presided over by that particular Judge; (ii) none of the 
connected matters are related to the contempt petition. 
Therefore, they must be de-tagged and be heard separately; 
(iii) the Court Martial proceedings which were relied upon by 

the High Court are not relevant to the present proceedings; 
(iv) the matters before the High Court, in which the appellant 
was appearing as a counsel, were being adjourned without a 
pass-over being granted on the first call; (v) the threat given 
to the lady advocate was nothing but elderly advice; (vi) no 
show cause notice in the contempt proceedings was served 
on him; (vii) all the transfer petitions and the underlying 
matters were transferred to one single bench without 
following the rules framed by the High Court relating to 
assignment of matters; (viii) the Judges who heard his case 
and issued notice under the Act were biased against him; and 
(ix) the appellant challenged all other proceedings initiated 
against him on the ground that the authorities conducting 
such proceedings were biased against him. 
16. We have also heard the learned counsel for the Respondent. 
It was their submission that the order impugned herein has 
been rendered after a detailed consideration of the material 
placed before them. It was submitted that the appellant had 
appeared before the Court pursuant to service of show cause 
notice under the Act, and the submission that there was no 
proper service of notice is not correct. It has also been 

contended that till date, the appellant has never apologised 
for his actions. In fact, even before this Court, he has been 
writing letters making reckless allegations against Judges 
and the Judiciary. 
Analysis: 
17. At the outset, we note that the order impugned herein is a 
detailed one, which considers and answers each and every 
aspect of the matter. While imposing the punishment, the 
High Court relied on a decision of this Court to highlight that 
judicial independence ought to be protected from acts 
maligning the reputation of judicial officers1. Further, the 
High Court also reiterated the finding of this Court, wherein 
it was highlighted that a contemnor ought to be punished 
with imprisonment for making libellous and motivated 
allegations against the Court and its Judges which interfere 
with the administration of justice2. Furthermore, the High 
Court highlighted the importance of protecting and upholding 
the dignity of the Court and the majesty of the law as also 
observed previously by this Court3. We are in complete 
 
1 M.B. Sanghi, Advocate v. High Court of Punjab & Haryana, (1991). 
2 Pritam Pal v. High Court of M.P., Jabalpur, 1993 Supp (1) SCC 529. 
3 Ajay Kumar Pandey, Advocate, In Re, (1998). agreement with the decision of the High Court on the need to 
maintain the dignity and reputation of judicial officers and to 
protect them from motivated, libellous and unfounded 
allegations. We are also of the opinion that the High Court 
was correct in not accepting the apology tendered by the 
appellant since it was not bonafide and lacked in sincerity, 
apart from being belated and a mere ‘lip service’. 
18. The submissions made before us are also not appealing. Even 
here, the appellant is trying to resort to forum shopping by 
asking us to refer the matter to a judge who had issued notice 
in a connected matter. The appellant has failed to see that 
notice in the lead matter was issued more than a decade and 
half ago. While the appellant seeks to de-tag the court martial 
proceedings as if they are unconnected to the egregious act 
of contempt, we note that those proceedings were not of a 
client of the appellant, in fact, the appellant himself was 
subjected to court martial proceedings, and he was in fact 
appearing as a party-in-person. We do not see two different 
lives here. The appellant contemnor is the petitioner in the 
court-martial proceedings. 

19. It is also incorrect to say that there was no service of notice 
on the appellant. The appellant had in fact appeared before 
the Court after issuance of notice under the Act. Making an 
assertion that there was no service of the notice is factually 
wrong. The appellant, while making an allegation of bias 
should have supplemented it with cogent material, which he 
has failed to do. This again, is an irresponsible statement. 
20. With respect to the other arguments made by the appellant 
before us, we are of the view that the High Court has 
elaborately dealt with the same and they require no 
interference or indulgence by us. 
21. The appellant’s conduct before the High Court and for that 
matter, even before this Court, amounts to undermining the 
system of the law and interfering with the course of justice 
administration. The High Court observed a pattern in the 
behaviour of the appellant. He has had a habit of 
misbehaving with a Bench which is not agreeing with him. 
The misbehaviour goes to the extent of casting aspersions 
and threatening the Judges hearing the matters. 
22. We are of the opinion that the High Court correctly rejected 
the apology. An apology must evidence remorse with respect 

to the contemptuous acts and is not to be used as a weapon 
to purge the guilty of their offence4. Further, an apology 
lacking in sincerity and not evidencing contriteness, cannot 
be accepted5. 
23. Having considered the order impugned before us in detail and 
having perused the way the appellant has conducted the 
proceedings before this Court, and after giving our anxious 
consideration, we are of the opinion that the finding of 
conviction against the appellant warrants no interference. 
However, considering the age of the appellant and taking note 
of his submission that he is suffering from certain medical 
ailments, we modify the sentence imposed by the High Court 
from imprisonment for three months till the rising of the 
court. 
24. The three other connected matters being (a) M.A. 256/2017 
in Contempt Petition (C) No. 64/2007, (b) SLP (Crl.) No. 
9689/2018, and (c) Diary No. 44408/2018 are not related to 
the present criminal appeal and, therefore, we de-tag them 
and direct them to be listed for hearing separately. 
 
4 M.Y. Shareef v. Hon’ble Judges of High Court of Nagpur, (1955). 
5 Omesh Saigal and State v. R.K. Dalmia, 1968 SCC OnLine Del 179 and L. D. Jaikwal v. State 
of U.P., (1984). 

25. In view of the above, arising 
out of SLP (Crl.) No. 1756 of 2007 against Final Common 
Judgment and Order dated 19.10.2006 passed by the High 
Court of Delhi in Criminal Contempt Cases Nos. 16 & 17 of 
2006, is dismissed, subject to the above modification of the 
sentence till the rising of the Court. 
26. Pending applications, if any, are disposed of. 
27. No order as to costs. 
 
……..……………………………….J. 
 [Vikram Nath].………….………………………….J. 
 [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha] 
 
New Delhi; 
January 30, 2024