IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

SHINGARA SINGH 

…. APPELLANT 
 
VERSUS 

 DALJIT SINGH & ANR...RESPONDENTS 

JUDGMENT 

PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J. 

1. 
The defendant No. 2 in the suit has preferred this appeal 
challenging the judgment and decree passed by the High Court 
allowing the appeal preferred by the plaintiff/Daljit Singh to set 
aside the judgment and decree of the Trial Court and the First 
Appellate Court which concurrently decreed the suit partially 

only for the alternative relief of recovery of Rs. 40,000/- along 
with interest while dismissing the suit in respect of specific 
performance of the agreement dated 17.08.1990. 
 
2. 
The facts of the case emerging from the pleadings of the 
parties are that plaintiff/Daljit Singh instituted the suit on 
24.12.1992 claiming specific performance of the agreement to 
sell dated 17.08.1990 in respect of the land measuring 79 
Kanals 09 marlas @ of Rs. 80,000/- per acre against the 
payment of earnest money of Rs. 40,000/- and the balance 
amount of Rs. 7,54,000/- at the time of execution and 
registration of the sale deed on or before 30.11.1992. 
3. 
According to the plaintiff, he remained present in the office 
of the Sub-Registrar on 30.11.1992 with the balance sale 
consideration and all the expenses for stamp papers but 
defendant no. 1 did not turn up to perform his part of the 
agreement. The plaintiff marked his presence by submitting an 
affidavit before the Executive Magistrate. The suit was 
preferred within 23 days as stipulated in the agreement. 
Defendant no. 1 initially denied the execution of the agreement 

to sell, much less, receipt of the earnest money with further 
averment that the subject land was a Joint Hindu Family 
property. During the pendency of the suit, the present 
appellant/defendant no. 2/Shingrara Singh was impleaded on 
25.01.1993 on the basis that defendant no. 1/ Janraj Singh 
executed a sale deed in his favour on 08.01.1993 in respect of 
the suit land on the basis of alleged agreement to sell dated 
19.11.1990 for a sum of Rs. 6,45,937.50. It is to be noted that 
the Trial Court passed an order of status quo on 24.12.1992 
qua alienation with regard to the share of defendant no. 1. 
4. 
Defendant No. 2/appellant filed his separate written 
statement stating that defendant no. 1 has sold the property to 
him by executing a registered sale deed on 08.01.1993 and 
delivered possession after which mutation has also been carried 
out. 
According 
to 
the 
appellant/defendant 
no. 
2, 
the 
agreement, basing which the suit is filed, is a fabricated ante-
dated document because defendant no. 1 did not disclose the 
factum of this agreement while executing the sale deed in his 
favour and thus, the appellant/defendant no. 2 is a bona fide 
purchaser. 

5. 
In the Trial Court plaintiff examined himself as PW-2, Deed 
Writer/ Kulwant Singh as PW-1, Jasjit Singh as PW-3 whereas 
defendants examined Kirpan Singh as DW 1, Shangara Singh 
as DW 2, B.M. Sehgal as DW 3 and Subhash Chander as DW 4. 
The Trial Court vide its judgment dated 27.04.2007 held that 
the plaintiff has proved the agreement to sell wherein 
defendant no. 2 has failed to prove that the agreement is a 
result of fraud and fabricated document. However, the Trial 
Court denied the decree for specific performance on the ground 
that since defendant no. 2 is the owner in possession of the suit 
land upon execution of the sale deed dated 08.01.1993, 
defendant no. 1 has left with no right or title of the suit land. 
Thus, he is unable to execute the sale deed in favour of the 
plaintiff and moreover the plaintiff and defendant no. 1 are 
close relative. The Trial Court also held that the plaintiff was 
ready and willing to perform his part of the contract. It was 
also held that defendant no. 2 is a bona fide purchaser as he 
was not having any knowledge about the agreement to sell 
between the plaintiff and defendant no. 1. The Trial Court 

eventually dismissed the suit in respect of the specific 
performance but allowed the alternative prayer for recovery of 
Rs. 40,000/- with interest @ 12% per annum. 
6. 
The First Appellate Court maintained the Trial Court’s 
judgment and decree by holding that the subject sale 
agreement is a result of fraud and collusion between the 
plaintiff and defendant no. 1. The First Appellate Court 
observed that in his first written statement he denied the 
execution of the agreement but subsequently after amendment 
in the plaint and impleadment of the appellant, he admitted the 
claim of the plaintiff. The First Appellate Court further observed 
that the doctrine of lis pendens is not applicable in the facts of 
the present case. 
 
7. 
The High Court, under the impugned judgment in this 
appeal, opined that the sale deed executed by defendant no. 1 
in favour of defendant no. 2/appellant is hit by doctrine of lis 
pendens and that defendant no. 2/appellant is not a bona fide 
purchaser. The High Court noted that the suit was filed on 
24.12.1992 and the next date before the Trial Court was fixed 

on 12.01.1993. However, the sale deed was executed by 
defendant no. 1 in favour of defendant no. 2 on 08.01.1993. 
Both defendant no. 1 and defendant no. 2 being the residents 
of same village, it is unbelievable that he was not having the 
knowledge of the agreement, for, the sale deed in favour of 
defendant no. 2 was for a lesser amount than the subject 
agreement. The agreement was for a sale consideration of Rs. 
7,94,000/- whereas the sale deed was for Rs. 6,45,937.50. It is 
also held that mere relationship between the plaintiff and 
defendant no. 1 would not be a ground to deny the 
discretionary relief and moreover, when both the courts below 
have found that the plaintiff was always ready and willing to 
perform his part of the contract. 
 
8. 
Mr. Hrin P. Raval, learned senior counsel appearing for the 
appellant argued that the High Court ought not to have 
disturbed the concurrent judgment and order passed by the 
Trial Court and the Appellate Court. 
On the other hand, Mr. Manoj Swarup, learned senior 
counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents argued that the 

judgment and order passed by the Trial Court and the Appellate 
Court being based on perverse findings and reasoning, the High 
Court has rightly set aside the same for decreeing the plaintiff’s 
suit in respect of specific performance. According to him, the 
High Court has rightly applied the doctrine of lis pendens. 
9. 
Before proceeding to deal with the applicability of doctrine 
of lis pendens, it is significant to note that Issue no. 5 framed 
by the Trial Court was to the effect as to whether the 
agreement dated 17.08.1990 is a result of fraud and collusion, 
therefore, not binding on defendant no. 1. This issue was 
decided against the defendant. When the plaintiff preferred first 
appeal, the defendant did not move any cross-appeal or cross-
objections, yet the first Appellate Court entered into this aspect 
of the matter to hold that the subject agreement was collusive 
between the plaintiff and defendant no. 1. This is not 
permissible in view of the law laid down by this Court in 
Banarsi vs. Ram Phal1 wherein this Court held thus in paras 
10 & 11: 
 
1 (2003) 

“10. The CPC amendment of 1976 has not 
materially or substantially altered the law 
except for a marginal difference. Even under 
the amended Order 41 Rule 22 sub-rule (1) a 
party in whose favour the decree stands in its 
entirety is neither entitled nor obliged to prefer 
any cross-objection. However, the insertion 
made in the text of sub-rule (1) makes it 
permissible to file a cross-objection against 
a finding. The difference which has resulted we 
will 
shortly 
state. 
A 
respondent 
may defend himself without filing any cross-
objection to the extent to which decree is in his 
favour; however, if he proposes to attack any 
part of the decree, he must take cross-
objection. The amendment inserted by the 
1976 amendment is clarificatory and also 
enabling and this may be made precise by 
analysing the provision. There may be three 
situations: 
(i) The impugned decree is partly in favour of 
the 
appellant 
and partly in 
favour 
of 
the 
respondent. 
(ii) The decree is entirely in favour of the 
respondent though an issue has been decided 
against the respondent. 
(iii) The decree is entirely in favour of the 
respondent and all the issues have also been 
answered in favour of the respondent but there 
is a finding in the judgment which goes against 
the respondent. 
11. In the type of case (i) it was necessary for 
the respondent to file an appeal or take cross-
objection against that part of the decree which 
is against him if he seeks to get rid of the same 
though that part of the decree which is in his 
favour he is entitled to support without taking 
any cross-objection. The law remains so post-

amendment too. In the type of cases (ii) and 
(iii) pre-amendment CPC did not entitle nor 
permit the respondent to take any cross-
objection as he was not the person aggrieved 
by the decree. Under the amended CPC, read in 
the light of the explanation, though it is still not 
necessary for the respondent to take any cross-
objection laying challenge to any finding 
adverse to him as the decree is entirely in his 
favour and he may support the decree without 
cross-objection; the amendment made in the 
text of sub-rule (1), read with the explanation 
newly inserted, gives him a right to take cross-
objection to a finding recorded against him 
either while answering an issue or while dealing 
with an issue. The advantage of preferring such 
cross-objection is spelled out by sub-rule (4). 
In spite of the original appeal having been 
withdrawn or dismissed for default the cross-
objection 
taken 
to 
any finding by 
the 
respondent shall still be available to be 
adjudicated upon on merits which remedy was 
not available to the respondent under the 
unamended CPC. In the pre-amendment era, 
the withdrawal or dismissal for default of the 
original appeal disabled the respondent to 
question the 
correctness 
or otherwise 
of 
any finding recorded against the respondent.” 
 
10. In the case at hand, the Trial Court had partly decreed the 
suit to the extent of recovery of Rs. 40,000/-. This part of the 
decree was not challenged by the defendants either by filing a 
separate appeal or by way of cross objections. They did not 
prefer any cross objection challenging the finding on issue no. 

5. In this situation the defendants have conceded to the decree 
for refund and finding on issue no. 5. Therefore, in absence of 
cross-appeal or cross-objections by the defendants, the First 
Appellate Court could not have recorded a finding that the 
subject agreement was a result of collusion between the 
plaintiff and defendant no. 1. 
11. In Usha Sinha vs. Dina Ram2 this Court held that the 
doctrine of lis pendens applies to an alienation during the 
pendency of the suit whether such alienees had or had no 
notice of the pending proceedings. The following has been held 
I paras 18 & 23: 
“18. Before one-and-half century, in Bellamy 
v. Sabine [(1857) 1 De G & J 566: 44 ER 842], Lord Cranworth, L.C. proclaimed that where a 
litigation is pending between a plaintiff and a 
defendant as to the right to a particular estate, 
the necessities of mankind require that the 
decision of the court in the suit shall be binding 
not only on the litigating parties, but also on 
those 
who 
derive 
title 
under 
them 
by 
alienations made pending the suit, whether 
such alienees had or had not notice of the 
pending proceedings. If this were not so, there 
could be no certainty that the litigation would 
ever come to an end. 
 
2 (2008) 

23. It is thus settled law that a purchaser of 
suit property during the pendency of litigation 
has no right to resist or obstruct execution of 
decree passed by a competent court. The 
doctrine of “lis pendens” prohibits a party from 
dealing with the property which is the subject-
matter of suit. “Lis pendens” itself is treated as 
constructive notice to a purchaser that he is 
bound by a decree to be entered in the pending 
suit. Rule 102, therefore, clarifies that there 
should not be resistance or obstruction by a 
transferee pendente lite. It declares that if the 
resistance is caused or obstruction is offered by 
a transferee pendente lite of the judgment-
debtor, he cannot seek benefit of Rules 98 or 
100 of Order 21.” 
 
12. This Court in Sanjay Verma vs. Manik Roy3 was dealing 
with a suit for specific performance. During pendency of the 
suit, a temporary injunction was granted in favour of the 
plaintiff and different portions of the suit land were sold 
whereafter the purchasers applied for impleadment, which was 
rejected by the Trial Court but allowed by the High Court 
against which special leave to appeal was filed. In the above 
background, this Court observed the following in para 12: 
“12. The principles specified in Section 52 of 
the TP Act are in accordance with equity, good 
conscience or justice because they rest upon an 
equitable and just foundation that it will be 
 
3 (2006) 

impossible to bring an action or suit to a 
successful 
termination 
if 
alienations 
are 
permitted to prevail. A transferee pendente lite 
is bound by the decree just as much as he was 
a party to the suit. The principle of lis pendens 
embodied in Section 52 of the TP Act being a 
principle of public policy, no question of good 
faith 
or 
bona 
fide 
arises. 
The 
principle 
underlying Section 52 is that a litigating party 
is exempted from taking notice of a title 
acquired during the pendency of the litigation. 
The mere pendency of a suit does not prevent 
one of the parties from dealing with the 
property constituting the subject-matter of the 
suit. The section only postulates a condition 
that the alienation will in no manner affect the 
rights of the other party under any decree 
which may be passed in the suit unless the 
property was alienated with the permission of 
the court.” 
 
13. Guruswamy Nadar vs. P. Lakshmi Ammal4 also arose 
out of a suit for specific performance of agreement wherein this 
Court considered the effect of subsequent sale of properties by 
owner (proposed vendor) in favour of a third party. In the 
above facts, this Court held thus in paras 9 & 15: 
“9. Section 19 of the Specific Relief Act clearly 
says subsequent sale can be enforced for good 
and sufficient reason but in the present case, 
there is no difficulty because the suit was filed 
on 3-5-1975 for specific performance of the 
 
4 (2008) 

agreement and the second sale took place on 
5-5-1975. Therefore, it is the admitted position 
that the second sale was definitely after the 
filing of the suit in question. Had that not been 
the position then we would have evaluated the 
effect of Section 19 of the Specific Relief Act 
read with Section 52 of the Transfer of Property 
Act. But in the present case it is more than 
apparent that the suit was filed before the 
second sale of the property. Therefore, the 
principle of lis pendens will govern the present 
case and the second sale cannot have the 
overriding effect on the first sale. 
15. So far as the present case is concerned, it 
is apparent that the appellant who is a 
subsequent purchaser of the same property, 
has purchased in good faith but the principle of 
lis pendens will certainly be applicable to the 
present case notwithstanding the fact that 
under Section 19(b) of the Specific Relief Act 
his rights could be protected.” 
 
14. In a recent judgment of this Court in Chander Bhan (D) 
through Lr. Sher Singh vs. Mukhtiar Singh & Ors.5 it is 
observed, “once it has been held that the transactions executed 
by the respondents are illegal due to the doctrine of lis pendens 
the defence of the respondents 1 – 2 that they are bona fide 
purchasers for valuable consideration and thus, entitled to 
 
5 204 INSC 377 

protection under Section 41 of the Transfer of Property Act, 
1882 is liable to be rejected.” 
 
15. In the case in hand also, it is an admitted position that the 
suit was filed on 24.12.1992 and the sale deed was executed 
on 08.01.1993 by defendant no. 1 in favour of defendant no. 
2/appellant during pendency of the suit. The doctrine of lis 
pendens as contained in Section 52 of the Transfer of Property 
Act, 1882 applies to a transaction during pendency of the suit. 
The Trial Court found execution of agreement to be proved and 
directed for refund of the amount of Rs. 40,000/- by defendant 
no. 1 to the plaintiff/appellant with further finding on issue no. 
5 that the agreement was not a result of fraud and collusion. 
The defendant did not prefer any cross-appeal or cross-
objections against the said partial decree and allowed the 
finding to become final. The plaintiff was non-suited only on the 
ground that defendant no. 2 had no notice of the agreement 
and is a bona fide purchaser. However, once sale agreement is 
proved and the subsequent sale was during pendency of the 
suit hit by the doctrine of lis pendens, the High Court was fully 

justified in setting aside the judgment and decree of the Trial 
Court and the First Appellate Court and passing a decree for 
specific performance. 
 
16. In our considered view, the High Court has not committed 
any error of law in rendering the judgment impugned which is 
hereby affirmed and the instant appeal deserves to be and is 
hereby dismissed. No order as to costs. 
 
………………………………………J. 

(HRISHIKESH ROY)...………………………………. J. 

 (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 
NEW DELHI; 
OCTOBER 14, 2024