IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Omkar Ramchandra Gond 
 …Appellant (s) 
 
Versus 
 
The Union of India & Ors....Respondent(s) 

JUDGMENT 

K.V. Viswanathan, J. 
 
1. 
Omkar Ramchandra Gond (the appellant) grew up in 
a middle-class family in the city of Latur in Maharashtra 
State. His father is a government servant. The appellant had 
a creditable academic performance in his tenth standard 
scoring 97.2%. He cleared his school final in the first 
division. The appellant aspired to be a doctor. Nothing wrong 
with it, except that he had to surmount a few legal hurdles 
enroute. 

2. 
Admittedly, the appellant has speech and language 
disability and is diagnosed with Hypernasality with 
Misarticulation IN K/C/O Repaired Bilateral CLEFT of 
palate. The appellant is certified to have 45% (in some 
reports, it was mentioned as 44%) permanent disability as per 
the Disability Certificate dated 18.05.2017. 
3. 
The appellant applied for the National Eligibility Cum 
Entrance Test NEET (UG), 2024 for admission to MBBS 
Course from the category of Persons with Disability (for 
short “PwD”) and Other Backward Classes (OBC) on 
18.02.2024. 
4. 
The application form had a disclaimer clause which 
stated that the eligibility under the PwD Category was purely 
provisional and was to be governed as per the National 
Medical Commission (NMC) guidelines regarding admission 
of students with “specified disabilities” under the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (for short “RPwD Act”). 

5. 
The appellant appeared for the NEET (UG) held on 
05.05.2024 and qualified the entrance examination. The 
Schedule for Centralized Admission Process (CAP) Round-I 
counseling for admission was notified on 20.08.2024. The 
appellant applied for the centralized admission process and 
claimed reservation under the OBC and the PwD category. 
In the provisional merit list published on 26.08.2024, the 
name of the appellant figured at 42091. Under the 
Information brochure, candidates with disability have to 
submit a disability certificate issued for the year 2024 and 
have to undergo medical examination at the Disability 
Assessment Board. 
6. 
The appellant approached the Designated Disability 
Certification Centre at Sir JJ Group of Hospitals on 
16.08.2024. The Certification Centre certified that the 
appellant has physical disability of speech and language of 
44% (in some reports, it was mentioned as 45%) and 
recorded that based on quantification of disability, the 

appellant was not eligible to pursue the medical course as per 
NMC norms. In view of that, the appellant was rendered 
ineligible person to obtain PwD reservation or to pursue 
medical course as per the NMC Gazette notification. 
 
7. 
The Board of Governors of the Medical Council of 
India, the previous avatar of the NMC, had amended the 
Graduate Medical Education Regulations, 1997, vide 
notification dated 13.05.2019. The existing Appendix “H” 
was substituted with Appendix “H-1” providing for 
guidelines regarding admission to students with “specified 
disabilities” under the RPwD Act with respect to admission 
in MBBS course. As per clause 1(D) thereof, persons who 
have equal to or more than 40% disability were not eligible 
for Medical Course. The relevant clause of the schedule is 
extracted hereinbelow:- 

Type of 
Disabilities 

Specified Disability 
Disability Range 
Eligible for 
Medical 
Course, Not 
Eligible for 
PwD Quota 
Eligible for 
Medical 
Course, 
Eligible for 
PwD Quota 
Not 
Eligible 
for 
Medical 
Course 
D. Speech 
& language 
disability$ 
Organic/neurological 
causes 
Less than 
40% Disabil-
ity 
 
Equal to 
or more 
than 40% 
Disability 
$ Persons with Speech Intelligibility Affected (SIA) shall be eligible to pursue 
MBBS Courses, provided Speech Intelligibility Affected (SIA) score shall not 
exceed 3 (three), which is 40% or below. 
Persons with Aphasia shall be eligible to pursue MBBS Courses, provided 
Aphasia Quotient (AQ) is 40% or below. 
 
Proceedings before the High Court: 
8. 
Disappointed but by no means dispirited, the appellant 
moved the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in writ 
petition being W.P. Stamp No. 24821 of 2024 contending 
that the Medical Council of India/NMC is not empowered to 
lay down eligibility criteria in such a manner as to altogether 
take away the benefits under the RPwD Act. Challenging the 
notification dated 13.05.2019 as well as the certificate issued 
by the Disability Certification Centre rendering him 

ineligible for pursuing the MBBS Course only on the ground 
of disability exceeding 40% without anything more, the 
appellant also sought interim relief permitting him to 
participate in the centralized admission process in admission 
to MBBS Course without considering the certificate issued 
by the Disability Certification Centre - Sir J.J. Group of 
Hospitals, Mumbai pending final disposal of the writ petition. 
9. 
The appellant contended that there is nothing which 
would show he is not competent to pursue the course. The 
appellant also alleged discrimination. By the order of 
29.08.2024, the High Court simply stood over the matter to 
19.09.2024 and did not pass any interim order. 
10. Running against time as the last date for submitting the 
choice for admission was 29.08.2024 and since the results of 
the CAP Round-I were to be declared on 30.08.2024, the 
appellant with great alacrity moved this Court seeking urgent 
reliefs. 

Interim order by this Court: 
11. When the matter came up on 02.09.2024, this Court, 
after hearing the counsel for the NMC, passed an order 
directing that the seat which the appellant would have been 
entitled, if rendered eligible, be kept vacant. This Court also 
directed the Dean, Byramjee Jeejeebhoy Government 
Medical College and Sassoon General Hospital, Pune to 
constitute a Medical Board consisting of one or more 
specialists, having domain expertise pertaining to the 
appellant’s disability. The Medical Board was to specifically 
examine whether the speech and language disability of the 
appellant would come in his way of pursuing the MBBS 
Degree Course. This course of action was previously 
adopted in another case with similar facts in Writ Petition (C) 
No. 793 of 2022 (Vibhushita Sharma vs. Union of India & 
Ors). 

Opinion of the Medical Board: 
12. Ultimately, since the B.J Government Medical College 
did not have the facility, the task was entrusted to Maulana 
Azad Medical College, Government of NCT of Delhi. The 
report has since been received and the Medical Board has 
opined that the Appellant’s speech and language disability 
would not come in the way of the appellant pursuing the 
MBBS Course, which is extracted hereinbelow:- 
“As directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, the 
medical examination of the petitioner, namely, Sh. Gond 
Omkar Ramchandra was conducted in the department of 
ENT(Room No. 609) by the above mentioned members 
of the Medical Board. Findings of the examinations are 
attached (OPD-116574108). The Board is of the opinion 
that the Speech & Language disability of the Petitioner 
namely Sh. Gond Omkar Ramchandra would not come in 
the way of pursuing the MBBS Course.” 

(Emphasis Supplied) 
 
13. We have heard Mr. S. B. Talekar, learned counsel for the 
appellant and Mr. S.D. Sanjay, learned Additional Solicitor 
General for the Union of India and Mr. Gaurav Sharma, 
learned senior counsel for the NMC. 

14. This Court made the following order on 18.09.2024:- 
“1. Leave granted. 
 
2. For the reasons to be recorded separately, the appeal is 
allowed. 
 
3. The appellant is directed to be admitted against the 
seat, which was directed to be kept vacant as per the 
orders passed by this Court.” 
 
Question before the Court: 
15. Merely because the disability is quantified at 44%/45%, 
should the appellant be disqualified to obtain admission 
under the PwD Category for the MBBS Course? 
Analysis and Reasoning: 
16. Article 41 in the Directive Principles of State Policy 
reads as under: 
“41. Right to work, to education and to public 
assistance in certain cases.- 
 
The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity 
and development, make effective provision for securing 
the right to work, to education and to public assistance in 
cases 
of 
unemployment, 
old 
age, 
sickness 
and 
disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want.” 
 
 (Emphasis Supplied) 

As is clear, it is the Constitutional goal of our nation that 
within the limits of its economic capacity and development, 
the State was to make effective provisions for securing the 
right to education including for the persons with disabilities. 
17. The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
replaced the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, 
Protection of Rights and Full Participation), Act 1995. The 
2016 Act was a sequel to the United Nations Convention on 
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. The Convention laid 
down principles to be followed by the States Parties for 
empowerment of persons with disabilities. The Convention 
laid down the following principles for empowerment of 
persons with disabilities, which the Act seeks to implement:- 
(i) respect for inherent dignity, individual autonomy 
including the freedom to make one’s own choices, and 
independence of persons; 
(ii) Non-discrimination; 
(iii) full and effective participation and inclusion in society; 

(iv) respect for difference and acceptance of persons with 
disabilities as part of human diversity and humanity; 
(v) equality of opportunity; 
(vi) accessibility; 
(vii) equality between men and women; 
(viii) respect for the evolving capacities of children with 
disabilities and respect for the right of children with 
disabilities to preserve their identities; 
(Emphasis supplied) 
18. The RPwD Act has several salutary provisions. For the 
purpose of our case, special emphasis needs to be provided 
on Sections 2(m), 2(r), 2(y), 3, 15 and 32. They are extracted 
herein below. 
“2(m) “inclusive education” means a system of 
education wherein students with and without disability 
learn together and the system of teaching and learning is 
suitably adapted to meet the learning needs of different 
types of students with disabilities; 
 
2(r) "person with benchmark disability" means a 
person with not less than forty per cent of a specified 
disability where specified disability has not been defined 
in measurable terms and includes a person with 
disability where specified disability has been defined in 

measurable terms, as certified by the certifying 
authority; 
 
2(y) "reasonable accommodation" means necessary 
and appropriate modification and adjustments, without 
imposing a disproportionate or undue burden in a 
particular case, to ensure to persons with disabilities the 
enjoyment or exercise of rights equally with others; 
 
3. Equality and non-discrimination.- 
 
(1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the 
persons with disabilities enjoy the right to equality, life 
with dignity and respect for his or her integrity equally 
with others. 
 
(2) The appropriate Government shall take steps to 
utilise the capacity of persons with disabilities by 
providing appropriate environment. 
 
(3) No person with disability shall be discriminated on 
the ground of disability, unless it is shown that the 
impugned act or omission is a proportionate means of 
achieving a legitimate aim. 
 
(4) No person shall be deprived of his or her personal 
liberty only on the ground of disability. 
 
(5) The appropriate Government shall take necessary 
steps to ensure reasonable accommodation for persons 
with disabilities. 
 
15. Designation of authorities to support.- (1) The 
appropriate Government shall designate one or more 
authorities to mobilise the community and create social 
awareness to support persons with disabilities in 
exercise of their legal capacity. 
 
(2) The authority designated under sub-section (1) shall 
take 
measures 
for 
setting 
up 
suitable 
support 

arrangements to exercise legal capacity by persons with 
disabilities living in institutions and those with high 
support needs and any other measures as may be 
required. 
 
32. Reservation in higher educational institutions.-(1) 
All Government institutions of higher education and 
other higher education institutions receiving aid from 
the Government shall reserve not less than five per cent 
seats for persons with benchmark disabilities. 
 
(2) The persons with benchmark disabilities shall be 
given an upper age relaxation of five years for 
admission in institutions of higher education. 
 
19. It is in pursuance of the 5% reservation provided for the 
persons with disabilities that the appellant applied for the 
MBBS course under the said category. He cleared the exam, 
however, was denied admission on the ground that his 
quantified disability was 44%/45%. 
20. The Appendix H-I extracted above provides a peculiar 
scenario. While people with less than 40% disability are not 
eligible for PwD quota, though they can pursue the Medical 
Course, persons with equal to or more than 40% disability are 
not eligible for the medical course. Read literally, while 
persons with speech and language disability with less than 

40% are not entitled to the reserved quota, if they have 40% 
or more disability they are rendered ineligible for the medical 
course. The column under the guidelines “Eligible for 
Medical Course, Eligible for PwD quota” is left blank 
reinforcing the absurd position that under this category no 
one is rendered eligible for the 5% reserved quota. Certainly 
that cannot be the legal position. 
21. In any event, adopting a purposive interpretation of the 
RPwD Act and, more particularly, of the provisions extracted 
hereinabove, we are of the opinion that merely because of the 
quantification of the disability for speech and language at 
40% or above, a candidate does not forfeit his right to stake a 
claim for admission to course of their choice. We say so for 
the reason that any such interpretation would render the 
clause in Appendix H-1 under the Graduate Medical 
Education Regulations of the Medical Council of India 
(precursor of the National Medical Commission) dated 
13.05.2019, over broad for treating unequals equally. 

22. In State of Gujarat and Another vs. Ambica Mills Ltd., 
Ahmedabad and Another, (1974), it was held 
that an over-inclusive classification includes not only those 
who are similarly situated with respect to the purpose but 
others who are not so situated as well. Among those with 
disability percentage of 40% or above in the category of 
speech and language disabilities, there will be individuals 
like the appellant to whom the disability may not come in the 
way of pursuing the particular educational course in question. 
Lumping together persons with benchmark disabilities who 
can pursue the educational course with those with the same 
disabilities who, in the opinion of the Medical Board, cannot 
pursue the course would tantamount to over inclusion. This is 
precisely what Article 14 frowns upon. 
23. We are constrained to hold that the Appendix H-1 in the 
notification of 13.05.2019, issued by the Medical Council of 
India cannot be interpreted to mean that merely because on 
the quantification of the disability percentage exceeding the 

prescribed limits, a person automatically becomes ineligible 
for the medical course. 
24. Dealing with an absolute bar imposed on women in 
seeking criteria or command appointments, this Court, while 
finding that such prescription fell foul of Article 14 held that 
implicit in the guarantee of equality is the principle that 
where the action of the State does differentiate between two 
classes of person, it does not differentiate them in an 
unreasonable or irrational manner. This Court further held 
that the right to equality is a right to rationality and whether a 
particular candidate should or should not be granted, could be 
a matter for the competent authority to decide but a blanket 
non-consideration of women for criteria or command 
appointments absent an individuated justification was not 
sustainable in law (See Secretary, Ministry of Defence v. 
Babita Puniya and Others, (2020) (para 85) 
25. A Constitutional Court examining the plea of 
discrimination is mandated to consider whether real equality 

exists. This Court is not to be carried away by a projection of 
facial equality. Viewed at first blush, the regulation providing 
that all persons with 40% or more disability are uniformly 
barred from pursuing the medical course in the category of 
speech 
and 
language 
disability, 
may 
appear 
non-
discriminatory. But here too, appearances can be deceptive. 
The Court of law is obliged to probe as to whether beneath 
the veneer of equality there is any invidious breach of Article 
14. 
26. This Court in Khandige Sham Bhat and Anr vs. 
Agricultural Income-tax Officer, Kasaragod, and Anr, AIR 
1963 SC 591 observed as under: 
“7. Though a law ex facie appears to treat all that fall within a 
class alike, if in effect it operates unevenly on persons or 
property similarly situated, it may be said that the law offends 
the equality clause. It will then be the duty of the court to 
scrutinise the effect of the law carefully to ascertain its real 
impact on the persons or property similarly situated. 
Conversely, a law may treat persons who appear to be 
similarly situate differently; but on investigation they may be 
found not to be similarly situate. To state it differently, it is not 
the phraseology of a statute that governs the situation but the 
effect of the law that is decisive. If there is equality and 

uniformity within each group, the law will not be condemned 
as discriminative, though due to some fortuitous circumstance 
 a peculiar situation some included in a class get 
an advantage over others, so long as they are not singled out 
for special treatment….” 
 
27. Similarly, in Lieutenant Colonel Nitisha & Ors. vs. 
Union of India & Ors., (2021), this Court 
observed as under: 
“52. We must clarify here that the use of the term “indirect 
discrimination” is not to refer to discrimination which is 
remote, but is, instead, as real as any other form of 
discrimination. Indirect discrimination is caused by facially 
neutral criteria by not taking into consideration the underlying 
effects of a provision, practice or a criterion” 
 
28. In fact, the “One Size Fits All” theory in deciding 
eligibility of persons with disability to avail the benefit of 
reserved seats was questioned first in Ravinder Kumar 
Dhariwal & Anr. vs. Union of India and Others, (2023) wherein this Court had the following to say: - 
“77. Since disability is a social construct dependent on the 
interplay between mental impairment with barriers such as 
social, economic and historical among other factors, the 
one-size-fits-all approach can never be used to identify the 
disability of a person. Disability is not universal but is an 
individualistic conception based on the impairment that a 
person has along with the barriers that they face. Since the 
barriers that every person faces are personal to their 

surroundings — interpersonal and structural, general 
observations on “how a person ought to have behaved” 
cannot be made.” 
 
29. Close on the heels of Ravinder Kumar Dhariwal 
(supra) came an order of this Court in [Bambhaniya Sagar Vasharambhai vs. Union 
of India & Ors.]. In the said writ petition, by order dated 
22.09.2023, in Para 13, this Court opined as under: 
“13. In the opinion of this Court in cases even 
of specified disabilities, in all cases the standard of 40% 
may result in “one size fit all” norm which will 
exclude eligible candidates. The Union, therefore, 
shall consider the steps to mitigate such 
anomalies, because a lower extent of disabilities bar 
benefits and at the same time render them functional, 
whereas higher extent of disability would entitle benefits, 
but also result in denying them the benefit of reservation. 
The National Commission and the Central Government 
are directed to consider the problem and work 
out suitable solutions to enable effective participation.” 
 
30. Though ultimately 
was dismissed on 31.10.2023, the issue with regard to finding 
a suitable solution to facilitate the effective participation of 
persons with disabilities by the Central Government, as 

suggested in the order of 22.09.2023, was directed to be 
complied with. 
31. It must be said to the credit of the Union of India that 
the directions of this Court in Bambhaniya (Supra) was 
carried forward and the Government of India through the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment issued a 
communication dated 25.01.2024 to the National Medical 
Commission. 
32. The communication was placed on record by Mr. S.D. 
Sanjay, learned ASG. The Government of India mentioned in 
the communication that the National Medical Commission 
was obliged to take into account the developments in aids 
and assistive devices and also in other technologies which are 
capable of reducing the effects of disability and ensure that 
the statutory requirements of RPwD Act are followed in letter 
and spirit. It was further mentioned in the communication 
that, pursuant to deliberations, the National Medical 
Commission was required to take action of providing a drop-

down menu or a mandatory category in the electronic 
application form. That drop down menu or the mandatory 
category was to mention which categories and percentage of 
disability are suitable for pursuing the MBBS Course, and, if 
necessary, the disability categories in the form should also 
show symptoms which would normally be excluded by the 
medical board. It was also stated therein that a Meeting 
should be held with the National Testing Agency and proper 
classification of disabilities should be made in the application 
form so as to ensure that once the candidate was allowed to 
take the examination, the candidate was not denied admission 
merely on the ground of disability. It was further mentioned 
that the regulations of NMC should immediately be 
reviewed. 
33. Attention was also drawn of the National Medical 
Commission to the position obtaining in the Department of 
Personnel 
and 
Training 
(DoPT), 
wherein 
functional 
classification and physical requirements consistent with 

requirements of the identified service/posts are being worked 
out for Civil Services. It was directed that on the lines of the 
exercise by DoPT, NMC should also work out functional 
classifications and physical requirements consistent with the 
requirements of medical profession and review its regulations 
accordingly. It was ordered that NMC should sensitize all the 
colleges with respect to reservation criteria for persons with 
benchmark disabilities as per the RPwD Act and also towards 
the requirements of such candidates once admitted. 
Suggestion was made for formation of Appellate Body 
against the decisions of the Medical Boards. 

(Emphasis supplied) 
34. We commend the Union of India, for having issued the 
communication dated 25.01.2024 through the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment. We also deem it 
appropriate to extract the communication:- 
“Subject: Compliance of Hon'ble Supreme Court order 
dated 22.09.2023 in WP (C) 856 of 2023 in the matter of 
Bambhaniya Sagar Vashrambhai vs UOI and ors – reg 

Sir, 
I am directed to refer to the captioned Court case and to 
your letter dated 13.10.2023 and to say that the Central 
Government has enacted the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act. 2016 which came into effect on 
19.04.2017. Section 32 of the said Act provides that (1) 
All Government institutions of higher education and other 
higher education institutions receiving aid from the 
Government shall reserve not less than five per cent seats 
for persons with benchmark disabilities (2) The persons 
with benchmark disabilities shall be given an upper age 
relaxation of five years for admission in institutions of 
higher education. 
 
Persons with Benchmark disability is defined under 
Section 2(r) as a person with not less than forty percent of 
a specified disability where specified disability has not 
been defined in measurable terms and includes a person 
with disability where specified disability has been defined 
in measurable terms, as certified by the certifying 
authority. 
 
2. It is also stated that at least 5% reservation to persons 
with benchmark disabilities in higher education is a 
statutory provision and denial of this benefit to eligible 
candidates is violation of a statutory provision. It is also a 
point to be noted that extending this facility to persons 
with disabilities having less than 40% disability would 
not qualify as fulfilment of statutory obligations. The 
Government is also cognizant of the challenges that exist 
in balancing the statutory rights of persons with 
benchmark disabilities viz a viz strenuous requirement of 
the medical profession. NMC is therefore requested to 
take into account the developments in aids and assistive 
devices and also in other technologies which are capable 
of reducing the effects of disability and ensure that the 
statutory requirements of RPwD Act, 2016 are followed 
in letter and spirit. 

3. Further, it may be recalled that, in pursuance to your 
letter dated 13.10.2023 vide which certain suggestions 
have been made to address the issues faced by PwDs, a 
meeting 
was 
held 
on 
21.12.2023 
under 
the 
Chairpersonship of Joint Secretary, Policy. Draft Minutes 
of the meeting were issued on 26.12.2023 upon which 
comments were received from NMC and DGHS. In 
pursuance of these comments, the matter was further 
considered in the Department and the following emerged: 
i. 
While filling up the NEET electronic form by PwDs, 
there must be a drop down or a mandatory category 
which 
should 
mention 
which 
categories 
and 
percentage of disability are suitable for pursuing the 
MBBS course. If it is necessary, the disability 
categories may also show symptoms which would 
normally be excluded by the medical board. Such form 
should be accessible. 
NMC may also consider linking this form to DEPwD's 
UDID portal i.e. www.swavlambancard.gov.in 
NMC 
to take 
action 
ii. 
A meeting should be done with National Testing 
Agency and proper classification of disabilities should 
be made in application forms so as to ensure that once 
the candidate is allowed to take the examination, 
she/he will not be denied admission merely on the 
ground of disability. iii. 
The regulations issued by NMC regarding admission 
of students with specified disabilities must be 
immediately reviewed. In this context, reference may 
be taken from DoPT wherein functional classification 
and 
physical 
requirements 
(abilities/disabilities) 
consistent 
with 
requirements 
of the identified 
service/posts are being worked out for Civil Services. 
On the lines of this exercise by DoPT, NMC should 
also work out functional classifications and physical 
requirements (abilities/disabilities) consistent with the 
requirements of medical profession and review its 
regulations accordingly. While carrying out this 
exercise, NMC should also take into account 
assessment 
guidelines 
dated 
04.01.2018 
and 
amendments made thereto. iv. 
The NMC should sensitize all the colleges with respect 
to reservation criteria for persons with benchmark 
disabilities (disability of 40% or more) as per the 
RPwD Act, 2016 and also towards the needs of such 
candidates once admitted. v. 
The availability of medical boards in the country 
should be increased and there must be minimum 1 
medical board in each State and UTs for proper 
medical examination of the students who have passed 
the examination. Further, larger States/UTs should 
have sufficient number of such medical boards to 
streamline the process. 
DGHS 
to take 
action 
vi. 
In case the PwD wants to challenge any decision of the 
medical board with regard to admission, an appellate 
body at the level of DGHS may be formed. vii. All India Institute of Medical Sciences at all places 
should be designated for issuing certificates of 
eligibility for attaining medical education. 
 
In view of the above, NMC and DGHS is requested to 
take appropriate action and a report may be sent to this 
Department.” 
 
35. We have no reason to doubt that the National Medical 
Commission will expeditiously comply with the requirements 
in the communication of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment dated 25.01.2024. In any event, we direct that 
the needful be done by the National Medical Commission 
before the publication of the admission brochure for the 
academic year 2025-26. 
36. In fact, a perusal of the amendment notification dated 
13.05.2019 and the Guidelines at Appendix H-1 would 
indicate that with regard to some categories of Disabilities 
particularly, Locomotor Disability, including specified 

disabilities like Leprosy cured person, Cerebral Palsy, 
Dwarfism, Muscular Dystrophy, Acid attack victims and 
other such as Amputation, Poliomyelitis etc. under the 
column “Eligible for the Medical Course,Eligible for PwD 
Quota” the following finds mention:- 
“40%-80% disability 
Persons with more than 80% disability may also be 
allowed on case to case basis and their functional 
competency will be determined with the aid of assistive 
devices, if it is being used, to see if it is brought below 
80% and whether they posses sufficient motor ability as 
required 
to 
pursue 
and 
complete 
the 
course 
satisfactorily.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
37. Similarly, for specific learning disabilities, Perceptual 
disabilities, Dyslexia, Dyscalculia, Dyspraxia under the 
column “Eligible for Medical Course, Eligible for PwD 
Quota”, it is mentioned as follows” 
“Equal to or more than 40% disability and equal to or less 
than 80%. 
But selection will be based on the learning competency 
evaluated with the help of the remediation/assisted 
technology/aids/infrastructural changes by the Expert 
Panel.” 

38. We are hopeful that in the revised regulations and 
guidelines which the National Medical Commission will 
issue, an inclusive attitude will be taken towards persons with 
disabilities from all categories furthering the concept of 
reasonable accommodation recognized in the RPwD Act. The 
approach of the Government, instrumentalities of States, 
regulatory bodies and for that matter even private sector 
should be, as to how best can one accommodate and grant the 
opportunity to the candidates with disability. The approach 
should not be as to how best to disqualify the candidates and 
make it difficult for them to pursue and realize their 
educational goals. 
39. We have also examined the latest notified Guidelines 
for assessing the extent of Specified Disabilities dated 
14.03.2024, which deals with the method for ascertaining the 
percentage of disabilities. In Clause 20.3.3, under the 
Computation of percentage Speech Disability, the following 
table is provided:- 

“20.3.3. Computation of percentage Speech Disability 
 
(a) Speech Intelligibility Test: 
 
The verbal output of person should be evaluated using 
Perceptual 
Speech 
Intelligibility 
Rating 
Scale 
[AYJNISHD (D), 2022] (Appendix IV) and percentage of 
Speech Intelligibility Affected (SIA) to be measured 
based on score as the table given below: 
 
Point 
Scale 
Description of Speech Sample 
Percentage 
of Disabil-
ity 

Normal 
0-15 

Can understand without difficulty, however, 
feel speech is normal 
16-30 

Can understand with little effort occasionally 
need to ask for repetition 
31-39 

Can understand with concentration and effort 
especially by sympathetic listener, require a 
minimum of two or three repetition. 
40-55 

Can understand with difficulty and concentra-
tion by family but not others 
56-75 

Can understand with effort if content is known 
76-89 

Cannot understand at all even when content is 
known 
90-100 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
To illustrate, it will be seen that a person with 40 to 55% 
speech disability is one who “Can understand with 
concentration and effort” especially by a sympathetic 
listener; require a minimum of 2 or 3 repetitions. In fact, for 
the entire range, this is the criterion. 
40. It is in matters like this that the principles of reasonable 
accommodation should come into full play. Section 2(y) of 

the RPwD Act, defines “reasonable accommodation” to mean 
necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments, 
without imposing a disproportionate or undue burden in a 
particular case, to ensure to persons with disabilities the 
enjoyment or exercise of rights equally with others. The 
concept of reasonable accommodation would encompass 
within itself the deployment of a purposive and meaningful 
construction of the NMC Regulations of 13.05.2019 read 
with the Appendix H-1 guidelines in a manner as to further 
the objectives of the RPwD Act. The reasonable 
accommodation as defined in Section 2(y) of the RPwD Act 
should not be understood narrowly to mean only the 
provision of assisting devices and other tangible substances 
which will aid persons with disabilities. If the mandate of the 
law is to ensure a full and effective participation of persons 
with disabilities in the society and if the whole idea was to 
exclude conditions that prevent their full and effective 
participation as equal members of society, a broad 

interpretation of the concept of reasonable accommodation 
which will further the objective of the RPwD Act and Article 
41 of the Directive Principles of State Policy is mandated. 
41. This concept of reasonable accommodation has come in 
for judicial interpretation in Vikash Kumar v. UPSC & 
Others, (2021) wherein this Court held that the 
principle of reasonable accommodation captures the positive 
obligation of the State and private parties to provide 
additional support to persons with disabilities to facilitate 
their full and effective participation in society. In Para 44, it 
was held as under. 
“44. The principle of reasonable accommodation captures 
the positive obligation of the State and private parties to 
provide additional support to persons with disabilities to 
facilitate their full and effective participation in society. 
The concept of reasonable accommodation is developed 
in section (H) below. For the present, suffice it to say 
that, for a person with disability, the constitutionally 
guaranteed fundamental rights to equality, the six 
freedoms and the right to life under Article 21 will ring 
hollow if they are not given this additional support that 
helps make these rights real and meaningful for them. 
Reasonable accommodation is the instrumentality—are 
an obligation as a society—to enable the disabled to 
enjoy the constitutional guarantee of equality and non-
discrimination. In this context, it would be apposite to 

remember R.M. Lodha, J's (as he then was) observation in 
Sunanda Bhandare Foundation v. Union of India, (2014), where he stated: (SCC p. 387, para 9) 
“9. … In the matters of providing relief to those who are 
differently abled, the approach and attitude of the 
executive must be liberal and relief oriented and not 
obstructive or lethargic.” 
 
42. Thereafter, in the said judgment, this Court held in para 
62, 63 and 65 as under. 
“62. The principle of reasonable accommodation 
acknowledges that if disability as a social construct has to 
be remedied, conditions have to be affirmatively created 
for facilitating the development of the disabled. 
Reasonable accommodation is founded in the norm of 
inclusion. Exclusion results in the negation of individual 
dignity and worth or they can choose the route of 
reasonable accommodation, where each individuals' 
dignity and worth is respected. Under this route, the 
“powerful and the majority adapt their own rules and 
practices, within the limits of reason and short of undue 
hardship, to permit realisation of these ends”. 
 
63. In the specific context of disability, the principle of 
reasonable accommodation postulates that the conditions 
which exclude the disabled from full and effective 
participation as equal members of society have to give 
way to an accommodative society which accepts 
difference, respects their needs and facilitates the creation 
of an environment in which the societal barriers to 
disability are progressively answered. Accommodation 
implies a positive obligation to create conditions 
conducive to the growth and fulfilment of the disabled in 
every aspect of their existence — whether as students, 
members of the workplace, participants in governance or, 
on a personal plane, in realising the fulfilling privacies of 
family life. The accommodation which the law mandates 

is “reasonable” because it has to be tailored to the 
requirements of each condition of disability. The 
expectations which every disabled person has are unique 
to the nature of the disability and the character of the 
impediments which are encountered as its consequence. 
 
65. Failure to meet the individual needs of every disabled 
person 
will 
breach 
the 
norm 
of 
reasonable 
accommodation. Flexibility in answering individual needs 
and 
requirements 
is 
essential 
to 
reasonable 
accommodation. The principle contains an aspiration to 
meet the needs of the class of persons facing a particular 
disability. Going beyond the needs of the class, the 
specific requirement of individuals who belong to the 
class must also be accommodated. The principle of 
reasonable accommodation must also account for the fact 
that disability based discrimination is intersectional in 
nature….” 
 
43. It should be borne in mind that the RPwD Act which was 
enacted to give effect to the United Nations Convention on 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities - was with the objective 
of granting persons with disabilities full and effective 
participation and inclusion in society, grant them equal 
opportunity and to show respect for their inherent dignity, 
individual autonomy including the freedom to make their 
own choices. 

44. This Court in Jeeja Ghosh & Anr. v. Union of India & 
Ors., (2016) observed as under: 
“40. In international human rights law, equality is founded 
upon two complementary principles: non-discrimination and 
reasonable differentiation. The principle of non-discrimination 
seeks to ensure that all persons can equally enjoy and exercise 
all their rights and freedoms. Discrimination occurs due to 
arbitrary denial of opportunities for equal participation. For 
example, when public facilities and services are set on 
standards out of the reach of persons with disabilities, it leads 
to exclusion and denial of rights. Equality not only implies 
preventing discrimination (example, the protection of 
individuals against unfavourable treatment by introducing anti-
discrimination laws), but goes beyond in remedying 
discrimination 
against 
groups 
suffering 
systematic 
discrimination in society. In concrete terms, it means 
embracing the notion of positive rights, affirmative action and 
reasonable accommodation…” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
45. In view of this mandate, while interpreting the RPwD 
Act and the agnate regulations, one must keep in mind the 
background and purpose for which the law was enacted. (See 
U.P. Bhoodan Yagna Samiti, U.P. v. Braj Kishore and 
others, (1988) ). In the said judgment, quoting 

from Lord Denning in “The Discipline of Law”, this Court 
held as under: 
“15. When we are dealing with the phrase “landless 
persons” these words are from English language and 
therefore I am reminded of what Lord Denning said about 
it. Lord Denning in “The Discipline of Law” at p. 12 
observed as under: [ Quoting from his decision in Seaford 
Court Estates Ltd. v. Asher, (1949) 2 KB 481] 
“Whenever a statute comes up for consideration it must 
be remembered that it is not within human powers to 
foresee the manifold sets of facts which may arise, and, 
even if it were, it is not possible to provide for them in 
terms free from all ambiguity. The English language is 
not an instrument of mathematical precision. Our 
literature would be much the poorer if it were. This is 
where the draftsmen of Acts of Parliament have often 
been unfairly criticised. A Judge, believing himself to be 
fettered by the supposed rule that he must look to the 
language and nothing else, laments that the draftsmen 
have not provided for this, or that, or have been guilty of 
some or other ambiguity. It would certainly save the 
Judges trouble if Acts of Parliament were drafted with 
divine prescience and perfect clarity. In the absence of it, 
when a defect appears a Judge cannot simply fold his 
hands and blame the draftsman. He must set to work on 
the constructive task of finding the intention of 
Parliament...” 
 
16. And it is clear that when one has to look to the 
intention of the legislature, one has to look to the 
circumstances under which the law was enacted. The 
preamble of the law, the mischief which was intended to 
be remedied by the enactment of the statute and in this 
context, Lord Denning, in the same book at p. 10, 
observed as under: 
 
“At one time the Judges used to limit themselves to the 
bare reading of the statute itself — to go simply by the 

words, giving them their grammatical meaning, and that 
was all. That view was prevalent in the 19th century and 
still has some supporters today. But it is wrong in 
principle. The meaning for which we should seek is the 
meaning of the statute as it appears to those who have to 
obey it — and to those who have to advise them what to 
do about it; in short, to lawyers like yourselves. Now the 
statute does not come to such folk as if they were 
eccentrics cut off from all that is happening around them. 
The statute comes to them as men of affairs — who have 
their own feeling for the meaning of the words and know 
the reason why the Act was passed — just as if it had 
been fully set out in a preamble. So it has been held very 
rightly that you can inquire into the mischief which gave 
rise to the statute — to see what was the evil which it was 
sought to remedy. 
 
It is now well settled that in order to interpret a law one 
must understand the background and the purpose for 
which the law was enacted…” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
46. Disabilities Assessment Boards are not monotonous 
automations to just look at the quantified benchmark 
disability as set out in the certificate of disability and cast 
aside the candidate. Such an approach would be antithetical 
to Article 14 and Article 21 and all canons of justice, equity 
and good conscience. It will also defeat the salutary 
objectives of the RPwD Act. The Disabilities Assessment 
Boards are obliged to examine the further question as to 

whether the candidate in the opinion of the experts in the 
field is eligible to pursue the course or in other words, 
whether the disability will or will not come in the way of the 
candidate pursuing the course in question. 
47. The concept of “inclusive education” has been elucidated 
in Avni Prakash v. National Testing Agency, (NTA) and 
others (2023). This Court held as under. 
“40. Education plays a key role in social and economic 
inclusion and effective participation in society. Inclusive 
education is indispensable for ensuring universal and 
non-discriminatory access to education. The Convention 
on Rights of Persons with Disabilities recognises that 
inclusive education systems must be put in place for a 
meaningful realisation of the right to education for PwD. 
Thus, a right to education is essentially a right to 
inclusive education. In India, the RPwD Act, 2016 
provides statutory backing to the principle of inclusive 
education. Section 2(m) defines “inclusive education” as: 
 
“2. (m) “inclusive education” means a system of 
education wherein students with and without disability 
learn together and the system of teaching and learning is 
suitably adapted to meet the learning needs of different 
types of students with disabilities;” 
 
48. While interpreting the Regulations and Guidelines, as 
provided in Appendix H-1 to the notification dated 
13.05.2019, as they stood for the academic year 2024-25, we 

are constrained, keeping in mind the salutary object of the 
RPwD Act and Article 41 of the Directive Principles of State 
Policy, to direct that mere existence of benchmark disability 
of 40% or above (or such other prescribed percentages 
depending on the disability) will not disqualify a candidate 
from being eligible for the course applied for. The Disability 
Assessment 
Boards 
assessing 
the 
candidates 
should 
positively record whether the disability of the candidate will 
or will not come in the way of the candidate pursuing the 
course in question. The Disability Assessment Boards should 
state reasons in the event of the Disability Assessment Board 
concluding that candidate is not eligible for pursuing the 
course. 
49. The Disability Assessment Boards will, pending 
formulation of appropriate Regulations by the NMC, 
pursuant to the communication of 25.01.2024 by the Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment, keep in mind the 

salutary points mentioned in the said communication while 
forming their opinion. 
50. Pending creation of the Appellate body, we further 
direct that such decisions of the Disability Assessment 
Boards which give a negative opinion for the candidate will 
be amenable to challenge in judicial review proceedings. 
The Court seized of the matter in the judicial review 
proceedings shall refer the case of the candidate to any 
premier medical institute having the facility for an 
independent opinion and relief to the candidate will be 
granted or denied based on the opinion of the said medical 
institution to which the High Court had referred the matter. 
51. Before we part, we will do well to recollect that 
acclaimed Bharatanatyam dancer Sudha Chandran, Arunima 
Sinha who conquered Mount Everest, prominent sports 
personality, H. Boniface Prabhu, entrepreneur Srikanth Bolla 
and Dr. Satendra Singh, the founder of ‘Infinite Ability’, are 
some of the shining daughters and sons from a long and 

illustrious list of individuals in India who scaled 
extraordinary heights braving all adversities. 
52. The world would have been so much the poorer if 
Homer, Milton, Mozart, Beethoven, Byron and many more 
would not have been allowed to realize their full potential. 
Distinguished Indian Medical Practitioner Dr. Farokh Erach 
Udwadia in his classic work “The Forgotten Art of Healing 
and Others Essays’ under the Chapter ‘Art and Medicine’ 
rightly extolls their extraordinary talent, and of the many 
more similarly circumstanced. 
Conclusion and Directions: 
53. For the reasons set out hereinabove, 

We hold that quantified disability per se will not dis-
entitle a candidate with benchmark disability from 
being 
considered 
for 
admission 
to 
educational 
institutions. The candidate will be eligible, if the 
Disability 
Assessment 
Board 
opines 
that 
notwithstanding the quantified disability the candidate 

can pursue the course in question. The NMC 
regulations in the notification of 13.05.2019 read with 
the Appendix H-1 should, pending the re-formulation 
by NMC, be read in the light of the holdings in this 
judgment. 
(ii) The Disability Assessment Boards assessing the 
candidates should positively record whether the 
disability of the candidate will or will not come in the 
way of the candidate pursuing the course in question. 
The Disability Assessment Boards should state reasons 
in the event of the Disability Assessment Boards 
concluding that the candidate is not eligible for 
pursuing the course. 
(iii) The Disability Assessment Boards will, pending 
formulation of appropriate regulations by the NMC, 
pursuant to the communication of 25.01.2024 by the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, keep in 

mind the salutary points mentioned in the said 
communication while forming their opinion. 
(iv) Pending creation of the appellate body, we further 
direct that such decisions of the Disability Assessment 
Boards which give a negative opinion for the candidate 
will be amenable to challenge in judicial review 
proceedings. The Court seized of the matter in the 
judicial review proceedings shall refer the case of the 
candidate to any premier medical institute having the 
facility, for an independent opinion and relief to the 
candidate will be granted or denied based on the 
opinion of the said medical institution to which the 
High Court had referred the matter. 

We have already, pursuant to our order dated 
18.09.2024, in view of the favorable report dated 
13.09.2024 of the Maulana Azad Medical College, 
granted admission to the appellant. We confirm the 

admission and direct the concerned authorities to treat 
the admission as a valid admission in the eye of law. 
54. The appeal is allowed and the impugned order dated 
29.08.2024 is set aside. In view of our directions, Writ 
Petition (Stamp) No. 24821 of 2024 pending in the High 
Court of judicature at Bombay will stand disposed of in terms 
of the holding in the present judgment. No order as to costs. 

…..…………………J. 

(B.R. Gavai) 

…..…………………J. 

(Aravind Kumar) 

…..…………………J. 

(K.V. Viswanathan) 
New Delhi; 
October 15, 2024.