IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
INHERENT JURISDICTION

IN

[@ ]
VITTHAL DAMUJI MEHER …PETITIONER

VERSUS

MANIK MADHUKAR SARVE & ORS. …RESPONDENTS
ORDER
DIPANKAR DATTA & AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, JJ.
By way of the captioned defective review petition, the Petitioner seeks
review of Judgment dated 28.08.2024 passed in titled Manik Madhukar Sarve & Ors. v Vitthal Damuji Meher &
Ors.1 Vide the said judgment [authored by one of us (Ahsanuddin
Amanullah, J.)], the Court set aside the grant of bail to the Petitioner
1 |.

(Respondent No.1 in the appeal) and directed him to surrender within three
weeks.
2.
The jurisprudential contour for a review petition was considered lately
in Sanjay Kumar Agarwal v State Tax Officer, (2024). The
present coram has taken note of the same in A S Raghavendra v Bharti
Airtel Limited,. We have kept the
principles enumerated therein in mind.
3.
A glance at the petition would exhibit that the Petitioner is dissatisfied
on his understanding that: observations in Para 26 of the judgment of which
review is sought are incorrect and contrary to the record; ‘later period’ or
‘change in circumstances’ has not been specified; relevant precedents have
not been considered; ‘Bail is the Rule, Jail is the exception’ (sic) has been
ignored; all other arrested accused have been released on bail; etcetera.
4.
As to why the Petitioner, in his own words, has been ‘single(d) out’, we
need only point towards the well-accepted dicta, reiterated in Sanjay Dubey
v State of Madhya Pradesh3,:
‘18.… It is too well-settled that judgments are not to
be read as Euclid's theorems; they are not to be
construed as statutes, and; specific cases are
authorities only for what they actually decide. We do
not want to be verbose in reproducing the relevant
2 Order dated 24.09.2024.
3 2023 INSC 519. paragraphs but deem it proper to indicate some
authorities on this point - Sreenivasa General
Traders v State of Andhra Pradesh, (1983) and Amar Nath Om Prakash v State of Punjab,
(1985) - which have been reiterated, inter
alia, in BGS SGS Soma JV v NHPC Limited, (2020), and Chintels India Limited v Bhayana
Builders Private Limited, (2021).’
(emphasis supplied)
5.
The facts of every case vary and are to be judged in their unique
perspective. Grant of bail to co-accused would not ipso facto entitle the
instant Petitioner to the same. Moreover, the record indicates that the
Petitioner was arrested on 28.04.2021 and granted bail by the High Court on
13.10.2021. Hence, the Petitioner was incarcerated for about 6 months, nay,
5 ½ months only. This cannot be taken as ‘incarceration for a significant
period of time’ as sought to be projected by the Petitioner by relying on
Union of India v K A Najeeb, (2021). Further, a reading of the
Judgment dated 28.08.2024 makes it clear that the Court was conscious of
the peculiarities of the case, as it was cancelling bail after almost three
years, and that Chargesheet had been filed.
6.
The judgment of which review is sought has considered the role
ascribed to the Petitioner, including the version in the Chargesheet. To allay
the Petitioner’s apprehensions, authorities concerned have been directed to
render appropriate care and assistance apropos his medical condition. The

calming caveat, that a bail application preferred afresh by the Petitioner shall
be considered on its own merits, without prejudice to the cancellation of bail
so ordered, also finds place in the Judgment dated 28.08.2024. We do not
appreciate the casual averment to the effect that ‘once bail granted by the
Hon’ble High Court is cancelled by this Hon’ble Court, neither the Learned
Trial Court nor the Hon’ble High Court would grant bail to the Review
Petitioner.’ The High Court, as also the Trial Court in seisin, have been
specifically permitted by this Court to consider the Petitioner’s bail
application, if and when preferred, ‘at a later period or in the event of a
change in circumstances’. The discretion in this context, albeit, to be
exercised in accordance with law, of the Court(s) below is left untouched.
Nevertheless, if the Petitioner chooses to so apply, while considering such
bail plea, the Court concerned need not feel inhibited by observations, if any,
against the Petitioner in the Judgment dated 28.08.2024, regard being had
to all due factors.
7.
Above being the position, a case for review is not discernible. This
petition is, thus, dismissed.
8.
Crl. M. P. seeking listing of the review petition in Open Court for
hearing is rejected.

9.
Crl. M. P. seeking exemption from surrendering is dismissed as
infructuous, as the period of three weeks granted to the Petitioner to
surrender (reckoned from 28.08.2024) has long elapsed.
10.
Crl. M. P. seeking permission to file additional documents stands
closed.
………..…………………………..J.
[DIPANKAR DATTA]
………..…………………………..J.
[AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER 15, 2024