IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Central Bureau of Investigation … Appellant 

 versus 

Srinivas D. Sridhar... Respondent 

JUDGMENT 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECTS 
1. 
The present appeal arises out of a charge sheet filed in 
First Information Report bearing no. RC 7/E/2014 registered 
with the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) (Bank Securities 
and Fraud Cell), Mumbai, for the offences punishable under 
Sections 420, 468, 471 and 120-B of IPC and Section 13(2) read 
with 13(1)(d) of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (for short, 
‘the PC Act’). Charge sheet was filed for the said offences on 
8th August 2014. A total of seven accused persons were charge-
sheeted, including the respondent herein, who was shown as 
accused no.7. At the relevant time, he was the Chairman and 
Managing Director of the Central Bank of India (for short “the 
Bank”). Accused no.1 was M/s Electrotherm (India) Limited (for 

short, “the Company”). Accused no.2-Mukesh Bhanwarlal 
Bhandari was the Chairman of the Company. Accused no.3-
Shailesh Bhanwarlal Bhandari was the Managing Director of 
the 
Company. 
Accused 
no.4-Avinash 
Prakashchandra 
Bhandari was the Joint Managing Director of the Company. 
Accused no.5 was one Hector Keki Vesuna, who was, at the 
relevant time, the Chief General Manager (Credit) of the Bank. 
Accused no. 6 was Ramnath Pradeep, who was an Executive 
Director of the Bank at the relevant time. 
2. 
During the years 2010-2011, the Bank sanctioned 
following three facilities to the Company: - 
a. Short-term loan of Rs. 50 crores; 
b. Letter of credit having a limit of Rs. 100 crores; and 
c. Export Packing Credit (EPC) facilities of Rs.330 crores. 
3. 
The Bank disbursed a sum of Rs. 247.50 crores against 
EPC on various dates. The Company claimed that it was 
awarded a contract by M/s Kamal Alloys Ltd., Tanzania, for the 
execution/setting up of a steel plant in Tanzania on a turnkey 
basis. Therefore, the EPC facility was granted for procurement 
of raw materials and components for the said project in 
Tanzania. The allegation is that instead of using the amount 
of Rs. 247.50 crores for procuring raw material for the project, 
the amounts were transferred by the Company to its accounts 
with various other Banks as well as to builders. The amounts 
were also used for payment of ECGC premium. 

4. 
It was alleged that the Company requested Lal Darwaja 
Branch of the Bank at Ahmedabad, to open a Standby Letter of 
Credit (SBLC) for an amount of USD 15 million in favour of 
Apple Commodities Ltd in Hong Kong for the supply of coal. 
Under the said facility, while the Bank had to pay USD 15 
million to the banker of Apple Commodities Ltd., the Company 
neither imported the coal to India nor was any payment 
arranged from the overseas buyer to whom the Company 
allegedly sold the coal. Similarly, the Company opened another 
SBLC for Euro 2.05 million in favour of Castleshine Pte. Ltd., 
Singapore, for the supply of a Continuous Hot Strip Mill for 
the proposed steel plant to be set up in Tanzania. The Bank 
had to pay Euro 2.05 million to the bank of M/s. Castleshine 
Pte. Ltd., though the Company did not procure any machinery. 
The allegation is that the Bank was put to an undue loss of 
Rs.436.74 crores, and there was a corresponding gain to the 
Company. 
5. 
An application for discharge made by the respondent 
(accused no.7) was rejected by the learned Special Judge of 
C.B.I., Court. In a revision application filed by the respondent 
before the High Court, by the impugned judgment, the High 
Court has discharged the respondent. The Appellant-CBI, 
being aggrieved by the said judgment, is before this Court. 
SUBMISSIONS 
6. 
In support of the appeal, the learned Additional Solicitor 
General (ASG) submitted that though the conduct of a mini-
trial was not contemplated at the stage of framing of 

the charge, the High Court has purported to conduct a mini-
trial in this case. She submitted that to prove allegations of 
conspiracy, it is not necessary that all the co-conspirators must 
know every detail of the conspiracy, and it is not essential that 
every accused must participate in the conspiracy from its 
inception to the last. She submits that even a strong suspicion 
created by the material forming part of the charge sheet is 
sufficient for framing the charge. The learned ASG pointed out 
the material forming part of the charge sheet against the 
respondent. She submitted that a proposal regarding the EPC 
facility of Rs.330 crores was added by a witness-V.K. Nagpal, 
on instruction of accused no.5, though there was no 
recommendation made by the zonal office to the proposal. She 
submitted that this was done on 10th August 2010, and on the 
same day, accused no.5 and 6 prepared a Memorandum to be 
submitted to the management committee. The said two 
accused and respondent signed the Memorandum on the same 
date. She submitted that undue hurry was shown for 
sanctioning an EPC facility of Rs.330 crores to the Company. 
She submitted that for the sake of alleged efficiency, the due 
process required to be followed for sanctioning credit facilities 
could not have been sacrificed. She submitted that no 
application was made by the Company for a grant of EPC 
facility. It is submitted that though there may not be any 
allegation of receipt of pecuniary benefits against the 
respondent, he abused his official position as a public servant 
and indulged himself in mischief or criminal misconduct, as 
provided in Section 13(1)(d) of the PC Act. She submitted that 

at the stage of framing of the charge, the High Court could not 
have gone into the veracity of the allegations made by the 
prosecuting agency in the charge sheet, and this is a case 
where trial ought to proceed against the respondent. 
7. 
Learned senior counsel representing the respondent has 
taken us through the material forming part of the charge 
sheets. His submission is that taking the material in the 
charge sheets as it is, no case was made out to proceed against 
the respondent, and therefore, no interference was called for. 
High Court has rightly discharged the respondent. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
8. 
We have perused the charge sheet, the statements of 
witnesses and other material accompanying the charge sheet. 
The allegations against the respondent are found mainly in 
paragraph no.3 of the chargesheet. It is alleged that the 
accused, with the object of cheating the Bank, granted the 
three facilities mentioned above to the Company. In paragraph 
3 of the charge sheet, it is stated that in furtherance of the 
conspiracy, accused nos.5 to 7: 

hurriedly got the Memorandum to the 
Management Committee prepared; 

without proper appraisal by the Credit 
Department/Central 
Office, 
without 
clearance by the New Business Group 
added/inserted EPC limit of Rs.330 
crores for execution of an export order 
for setting up a steel plant in Tanzania, 
Africa by the Company. Standby letters 

of Credit (SBLC) within the LC limit, 
without any written request from the 
Company were allowed. 

The 
Memorandum 
was 
hurriedly 
approved by accused no.6 and the 
respondent on 10.08.2010 for placing 
the 
Memorandum 
before 
the 
Management Committee of the Board of 
Directors. The said Memorandum was 
placed 
before 
the 
Management 
Committee in its meeting held on 
13.08.2010, 
and 
based 
on 
the 
recommendations in the Memorandum 
to the Management Committee, the 
credit facilities, i.e. (i) Short Term Loan 
of Rs.50 crore, (ii) LC/SBLC/Buyer's 
Credit limit of Rs.100 crore and EPC 
limit of Rs.339 crore were sanctioned to 
the 
Company. 
The 
sanction 
was 
conveyed by the Credit Department, 
Central Office of the ZO/Branch vide 
letter dated 18.8.2010.” 
These are the allegations against the respondent in the charge 
sheet. 
9. 
We have perused the statements of the relevant 
witnesses and the documents on record in the charge sheet 
and the supplementary charge sheet. We may note here that 
there are no allegations against the respondent as regards the 
sanction of SBLC. There is no material placed in the charge 
sheets to show that the respondent has played any role in 
sanction of SBLC. The statement of Shri Ayodhya Prasad 
Dwivedi, who is retired General Manager of the Bank (PW-3), 
refers to recommendations of the zonal office for sanctioning 
the first two facilities of Rs. 50 crores and Rs.100 crores 

respectively. He stated that he could not find any 
recommendation from the zonal office for sanctioning the EPC 
facility. He has referred to the Memorandum submitted to the 
Management Committee, which refers to the EPC facility of 
Rs.330 crores. He stated that there was a summary note 
bearing the signatures of accused nos.5 to 7. He stated that 
the Memorandum was put up before the Loan Advisory 
Committee on 11th August 2010. The Loan Advisory 
Committee recommended the proposal. He duly signed the 
recommendation along with accused no.6 and Dr. Ram 
Saduba Sangapure, Manager, Risk Management. The Loan 
Advisory Committee recommended the proposal on the terms 
and conditions proposed in the Executive Brief. He stated that 
the Management Committee meeting held on 13th August 2010 
was attended by respondents nos. 5 to 7, Executive Director 
Shri Arun Kaul, Shri M.S. Zohar, Shri Ved Prakash, Shri B.S. 
Rambabu, Shri B.S. Srivastava, General Manager and Shri R. 
Tyagrajan, AGM as well as the General Secretary to the Board. 
10. 
At this stage, we may note that according to the 
prosecution, the usual procedure followed by the Bank at the 
relevant time was that credit proposals were processed by the 
Branch and submitted to the zonal office. After the 
recommendation of the zonal office, the proposals were 
examined by the Credit Department in the Head Office. The 
Memorandum duly signed was used to be placed before the 
Loan Advisory Group of six General Managers. The loan 
proposals were thereafter presented before the Management 

Committee, comprising the Chairman and Managing Director, 
whole-time Directors, RBI Nominee Director, and 3 other 
directors, including at least 2 independent directors, one of 
them being chairman of the Audit Committee. The 
Memorandum placed before the Management Committee was 
prepared by the Bank's Credit Department and signed by the 
Deputy General Manager (Credit) and General Manager 
(Credit). 
11. 
Dr Ram Saduba Sangapure (PW-4) was a Member of the 
Committee of New Business Group (NBG) and Loan Advisory 
Committee (LAC). He stated that NBG examines large credit 
proposals concerning new borrowers and takes a view. He 
stated that as per the practice that prevailed at the relevant 
time in the Bank, after receiving regular proposals from the 
branch/zonal office, the same was processed by the Credit 
Department. Recommendations of the Credit Department in 
Executive Brief format used to be sent to the Risk Management 
Department to weigh the risk involved. After that, it used to be 
placed before the LAC. Subsequently, the proposal used to be 
placed before the Executive Director and CMD. After their 
clearance, the proposal was placed before the Management 
Committee for a final decision. He also referred to the 
Memorandum of Management Committee dated 10th August 
2010, which contained a proposal for the grant of EPC facility 
in the sum of Rs. 330 crores. He stated that the summary 
note containing the signatures of the accused nos. 5 to 7, and 
the Memorandum were placed before the Loan Advisory 

Committee on 11th August 2010, which recommended 
sanction on the terms and conditions proposed in the 
Executive Brief. After that, on 13th August 2010, the 
Management Committee approved the proposal. Witness Shri 
Sivasubramanian Gopalakrishnan (PW-5) stated that NBG 
clearance for admitting the proposal was issued. 
12. 
The statement of Shri Vinod Kumar Nagpal (PW-10) 
refers to NBG approval given on 10th August 2010. However, 
witness Shri Salim Gangadharan (PW-18) stated that the 
central 
office 
entertained 
the 
proposal 
without 
the recommendation of the zonal office. He stated that though 
he was a nominee Director of RBI, he did not attend the 
Management Committee meeting dated 13th August 2010, as 
in view of the instructions of RBI prevailing at that time, he 
was not supposed to attend the meeting. This witness and 
another witness, Mrs.V R Iyer, had visited Tanzania to conduct 
a survey and explore the possibility of opening a Branch. He 
stated that he met Shri Gagan Gupta, the Director of M/s 
Kamal Alloys Ltd. in Tanzania. He doubted whether M/s 
Kamal Alloys Ltd could generate funds to set up a plant on the 
company's marshy land. But the witness agreed that he did 
not submit a report to that effect. Witness Mrs. V.R. Iyer, who 
was the Executive Director of the Bank, in her statement 
stated that the Bank could have been more prudent in doing 
the due diligence of the foreign entity. 
13. 
We find that the Loan Advisory Committee's favourable 
recommendations regarding the Company's proposal are also 

on record, apart from the memorandum submitted to the 
Management Committee. We have also seen the Executive 
Brief prepared containing the proposal. 
14. 
After perusing the entire material and taking it as 
correct, perhaps the only material that creates suspicion is the 
speed with which the proposal of the Company was 
sanctioned. As far as the respondent is concerned, considering 
his position and the role ascribed to him in the grant of 
sanction to the loan proposal of the Company, mere suspicion 
against him is not enough to frame a charge against him. The 
proposal had passed through the Loan Advisory Committee 
which recommended the same. The proposal was placed before 
the respondent on 10th August 2010. As the credit proposal 
was beyond the sanctioning authority of the respondent, it was 
directed to be placed before the Management Committee. 
Apart from the Loan Clearance Committee, the proposal was 
approved by the Bank's Chief General Manager (Credit). 
15. 
The 
respondent's 
role 
started 
with 
signing 
the 
Memorandum after it was approved by the Chief General 
Manager (Credit) and the Executive Director. A perusal of the 
Memorandum placed before the respondent for sanction 
showed that as many as 14 Public Sector Banks were lending 
to the Company apart from an international private sector 
bank. The respondent's role was confined to signing the 
memorandum 
prepared 
by 
the 
senior 
officers 
and 
participating in the Management Committee meeting, which 
approved the proposal. No material is placed on record to 

show that any of the accused other than bank officials ever 
met the respondent before the sanction of the proposal by the 
Management Committee. Only because the entire proposal 
was processed and cleared within a short span of time, no 
offence is made out against the respondent. Taking the 
material in the charge sheet as it is, complicity of the 
respondent is not made out. 
16. 
Therefore, we see no scope to interfere with the 
impugned order. While we say so, we must observe here that 
we have examined only the role ascribed to the respondent in 
the process of sanctioning the facilities to the Company. We 
have examined the charge sheet only for that limited purpose. 
Therefore, any observation made in the judgment will not 
affect the trial against the other accused persons as we have 
not recorded any findings about the material against them. 
17. 
Subject to what is stated above, the appeal is dismissed....…………………………….J. 

 (Abhay S Oka)..…………………………….J. 
 (Ujjal Bhuyan) 
New Delhi; 
October 16, 2024.