SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Appeal No. of 2024 
( SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 

Lalu Yadav 

 …Appellant(s) 
Versus 
 
The State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. …Respondent(s) 

JUDGMENT 
 
C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
1. 
The captioned Appeal is directed against the order 
dated 26.07.2018 of the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad in. The said Writ Petition was filed under 
Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeking 
quashment of FIR dated 21.02.2018 bearing Case Crime 
No. 28 of 2018 registered under Sections 376 and 313 of 
the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short the ‘IPC’) at Police 
Station Nandganj in Ghazipur District of the State of Uttar 

SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 
Pradesh. In view of the fact that quashment of FIR was 
sought under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, it is 
relevant to refer to a decision of this Court in Pepsi Foods 
Ltd. v. Special Judicial Magistrate1. It was held therein 
that the High Court could exercise its power of judicial 
review in Criminal matters and it could exercise the 
power either under Article 226 of the Constitution of 
India or under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (for brevity ‘Cr.P.C’), to prevent the 
abuse of process of the court or otherwise to secure the 
ends of justice. Nomenclature under which a petition is 
filed is not quite relevant. If the court finds that the 
petitioner could not invoke the jurisdiction of the Court 
under Article 226, it may treat the petition under Section 
482, Cr. P.C. 
2. 
Heard the learned counsel for the appellant and the 
learned counsel for the State of Uttar Pradesh for 
respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and also the learned counsel for 
respondent No. 4 (the complainant). 
3. 
The gravamen of her complaint, based on which 
the 
above-mentioned 
crime 
was 
registered 
on 
21.02.2018, is revealed from the following allegations 
made thereunder: - 
 
1 (1998) 

SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 
“…My elder sister Meera Devi was married to 
Satendra 
Yadav 
Village 
Kukuda 
P.S. 
Nandganj, District – Ghazipur, Lalu Yadav S/o 
Seshnath Yadav R/o Atarsuya P.S. Nandganj 
District – Ghazipur used to come to my house 
along with the brother in law Ravindra Yadav 
of my elder sister, at that time about five years 
back I was a student of High School, then the 
said Lalu Yadav by way of deceiving myself 
promise that he will marry me and established 
physical relationship with me without my 
consent and started living with me as the 
husband. He used to say that he would marry 
me when he gets a job. My mother Rajvati 
Devi and my father Hari Singh Yadav was also 
of the knowledge of our relation. When my 
father and mother raised an objection about 
our relation then Lalu Yadav told her that he 
will marry Preeti. He told her that nobody 
should object and therefore my parents went 
silent and Lalu Yadav kept established with me 
the applicant without my consent due to which 
I became pregnant after the knowledge of 
which he give me a medicine of with which 
and abortion has occurred and when the said 
Lalu Yadav came to the house of the applicant 
on 28.09.2017 then he took the said applicant 
to Varanasi on 29.09.2017 and kept me in a 
hotel and again made physical relationship 
with me due to which I became pregnant in 
May 2017 and said Lalu Yadav did my abortion 

SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 
my pressuring me again, thereafter again 
17.12.2017 the said Lalu Yadav took me to a 
hotel 
in 
Varanasi 
an 
made 
physical 
relationship with me their, thereafter Lalu 
Yadav got a job in army and after which he is 
refusing to marry the applicant…” 
 
4. 
In the contextual situation, it is relevant to refer to 
the details given under item No. 3 in Annexure- P2/FIR, 
which read thus: - 
“3 (a) occurrence of offence. 
1. 
Day Date from – 05.01.2013 
Date To – 05.01.2018 
(b) Information received at P.S: 
 Date: 21.02.2018. Time: 21.34 hr.” 
 
5. 
Before delving into the rival contentions, it is 
relevant to note that though this Court stayed further 
proceedings in case Crime No. 28/2018 on 13.11.2018, 
this Court virtually modified the same on 18.08.2023 as 
under: - 
“It is made clear that the interim order passed 
by this Court staying further proceedings in 
Crime 
No. 
28/2018 
registered 
at 
P.S. 
Nandganj, District Ghazipur, U.P. dated 
13.11.2018 will not stand in the way of 
investigation for investigating into the offence 
under Section 313 of IPC. 
 
List the matter after two months.” 

SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 
 
6. 
Earlier, on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 counter 
affidavit was filed fully justifying the impugned order. 
On behalf of the respondent No. 4 also, a counter affidavit 
was filed, evidently, on the same line. Pursuant to the 
order 
dated 
18.08.2023, 
virtually, 
permitting 
continuance of investigation in Crime No. 28/2018 in 
respect of the allegation of commission of offence under 
Section 313 IPC, investigation in that regard was 
continued and completed. Thereupon, an additional 
affidavit was filed on behalf of the first respondent - State 
with respect to the status of investigation and the same, 
insofar as it is relevant, reads thus: - 
“6. That pursuant to the direction, the 
investigating 
officer 
had 
conducted 
investigation with respect to offence u/s 313 
IPC and after due investigation and material 
available on record, including her statement, 
medical reports etc. has concluded that there 
is no evidence/material available with respect 
to offence u/s 313 IPC i.e. no material 
substantiating abortion of the victim in the 
present offence and hence as on 02.02.2024 
omitted offence u/s 313, IPC. 
 
7. That the investigation u/s 376 is still pending 
as the same is stayed by this Hon’ble Court.” 

SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 
7. 
In view of the statement in the afore-extracted 
paragraph 6 and 7, the undisputed position obtained that 
the allegation of commission of offence under Section 
313, IPC stands omitted against the appellant. What 
survives for consideration is only the question whether 
the impugned order invites interference and the subject 
FIR be quashed invoking the inherent jurisdiction? 
8. 
We have already taken note of the facts revealed 
from the subject FIR itself that the time of occurrence of 
offence is allegedly, from 05.01.2013 to 05.01.2018 and 
that it was registered only at 21.34 hrs. on 21.02.2018. 
That apart, it is evident that even going by respondent 
No. 4, the complainant herself and the appellant were 
living as husband and wife. The complaint of respondent 
no. 4, as is revealed therefrom, is that the appellant had 
deceived her by promising to marry and then by 
establishing physical relationship. At the risk of 
repetition, we will have to refer to the FIR, carrying the 
following recitals from her complaint: 
“… Lalu Yadav S/o Seshnath Yadav R/o 
Atarsuya P.S. Nandganj District- Ghazipur, 
used to come to my house along with the 
brother-in-law Ravindra Yadav of my elder 
sister, at that time about five years back I was 
a student of High School, then the said Lalu 
Yadav by way of deceiving myself promise 

SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 
that he will marry me and established physical 
relationship with me without my consent and 
started living with me as the husband.” 
 (underline supplied) 
9. 
At the very outset, it is to be noted that there is a 
huge irregularity between the statements “established 
physical relationship with me without my consent” and 
“started living with me as the husband”. Be that as it 
may, bearing in mind the allegations raised by 
respondent No. 4 reflected in the subject FIR, we will 
refer to the relevant decisions of this Court. 
10. 
While dismissing the writ petition under the 
impugned order, presumably taking note of the 
contentions based on time lag of five years, the High 
Court relied on its Full Bench decisions in Ajit Singh uraha v. State of U.P.2, and in Satya Pal v. State of 
U.P.3. as well as the decision of this Court in State of 
Haryana and Ors. v. Bhajan Lal and Ors.4. It observed 
and held that there could be no interference with the 
investigation or order staying arrest unless cognizable 
offence is not ex-facie discernible from the allegations 
contained in the FIR or there exists any statutory 
 
2 2006 (56) ACC 433 
3 2000 CrLJ 569 
 SC 604 

SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 
restriction operating against the power of the Police to 
investigate a case. There can be no two views on the 
exposition of law thus made relying on the said 
decisions. In the same breath we will have to say that 
those decisions can be no bar for the exercise of power 
under Section 482, Cr.P.C., in various other situations 
dealt with, in detail, by this Court, including in the 
decision in Bhajan Lal’s case (supra). 
11. 
To determine whether the case in hand deserves to 
be quashed at the present stage we will refer to some of 
the decisions. We have already taken note of the fact that 
though there was an allegation in the FIR regarding 
commission of offence under Section 313, IPC, on 
completion of the investigation, the investigating agency 
itself omitted the offence under Section 313, IPC against 
the appellant-accused. In paragraph 102 of the decision 
in Bhajan Lal’s case (supra) this Court held thus: - 
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of 
the various relevant provisions of the Code 
under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law 
enunciated by this Court in a series of 
decisions relating to the exercise of the 
extraordinary power under Article 226 or the 
inherent powers under Section 482 of the 
Code 
which 
we 
have 
extracted 
and 
reproduced above, we give the following 

SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 
categories of cases by way of illustration 
wherein such power could be exercised either 
to prevent abuse of the process of any court or 
otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though 
it may not be possible to lay down any precise, 
clearly defined and sufficiently channelised 
and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae 
and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds 
of cases wherein such power should be 
exercised. 
(1) Where the allegations made in the first 
information report or the complaint, even if 
they are taken at their face value and accepted 
in their entirety do not prima facie constitute 
any offence or make out a case against the 
accused. 
(2) Where the allegations in the first 
information report and other materials, if any, 
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a 
cognizable offence, justifying an investigation 
by police officers under Section 156(1) of the 
Code except under an order of a Magistrate 
within the purview of Section 155(2) of the 
Code. 
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations 
made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence 
collected in support of the same do not 
disclose the commission of any offence and 
make out a case against the accused. 
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not 
constitute a cognizable offence but constitute 

SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 
only 
a 
non-cognizable 
offence, 
no 
investigation is permitted by a police officer 
without 
an 
order 
of 
a 
Magistrate 
as 
contemplated under Section 155(2) of the 
Code. 
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or 
complaint are so absurd and inherently 
improbable on the basis of which no prudent 
person can ever reach a just conclusion that 
there is sufficient ground for proceeding 
against the accused. 
(6) Where there is an express legal bar 
engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code 
or the concerned Act (under which a criminal 
proceeding is instituted) to the institution and 
continuance of the proceedings and/or where 
there is a specific provision in the Code or the 
concerned Act, providing efficacious redress 
for the grievance of the aggrieved party. 
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly 
attended with mala fide and/or where the 
proceeding is maliciously instituted with an 
ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the 
accused and with a view to spite him due to 
private and personal grudge.” 
 
12. 
In the decision in Shivashankar alias Shiva v. State 
of Karnataka and Anr.5, this Court held thus: - 
“4. In the facts and circumstances of the 
present case, it is difficult to sustain the 
 
5 (2019) 

SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 
charges levelled against the appellant who 
may have possibly, made a false promise of 
marriage to the complainant. It is, however, 
difficult to hold sexual intercourse in the 
course of a relationship which has continued 
for eight years, as “rape” especially in the face 
of the complainant's own allegation that they 
lived together as man and wife.” 
 
13. 
The decision in “XXXX” v. State of Madhya 
Pradesh and Anr.6, also assumes relevance in the 
contextual situation. This court took into consideration 
an earlier decision of this Court in Naim Ahamed v. State 
(NCT of Delhi)7, where the allegation was one of alleged 
rape on false promise of marriage, made five years after 
the complainant and the accused started having relations 
and even got pregnant from the accused, of course when 
she was having a subsisting marriage, the Court found 
that there cannot be any stretch of imagination that the 
prosecutrix 
had 
given 
her 
consent 
for 
sexual 
relationship under misconception. Having considered 
the said decision and finding identity in facts, this court 
in the decision reported in (2024) reversed 
the order impugned therein dismissing the petition filed 
under Section 482, Cr.P.C. for quashment of FIR and 
 
6 (2024) 

SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 
allowed the appeal by setting aside the impugned order 
and quashing the subject FIR. 
14. 
Now, having bestowed our anxious consideration 
to the decisions referred supra with reference to the 
factual situations obtained in the case at hand, we are of 
the considered view that the High Court has palpably 
gone wrong in not considering the question whether the 
allegations in the complaint reveals prima facie case that 
the complainant had given her consent for the sexual 
relationship with the appellant under misconception of 
fact, as alleged, or whether it reveals a case of 
consensual sex. Firstly, it is to be noted that the subject 
FIR itself would reveal that there occurred a delay of 
more than 5 years for registering the FIR; secondly, the 
very case of the complainant, as revealed from the FIR, 
would go to show that they lived for a long period as man 
and wife and thirdly, the facts and circumstances 
obtained from the subject FIR and other materials on 
record would reveal absence of a prima facie case that 
the complainant viz., respondent No. 4 had given her 
consent for sexual relationship with the appellant under 
misconception of fact. At any rate, the allegations in the 
FIR would not constitute a prima facie case of false 
promise to marry from the inception with a view to 

SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 
establish sexual relationship and instead they would 
reveal a prima facie case of long consensual physical 
relationship, during which the complainant addressed 
the appellant as her husband. Moreover, it is also the 
case of the complainant, revealed from the subject FIR 
and the other materials on record that she went along 
with the appellant to Varanasi with the knowledge of her 
family and stayed with him in hotels during such visits. 
The subsequent refusal to marry the complainant would 
not be sufficient, in view of the facts and circumstances 
obtained in the case at hand, by any stretch of 
imagination to draw existence of a prima facie case that 
the complainant had given consent for the sexual 
relationship with the appellant under misconception of 
fact, so as to accuse the appellant guilty of having 
committed rape within the meaning of Section 375, IPC. 
15. 
The long and short of the above discussion is that 
the case at hand is a befitting case where the High Court 
should have exercised the power available under 
Section 482, Cr.P.C. to prevent abuse of the process of 
the Court. Now that the allegation of offence under 
Section 313, IPC is omitted, there is absolutely no prima 
facie case for proceeding further against the appellant on 
the allegation of commission of offence punishable 

SLP (Crl.) No. 9371 of 2018 
under Section 376, IPC. We are of the considered view 
that the High Court should have exercised its inherent 
power. 
16. 
For the reasons aforesaid, the impugned order 
dated 26.07.2018 of the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad in dated 
21.02.2018 registered at Police Station – Nandganj, 
Ghazipur District of Uttar Pradesh and all further 
proceedings on its basis are quashed. The appeal is 
accordingly allowed. 
 
……………………, J. 
 (C.T. Ravikumar) 

……………………, J. 
(Rajesh Bindal) 
New Delhi; 
October 16, 2024