IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
Writ Petition (C) No 274 of 2009 

IN RE: SECTION 6A OF THE CITIZENSHIP ACT 1955 

With 
 
 With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
And With 

JUDGMENT 
 
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 

Table of Contents 
A. Background... 4 
B. Issues... 10 
C. 
Analysis... 12 
i. 
Legislative competence of Parliament to enact Section 6A... 12 
a. 
The scope of the constitutional provisions on Indian citizenship... 12 
b. 
Section 6A of the Citizenship Act 1955 does not conflict with Articles 6 
and 7 of the Constitution... 24 
c. 
The scope of Article 11 of the Constitution... 26 
ii. 
Section 6A is not violative of Article 14 of the Constitution... 34 
a. 
The legal regime under the Citizenship Act 1955 governing migrants... 35 
b. 
The legal regime governing migrants from East and West Pakistan to 
Assam... 40 
c. 
The scope of judicial review under Article 14... 46 
d. 
The scope of judicial review of under-inclusive provisions... 48 
e. 
The legislative objective of Section 6A of the Citizenship Act... 54 
f. 
Section 6A is not violative of Article 14... 57 
iii. The challenge under Article 355... 60 
iv. Section 6A does not violate Article 29(1) of the Constitution... 68 
v. 
Section 6A(3) is constitutional... 75 
a. 
The interplay of NRC and the citizenship regime... 77 
b. 
Section 6A(3) is not unconstitutional on the ground of temporal 
unreasonableness... 83 

vi. Section 6A(2) cannot be held unconstitutional for not prescribing a 
procedure for registration... 90 
D. Conclusion... 91 

PART A 

Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 
 
1. 
Section 6A of the Citizenship Act 19551 confers citizenship on a specific 
class of migrants from Bangladesh to Assam. In Assam Sanmilita Mahasangha 
v. Union of India2, a two-Judge Bench referred the issue of the constitutional 
validity of Section 6A to a Constitution Bench. The petitioners have assailed the 
constitutional validity of Section 6A on the ground that it violates Articles 6,7,14, 29 
and 355. 
2. 
I have had the benefit of the opinions of my learned brothers, Justice Surya 
Kant and Justice J B Pardiwala. Having regard to the constitutional importance of 
the issues raised, I deem it necessary to author my own opinion. 
A. Background 
3. 
The judgment of Justice Surya Kant traces the background and the 
submissions of the counsel with sufficient clarity. To avoid prolixity, I will briefly 
advert to the background. 
4. 
In 1985, the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 1985 was enacted to include 
Section 6A to the Citizenship Act3. The provision grants citizenship to persons of 
 
1 “Citizenship Act” 
2 (2015) 
3 “6A. Special provisions as to citizenship of persons covered by the Assam Accord.― 
(1) For the purposes of this section― 
 (a) “Assam” means the territories included in the State of Assam immediately before the commencement of 
the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 (65 of 1985); 
(b) “detected to be a foreigner” means detected to be a foreigner in accordance with the provisions of the 
Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) and the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 by a Tribunal constituted under 
the said Order; 
(c) “specified territory” means the territories included in Bangladesh immediately before the commencement 
of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 (65 of 1985); 

PART A 

(d) a person shall be deemed to be Indian origin, if he, or either of his parents or any of his grandparents was 
born in undivided India; 
(e) a person shall be deemed to have been detected to be a foreigner on the date on which a Tribunal 
constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 submits its opinion to the effect that he is a foreigner 
to the officer or authority concerned. 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (6) and (7), all persons of Indian origin who came before the 
1st day of January, 1966 to Assam from the specified territory (including such of those whose names were 
included in the electoral rolls used for the purposes of the General Election to the House of the People held 
in 1967) and who have been ordinarily resident in Assam since the dates of their entry into Assam shall be 
deemed to be citizens of India as from the 1st day of January, 1966. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (6) and (7), every person of Indian origin who― 
(a) came to Assam on or after the 1st day of January, 1966 but before the 25th day of March, 1971 from the 
specified territory; and 
(b) has, since the date of his entry into Assam, been ordinarily resident in Assam; and 
(c) has been detected to be a foreigner; shall register himself in accordance with the rules made by the 
Central Government in this behalf under section 18 with such authority (hereafter in this sub-section referred 
to as the registering authority) as may be specified in such rules and if his name is included in any electoral 
roll for any Assembly or Parliamentary constituency in force on the date of such detection, his name shall be 
deleted therefrom. 
Explanation.―In the case of every person seeking registration under this sub-section, the opinion of the 
Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 holding such person to be a foreigner, shall 
be deemed to be sufficient proof of the requirement under clause (c) of this sub-section and if any question 
arises as to whether such person complies with any other requirement under this subsection, the registering 
authority shall,― 

if such opinion contains a finding with respect to such other requirement, decide the question in 
conformity with such finding; 

if such opinion does not contain a finding with respect to such other requirement, refer the 
question to a Tribunal constituted under the said Order hang jurisdiction in accordance with such 
rules as the Central Government may make in this behalf under section 18 and decide the 
question in conformity with the opinion received on such reference. 
(4) A person registered under sub-section (3) shall have, as from the date on which he has been detected to 
be a foreigner and till the expiry of a period of ten years from that date, the same rights and obligations as a 
citizen of India (including the right to obtain a passport under the Passports Act, 1967 (15 of 1967) and the 
obligations connected therewith), but shall not entitled to have his name included in any electoral roll for any 
Assembly or Parliamentary constituency at any time before the expiry of the said period of ten years. 
(5) A person registered under sub-section (3) shall be deemed to be a citizen of India for all purposes as from 
the date of expiry of a period of ten years from the date on which he has been detected to be a foreigner. 
 (6) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 8― 
(a) if any person referred to in sub-section (2) submits in the prescribed manner and form and to the 
prescribed authority within sixty days from the date of commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 
1985 (65 of 1985), a declaration that he does not wish to be a citizen of India, such person shall not be 
deemed to have become a citizen of India under that sub-section; 
 (b) if any person referred to in sub-section (3) submits in the prescribed manner and form and to the 
prescribed authority within sixty days from the date of commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 
1985(65 of 1985), or from the date on which he has been detected to be a foreigner, whichever is later, a 
declaration that he does not wish to be governed by the provisions of that sub-section and sub-sections (4) 
and (5), it shall not be necessary for such person to register himself under sub-section (3). 
 
Explanation.―Where a person required to file a declaration under this sub-section does not have the capacity 
to enter into a contract, such declaration may be filed on his behalf by any person competent under the law 
for the time being in force to act on his behalf. 
(7) Nothing in sub-sections (2) to (6) shall apply in relation to any person― 
(a) who, immediately before the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 (65 of 1985), is 
a citizen of India; 

PART A 

Indian origin who migrated to Assam from Bangladesh. The provision classifies the 
class of migrants into two categories based on when they entered Assam: those 
who entered Assam before 1 January 1966 and those who came to Assam after 1 
January 1966 but before 25 March 1971. 
5. 
Section 6A(2) provides that a person would be deemed to be a citizen of 
India as on 1 January 1966 if the following conditions are fulfilled: 
a. The person must be of Indian origin. A person is deemed to be of 
Indian origin if they or either of their parents or their grandparents 
were born in undivided India4; 
b. The person should have come to Assam from a ‘specified territory’ 
before 1 January 1966. ‘Specified territory’ is defined as territories 
included in Bangladesh immediately before the commencement of 
the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 1985.5 All those persons who were 
included in the Electoral roll used for the purpose of the General 
Election to the House of People in 1967 must be considered; and 
c. The person should have been an ordinary resident in Assam since 
the date of entry into Assam. 
 
(b) who was expelled from India before the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, under 
the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946). 
 (8) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this section, the provisions of this section shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force.” 
4 Citizenship Act; Section 6A(1)(d) 
5 Citizenship Act; Section 6A(1)(c) 

PART A 

6. 
Section 6A(3) states that a person must register to secure citizenship in 
accordance with the rules made by the Central Government under Section 18 if the 
following conditions are fulfilled: 
a. The person must be of Indian origin; 
b. The person must have entered Assam on or after 1 January 1966 but 
before 25 March 1971 from the specified territory, that is, Bangladesh; 
c. The person must have been ordinarily resident in Assam since the 
date of entry into Assam; and 
d. The person must be detected as a foreigner in accordance with the 
provisions of the Foreigners Act 19466 and the Foreigners (Tribunals) 
Order 19647.8 
7. 
The Explanation to Section 6A(3) stipulates that the opinion of the Tribunal 
constituted under the Foreigners Tribunals Order declaring a person to be a 
Foreigner is deemed as sufficient proof for requirement (d). Whether the person 
satisfies the other requirements must be decided on the basis of the opinion of the 
Tribunal, if there is a finding in the opinion with respect to that requirement. If the 
opinion does not have a finding with respect to the other requirement(s), the 
registering authority must refer the questions to the Tribunal.9 
 
6 “Foreigners Act” 
7 “Foreigners Tribunals Order” 
8 Read with Section 6A(1)(b) of the Citizenship Act 1955 
9 Citizenship Act 1955; Explanation to Section 6A(3) 

PART A 

8. 
Section 6A(4) states that if the person who has registered under sub-Section 
(3) is included in the electoral roll for any assembly or parliamentary constituency, 
their name must be deleted from the roll for a period of ten years from the date of 
detection as a foreigner. However, a person who has been registered will have the 
same rights and obligations as a citizen of India except having their name included 
in the electoral roll for ten years.10 They will also have the right to obtain passport 
under the Passport Act 1967. Upon the completion of ten years from the date of 
detection as a foreigner, a person who has registered would deemed to be a citizen 
of India.11 
9. 
The petitioners12 initiated proceedings under Article 32 of the Constitution, 
inter alia13, for challenging the constitutional validity of Section 6A of the Citizenship 
Act. By an order dated 17 December 2014, a two-Judge Bench of this Court 
referred the following thirteen issues to a Constitution Bench: 
a. 
“Whether Articles 10 and 11 of the Constitution of 
India permit the enactment of Section 6A of the 
Citizenship Act in as much as Section 6A, in prescribing 
a cut-off date different from the cut-off date prescribed 
in Article 35 Page 36 6, can do so without a “variation” 
of Article 6 itself; regard, in particular, being had to the 
phraseology of Article 4 (2) read with Article 368 (1); 
 
10 Citizenship Act 1955; Section 6A(4) 
11 Citizenship Act 1955; Section 6A(5) 
12 WP (C) 562 of 2012; WP (C) 274 of 2009; WP (C) No. 876 of 2014 
13 In WP (C) No. 876 of 2014, the prayer included (a) challenging the constitutional validity of Rule 4A of the 
Citizenship (Registration of Citizens and Issue of National Identity Cards) Rules 2003 as ultra vires Section 
6A of the Citizenship Act; (b) direction to complete fencing of the entire stretch of the Border with Bangladesh; 
(c) to step up the process of identification, detection and deportation of foreigners in the State of Assam in 
accordance with the provisions of the Foreigners Act 1946 and constitute more Tribunals under the 
Foreigners (Tribunals) Orders 1964; and (d) direction to remove encroachers from protected tribal lands. In 
WP 562 of 2012, the prayer included a direction that the National Register of Citizens with respect to Assam. 

PART A 

b. 
Whether Section 6A violates Articles 325 and 326 
of the Constitution of India in that it has diluted the 
political rights of the citizens of the State of Assam; 
c. 
What is the scope of the fundamental right 
contained in Article 29(1)? Is the fundamental right 
absolute in its terms? In particular, what is the meaning 
of the expression “culture” and the expression 
“conserve”? Whether Section 6A violates Article 29(1); 
d. 
Whether Section 6A violates Article 355? What is 
the true interpretation of Article 355 of the Constitution? 
Would an influx of illegal migrants into a State of India 
constitute 
“external 
aggression” 
and/or 
“internal 
disturbance”? Does the expression “State” occurring in 
this Article refer only to a territorial region or does it also 
include the people living in the State, which would 
include their culture and identity; 
e. 
Whether Section 6A violates Article 14 in that, it 
singles out Assam from other border States (which 
comprise a distinct class) and discriminates against it. 
Also whether there is no rational basis for having a 
separate cut-off date for regularizing illegal migrants 
who enter Assam as opposed to the rest of the country; 
f. 
Whether Section 6A violates Article 21 in that the 
lives and personal liberty of the citizens of Assam have 
been affected adversely by the massive influx of illegal 
migrants from Bangladesh; 
g. 
 Whether delay is a factor that can be taken into 
account in moulding relief under a petition filed under 
Article 32 of the Constitution; 
h. 
Whether, after a large number of migrants from 
East Pakistan have enjoyed rights as Citizens of India 
for over 40 years, any relief can be given in the petitions 
filed in the present cases; 
i. 
Whether section 6A violates the basic premise of 
the Constitution and the Citizenship Act in that it permits 
Citizens who have allegedly not lost their Citizenship of 
East Pakistan to become deemed Citizens of India, 
thereby conferring dual Citizenship to such persons; 
j. 
Whether section 6A violates the fundamental basis 
of section 5 (1) proviso and section 5 (2) of the 
Citizenship Act (as it stood in 1985) in that it permits a 
class of migrants to become deemed Citizens of India 

PART B 

without any reciprocity from Bangladesh and without 
taking the oath of allegiance to the Indian Constitution; 
k. 
Whether the Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) 
Act, 1950 being a special enactment qua immigrants 
into Assam, alone can apply to migrants from East 
Pakistan/Bangladesh to the exclusion of the general 
Foreigners Act and the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 
1964 made thereunder; 
l. 
Whether Section 6A violates the Rule of Law in that 
it gives way to political expediency and not to 
Government according to law; and 
m. Whether Section 6A violates fundamental rights in 
that no mechanism is provided to determine which 
persons are ordinarily resident in Assam since the dates 
of their entry into Assam, thus granting deemed 
citizenship to such persons arbitrarily.” 
 
10. 
On 13 December 2022, the Constitution Bench directed the counsel to jointly 
formulate issues which arise for the consideration of the Bench. On 10 January 
2023, the Constitution Bench framed the following primary issue for determination: 
“Whether Section 6A of the Citizenship Act suffers from any constitutional infirmity.” 
11. 
 The issue of the constitutional validity of Section 6A of the Citizenship Act 
is the only issue which falls for the consideration of this Bench. 
 
B. Issues 
12. 
The challenge to the constitutional validity of Section 6A of the Citizenship 
Act gives rise to the following issues: 

PART B 

a. Whether the grant of citizenship to migrants from Bangladesh to 
Assam was within the legislative competence of Parliament under 
Article 11 of the Constitution; 
b. Whether Section 6A of the Citizenship Act adopts unreasonable cut-
off dates and singles out the State of Assam thereby violating Article 
14 of the Constitution; 
c. Whether Section 6A of the Citizenship Act can be regarded to be 
violative of Article 355 on the ground that the provision does not curb 
undocumented immigration which amounts to ‘external aggression’; 
d. Whether Section 6A of the Citizenship Act is violative of Article 29(1) 
of the Constitution on the ground that the Assamese cultural identity 
is lost as a direct consequence of granting citizenship to migrants 
from Bangladesh residing in Assam; 
e. Whether Section 6A(3) of the Citizenship Act is unconstitutional on 
the ground of temporal unreasonableness; and 
f. Whether Section 6A(2) of the Citizenship Act is unconstitutional on 
the ground that it neither provides a method for implementation nor 
empowers the executive to implement the provisions. 

PART C 

C. Analysis 
i. 
Legislative competence of Parliament to enact Section 6A 
13. The petitioners submitted that Parliament did not have the competence to 
enact Section 6A because: (a) the legislative field with respect to granting 
citizenship to migrants from Bangladesh to India is occupied by Articles 6 and 
7; and (b) any alteration of the cut-off date prescribed by Articles 6 and 7 for 
migrants from Bangladesh could only be through a constitutional amendment 
and not by parliamentary legislation. The respondents submitted that even if it 
is accepted that Section 6A amends Articles 6 and 7, the amendment is 
permissible in view of Article 11. a. The scope of the constitutional provisions on Indian citizenship 
 
14. 
Section 6A confers citizenship to migrants of Indian origin from the specific 
territory of Bangladesh. The legal regime on citizenship, in particular the provisions 
governing citizenship status to migrants from East and West Pakistan in the 
aftermath of the partition of India must be laid bare to understand the context in 
which Section 6A was inserted in the Citizenship Act. 
15. 
The Constitution of India upon its adoption guaranteed fundamental rights 
to the citizens of India.14 It is but natural that the provision on who would be citizens 
of the newly independent nation produced one of the most contentious of 
discussions in the Constituent Assembly.15 On 30 May 1947, Mr BN Rau, the 
 
14 Articles 14, 20, 21, 22,25,27, 28 guarantees rights to persons. Articles 15,16, 19, and 29(2) guarantees 
rights to citizens. 
15 BR Ambedkar in Constituent Assembly Debates (10 August 1949). “Except one other Article in the Draft 
Constitution, I do not think that any other article has given the Drafting Committee such a headache as this 

PART C 

Constitutional Advisor prepared the Memorandum on the Union Constitution and 
Draft Clauses. The Part on Citizenship consisted of three provisions. The first 
provision prescribed who would be citizens of India on the date of the 
commencement of the Constitution.16 The second provision stipulated who would 
be citizens after the commencement of the Constitution.17 The provision 
recognised citizenship by birth, citizenship by naturalization and citizenship by 
descent. The third provision stipulated that further provisions governing the 
acquisition and termination of federal citizenship may be made by Federal law.18 It 
was, however, observed in the Note appended to the Memorandum that the second 
clause was not necessary since (a) it would be impossible to exhaustively define 
the conditions of nationality, birth or naturalisation in the Constitution; and (b) there 
may be some difficulty in the interpretation of the provisions of legislation on 
citizenship if the provisions were entrenched in the Constitution.19 The ad-hoc 
Committee on Citizenship slightly altered the first clause20, agreed to the second 
 
particular article. I do not know how many drafts were prepared and how many were destroyed as being 
inadequate to cover all the cases which it was thought necessary and desirable to cover.” 
16 B Shiva Rao, The framing of India’s Constitution: Select Documents (Part II), 472 
“At the date of commencement of this Constitution:- 
Every person domiciled in the territories subject to the jurisdiction of the federation- 
(a) Who has been ordinarily resident in those territories for not less than five years immediately 
preceding that date, or 
(b) Who, or whose parents, or either of whose parents, was or were born in India, 
Shall be a citizen of the Federation. 
Provided that any such person being a citizen of any State may, in accordance with Federal law, elect not to 
accept the citizenship hereby conferred.” 
17 B Shiva Rao, The framing of India’s Constitution: Select Documents (Part II), 472 
“After the commencement of this Constitution- 
(a) Every person who is born in the territories subject to the jurisdiction of the federation; 
(b) Every person who is naturalized in accordance with Federal law; and 
(c) Every person, either of whose parents was, at the time of such person’s birth, a citizen of the 
Federation” 
18 B Shiva Rao, The framing of India’s Constitution: Select Documents (Part II), 473 
“Further provisions governing the acquisition and termination of Federal citizenship may be made by Federal 
Law.” 
19 See the Constitution of the Irish Free State; Article 3 
20 B Shiva Rao, The framing of India’s Constitution: Select Documents (Part II), 683 

PART C 

clause and recommended that in addition to the law making power on acquisition 
and termination of citizenship, a provision for avoiding dual citizenship may be 
included in the third clause.21 
16. 
The provision on conditions for acquiring citizenship after the 
commencement of the Constitution, that is, the second clause in the memorandum, 
was not included in the Draft Constitution of India 194822 submitted by the Drafting 
Committee on 21 February 1948. The Draft Constitution only included provisions 
on who would be citizens on the date of the commencement of the Constitution,23 
and granted Parliament the power to make provision on acquisition and termination 
of citizenship and “all other matters relating thereto”.24 Article 5 of the Draft 
Constitution 1948 included provisions for refugees from East and West Pakistan. 
Clause (b) of Article 5 provided that every person who or either of whose parents 
or any of whose grandparents were born in India as defined in the Government of 
India Act 1935 or in Burma, Ceylon or Malaya and who is domiciled in the territory 
of India as defined by the Constitution will be a citizen upon the commencement of 
the Constitution, provided that the person has not acquired the citizenship of any 
foreign State. The explanation to the provision stated that a person is deemed to 
be domiciled in the territory of India on depositing a declaration to acquire such 
 
“At the date of commencement of this Constitution, every person who: 
(a) Who or whose parents or either of whose parents, was or were born in the territories of the 
Federation and subject to its jurisdiction, or 
(b) who is domiciled in the territories subject to the jurisdiction of the federation.” The clause granting 
citizenship to those who have been ordinarily resident for five years was removed. 
21 B Shiva Rao, The framing of India’s Constitution: Select Documents (Part II), 683 
22 “Draft Constitution” 
23 Draft Constitution of India 1948, Article 5 
24 Draft Constitution of India 1948, Article 6. 

PART C 

domicile after having resided for at least one month in the territory of India.25 
According to the explanation, the declaration had to be deposited before the 
commencement of the Constitution. Thus, migrants from East or West Pakistan to 
India could be citizens by virtue of Article 5(b) of the Draft Constitution if they 
submitted a declaration after having resided in India for a month. 
17. 
 Dr Ambedkar, as the Chairperson of the Drafting Committee introduced 
amendments to draft Articles 5 (corresponding to Article 5 of the Indian 
Constitution) and 6 (corresponding to Article 11). He further introduced Articles 5-
A (corresponding to Article 6), 5-B (corresponding to Article 7) and 5-C 
(corresponding to Article 10) which provided separate provisions for migrants to 
acquire citizenship.26 While introducing these amendments, Dr Ambedkar noted 
that the object of the above provisions was not to lay down a permanent law of 
citizenship but to decide who would be citizens as on the date of the 
commencement of the Constitution.27 The drafting history of the provisions on 
citizenship (in particular the deletion of clause 2 of the Memorandum) elucidates 
that after extensive deliberation in the Constituent Assembly and the Drafting 
Committee, it was decided that the Constitution would only stipulate who would 
hold citizenship “on the commencement of the Constitution”. This is also clear from 
 
25 Draft Constitution of India 1948, Explanation to Article 5(b) 
26 BR Ambedkar, Constituent Assembly Debates (10 August 1949) 
27 BR Ambedkar, Constituent Assembly Debates (10 August 1949) “Now, Sir, this article refers to, citizenship 
not in any general sense but to citizenship on the date of the commencement of this Constitution. It 
is not the object of this particular article to lay down a permanent law of citizenship for this country. The 
business of laying down a permanent law of citizenship has been left to Parliament, and as Members will see 
from the wording of article 6 as I have moved the entire matter regarding citizenship has been left to 
Parliament to determine by any law that it may deem fit.”[emphasis supplied] 

PART C 

the language and the substantive portions of the provisions included in Part II of 
the Constitution, which deals with Citizenship. 
18. 
Article 5 of the Constitution deals with “Citizenship at the commencement of 
the Constitution”. The Article stipulates that every person who has their domicile in 
the territory of India will be a citizen of India at the commencement of the 
Constitution, if any of the following criteria is fulfilled: 
a. The person was born in the territory of India; or 
b. Either of their parents were born in the territory of India; or 
c. The person was ordinarily resident in the territory of India for not less than 
five years immediately preceding the commencement of the Constitution. 
19. 
Articles 6, 7 and 8 of the Constitution begin with a non-obstante clause, 
overriding the provisions of Article 5. Articles 6 and 7 recognise the largest 
migration in human history28 following the partition of undivided India into India and 
Pakistan. Article 6 deals with the citizenship of those who migrated from Pakistan 
to India. The provision states that notwithstanding anything in Article 5, a person 
who migrated to the territory of India from Pakistan would deemed to be a citizen 
of India at the commencement of the Constitution if the following two conditions 
are satisfied29: 
 
28 UNHRC, The State of the World’s Refugees 2000L Fifty Years of Humanitarian Action (Oxford University 
Press) 59 
29 “6. Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to India from Pakistan 
Notwithstanding anything in article 5, a person who has migrated to the territory of India from the territory 
now included in Pakistan shall be deemed to be a citizen of India at the commencement of this Constitution 
if— 

PART C 

a. he or his parents or grandparents were born in India as defined in the 
Government of India Act 1935 (which included the present Pakistan and 
Bangladesh) [Article 6(a)]; and 
b. if (i) he migrated before 19 July 1948, he must have been an ordinary 
resident since then [Article 6(b)(i)]; or (ii) he migrated on or after 19 July 
1948, he must register as a citizen of India on an application made by him 
before the commencement of the Constitution in the manner prescribed. A 
person can be registered under this provision only if he has resided in the 
territory for at least six months before the application. [Article 6(b)(ii)]30. 
20. 
A brief historical background is necessary to understand the objective of this 
provision and in particular, the division of the migrants into two classes: those who 
migrated before and after 19 July 1948. The significance of the date 19 July 1948 
can be traced to the provisions of the Influx from West Pakistan (Control) 
Ordinance 194831. The West Pakistan Ordinance which came into force on 19 July 
1948 introduced a system by which any person from West Pakistan could enter the 
territory of India only on the possession of a permit.32 Thus, while persons who 
 
(a)he or either of his parents or any of his grand-parents was born in India as defined in the Government of 
India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted); and 
(b)(i)in the case where such person has so migrated before the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been 
ordinarily resident in the territory of India since the date of his migration, or 
(ii)in the case where such person has so migrated on or after the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been 
registered as a citizen of India by an officer appointed in that behalf by the Government of the Dominion of 
India on an application made by him therefore to such officer before the commencement of this Constitution 
in the form and manner prescribed by that Government: 
Provided that no person shall be so registered unless he has been resident in the territory of India for at least 
six months immediately preceding the date of his application.” 
30 This provision is a modification of Article 5(b) of the Draft Constitution. 
31 “West Pakistan Ordinance” 
32 Pakistan also enacted a similar legislation introducing the permit system for persons to enter into Pakistan 
from India; See the Pakistan (Control of Entry) Ordinance 1948 

PART C 

entered India before the permit system was introduced could become Indian 
citizens if they were domiciled in India, those who entered after the cut-off date had 
to satisfy the following criteria: 
a. They must have resided in India for six months since 19 July 1948; and 
b. They had to make an application upon the completion of six months but 
before the commencement of the Constitution. 
21. 
Article 394 provides when different provisions of the Constitution 
commence. 
The 
provision 
states 
that 
Article 

and 
Articles 
5,6,7,8,8,9,60,324,366,367,379,380,388,391,392 and 392 will come into force “at 
once” and the remaining provisions will come into force on 26 January 1950. The 
provision also states that the commencement of the Constitution, where used in 
the Constitution means 26 January 1950. In terms of Article 394, Article 6 came 
into force on “at once”, that is, immediately after the Constitution was adopted. The 
Constitution was adopted on 26 November 1949. Thus, for migrants after 19 July 
1948 to secure citizenship in terms of Article 6, the application ought to have been 
filed before 26 January 1950. Since the application could only be filed if the person 
had resided in India for at least six months before that, the provision only covered 
those who migrated to India after 19 July 1948 but before 26 July 1949. The ad-
hoc/temporary nature of the provision is evident from the provision itself. In addition 
to the use of the phrase ‘at the commencement of the Constitution’, the substantive 
portion also prescribes a temporal limit. 

PART C 

22. 
Article 6 grants citizenship to all persons who migrated from Pakistan to 
India till 26 July 1949. Article 7 carves out an exception to Article 6.33 The provision 
stipulates that notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 5 and 6, any person who 
migrated from India to Pakistan after 1 March 1947 shall not deemed to be a citizen. 
1 March 1947 signifies the date from when the intense communal violence broke 
out in India, particularly in Punjab.34 Article 7 deals with re-migration. That is, the 
deeming citizenship conferred by Article 6 shall not apply to a person who before 
migrating from Pakistan to India had earlier migrated from India to Pakistan 
immediately after partition. The proviso to Article 7 provides an exception to those 
who remigrated to India under a ‘permit for resettlement or permanent return issued 
by or under the authority of any law’. According to the proviso, irrespective of the 
date when persons entered the Indian territory, it shall be deemed that they entered 
after 19 July 1948 for the purposes of Article 6(b). Thus, any person who falls under 
this category (migration must be completed between 1 March 1947 and before the 
commencement of the Constitution35) would have to register as citizens upon the 
submission of an application as prescribed by Article 6(b)(ii) of the Constitution. 
23. 
Thus, the following conditions must be fulfilled to secure citizenship in terms 
of the proviso to Article 7: 
 
33 “7. Rights of citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan.- Notwithstanding anything in Articles 5 and 
6, a person who has after the first day of March, 1947, migrated from the territory of India to the territory 
now included in Pakistan shall not be deemed to be a citizen of India: 
Provided that nothing in this article shall apply to a person who, after having so migrated to the territory now 
included in Pakistan, has returned to the territory of India under a permit for resettlement or permanent 
return issued by or under the authority of any law and every such person shall for the purposes of clause 
(b) of Article 6 be deemed to have migrated to the territory of India after the nineteenth day of July, 1948.” 
34 Yasmin Khan, The Great Partition: The Making of India and Pakistan (Penguin India) 168 
35 See Kulathil v. State of Kerala, AIR 1966 SC 1614 [Justice Shah, 32] 

PART C 

a. The person must have migrated from the Indian territory to the territory of 
Pakistan after 1 March 1947; 
b. The person must have migrated back from the territory of Pakistan to the 
Indian territory under a permit for resettlement or permanent return issued 
under the authority of any law; and 
c. The person, in terms of Article 6(b)(ii), must apply for citizenship to such 
officer of the Government before the commencement of the Constitution 
(that is, 26 January 1950). The person must have resided in India for a 
minimum of six months before the application. Thus, the proviso covers 
those who remigrated to India between 1 March 1947 and 26 July 1949. 
24. 
The distinction between Article 6 and Article 7 is that the former provision 
does not specifically refer to the permit system while the latter does. Though the 
significance of the date 19 July 1948 is traceable to the permit system, Article 6 
does not mandate that citizenship would be granted only if the person entered the 
Indian territory on a permit. As opposed to this, Article 7 provides citizenship only 
to those who entered India through a valid permit. Article 7, like Article 6 is 
temporary in nature because (a) persons covered by the proviso to Article 7 must 
have registered as a citizen under Article 6(ii)(b) which prescribes a time limit; and 
(b) the guarantee is dependent on a parliamentary legislation (that is, the permit 
must be issued under authority of law) which itself indicates that it is not a 
permanent code. 
25. 
The legislation(s) which introduced the permit system must be referred to 
understand the scope of the proviso to Article 7. On 26 July 1949, the Governor 

PART C 

General promulgated the Influx from West Pakistan (Control) Ordinance 1948. The 
Ordinance stipulated that persons can enter India from any place in West Pakistan 
only if they are in possession of permits. ‘Permit’ was defined as a permit for the 
time being in force issued or renewed by the prescribed authority after satisfying 
the described conditions relating to the class of permits to which it belongs.36 The 
Central Government was conferred the power to issue rules, inter alia, prescribing 
the authorities by whom permits may be issued or renewed and the conditions to 
be satisfied for such permits. It is crucial to note that the Ordinance only applied to 
the influx from the part of Pakistan which lies to the west of India (that is, the 
present day Pakistan).37 It did not apply to migrants from East Pakistan (that is, 
present day Bangladesh). On 7 September 1948, the Government of India in 
exercise of its power under the West Pakistan Ordinance issued rules for the 
implementation of the permit system. The rules introduced three kinds of permits: 
the permit for temporary visits, the permit for resettlement or permanent return and 
the permanent permit. The proviso to Article 7 only covers those who remigrated 
to India under the resettlement or permanent return permit.38 
 
36 West Pakistan (Control) Ordinance 1948, Section 2(c) 
37 West Pakistan (Control) Ordinance 1948, Section 3(2) 
38 See Speech by Dr BR Ambedkar and Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru in the Constituent Assembly on 12 August 
1949: [Nehru]“There are three types of permits, I am told. One is purely a temporary permit for a month or 
two, and whatever the period may be, a man comes and he has got to go back during that period. This does 
not come into the picture. The other type is a permit, not permanent but something like a permanent permit, 
which does not entitle a man to settle here, but entitles him to come here repeatedly on business. He comes 
and goes and he has a continuing permit. I may say; that, of course, does not come into the picture. The 
third type of permit is a permit given to a person to come here for permanent stay, that is return to Indian 
and settle down here.” 

PART C 

26. 
On 10 November 1948, the Governor General promulgated the Influx from 
Pakistan (Control) Ordinance 1948 by which a permit system was introduced for a 
person from ‘any’ place in Pakistan to enter India. This Ordinance introduced a 
permit system for persons entering India from East Pakistan also (that is, present 
day Bangladesh). The Ordinance also repealed the Influx from West Pakistan 
(Control) Ordinance 1948. The Pakistan (Control) Ordinance 1948 was repealed 
and replaced by the Influx from Pakistan (Control) Act 1949 which contained 
provisions pari materia to the Pakistan (Control) Ordinance 1948. Section 4 of the 
Influx from Pakistan (Control) Act 1949 conferred the Central Government the 
power to make Rules prescribing, among other things, the conditions to be satisfied 
by applicants for permits. On 20 May 1949, the Central Government issued Rules 
in exercise of the power conferred by Section 4. The Rules called the ‘Permit 
System Rules 1949’ prescribed elaborate provisions only regarding the permit 
system introduced between Western Pakistan (that is, current day Pakistan) and 
India. Though the Influx from Pakistan (Control) Act 1949 applied to the whole of 
Pakistan (including the current day Bangladesh), the Central Government did not 
frame any Rules to implement the permit system for the movement from East 
Pakistan to India. 
27. 
The reason for not implementing the permit system for the migrants from 
East Pakistan to India was explained by Mr. Gopalaswami Ayyangar while 
introducing the Undesirable Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Bill 195039. The 
Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Bill granted the Central Government, the 
 
39 The word undesirable was removed from the short title after extensive discussion. 

PART C 

power to expel persons who come into Assam. Mr. Ayyangar stated that the Central 
Government examined the suggestion to introduce a permit system between East 
Pakistan and India but decided against it because it would restrict the freedom of 
movement of a large number of persons who, in their ordinary avocations, had to 
pass between East Pakistan and either Assam or West Bengal.40 Thus, the 
geographical placement of Bangladesh (East Pakistan) prevented the Indian 
Government from replicating the permit system that was applied for movement in 
the Western border. The proviso to Article 7 which dealt with persons who 
remigrated to India did not apply to those who came from East Pakistan because 
the permit system was not implemented there. 
28. 
On 1 January 1952, the Influx from Pakistan (Control) Act was repealed41 
putting an end to the permit system governing the travel between West Pakistan 
and India. In October 1952, the India-Pakistan Passport and Visa Scheme 
regulated the travel between India and Pakistan. The scheme proposed a specific 
passport system between India and Pakistan.42 
 
40 Shri Gopalaswami while introducing the Undesirable Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Bill, 
Parliamentary Debates: Official Report (Volume 1, 1950), 313 “The obvious suggestion that was put forward 
at the beginning was that we should introduce a permit system as between Assam and East Pakistan. The 
Central Government examined this suggestion and studies its repercussions on other parts of India 
particularly on West Bengal and the restrictions it would impose on the freedom of movement of a large 
number of persons who, even in their ordinary avocations, had to pass between East Pakistan and either 
Assam or West Bengal. If restrictions by way of a permit system had been imposed, it was feared that there 
would have been difficulties experienced which it would not have been easy to get over, and after further 
discussions with the Government of Assam, it was settled in consultation with them that instead of introducing 
a permit system which would control the entry of outsiders into Assam, we might take power to expel from 
Assam such foreign Nationals who entered that State and whose continuance was likely to cause disturbance 
to its economy.” 
41 See the Influx from Pakistan (Control) Repealing Act 1952; the Statement of Objects and Reasons stated 
that it was agreed “with the Government of Pakistan that with effect from prescribed date, the permit system 
should be replaced by a system of passports.” 
42 See paper Rights: The emergence of Documentary Identities in Post-Colonial India, 1950-67 (2016), 
History Faculty Publications.129 

PART C 

b. Section 6A of the Citizenship Act 1955 does not conflict with Articles 6 and 
7 of the Constitution 
29. 
It is in the above background that the argument of the petitioners that 
Section 6A is unconstitutional for prescribing a cut-off date different from the date 
in Articles 6 and 7 has to be decided. Two issues arise for the consideration of this 
Court: (a) whether Section 6A prescribes a cut-off date different from that 
prescribed by Articles 6 and 7 for migrants from Bangladesh to Assam; and (b) if 
(a) is in the affirmative, whether Article 11 of the Constitution confers Parliament 
with the power to ‘alter’ the provisions in Part II of the Constitution conferring 
citizenship. 
30. 
The following position emerges from our discussion of Articles 5, 6 and 7 in 
the preceding section: 
a. The Constitution only prescribes who would be citizens upon the 
commencement of the Constitution. This is evident from the language of 
Articles 5 and 6 which uses the phrase ‘at the commencement of the 
Constitution’ and the drafting history of the provision; 
b. Article 6 covers a limited class of migrants from both Pakistan and 
Bangladesh to India (including Assam). The provision only covers those 
who migrated to India till 26 July 1949 (based on the six months residence 
requirement); 
c. The benefit of citizenship to the class covered by the proviso to Article 7 
depended on the permit system prescribed by law. The Permit System 

PART C 

Rules 1949 framed in exercise of the power under the Influx from Pakistan 
(Control) Act 1949 did not cover those who remigrated from East Pakistan 
(today’s Bangladesh) to India. It only covered those who remigrated from 
West Pakistan (today’s Pakistan) to India. Thus, though the proviso to 
Article 7 does not distinguish between migrants from West Pakistan and 
East Pakistan, migrants from the latter were unable to secure the benefit 
of citizenship in the absence of Rules on the implementation of the permit 
system along the eastern border. Thus, the proviso to Article 7 only covered 
those who remigrated to India from West Pakistan after 1 March 1947 but 
before 26 July 1949; and 
d. Article 6 and the proviso to Article 7 confer citizenship on a limited class 
upon the commencement of the Constitution: (i) migrants from West 
Pakistan and East Pakistan till 26 July 1949; and (ii) persons who re-
migrated from West Pakistan to India (who had earlier migrated from India 
to Pakistan after partition) under the permit system till 26 July 1949. 
31. 
As opposed to Articles 6 and 7, Section 6A confers citizenship on those who 
migrated from Bangladesh to Assam until 24 March 1971. Article 6 and the proviso 
to Article 7 confer citizenship on a limited class. Section 6A deals with those who 
are not covered by the constitutional provisions, that is those who migrated (or re-
migrated) after 26 July 1949. The provision also covers those who migrated in the 
period covered by the constitutional provisions but who were not covered by the 
substantive stipulations in the provisions. For example, Article 6 does not cover a 
person who migrated from east Pakistan to Assam after 19 July 1948 but did not 

PART C 

apply to register as a citizen before the commencement of the Constitution. Section 
6A confers citizenship on such persons. There is thus, a certain degree of overlap 
between Section 6A and the constitutional provisions. However, that does not 
amount to an ‘alteration or amendment’ of the constitutional provisions. This is for 
the simple reason that Article 6 and the proviso to Article 7 confer citizenship on 
the ‘commencement of the constitution’. That is, they only deal with who shall be 
citizens on 26 January 1950. In contrast, Section 6A confers citizenship from 1 
January 1966 to those who migrated before that date. Those who migrated 
between 1 January 1966 and 24 March 1971, are conferred citizenship upon the 
completion of ten years from the date of detection as a foreigner. Thus, Section 6A 
confers citizenship on a later date to those who are not covered by Articles 6 and 
7. Section 6A could be interpreted to alter or amend Articles 6 and 7 only if it 
conferred citizenship retrospectively, as at the commencement of the Constitution 
which is not the case. c. The scope of Article 11 of the Constitution 
 
32. 
Article 11 stipulates that the provisions of Part II shall not ‘derogate’ from the 
power of Parliament to make any provision with respect to (a) acquisition of 
citizenship; (b) termination of citizenship; and (c) all other matters relating to 
citizenship: 
“11. Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by 
law.- Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part 
shall derogate from the power of Parliament to make 
any provision with respect to the acquisition and 
termination of citizenship and all other matters relating 
to citizenship.” 

(emphasis supplied) 

PART C 

33. 
Article 10 is also related to Parliament’s law making power on citizenship. 
The provision provides that every person who is or is deemed to be a citizen under 
the provisions of Part II of the Constitution shall continue to be so, subject to the 
provisions of any law made by Parliament: 
“10. Continuance of the rights of citizenship.- Every 
person who is or is deemed to be a citizen of India under 
any of the foregoing provisions of this Part shall, 
subject to the provisions of any law that may be made 
by Parliament, continue to be such citizen.” 

(emphasis supplied) 
34. 
Article 24643 read with Entry 17 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution confers Parliament the power to make laws with respect to ‘citizenship, 
naturalisation and aliens’. What then is the purpose and scope of Article 11? The 
earlier draft of Article 11 read as follows: 
“Further provisions governing the acquisition and 
termination of Union citizenship, and avoidance of 
double citizenship may be made by Union law.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
When the draft of Article 11 read as above, there was also a provision on who 
would hold citizenship ‘after’ the commencement of the Constitution.44 Thus, in the 
earlier scheme, the Constitution was to stipulate the conditions for securing 
citizenship and Parliament was conferred with the power to make ‘further’ 
provisions. However, the Draft Constitution of India 1948 did not consist of a 
 
43 “Subject matter of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States: (1) Parliament has the 
exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in the Seventh 
Schedule.[…]” 
44 B Shiva Rao, The framing of India’s Constitution: Select Documents (Part II) 683; See BN Rao, 
Memorandum on the Union Constitution and Draft Clauses (May 30 1947); Ad-hoc Committee on Citizenship 
(12 July 1947) 

PART C 

provision on acquisition of citizenship after the commencement of the Constitution. 
Part II of the Draft Constitution only consisted of provisions on citizenship at the 
commencement of the Constitution and Parliament’s power to make “further” 
provisions.45 Dr BR Ambedkar introduced an amendment to draft Article 6 (as 
Article 11 exists in the current form) when it was taken up for discussion. The 
phrase “further provision” was used when the Draft dealt with the acquisition of 
citizenship after the commencement of the Constitution. However, once that was 
deleted, the language of Article 11 was amended. 
35. 
Article 246 read with the Seventh Schedule delimits the legislative 
competence of Parliament and the legislature of the States. The inference that can 
be drawn from the inclusion of Entry 17 in List I of the Seventh Schedule is that 
Parliament (and not the state legislatures) has the legislative competence to enact 
laws with respect to citizenship. The legislative subject to enact laws on citizenship 
is thus, traceable to Entry 17. Provisions of Part II (Articles 10 and 11, in particular) 
do not confer Parliament the power to enact laws relating to citizenship. The 
provisions operate in a different sphere. The provisions clarify the scope of the 
legislative power. 
36. 
The question is whether Parliament’s power under Article 11 is restricted by 
other provisions in Part II. The provision stipulates that “nothing in the foregoing 
provisions of this Part”, meaning Articles 5-10, shall derogate from the power to 
make any provision with respect to citizenship. The word ‘derogate’ may have two 
 
45 Draft Constitution of India, 1948; Article 6 “Parliament may, by law, make further provision regarding 
acquisition and termination of citizenship and all other matters relating thereto”. 

PART C 

meanings: (a) to diminish or reduce; and (b) to diverge or depart.46 The phrase 
“derogate” is used in six other instances in the Constitution. In one of the instances 
(Article 1347), the phrase takes the meaning of diverge or depart. In all the other 
usages,48 the provision takes the meaning of ‘diminish or reduce’. 
37. 
The distinction between a non-obstante clause and the words ‘shall not 
derogate from’ lies in the fact that the former is used as an expression providing 
overriding effect while the latter is used as a clarificatory expression. The non-
obstante clause is used when there is a link between two clauses/provisions and 
the link is sought to be detached by carving out an exception. For example, if the 
provision states that notwithstanding A, B has the power to do action C, it means 
that the provision confers power on B to do C, and this is an exception to provision 
A. In contrast, the phrase ‘shall not derogate from’ is used to indicate that certain 
provisions do not reduce the effect or scope of the provision, thereby, de-linking 
the two provisions. For example, a provision which states that A shall not derogate 
B’s power to do C is used when B’s power to do C is conferred elsewhere and it is 
clarified that the scope of A and the scope of B do not overlap. This is evident on 
an analysis of the provisions which use the phrase ‘shall not derogate’. The usage 
indicates that (a) the Constitution confers power elsewhere; and (b) another 
provision does not override or in any manner impact the power. For example: 
 
46 P Ramanatha Aiyar, Advanced Law Lexicon (6th Edition Volume 2 D-1)1587, (a) Derogate: to lesson in 
estimation; to invalidate; degenerate; degrade; (b) Derogation: Derogation is the partial repeal or abrogation 
of a law by a later act that limits its scope or impairs its utility and force. 
47 The heading to Article 13 states “laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights”. 
48 See second proviso to Article 200, Article 226(4), Article 239AA(3)(b), Article 241, Article 371-F(m) 

PART C 

a. Clause (4) to Article 226 stipulates that the power conferred upon High 
Courts to issue certain writs shall not be in derogation of the powers 
conferred on the Supreme Court by Article 32(2)49. It provides that the former 
shall not have an impact on the later since they operate in separate fields; 
b. Article 239-AA(3)(a) provides the Legislative Assembly of the National 
Capital Territory with legislative competence over certain matters in the State 
List and the Concurrent list. Article 239-AA(3)(b) states that nothing in sub-
clause (a) shall derogate from the powers of Parliament to make laws for the 
Union territory. This provision must be read in the context of Article 246(4) 
which provides Parliament the power to enact laws on matters enumerated 
in all three lists for Union territories. Article 239-AA(3)(b) states that the 
power conferred in clause (a) shall not impact the law making power of 
Parliament with respect to Union territories; 
c. Article 241(1) stipulates that Parliament may by law constitute a High Court 
for a Union territory. Clause (4) of Article 241 stipulates that nothing in the 
Article shall derogate from the power of Parliament to extend or exclude the 
jurisdiction of a High Court to, or from any Union territory. This provision must 
be read in the context of Entry 79 of List I which provides Parliament the 
power to legislate on the “extension of the jurisdiction of a High Court to, and 
exclusion of the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory.” Clause 
 
49 “(4) The power conferred on a High Court by this article shall not be in derogation of the power conferred 
on the Supreme Court by clause (2) of article 32.” 

PART C 

(4) states that Clause (1) does not impact the legislative competence 
exercised by Parliament under Article 245 read with Entry 79 of List I; and 
d. Article 371F(m) provides that no court would have the jurisdiction to deal 
with any dispute an agreement or treaty relating to Sikkim but 
that nothing in the provision shall be ‘construed to derogate from the 
provisions of Article 143’. Here, the phrase is used to ensure that the 
provision does not have any impact on the power under Article 143. 
38. 
Thus, the use of the phrases ‘notwithstanding’ and ‘shall not derogate from’ 
produce different effects. Article 11, when interpreted on the basis of the above 
analysis produces the following meaning: 
a. The legislative competence of Parliament to enact laws related to citizenship 
is traceable to Entry 17 of List I and not Article 11; and 
b. The provisions in Part II do not impact or limit the legislative competence 
of Parliament. 
39. 
A non-obstante clause cannot be artificially read into Article 11. In Izhar 
Ahmed v. Union of India50, the constitutional validity of Section 9(2) of the 
Citizenship Act and Rule 3 in Schedule III of the Citizenship Rules 1956 were 
challenged. Before dealing with the challenge, Justice Gajendragadkar writing for 
the Constitution Bench delineated the scope of the provisions in Part II of the 
Constitution. With respect to Article 11, the learned Judge observed that the 
provisions of the parliamentary law on citizenship cannot be challenged on the 

PART C 

ground of a violation of the provisions in Part II. The relevant part of the 
observations is extracted below: 
“11. That takes us to Article 11 which empowers the 
Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law. It 
provides that nothing in the foregoing provisions of Part 
II shall derogate from the power of Parliament to make 
any provision with respect to the acquisition and 
termination of citizenship and all other matters relating 
to citizenship. It would thus be noticed that while making 
provisions for recognising the right of citizenship in the 
individuals as indicated by the respective articles, and 
while guaranteeing the continuance of the said rights of 
citizenship as specified by Article 10, Article 11 confers 
and recognises the power of the Parliament to make 
any provision with respect to not only acquisition but 
also the termination of citizenship as well as all matters 
relating to citizenship. Thus, it would be open to the 
Parliament to affect the rights of citizenship and the 
provisions made by the Parliamentary statute in 
that behalf cannot be impeached on the ground that 
they are inconsistent with the provisions contained 
in Articles 5 to 10 of Part II. In this connection, it is 
important to bear in mind that Article 11 has been 
included in Part II in order to make it clear that the 
sovereign right of the Parliament to deal with citizenship 
and all questions connected with it is not impaired by 
the rest of the provisions of the said Part. Therefore, the 
sovereign legislative competence of the Parliament to 
deal with the topic of citizenship which is a part of Entry 
17 in List I of the Seventh Schedule is very wide and not 
fettered by the provisions of Articles 5 to 10 of Part II of 
the Constitution. This aspect of the matter may have 
relevance in dealing with the contention raised by the 
petitioners that their rights under Article 19 are affected 
by the impugned provisions of Section 9(2) of the Act.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
40. 
By the above observations, the Court did not read in a non-obstante clause 
in Article 11. This is clear from the observations in the subsequent paragraph where 
this Court discusses the alleged conflict between Article 9 of the Constitution and 
Section 9 of the Citizenship Act. Section 9 of the Citizenship Act provides that any 
person who has acquired citizenship of another country between the 

PART C 

commencement of the Constitution and the commencement of the Act shall cease 
to be a citizen of India. While dealing with Section 9, this Court observed that Article 
9 dealt with the acquisition of citizenship of a foreign State prior to the 
commencement of the Constitution. As opposed to Article 9, Section 9 dealt with 
the acquisition of citizenship after the commencement of the Constitution.51 Thus, 
the possibility of the provisions of parliamentary law conflicting with Article 9 (and 
other provisions of the Constitution) would not arise.52 In Izhar Ahmed (supra), the 
observations that statutory provisions on citizenship cannot be challenged on the 
ground of violation of provisions in Part II cannot be interpreted as a reading in of 
a non-obstante clause in Article 11. Provisions of the Parliamentary law on 
citizenship cannot be challenged on the ground of violation of the provisions of Part 
II because the constitutional provisions on citizenship are redundant for all 
purposes after the commencement of the Constitution. Though in the context of 
Article 11 the use of the non-obstante clause and the phrase ‘shall not derogate 
from’ will produce the same result, it is important to clarify the distinct usage of the 
phrases. 
41. 
Similarly, the reason that Article 11 does not include a clause (similar to 
Article 4(2)) that the law shall not be deemed to be an amendment of the 
 
51 Also see State of UP v. Shah Mohammed, (1969) [5] 
52 “12. […] There is no ambiguity about the effect of this Section. It is clear that the voluntary acquisition by 
an Indian citizen of the citizenship of another country terminates his citizenship of India, provided the said 
voluntary acquisition has taken place between 26th January, 1950 and the commencement of the Act or 
takes place thereafter. It would thus be seen that whereas Article 9 of the Constitution dealt with the 
acquisition of citizenship of a foreign State which had taken place prior to the commencement of the 
Constitution, Section 9 of the Act deals with acquisition of foreign citizenship subsequent to the 
commencement of the Constitution. There is, therefore, no doubt that the Constitution does not 
favour plural or dual citizenship and just as in regard to the period prior to the Constitution, Article 9 
prevents a person who had voluntarily acquired the citizenship of foreign country from claiming the 
status of an Indian citizen, so does Section 9(1) make a similar provision in regard to the period 
subsequent to the commencement of the Constitution. [Emphasis supplied] 

PART C 

Constitution for the purpose of Article 368 is because there is no possibility of the 
law amending the constitutional provisions in Part II in view of the temporal limit of 
all the provisions. 
42. 
In view of the discussion above, I have reached the following conclusions: 
(a) Section 6A of the Citizenship Act does not have the effect of amending Articles 
6 and 7; and (b) Article 11 is not a non-obstante clause. However, since the 
Constitution confers citizenship only at the commencement of the Constitution, the 
law enacted in exercise of the power under Article 246 read with Entry 17 of List I 
and the constitutional provisions on citizenship operate in different fields. ii. 
Section 6A is not violative of Article 14 of the Constitution 
43. 
The petitioners submitted that Section 6A is violative of Article 14 on three 
grounds: (a) Section 6A is under-inclusive because it confers citizenship only to 
migrants to Assam; (b) there was no justification to single out Assam to the 
exclusion of other border States that border Bangladesh since they all form a 
homogenous class; and (c) the provision prescribes a different cut-off date for 
granting citizenship to migrants who enter Assam as opposed to other States. 
44. 
 Thus, while deciding the Article 14 challenge, this Court must decide on the 
following three issues: 
a. Whether Section 6A is underinclusive because it grants citizenship only 
to migrants from Bangladesh to Assam; 

PART C 

b. Whether all Indian States bordering Bangladesh form a ‘homogenous 
class’ for the purposes of the law such that Assam alone could not have 
been singled out; and 
c. Whether the cut-off date of 25 March 1971 is arbitrary. a. 
The legal regime under the Citizenship Act 1955 governing migrants 
45. 
In this section, I will discuss the provisions of the Citizenship Act, in particular 
the provisions relating to migrants of Indian origin. There was a legal limbo on the 
acquisition of citizenship between the commencement of the Constitution and the 
enactment of the Citizenship Act in 1955. Parliament enacted the Citizenship Act 
to provide for the acquisition and determination of Indian citizenship. The 
Citizenship Act provides the following methods for acquiring citizenship, namely 
by: (a) birth53; (b) descent54; (c) registration55; (d) naturalisation56; and (e) 
incorporation of territory57. Section 5(1) provides a fairly simple and easy method 
for acquiring citizenship. Citizenship could be acquired through registration if any 
of the following conditions are satisfied: 
a. Persons of Indian origin who are ordinarily resident in India and have been 
so resident for six months immediately before making an application for 
registration; 
 
53 Citizenship Act 1955; Section 3 
54 Citizenship Act 1955; Section 4 
55 Citizenship Act 1955; Section 5 
56 Citizenship Act 1955; Section 6 
57 Citizenship Act 1955; Section 7 

PART C 

b. Persons of Indian origin who are ordinarily resident in any country or place 
outside undivided India; 
c. Women who are, or have been, married to citizens of India; 
d. Minor children of persons who are citizens of India; and 
e. Persons of full age and capacity who are citizens of a country specified in 
the First Schedule. 
According to the provision, a person shall be deemed to be of Indian origin if he, 
or either of his parents, or of his grand-parents were born in undivided India.58 
Thus, refugees from either West or East Pakistan would undoubtedly be covered 
within the meaning of the word ‘Indian origin’. Section 5(1) creates two classes with 
respect to persons of Indian origin. Section 5(1)(b) deals with persons of Indian 
Origin who are ordinarily resident in undivided India. Any person of Indian Origin 
who is an ordinary resident of any country other than West and East Pakistan can 
acquire citizenship through registration in terms of Section 5(1)(b). Indian origin 
migrants from either West or East Pakistan who were ordinarily resident in India 
for six months could acquire citizenship through registration in terms of Section 
5(1)(a). Section 5(1)(e) enables a citizen of any of the countries listed in the First 
Schedule of the Act to acquire citizenship through registration. Pakistan was one 
of the countries listed in the Schedule. Section 5(1)(e) read with the First Schedule 
enabled a migrant who was a citizen of Pakistan to acquire citizenship. Thus, 
 
58 Citizenship Act 1955; Explanation to Section 5(1) 

PART C 

migrants from Pakistan could acquire citizenship in terms of Section 5(1)(a) and 
Section 5(1)(e). 
46. 
 In exercise of the power conferred by Section 18 of the Citizenship Act, the 
Central Government notified the Citizenship Rules 195659. The 1956 Rules 
prescribed a form in which an application for registration as a citizen of India under 
Section 5(1)(a) would have to be made. The form requested the submission of, 
inter alia, passport and visa details, if any.60 The form had a separate part (Part II) 
for migrants from Pakistan. It requested, inter alia, the following details: (a) 
profession or occupation while residing in Pakistan; (b) whether the applicant 
applied for long term visa for permanent resettlement earlier; (c) whether the 
applicant was residing in the territory now included in India or Pakistan at the time 
of partition; and (e) places of residence in India prior to migration. The 1956 Rules 
(in particular the details required in the Part II of Form I) make it clear that migrants 
from East and West Pakistan could apply for citizenship under Article 5(1)(a). Even 
before the 1956 Rules were framed, the Deputy Secretary (Home Affairs) issued 
‘urgent’ instructions to the various state governments directing them to make 
‘immediate arrangements for registration of ‘displaced persons’ under Section 
5(1)(a) of the Citizenship Act.61 In 1958, another notification was issued by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs that it was not necessary to insist on acceptance of 
surrender of Pakistani passports before registration is made.62 In a reply issued in 
 
59 “1956 Rules” 
60 Requests the name of the father, mother, address of ordinary residence, profession, description of 
immovable property(s) and details of family members who are staying in India. 
61 See the Executive instructions issued in the letter from the Deputy Secretary (Home) dated 14 June 1956. 
File no. 10/1/56, MHA-IC, NAI. Also see Anupama Roy, Mapping Citizenship in India, 
62 See Express letter dated 11 April 1958 from the government of West Bengal to the Minisitry of Home Affairs, 
IC Section. File no. 4/65/58, MHA-IC, NAI 

PART C 

1958 to a query, the Ministry of Home Affairs also clarified that authorities can 
register minorities without Pakistani passports or travel documents.63 Thus, Section 
5(1)(a) along with the 1956 Rules and the various executive notifications facilitated 
the registration of migrants (including undocumented migrants) from East and West 
Pakistan as citizens. The 1956 Rules did not prescribe Rules for registration under 
Section 5(1)(e) of the Citizenship Act. Irrespective of the manner in which Section 
5(1)(a) and Section 5(1)(e) of the Citizenship Act were implemented, the provisions 
enabled the registration of both documented and undocumented migrants to India 
from East and West Pakistan. 
47. 
In fact, the Citizenship Act was viewed by the members of the Parliament as 
an enactment that would put an end to the limbo on granting citizenship to migrants 
from East and West Pakistan. Sentiments that refugees should not even be 
required to register also prevailed in Parliament. Thakurdas Bhargava noted that 
“registration is only for those who are not real citizens of India nor are rooted in the 
land of India not having a domicile in this country, not wanting to return to any other 
country.”64 HN Mukherjee, a member from north-east Calcutta claimed that 
 
63 See Note dated 18 July 1958, Ministry of Home Affairs (IC Section) File no. 4/65/58, MHA-IC, NAI 
 “the persons about whom the present reference has been made belong to the minority community in 
Pakistan and are stated to have sworn declarations renouncing their Pakistani nationality. It is also stated in 
the M.E.A.’s letter no. F6(44)/57-PSP, dated 14.4.58 that in most of these cases their permanent settlement 
in India would eventually be granted. Their present ineligibility for registration under section 5(10(a) of the 
Citizenship Act is therefore only technical… in cases where the applicants belonging to the minority 
community in Pakistan are staying on in India swearing affidavits that they have surrendered/lost their 
Pakistani passports, it was for the authorities to satisfy themselves that the intention was to permit the 
persons concerned to stay on indefinitely in India or the applicants have severed all connections with Pakistan 
and intend to settle down permanently in India; and in cases where the authorities are so satisfied, the 
applicants can be registered under section 5(1)(a).” 
64 Citizenship Bill, Parliamentary Debates, New Delhi, 3 December 1955, p.1176. 

PART C 

registration would involve substantial cost and travel which would create difficulties 
for refugees.65 
48. 
In National Human Rights Commission v. State of Arunachal Pradesh66, 
proceedings under Article 32 were initiated, inter alia, claiming that the citizenship 
applications under Article 5(1)(a) of persons belonging to the Chakma group were 
not being processed. The people belonging to the Chakmas were migrants from 
Bangladesh. The Union Government had conveyed its decision to confer 
citizenship to persons belonging to the Chakma group under Section 5(1)(a) of the 
Citizenship Act. A three-Judge Bench observed that they can seek citizenship 
under Article 5(1)(a) and directed that the applications must be forwarded by the 
Collector to the Registering Authority. In Committee for Citizenship Rights of the 
Chakmas of Arunachal Pradesh v. State of Arunachal Pradesh67, proceedings 
under Article 32 were instituted requiring the State to comply with the earlier 
directions on grant of citizenship to Chakma and Hajong refugees who migrated 
from Assam to Arunachal Pradesh. The petition was allowed directing the 
Government of India and the State of Arunachal Pradesh to finalise the conferment 
of citizenship rights to persons of the Chakmas and Hajong groups.68 
49. 
This was the position of law until the enactment of the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act 200369 which was notified on 7 January 2004. The 2003 
 
65 Ibid, p. 1089; See Haimanti Roy, Partitioned Lives: Migrants, Refugees, Citizens in India and Pakistan, 
1947-1965 Pg. 134-135 
66 (1996) 
67 (2016) 
68 Also see the decision of the Gauhati High Court in Shah Muhammad Anwar Ali v. State of Assam, 2014 
SCC OnLine Gau 103. The High Court held that Section 5(1)(a) of the Citizenship Act permitted the 
registration of the undocumented migrants of Indian Origin until the amendment in 2003. 
69 “2003 Amendment Act” 

PART C 

Citizenship Amendment Act amended Section 2(1)(b) to define the term illegal 
migrant70. An illegal migrant was defined to mean a foreigner who entered India (a) 
without a valid passport or other travel documents prescribed by law; or (b) with a 
valid passport and travel documents but has overstayed. The 2003 Amendment 
Act also amended Sections 5 and 6 of the Act to exclude illegal immigrants from 
acquiring citizenship by naturalisation and registration. Sections 5 and 6 of the 
Citizenship Act, after the amendments introduced by the 2003 Amendment Act now 
expressly bar illegal migrants from acquiring citizenship by registration or 
naturalisation.71 In addition to the amendments excluding illegal immigrants, the 
enactment also deleted Section 5(1)(e) which permitted the registration by citizens 
of countries specified in the First Schedule. 
50. 
It is clear from the above discussion that undocumented migrants could be 
registered as Indian citizens under the Citizenship Act until the enactment of the 
2003 Amendment Act which came into force on 3 December 2004 by which the 
class of ‘illegal immigrants’ was excluded from acquiring citizenship. b. 
The legal regime governing migrants from East and West Pakistan to Assam 
51. 
The legal regime on citizenship must be read alongside other laws that deal 
with migrants. On 23 November 1946, the Foreigners Act 194672 was enacted to 
 
70 “illegal migrant means a foreigner who has entered into India- (i) without a valid passport or other travel 
documents and such other document or authority as may be prescribed by or under any law in that behalf; 
or (ii) with a valid passport or other travel documents and such other document or authority as may be 
prescribed by or under any law in that behalf but remains therein beyond the permitted period of time.” 
71 Citizenship Act 1955; Section 5: “Subject to the provisions of this section and such other conditions and 
restrictions as may be prescribed, the Central Government may, on an application made in this behalf, 
register as a citizen of India any person not being an illegal migrant […]”; Section 6” Where an application is 
made in the prescribed manner by any person of full age and capacity not being an illegal migrant […]” 
72 “Foreigners Act” 

PART C 

confer upon the Central Government certain powers in respect of foreigners. A 
‘foreigner’ was defined as a person who is not a natural born British subject as 
defined in Sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 1 of the British Nationality and Status 
of Aliens Act of 1914 or who was not granted a certificate of naturalization as a 
British subject under Indian law.73 Section 3 conferred the Central Government the 
power to make provisions for prohibiting, regulating or restricting the entry of 
foreigners to India.74 In exercise of the power under Section 3, the Central 
government notified the Foreigners Order 194875. In terms of the Foreigners Order, 
foreigners can enter India only at such port or other place of entry on the borders 
of India as the registration officer having jurisdiction at that port or place may 
 
73 The Foreigners Act 1946, Section 2(a) 
74 Section 3(2): In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, orders made under 
this section may provide that the foreigner— 
(a) shall not enter [India] or shall enter [India] only at such times and by such route and at such port or place 
and subject to the observance of such conditions on arrival as may be prescribed; 
(b) shall not depart from [India], or shall depart only at such times and by such route and from such port or 
place and subject to the observance of such conditions on departure as may be prescribed; 
(c) shall not remain in [India] or in any prescribed areas therein; 
 [(cc) shall, if he has been required by order under this section not to remain in India, meet from any resources 
at his disposal the cost of his removal from India and of his maintenance therein pending such removal;] 
(d) shall remove himself to, and remain in, such area in [India] as may be prescribed; 
(e) shall comply with such conditions as may be prescribed or specified— (i) requiring him to reside in a 
particular place; (ii) imposing any restrictions on his movements; (iii) requiring him to furnish such proof of 
his identity and to report such particulars to such authority in such manner and at such time and place as 
may be prescribed or specified; (iv) requiring him to allow his photograph and finger impressions to be taken 
and to furnish specimens of his handwriting and signature to such authority and at such time and place as 
may be prescribed or specified; (v) requiring him to submit himself to such medical examination by such 
authority and at such time and place as may be prescribed or specified; (vi) prohibiting him from association 
with persons of a prescribed or specified description; (vii) prohibiting him from engaging in activities of a 
prescribed or specified description; (viii) prohibiting him from using or possessing prescribed or specified 
articles; (ix) otherwise regulating his conduct in any such particular as may be prescribed or specified; 
(f) shall enter into a bond with or without sureties for the due observance of, or as an alternative to the 
enforcement of, any or all prescribed or specified restrictions or conditions; 
[(g) shall be arrested and detained or confined;] and may make provision [for any matter which is to be or 
may be prescribed and] for such incidental and supplementary matters as may, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, be expedient or necessary for giving effect to this Act. 4 [(3) Any authority prescribed in this 
behalf may with respect to any particular foreigner make orders under clause (e) 5 [or clause (f)] of sub-
section (2).] 
75 “Foreigners Order” 

PART C 

appoint.76 The Order also provides that a foreigner can enter only with the leave of 
the civil authority having jurisdiction77 and leave will be refused if the foreigner is 
not in possession of a valid passport or visa78. Thus, every migrant without a valid 
visa, irrespective of the country from which they migrated and the Indian State to 
which they have migrated, was refused permission to enter India. 
52. 
However, the Foreigners Act when it was enacted did not apply to migrants 
from West and East Pakistan since they were also British subjects. The definition 
of ‘Foreigner’ in the Act was amended by Act 11 of 1957 to mean a person who is 
not a citizen of India. This amendment came into force from 19 January 1957.79 
Thus, until 1957, the Foreigners Act which provided the Central Government with 
the power to remove a migrant without legal documentation from the soil of India 
did not apply to migrants from West and East Pakistan. However, even before the 
immigrants from West and East Pakistan were considered ‘foreigners’ for the 
purpose of the Foreigners Act, Parliament enacted the Immigrants (Expulsion from 
Assam) Act 1950. The Statement of Objects and Reasons states that the 
Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act 1950 was enacted to deal with the large 
scale immigration of migrants from East Bengal to Assam: 
“During the last few months a serious situation had 
arisen from the immigration of a large number of East 
Bengal residents into Assam. Such large migration is 
disturbing the economy of the Province, besides giving 
rise to a serious law and order problem. The Bill seeks 
to confer necessary powers on the Central Government 
to deal with the situation.” 
 
76 Foreigners Order 1948; Paragraph 3 (1)(a) 
77 Foreigners Order 1948; Paragraph 3 (1)(b) 
78 Foreigners Order 1948; Paragraph 3(2)(a) 
79 Act 11 of 1957, Section 2 

PART C 

53. 
The enactment granted the Central Government the power to remove any 
person or class of persons who came into Assam and whose stay is detrimental to 
the interests of Assam80. The enactment carved out an exception with respect to 
any person who was displaced from any area in Pakistan (which includes the 
present day Pakistan and Bangladesh) on account of civil disturbances or the fear 
of it.81 It is crucial to note that this Act only applied to immigrants in Assam and not 
the rest of India. Shri Gopalaswami, while introducing the Bill, explained the 
objective for singling out Assam as follows: 
“The Bill itself is a simple one. In the State of Assam, 
particularly after the Partition, the influx of persons from 
outside Assam into that State has been assuming 
proportions which have caused apprehensions to the 
Government and the people of Assam as to the 
disturbance that such an influx would cause to their 
economy. The Assam Government brought this fact to 
the notice of the Central government in 1949, and since 
then, the matter has been under examination; a number 
of conferences and discussions have been held, some 
with Pakistan, others between central Government and 
the State Government. Various suggestions were 
considered. […] it was finally settled in consultation with 
them that instead of introducing a permit system which 
would control the entry of outsiders into Assam, we 
might take power to expel from Assam such foreign 
nationals who entered 
that 
State 
and whose 
continuance was likely to cause disturbance to its 
economy.” 
54. 
The earlier draft of the Bill did not include an exception for ‘refugees’ from 
East and West Pakistan. However, members of Parliament felt that the enactment 
must only cover those who migrate for “economical” reasons and not refugees who 
migrate because of civil disturbance caused due to the political instability in the 
 
80 The Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act 1950; Section 2 
81 The Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act 1950; proviso to Section 2 

PART C 

aftermath of the partition.82 The Parliamentary debates on the Bill elucidate that: 
(a) there were more migrants from Bangladesh because of the absence of a permit 
system for travel between East Pakistan and India; and (b) the influx was most 
profound in the Indian State of Assam compared to the other bordering states. It is 
crucial to note that the Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act 1950 was enacted 
because the Foreigners Act did not include immigrants from Pakistan.83 
55. 
The provisions of the Foreigners Act before the amendment in 1957 and the 
Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act 1950 indicate the lenient policy of India 
towards the refugees of West and East Pakistan in the aftermath of the partition of 
India. This must be read along with the legal regime governing citizenship in India 
upon the enactment of the Citizenship Act 1955 that permitted the registration of 
migrants from East and West Pakistan as citizens. 
56. 
However, the huge influx of migrants from East Pakistan to Assam was not 
receding. On 25 December 1983, the Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) 
Act 198384 came into force. The preamble to the Act stated that the Act provided 
for the establishment of Tribunals to determine illegal immigrants. The Act was 
deemed to have come into force in Assam on 15 October 1983 and in any other 
State on such date as may be notified by Central Government.85 Thus, unlike the 
 
82 Shri RK Choudhuri (Assam), Parliamentary Debates: Official Report (Volume 1, 1950), 318 
83 See the response of Shri Gopalaswami to the question from Dr Deshmukh, Parliamentary Debates: Official 
Report (Volume 1, 1950), 336 
84 “IMDT Act” 
85 The Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act 1983; Section 1(3): “It shall be deemed to have come 
into force in the State of Assam on the 15th day of October, 1983 and in any other State on such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed 
for different States and references in this Act to the commencement of this Act shall be construed in relation 
to any State as reference to the date of commencement of this Act in such State.” 

PART C 

Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act 1950, the IMDT Act applied to the whole 
of India. Section 3(c) of the IMDT Act defined an illegal migrant as a person who 
has satisfied each of the following criteria (a) entered India on or after 25 March 
1971; (b) is a foreigner; and (c) entered India without being in possession of a valid 
passport or other travel document or any other lawful authority. The date on which 
a person becomes an illegal immigrant according to the IMDT Act, that is 25 March 
1971 is the same as the date prescribed in Section 6A of the Citizenship Act for 
acquiring citizenship. Section 4 gave the IMDT Act overriding effect 
notwithstanding anything in the Passport (Entry into India) Act 1920, the Foreigners 
Act 1946, the Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act 1950 or the Passports Act 
1967. In terms of Section 1, the Act applies to the whole of India. The Central 
Government in exercise of the power under Section 1 of the Act, however, did not 
enforce the Act in any other Indian State. The special provisions in the form of the 
Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act 1950 and the IMDT Act clearly elucidate 
that the huge influx of migrants from Bangladesh to Assam has always been a 
‘cause for concern’ and Parliament has taken steps to address the issue previously. 
57. 
The above discussion of the provisions governing migrants, and in particular, 
migrants from Bangladesh elucidates the balance that Parliament has sought to 
draw between its humanitarian view towards migrants of Indian origin from 
Bangladesh and the impact of the huge influx on the economic and cultural 
resources of Indian States. With this background, I proceed to determine the 
constitutional validity of Section 6A on the anvil of Article 14. 

PART C 

c. The scope of judicial review under Article 14 
58. 
Before I proceed to deal with the issues, it is necessary that I summarise the 
scope of judicial review under Article 14. Courts have traditionally tested laws and 
executive actions for violation of Article 14 on the grounds of unreasonable 
classification86 and arbitrariness87. Courts have adopted the two-prong test for 
unreasonable classification88 and the manifest arbitrariness standard89. In 
Association for Democratic Reforms v. Union of India90, writing for three other 
Judges of the Constitution Bench, I explained that the test of manifest arbitrariness 
includes the following two applications:91 
a. The determination of whether the provision lacks an “adequate determining 
principle” or if the adequate determining principle is not in consonance with 
constitutional values; and 
b. If the provision does not make a classification by identifying the degrees of 
harm. 
These two applications have in the past also been subsumed in the traditional two-
prong Article 14 analysis. In State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar92, Justice 
S R Das observed that there must be a yardstick to differentiate those included in 
 
86 See Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Shri SR Tandolkar; Moorthy Match Works v. CCE, 
(1974); State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar (1952) 
87 EP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, (1974); Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Seheravardi, (1981); State of Andhra Pradesh v. McDowell, (1996) 
88 Anwali Ali Sarkar (supra) 
89 Shayara Bano v. Union of India, (2017); Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India, (2018) 

91 [194-195] 
92 (1952) 

PART C 

and excluded from the class.93 Since then, in addition to inquiring if there is a 
yardstick, this Court has also adopted a more intensive analysis of the yardstick 
adopted in the backdrop of constitutional values and provisions. For example, in 
the context of determining the backward class for the purpose of Article 15(4), this 
Court has held that a yardstick which measures social backwardness must be 
adopted.94 The degree of scrutiny of the yardstick used hinges on the nature of the 
right alleged to be violated. For example, the legislature has a greater latitude to 
choose the yardstick for classification in fiscal matters.95 However, the Court has 
adopted a stringent standard in determining the ‘rationality’ of the yardstick in 
matters which deal with constitutional rights.96 The standard of review to be 
adopted by courts must thus depend on the nature of the right which is alleged to 
be infringed. 
59. 
 A classification is constitutionally permissible if the following two prong test 
is satisfied: First, there must be an intelligible differentia between those forming a 
group and those left out. Second, the differentia must have a reasonable nexus 
with the object sought to be achieved. The Court now, within the traditional two-
prong test has advocated for a more substantial inquiry that subsumes the 
following prongs: 
a. Objective: The Courts test the (i) genuineness of the objective by making 
a distinction between the ostensible objective and the real objective97. 
 
93 Anwali Ali Sarkar (supra) [66] 
94 State of Punjab v. Davinder Singh, 
95 Kerala Hotel and Restaurant Association v. State of Kerala, (1990) 
96 Navtej Singh Johar (supra), See opinion of Justice Indu Malhotra [14.9] 
97 Joseph Shine v. Union of India, (2019) 

PART C 

The ostensible purpose is the purpose which is claimed by the State and 
the real purpose is the purpose identified by Courts based on the 
surrounding circumstances98; and (ii) unreasonableness of the objective 
by determining if it is discriminatory.99 
b. Means: The Courts undertake the following analysis while identifying the 
means: (i) whether there is a yardstick (that is, the basis) to differentiate 
those included and others excluded from the group100; (ii) whether the 
yardstick is in compliance with constitutional provisions and values101; 
(iii) whether all those similarly situated based on the yardstick have been 
grouped together102; and (iv) whether the yardstick has a rational nexus 
with the objective103. d. The scope of judicial review of under-inclusive provisions 
60. 
To determine if Section 6A is violative of Article 14 on the ground of under-
inclusiveness, the scope of judicial review on the ground of under-inclusion first 
needs to be set out. 
 
98 See Association for Democratic Reforms v. Union of India, [194]; Also see the opinions of 
Justice Chandrachud, Justice Malhotra and Justice Nariman in Navtej Singh Johar (supra) and Justice 
Chandrachud and Nariman in Joseph Shine (supra). 
99 See Nagpur Improvement Trust v. Vithal Rao, 1973 “26. […] The object itself cannot be 
discriminatory, for otherwise, for instance, if the object is to discriminate against one section of the minority 
the discrimination cannot be justified on the ground that there is a reasonable classification because it has 
rational relation to the object sought to be achieved.” 
100 Anwar Ali Sarkar (supra) (1952), [Das J, 66]. 
101 See State of Punjab v. Davinder Singh,; Opinion of Justice Malhotra in Navtej Singh Johar 

102 See Arun Kumar v. Union of India, (2007); G Sadasivan Nair v. Cochin University of Science 
and Technology, (2022) 
103 Anwar Ali Sarkar (supra) 

PART C 

61. 
A provision is under-inclusive if it fails to regulate all those who are part of 
the problem that the legislature seeks to address and is over-inclusive if it regulates 
somebody/something that is not a part of the problem.104 That is, under-
inclusiveness and over-inclusiveness depends on whether those who are similarly 
situated have not been included or those who are not similarly situated have been 
included. In State of Gujarat v. Ambica Mills105, this Court dealt with the argument 
of under-inclusiveness for the first time. In this case, the definition of the phrase 
‘establishment’ in the Bombay Labour Welfare Fund Act 1953 was challenged on 
the ground of under-inclusiveness. The enactment defined an ‘establishment’ to 
mean (a) a factory; (b) a tramway or motor omnibus service; and (c) any 
establishment including a society or a trust which employs more than fifty persons 
but not to include an establishment (not being a factory) of the Central or State 
Government. The enactment provided for the constitution of a Fund to finance 
activities to promote labour welfare. The definition of ‘establishment’ was 
challenged for being under-inclusive since it excluded places that employed less 
than fifty persons. 
62. 
Justice K K Mathew, writing for the Constitution bench observed that to 
identify if a provision is under-inclusive or over-inclusive, the Court must determine 
 
104 See State of Tamil Nadu v. National South Indian River Inter-linking,(2021) [32]; State of 
Gujarat v. Ambica Mills, (1974) [55] “A classification is under-inclusive when all who are included 
in the class are tainted with the mischief but there are others also tainted whom the classification does not 
include. In other words, a classification is bad as under-inclusive when a State benefits or burdens persons 
in a manner that furthers a legitimate purpose but does not confer the same benefit or place the same burden 
on others who are similarly situated. A classification is over-inclusive when it includes not only those who are 
similarly situated with respect to the purpose but others who are not so situated as well. In other words, this 
type of classification imposes a burden upon a wider range of individuals than are included in the class of 
those attended with mischief at which the law aims.” 
105 (1974) 

PART C 

if all persons similarly situated for the purpose of law have been grouped.106 This 
Court observed that while dealing with a challenge on the ground of under-
inclusiveness, the administrative convenience of the State must be taken into 
consideration. The learned Judge referred to the observations of Justice Oliver 
Wendell Holmes in Missouri Kansas & Texas Railway v. May107 that the Courts 
must be deferential to under-inclusive legislation. 
63. 
On the facts of the case, Justice Mathew observed that the justification of 
the State for under-inclusion, that unpaid accumulations will be less in 
establishments which employ less than fifty persons and it would not be sufficient 
to meet administrative costs, was fair and reasonable.108 In Ambica Mills (supra), 
this Court tested whether the under-inclusiveness was justified. 
64. 
The reference to Missouri Kansas & Texas Railway (supra) must not be 
read detached from the context.109 In multiple places in the judgment, this Court 
observed that a deferential approach must be adopted in challenges to laws 
dealing with economic activity.110 This is also evident from the manner in which this 
Court dealt with the argument of over-inclusion. It was contended that the definition 
of ‘establishment’ was over-inclusive because it included tramways and omnibuses 
The Court rejected the argument on the ground that judicial deference must be 
 
106 (1974) [55] 
107 194 US 297, 269 
108 (1974) [69] 
109 (1974) [56] […] “Mr Justice Holmes, in urging tolerance of under-inclusive classifications, 
stated that such legislation should not be disturbed by the Court unless it can clearly see that there is no fair 
reason for the law which would not require with equal force its extension to those whom it leaves untouched.” 
110 (1974) [64-67]; “64. Laws regulating economic activity would be viewed differently from laws 
which touch and concern freedom of speech and religion, voting, procreation, rights with respect to criminal 
procedure, etc.” 

PART C 

shown in challenges dealing with economic policy.111 Thus, the observations of this 
Court in Ambica Mills (supra) on judicial deference to under-inclusive provisions 
must be read in light of the established position of this Court that it must defer in 
matters relating to economic policy112. 
65. 
In Missouri Kansas & Texas Rly (supra), the constitutional validity of a 
Texas Statute113 imposing penalty on railroad companies for permitting the spread 
of Johnson grass and Russian thistle was challenged. The law was challenged on 
the ground that it was under-inclusive since it only penalised railroad companies to 
the exclusion of others. Justice Holmes writing for the majority of the US Supreme 
Court observed that Court should interfere only when there is no fair reason for the 
under-inclusion. The Court then identified numerous reasons for why the Railway 
Company may be singled out when compared to owners of farms who have an 
element of self-interest.114 Thus, Missouri Kansas & Texas Rly (supra) is also not 
an authority for the proposition that the scope of judicial review for under-inclusive 
law is limited. 
66. 
The degree of judicial deference to any provision, including under-inclusive 
provisions depends on the subject matter of the case. In Joseph Shine v. Union 
of India115, the constitutional validity of Section 497 of the Indian Penal Code 1860 
 
111 (1974) [72]; Also see John Sebastian, Underinclusive Laws and Constitutional Remedies- An 
Exploration of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019, Indian Law Review [Volume 7 Issue 3 (2023)] 
112 Ugad Sugar Works Limited v. Delhi Administration, (2001); State of Tamil Nadu v. National 
South Indian River Inter-linking,(2021) 
113 Fourteenth Amendment of chapter 117 of the Laws of Texas of 1901 
114 “But it may have been found […] that the seed is dropped in such quantities as to cause special trouble. 
It may be that the neglected strips occupied by railroads afford a ground where noxious strips occupied by 
railroads afford a ground where noxious weeds flourish, and that whereas self-interest leads to the owners 
of farms to keep down pests, the railroad companies have done nothing in a matter which concerns their 
neighbors only.” 
115 (2019) 

PART C 

was challenged on the ground of violation of Articles 14 and 15. Section 497 
defined the offence of adultery as when a person has sexual intercourse with a 
woman, whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the wife of another man, 
without the consent of that man. One of the contentions was that the provision was 
under-inclusive since it only dealt with a situation where a man had sexual 
intercourse with a married woman without the consent of the husband but not the 
other way around, that is a woman having sexual intercourse with a married man 
without the consent of his wife. The Constitution Bench tested the provision by 
applying a high standard of review. This Court held that there was no rational 
yardstick for the classification116 and that the yardstick was steeped in gender 
stereotypes where a woman is considered to not have any agency117. In my 
concurring opinion, I noted that the problem with Section 497 was not just its ‘under 
inclusion’ but the impact of the under-inclusion of subjugating a woman to a position 
of inferiority.118 A high standard of scrutiny was applied to test the validity of an 
under-inclusive provision. 
67. 
In Basheer v. State of Kerala119, the constitutional validity of the proviso to 
sub-Section (1) of Section 41 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances 
(Amendment) Act 2001120 was under challenge. By the 2001 Amendment, the 
sentence for offences under the NDPS Act was altered. Section 41, included by 
the 2001 Amendment, provided that the amended provisions shall apply to all 
pending cases before the court as on 2 October 2001 and all cases under 
 
116 See (2019) [Chief Justice Misra, writing for himself and Justice Khanwilkar [23]] 
117 (2019) [Justice DY Chandrachud [35]] 
118 (2019) [Justice DY Chandrachud [11] 
119 2004 
120 “2001 Amendment” 

PART C 

investigation. The proviso to the provision excluded cases pending in appeal. The 
exclusion of the category of cases in the proviso was challenged on the ground of 
under-inclusiveness. Justice B N Srikrishna, writing for the two-Judge Bench 
observed that the classification could not be held to be unreasonable due to 
‘marginal over-inclusiveness or under-inclusiveness’.121 This principle flows from 
the established judicial position that Article 14 does not require classifications with 
‘mathematical precision’.122 This observation does not lead to the conclusion that 
under-inclusive provisions must be met with judicial deference. In Basheer (supra), 
this Court observed that the guiding principle of the provision was the conclusion 
of the trial since the application of the amended provision to pending appeals would 
reopen concluded trials.123 In this case, the court determined the yardstick of 
classification based on the reading of the provision(s) and observed that the 
yardstick was reasonable. Based on the yardstick, it was concluded that there was 
no case for under-inclusion. 
68. 
The following principles emerge from the discussions above: 
a. There is no general principle that the constitutional validity of under-
inclusive provisions must be assessed with judicial deference; 
b. The degree of judicial scrutiny of an under-inclusive provision depends 
on the subject matter. The Courts must adopt a higher degree of judicial 
 
121 2004 [20] 
122 Gauri Shanker v. Union of India, (1994) 6 349; Anant Mills v. State of Gujarat, (1975) 
123 2004 [23]. 

PART C 

scrutiny if the law deals with core rights of individuals or groups (as 
opposed to economic policy); and 
c. The determination of the yardstick for classification will help in the 
assessment of whether a provision is under-inclusive or over-inclusive. 
The yardstick must have a nexus with the object and must be in 
consonance with constitutional principles. If the yardstick satisfies the 
test, then the State must determine if all persons/situations similarly 
situated based on the yardstick have been included. The State must on 
the submission of cogent reason justify if those who are similarly situated 
have not been included (under-inclusiveness) or those who are not 
similarly situated have been included (over-inclusiveness). The degree of 
justification that the State is required to discharge depends on the subject-
matter of the law, that is whether the matter deals with economic policy or 
fiscal matters, whether it is a beneficial provision such as a labour 
provision or whether it deals with the core or innate traits of individuals. 
The degree of justification is the least for economic policy, higher for a 
beneficial provision and the highest if it infringes upon the core or innate 
trait of individuals. e. The legislative objective of Section 6A of the Citizenship Act 
69. 
The preamble to the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 1985 by which Section 
6A was included states that the amendment was made for the “purpose of giving 
effect to certain provisions of the Memorandum of Settlement relating to the 
foreigners issue in Assam (Assam Accord) which was laid before the Houses of 

PART C 

Parliament on the 16th day of August 1985.” The Assam Accord was entered into 
in the backdrop of numerous agitations led by All Assam Students Union124 and All 
Assam Gana Sangram Parishad125 against the migration from Bangladesh to 
Assam. The movement saw foreigners as a threat to Assamese political power and 
as contenders of the scarce economic opportunities.126 In January 1980, the 
student leaders met Ms Indira Gandhi, the then Prime Minister of India for 
negotiation talks and demanded the detection and deportation of foreigners who 
had come to live in Assam since 1951.127 On 15 August 1985, the Union 
Government and the leaders of the movement signed the Assam Accord.128 
70. 
The preamble to the Accord stipulates that the settlement was reached 
“keeping all aspects of the problem including constitutional and legal provisions, 
international 
agreements, 
national 
commitments 
and 
humanitarian 
consideration”. On the foreigners issue, the following settlement was arrived at: 
“5.1 For purposes of detection and deletion of 
foreigners, 1.1.1966 shall be the base date and year. 
5.2 All persons who came to Assam prior to 1.1.1966, 
including those amongst them whose names appeared 
on the electoral rolls used in 1967 elections, shall be 
regularised. 
5.3 Foreigners who came to Assam after 1.1.1966 
(inclusive) and upto 24th March, 1971 shall be detected 
in accordance with the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 
1946 and the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order 1964. 
5.4 Names of foreigners so detected will be deleted 
from the electoral rolls in force. Such persons will be 
required to register themselves before the Registration 
 
124 “AASU” 
125 “AAGSP” 
126 Arupjyoti Saikia, The Quest for Modern Assam, (Penguin and Allen Lane) 455 
127 Ibid, 449 
128 Ibid, 489 

PART C 

officers of the respective districts in accordance with the 
provisions of the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939 
and the Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1939. 
5.5 For this purpose, Government of India will 
undertake suitable strengthening of the governmental 
machinery. 
5.6 On the expiry of a period of ten year following the 
date of detection, the names of all such persons which 
have been deleted from the electoral rolls shall be 
restored. 
5.7 All persons who were expelled, earlier, but have 
since re-entered illegally into Assam, shall be expelled. 
5.8 Foreigners who came to Assam on or after March 
25, 1971 shall continue to be detected, deleted and 
expelled in accordance with law. Immediate and 
practical steps shall be taken to expel such foreigners. 
5.9 The Government will give due consideration to 
certain difficulties expressed by the AASU/AAGSP 
regarding the implementation of the Illegal Migrants 
(Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983.” 
71. 
 The provisions of Section 6A of the Citizenship Act are traceable to the 
Assam Accord. The Assam Accord, as explained above, was a political settlement 
between the Union of India (‘the executive’) and students groups in Assam. In an 
Article 14 challenge to a legislative provision, the court must identify the ‘legislative’ 
objective. The objective, against which this Court must test the validity of the law 
must be identified based on the circumstances surrounding the Assam Accord and 
the enactment of the legislation. Section 6A was included with the objective of 
reducing the influx of migrants to India and dealing with those who had already 
migrated. The Assam Accord was a political solution to the issue of growing 
migration and Section 6A was a legislative solution. Section 6A must not be read 
detached from the previous legislation enacted by Parliament to deal with the 
problem of influx of migrants of Indian Origin that I have traced in the preceding 

PART C 

sections. Section 6A is one more statutory intervention in the long list of legislation 
that balances the humanitarian needs of migrants of Indian Origin and the impact 
of such migration on economic and cultural needs of Indian States. f. Section 6A is not violative of Article 14 
72. 
Section 6A confers citizenship to migrants from Bangladesh to Assam before 
25 March 1971. Two yardsticks are discernible from Section 6A: (a) migrants must 
have entered Assam; and (b) the entry of migrants must be before the cut-off date 
of 25 March 1971. It first needs to be determined if the above two yardsticks are 
reasonable, have a nexus with the object and are in compliance with constitutional 
principles. 
73. 
Parliament, even before the enactment of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 
1995 has treated migration to the State of Assam as a cause of concern. Previous 
sections of this judgment trace the enactment of the Immigrants (Expulsion from 
Assam) Act 1950 and the IMDT Act which dealt with the specific problem of 
undocumented migration to Assam. The Central Government could have extended 
the application of the IMDT Act to any other State by a notification. However, no 
such notification was issued indicating that the immigration to Assam presented 
the Union with a unique problem in terms of magnitude and impact. Though other 
states such as West Bengal (2216.7 km), Meghalaya (443 km), Tripura (856 km) 
and Mizoram (318 km) share a larger border with Bangladesh as compared to 
Assam (263 km), the magnitude of influx to Assam and its impact on the cultural 
and political rights of the Assamese and Tribal populations is higher. The data 
submitted by the petitioners indicates that the total number of immigrants in Assam 

PART C 

is approximately forty Lakhs, fifty seven Lakhs in West Bengal, thirty thousand in 
Meghalaya and three Lakh and twenty five thousand in Tripura.129 The impact of 
forty lakh migrants in Assam may conceivably be greater than the impact of fifty 
seven lakh migrants in West Bengal because of Assam’s lesser population and 
land area compared to West Bengal. 
74. 
Similarly, the cut-off date of 25 March 1971 is also rational. Even before the 
enactment of Section 6A, the IMDT Act defined an ‘illegal immigrant’ as a person 
who entered India on or after 25 March 1971 without travel documents. As noted 
above, the IMDT Act was not specific in its application to Assam. The enactment 
defined the phrase illegal immigrant for all States though the Central Government 
did not extend the provisions of the Act to other States. On 25 March 1971, the 
Pakistani Army launched Operation Search Light to curb the Bengali nationalist 
movement in East Pakistan.130 The migrants before the operation were considered 
to be migrants of partition towards which India had a liberal policy. Migrants from 
Bangladesh after the said date were considered to be migrants of war and not 
partition. Thus, the cut-off date of 25 March 1971 is reasonable. 
75. 
Having held that both the cut-off date and the singling out of Assam is based 
on rational considerations, the next question is whether the yardsticks have a 
rational nexus with the object of the provision. The answer is in the affirmative. 
Since the migration from East Pakistan to Assam was in great numbers after the 
partition of undivided India and since the migration from East Pakistan after 
 
129 See Report of Governor of Assam Lt. Col S.K Sinha dated 8.11.1998 and Statement of Indrajeet Gupta, 
Union Home Minister in the Parliament dated 14.07.2004 
130 M Rafiqul Islam, A Tale of Millions: Bangladesh Liberation War, 1971 (Bangladesh Books International) 

PART C 

Operation Search-Light would increase, the yardstick has nexus with the objects 
of reducing migration and conferring citizenship to migrants of Indian origin. 
Section 6A would be under-inclusive only when all those who are similarly situated 
with respect to the object and on the application of the rational yardstick are not 
included. Similarly, the provision would be over-inclusive only when those who are 
not similarly situated with respect to these two parameters are included. That not 
being the case, Section 6A is neither under-inclusive nor over-inclusive. 
76. 
Over-inclusiveness and under-inclusiveness must be determined based on 
whether there are similarly situated persons/situations who or which have not been 
included or have been included based on the yardstick identified. The 
determination cannot be made with reference to the objective without a reference 
to the yardstick. Doing so would limit the ability of the Legislature to identify the 
degrees of harm. The yardstick can be challenged where another yardstick affects 
or is related to the objective in a comparable manner.131 
77. 
The last question which is required to be considered is whether granting 
‘citizenship’ has any relevance to the problem identified, that is, migration crisis. It 
was submitted that if Assam is facing a migration crisis, the State must focus on 
removing the migrants instead of conferring them citizenship. To elucidate this 
point, the petitioners submitted that undocumented migrants in other States will not 
receive the benefit of citizenship and this would lead to a situation where migrants 
in other states would also move to Assam to secure the benefit of citizenship. This, 
it has been argued would not satisfy the object of the provision. 
 
131 See Williums-Yulee v. The Florida Bar, 575 US (2015) [opinion of Roberts J] 

PART C 

78. 
In the preceding section of this judgment, I have held that the Citizenship 
Act and the notifications issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs allowed the 
acquisition of citizenship by undocumented citizens through registration under 
Section 5(1)(a). This was the position until Section 5(1) was amended by the 2003 
Amendment Act to exclude applications from ‘illegal immigrants’. Thus, the claim 
that undocumented migrants to other Indian States were not able to secure 
citizenship is erroneous. Section 6A carves out an exception in that regime for the 
State of Assam for the reasons discussed above. Even otherwise, conferring 
citizenship has a nexus since the legislative object of introducing Section 6A was 
not just to deal with the migration from Assam but to balance it with humanitarian 
considerations (including conferment of citizenship) for partition refugees. iii. 
 The challenge under Article 355 
79. 
The petitioners urged that Section 6A violates Article 355 of the Constitution 
because: (a) Article 355 casts a duty on the Union to prevent external aggression; 
(b) the expression “external aggression” has been construed by a three-Judge 
Bench in Sarbananda Sonowal v. Union of India132 to include aggression caused 
due to external migration; and (c) instead of preventing external migration, Section 
6A induces more migration into Assam. The judgment in Sarbananda Sonowal 
(supra) was cited to support the submission that the constitutional validity of a 
provision can be challenged for violation of Article 355. 
80. 
Article 355 provides that it is the duty of the Union to protect States against 
external aggression and internal disturbance and ensure that the Government of 
 
132 (2005) 

PART C 

every State is carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.133 
In Sarbananda Sonowal (supra), proceedings were initiated under Article 32 to 
challenge the constitutional validity of the IMDT Act and the Illegal Migrants 
(Determination by Tribunals) Rules 1984134. Their validity was challenged on the 
ground that the enactment and Rules which dealt with the detection of 
undocumented migrants in Assam were not as effective as the Foreigners Act 
which applied to the rest of India. A three-Judge Bench of this Court allowed the 
writ petition and struck down the provisions of the IMDT Act and the IMDT Rules. 
81. 
 This Court observed that the Union has a constitutional obligation (or ‘duty’) 
to protect states from external aggression in view of Article 355. The three-Judge 
Bench held that the expression ‘aggression’ in Article 355 is of wide import and 
includes actions other than war, such as the inflow of a large number of persons 
from a neighbouring country135. Referring to the Report of Lt. Colonel SK Sinha, 
the Bench observed that migration from Bangladesh to Assam has led to an 
alteration of the demographic pattern of the State, thereby reducing the Assamese 
into a minority in their own State. The Bench noted that since the State of Assam 
is facing “external aggression and internal disturbance” due to large-scale illegal 
migration of Bangladesh nationals, the Court must determine if the Union had 
“taken any measures for that purpose” in view of the constitutional mandate under 
 
133 “355. Duty of the Union to protect States against external aggression and internal disturbance.- It shall be 
the duty of the Union to protect every State against external aggression and internal disturbance and to 
ensure that the government of every State is carried on in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.” 
134 “IMDT Rules” 
135 Referred to the Statement of Dr Nagendra Singh, India’s representative in the Sixth Committee of the 
General Assembly on the Definition of Aggression; (2005) [52-60] 

PART C 

Article 355.136 This Court then held that the IMDT Act and IMDT Rules are 
unconstitutional for violating Article 355: 
“67. The above discussion leads to irresistible 
conclusion that the provisions of the IMDT Act and the 
Rules 
made 
thereunder 
clearly 
negate 
the 
constitutional mandate contained in Article 355 of the 
Constitution, where a duty has been cast upon the 
Union of India to protect every State against external 
aggression and internal disturbance. The IMDT Act 
which contravenes Article 355 of the Constitutional, is 
therefore, wholly unconstitutional and must be struck 
down.” 
82. 
The IMDT Act and Rules were held to be unconstitutional on the following 
grounds: 
a. The procedure under the Foreigners Act and the Foreigners (Tribunals) 
Order 1964 is more effective for the identification and deportation of 
foreigners than the procedure prescribed by the IMDT Act and the Rules137. 
In particular, Section 9 of the Foreigners Act places the burden of proof of 
being an Indian citizen on the person concerned. The provisions of the IMDT 
Act and Rules are silent on the onus of proof; 
b. In Assam, where the IMDT Act is applicable, only 10,015 persons were 
declared illegal migrants until 30 April 2000 though 3,10,759 inquiries were 
initiated. However, in West Bengal where the Foreigners Act is applicable, 
4,89,046 persons were deported between 1983 and November 1998. Thus, 
the numbers indicated that the implementation of the IMDT Act and Rules in 
 
136 (2005) [63] “Having regard to this constitutional mandate, the question arises whether the 
Union of India has taken any measures for that purpose.” 
137 (2005) [64] 

PART C 

Assam has made the identification and deportation of illegal migrants more 
difficult;138 and 
c. The IMDT Act superseded the Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act 1950 
and the Passport (Entry into India) Act 1920 which granted the Central 
Government the power to remove any person who entered Assam and who 
was detrimental to the interests of the State, and those who entered without 
a valid passport, respectively.139 
83. 
In addition to the violation of Article 355, this Court also found the IMDT Act 
and Rules to be violative of Article 14 on the ground that if the purpose was to 
control the influx of Bangladeshi migrants to Assam, provisions which are more 
stringent would have to be made. This Court noted that, the provisions of the IMDT 
Act and Rules were more lenient than the Foreigners Act which applied to the rest 
of India, where the problem was not as grave as in Assam.140 Thus, this Court held 
that there was no nexus between the object sought to be achieved and the means 
adopted by the enactment and Rules. 
84. 
In Naga People’s Movement of Human Rights v. Union of India141, the 
constitutional validity of the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act 1958142 and the 
Assam Disturbed Areas Act 1955 was under challenge. ASFPA was enacted to 
confer special powers upon the members of the armed forces in the disturbed 
 
138 ibid 
139 (2005) [65] 
140 “70. […] “In such circumstances, if Parliament had enacted a legislation exclusively for the State of Assam 
which was more stringent than the Foreigners Act, which is applicable to rest of India […] such a legislation 
would have passed the test of Article 14 as the differentiation so made would have had rational nexus with 
the avowed policy and objective of the Act.” 
141 (1998) 
142 “AFSPA” 

PART C 

areas in Assam and Manipur. In terms of the Act, the Governor of the State had the 
power to issue a notification declaring the whole or any part of the State to which 
the Act applies as a disturbed area.143 The Act was amended by Act 7 of 1972 by 
which the power to issue a notification was also conferred on the Central 
Government. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the amendment Bill stated 
that it was important that the power to issue notifications is extended to the Central 
Government (in addition to the Governor) in view of the duty cast on the Union by 
Article 355.144 One of the contentions of the petitioners for challenging the 
constitutional validity of the enactment was that Parliament had the competence to 
enact laws with respect to ‘armed rebellion’ only in exercise of emergency powers 
under Articles 352 and 356145. The Constitution Bench rejected this argument. 
Justice Agarwal, writing for the Bench observed that AFSPA was enacted to enable 
the Central Government to discharge its obligation under Article 355. The learned 
Judge observed that a proclamation under Article 356 had grave consequences 
and thus, it was open to Parliament to deal with external aggression and internal 
disturbances through legislation before the Governor exercises powers under 
Article 356.146 Further, this Court also observed that the power of the Central 
Government to issue a notification under AFSPA does not violate the federal 
structure in view of Article 355.147 
85. 
In Naga People’s Movement of Human Rights (supra) and Sarbananda 
Sonawal (supra), this Court referred to Article 355 for the purpose of emphasising 
 
143 AFSPA; Section 3 
144 (1998) [14] 
145 (1998) [28] 
146 (1998) [32] 
147 (1998) [41] 

PART C 

that one of the duties that is cast upon the Union is to protect States against 
external aggression and internal disturbance. In Naga People’s Movement of 
Human Rights (supra), the legislative object of the 1972 amendment to ASFPA 
was traced to Article 355. Similarly, in Sarbananda Sonawal (supra), the 
legislative object of the IMDT Act and the IMDT Rules was traced to Article 355. 
Though the three-Judge Bench in paragraph 67 of the judgment held that the IMDT 
Act and Rules were unconstitutional for violation of Article 355 of the Constitution, 
the scrutiny of the legislation and Rules was on Article 14 grounds. The reasons 
summarised in paragraph 82 of this judgment elucidate that the framework of 
analysis was limited to a comparison of the provisions of the IMDT Act and Rules 
(applicable to Assam) and the Foreigners Act (applicable to the rest of India). On a 
comparison of the provisions, it was found that the provisions of the Foreigners Act 
were more effective for achieving the object (that is, the detection of migrants). The 
Court held the IMDT Act and the IMDT Rules unconstitutional on the ground that: 
(a) Undocumented immigrations impacted Assam on a much larger scale as 
compared to the other States in India; (b) Since the State of Assam faces a graver 
problem, the provisions of the IMDT Act and the IMDT Rules ought to be more 
stringent than the Foreigners Act which applies to the rest of the States in India; 
and (c) The provisions of the IMDT Act and IMDT Rules were less effective 
compared to the provisions of the Foreigners Act. Thus, the classification effected 
by the IMDT Act and the IMDT Rules between the State of Assam and the other 
States in India was held not to have a nexus with the object. 
86. 
Both in Sarbananda Sonawal (supra) and in Naga People’s Movement of 
Human Rights (supra), this Court referred to Article 355 to test the validity of the 

PART C 

means adopted to achieve the legislative object under Article 14 of the Constitution. 
The test of ‘legitimate objective’ is one of the prongs used by the Courts in its rights 
framework analysis. The first test that the Courts adopt to determine if the violation 
of fundamental rights is justified based on the proportionality standard, is to assess 
if the law was enacted in pursuance of a ‘legitimate object’.148 The Constitution 
Bench in Naga People’s Movement of Human Rights (supra) and the three-
Judge Bench in Sarbananda Sonawal (supra), relied on Article 355 for this 
purpose, that is, to test the constitutional legitimacy of the object of the amendment 
and the enactment, respectively. 
87. 
Article 355, couched in Part XVIII of the Constitution which deals with 
emergency powers stipulates that it is the duty of the ‘Union’ to (a) protect every 
State against external aggression and internal disturbance; and (b) ensure that the 
government of every State is carried on in accordance with the provisions of the 
Constitution. It is established jurisprudentially that the correlative of a duty is a 
right.149 The question is, however, whether the duty vested in the Union in Article 
355 confers a correlative right that a legislation can be challenged for violation of 
the constitutional provision. 
88. 
 Article 355 was absent in the Draft Constitution of 1948. Dr BR Ambedkar 
introduced the provision as a justification for the Union’s interference in the 
administration of States in exercise of the emergency powers conferred by the 
 
148 The first prong of the proportionality test. See Madhyamam Broadcasting Limited v. Union of India, (2023) 
SCC OnLine SC 366 
149 W.N Hohfeld, Fundamental Legal Conceptions as applied in Judicial Reasoning and other legal essays, 
(W.W. Cook ed., Yale University Press, 1919). 

PART C 

Constitution.150 Dr Ambedkar explained that in a federal Constitution such as the 
Indian Constitution where the States are sovereign since they also have legislative 
power in their own field, the Centre can interfere with the administration of States 
only when there is ‘some obligation which the Constitution imposes upon the 
Centre’.151 In SR Bommai v. Union of India152, Justice Sawant (writing for himself 
and Justice Singh) referring to the debates in the Constituent Assembly observed 
that Article 355 is not an independent source of power for interfering with the 
functioning of the State Government but is a justification for the measures 
adopted in Articles 356 and 357.153 
89. 
The question is whether a legislative enactment can be challenged for 
contravention of Article 355 of the Constitution. For more than one reason, I think 
that such an interpretation would lead to disastrous consequences. Article 355 
casts a duty on the Union to (a) protect every State against “external aggression”; 
(b) protect every State against “internal disturbance”; and (c) ensure that the 
“government of every State is carried out in accordance with the provisions of the 
Constitution”. All these three phrases (internal disturbance, external aggression 
and government of the State to be carried out in accordance with the provisions of 
the Constitution) feature in Part XVIII of the Constitution which deals with 
emergency powers. If the duty of the Union to safeguard States against external 
aggression is justiciable in view of Article 355, then petitions could be filed claiming 
that the Union has not appropriately dealt with ‘any’ of the situations referred to in 
 
150 See Constitution of India, Articles 352 and 356 
151 Dr BR Ambedkar, Constituent Assembly Debates (Volume 9, 3 August 1949) 
152 (1994) 
153 (1994) [57] 

PART C 

Article 355. It could also be contended that emergency powers ought to have been 
invoked by the Union to deal with the situations appropriately. Reading the duty in 
Article 355 into a right would effectively place the emergency powers with citizens 
and courts. Such a consequence would be catastrophic for the federal structure of 
the Indian Constitution and would subjugate the constitutional status of States. 
Article 355 cannot be elevated as an independent ground of judicial review in view 
of the purpose of the provision (as a justification clause) and the impact of such a 
reading on the federal framework of the Constitution. 
90. 
The validity of the exercise of the Presidential power under Part XVIII (such 
as Article 352 and Article 356) has been held to be amenable to judicial review.154 
Proclamations under Articles 352 and 356 are amenable to review on the ground 
that the exercise of power is beyond the limits of the power prescribed by the 
constitutional provision. The petitioners in this case, however, seek to challenge 
the constitutional validity of a legislative provision (Section 6A) on the ground of 
Article 355. In doing so they seek to elevate Article 355 to an independent ground 
for judicial review of legislative action. This is beyond the scope of the provision. 
Besides a lack of legislative competence and a violation of Part III, legislation may 
be challenged for breach of a substantive limitation on legislative power, created 
by a constitutional provision. Article 355 is not however such a provision. iv. 
Section 6A does not violate Article 29(1) of the Constitution 
91. 
Article 29(1) of the Constitution provides that ‘any section of citizens’ residing 
in the territory of India or any part thereof and having a distinct language, script, or 
 
154 SR Bommai v. Union of India, 1994; In Re Article 370 of the Constitution, 2023 INSC 1058 

PART C 

culture of their own shall have the right to conserve the same’. The claim of the 
petitioners is that Section 6A is violative of Article 29 because it permits people 
from Bangladesh who have a distinct culture to be ordinarily resident in Assam and 
secure citizenship which infringes upon their right to conserve Assamese culture. 
92. 
The heading to Article 29(1) reads ‘protection of interests of minorities’. 
However, the text of the provision is not limited to minorities. It confers the right to 
any ‘section of citizens’ having a distinct language, script or culture. Thus, Article 
29 applies to non-minorities as much as it applies to minorities, provided that (a) 
the section is of citizens; and (b) that section has a distinct language, script or 
culture.155 The right that is granted to this beneficiary class is the right to ‘conserve’ 
their language, script or culture. The people of Assam (the Assamese) are a section 
of citizens who have a distinct language, script of culture which they are entitled to 
conserve in terms of Article 29(1). 
93. 
Two prominent points must be noted at the outset. First, Article 29(1) confers 
the right to ‘conserve’ culture, that is, the operation of the law must not interfere 
with the ability of the section to take steps to protect the culture from harm or 
destruction. Second, the provision must be read in light of the multi-cultural and 
plural nation that India is. 
94. 
This Court has not had the opportunity to deal with the scope of Article 29(1) 
elaborately in the past. The provision has been considered in a limited manner 
when this Court had to determine the issue of whether the right guaranteed by 
 
155 See Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College Society v. State of Gujarat, (1974), (9J) [Chief Justice 
Ray writing for himself and Justice Palekar [5,6], Justice Khanna [73], Justice Mathew writing for himself and 
Justice YV Chandrachud [125, 126]; Rev. Father W Proost v. State of Bihar [5J] (1969) [8,9] 

PART C 

Article 30 to establish minority educational institutions must be limited to the 
purpose of conserving language, script or culture.156 This Court held that a minority 
educational institution can be established for the purpose of conserving the 
language, culture and script but it is not necessary that it must be limited to that 
purpose.157 This Court in the context of the scope of the right to establish and 
administer minority educational institutions under Article 30(1) also observed that 
the right would include the choice of the medium of instruction. The imposition of 
the medium of instruction by the State would be violative of the right of minority 
educational institutions under Article 30(1) read with Article 29(1).158 
95. 
In Jagdev Singh Sidhanti v. Pratap Singh Daulta159, the question before 
the Constitution Bench was whether appeals made to the electorate to vote or 
refrain from voting on account of language constitute a corrupt practice under 
Section 123(3) of the Representation of the People Act 1951160. The Constitution 
Bench held that the issue of whether any person was guilty of the corrupt practice 
under Section 123(3) must be determined in the backdrop of Article 29(1) of the 
Constitution. In this context, Justice JC Shah writing for the Bench observed that 
the right to conserve language includes the right to agitate for the protection of 
 
156 Rev. Father W. Proost v. The State of Bihar, (1969); Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College Society 
v. State of Gujarat, (1974) 
157 ibid 
158 See DAV College, Bhatinda v. State of Punjab, AIR 1969 SC 465; and State of Karnataka v. Associated 
Management of English Medium Primary and Secondary Schools, (2014) where the Constitution 
Bench held that imposing mother tongue as the medium of instruction in students infringes upon Article 30(1) 
read with Article 29(1) 
159 (1964) 
160 “The appeal by a candidate […] to vote or refrain from voting for any person on the ground of religion, 
race, caste, community or language […]” 

PART C 

language and that political agitation for that purpose cannot be regarded as a 
corrupt practice. 
96. 
 Article 29(1) confers the right to take steps (through positive action) for the 
preservation of culture, language and script. The phrase ‘conserve’ in the provision 
denotes positive action taken towards a specific end.161 The provision protects 
those steps that have a nexus with the end of preservation of culture. There is 
sound reason to provide a constitutional guarantee to conserve culture, language 
or script. It is a constitutional recognition of the fact that culture, language and script 
die a natural death if positive steps are not taken to promote and protect them.162 
This is particularly true in a multi-cultural and multi-linguistic country such as India. 
97. 
 The second principle is that a law or an executive action is unconstitutional 
to the extent that it prevents a section from taking steps to preserve their culture. 
At this juncture, it must be noted that it is now settled that the fundamental rights 
include both negative and positive rights. The negative right flowing from Article 
29(1) prevents the State from interfering with the right of the section of citizens to 
conserve their culture. The Courts must adopt the well-established effects standard 
to test if the action of the State is violative of Article 29(1). The positive right flowing 
from Article 29(1) casts a duty on the State to create conditions for the exercise of 
the right to conserve culture.163 
 
161 Oxford Dictionary defines the phrase as “to protect something and prevent it from being changed or 
destroyed”. 
 SC 27 
163 For a detailed exposition on the positive and negative facets of a fundamental right, see Supriyo upriyo 
Chakraborty v. Union of India, 2023 INSC 920 [Chief Justice DY Chandrachud, 156-158] 

PART C 

98. 
In Jagdev Singh Sidhanti (supra), this Court also observed that the right 
guaranteed by Article 29(1) is absolute.164 It is true that Article 29(1), unlike Article 
19 of the Constitution, does not prescribe grounds for the reasonable restrictions 
of the right. It must be noted that the decision in Jagdev Singh Sindhanti (supra) 
was rendered in 1964 when the opinion of this Court in AK Gopalan v. State of 
Madras165 held the field on the interpretation of fundamental rights. In AK Gopalan 
(supra), the majority of this Court observed that the fundamental rights operate in 
mutually exclusive silos. In 1970, the decision in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper v. 
Union of India166, rejected this interpretation of Part III holding that fundamental 
rights are not water-tight compartments. Once this Court has held that fundamental 
rights are not water- tight compartments, rights which are not expressly subject to 
reasonable restrictions can be restricted to give effect to other fundamental 
rights.167 For example, Article 30 which guarantees the right to establish and 
administer educational institutions, similar to Article 29, is not subject to an express 
restrictions clause. This Court in numerous decisions has held that the absence of 
a subjection clause does not mean that a minority educational institution cannot 
be regulated.168 Thus, the observation in Jagdev Singh Sidhanti (supra) that the 
right guaranteed by Article 29 is absolute is no more good law is view of the 
subsequent developments on the interpretation of Part III of the Constitution. 
 
164 “25 […] Unlike Article 19(1), Article 29(1) is not subject to any reasonable restrictions. The right conferred 
upon the Section of the citizens residing in the territory of India or any thereof to conserve their language, 
script or culture is made by the Constitution absolute” 
 SC 27 
166 (1970); Also see Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 
167 See Indian Young Lawyers Association v. State of Kerala, (2019) [217] 
168 See State of Kerala v. Very Rev. Mother Provincial, (1970); Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College 
Society v. State of Gujarat, (1974); TMA Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka, (2002) 

PART C 

99. 
It is in this backdrop that the issue of whether Section 6A is violative of Article 
29(1) of the Constitution must be decided. The petitioners’ contention that Section 
6A is violative of Article 29 is based on the following premises: (a) conferring 
citizenship to migrants from Bangladesh to Assam will increase Bengali population 
in Assam; and (b) the increase in Bengali population affects the culture of the 
Assamese population. The premise of the petitioners argument is not that the effect 
of the provision is that the people of Assam are prevented from taking steps to 
conserve their culture neither is it that the State is not taking effective steps to 
create conditions to enable groups to take steps to conserve culture. The argument 
of the petitioners is that the culture of Assam is infringed by the large influx of 
Bangladeshi immigrants who are conferred citizenship and Section 6A to the extent 
that it allows the influx is unconstitutional. 
100. I am unable to accept this argument. First, as a matter of constitutional 
principle, the mere presence of different ethnic groups in a State is not sufficient 
to infringe the right guaranteed by Article 29(1). As explained above, Article 29(1) 
confers the right to ‘conserve’ which means the right to take positive steps to 
protect culture and language. The petitioners ought to prove that the necessary 
effect of the law that promotes the presence of various ethnic groups in a State is 
that another ethnic group is unable to take steps to protect their culture or 
language. The petitioner also ought to prove that the inability to take steps to 
conserve culture or language is attributable to the mere presence of different 
groups. 

PART C 

101. Second, various constitutional and legislative provisions protect Assamese 
cultural heritage. The Constitution provides certain special provisions for the 
administration of Tribal Areas in Assam. The Constitution (Twenty-second 
Amendment) Act 1969 included Article 244A of the Constitution. Article 244A 
stipulates that notwithstanding anything in the Indian Constitution, Parliament may 
by law form an autonomous State within Assam comprising wholly or in part of all 
or any of the tribal areas. Parliament may by law also create a body to function as 
a Legislature for the autonomous State. Article 330 provides that seats must be 
reserved in the House of the People for the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous 
districts of Assam. By the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act 1969, 
Article 371B was included in the Constitution which provides a special provision 
with respect to the State of Assam. According to the provision, the President may 
by an order provide for the constitution and functions of a committee of the 
Legislative Assembly of the State consisting of the members of the Assembly 
elected from the tribal areas and such number of other members of the Assembly. 
The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution consists of provisions regarding the 
administration of tribal areas in the State of Assam, among other States. 
102. Article 345 of the Constitution provides that the State Legislature may by law 
adopt any one or more language as the language to be used for official purposes 
in the State. In exercise of the power under Article 345, the Legislature of the State 
of Assam enacted the Assam Official Language Act 1960169. The enactment adopts 
Assamese as the language for all official purposes of the State of Assam.170 The 
 
169 “The Assam Official language Act” 
170 The Assam Official Language Act 1960, Section 3 

PART C 

enactment further safeguards the use of languages on the basis of usage within 
the geographical limits. Section 4 provides that only languages which were in use 
immediately before the commencement of the Assam Official Language Act shall 
continue to be used for administrative and other official purposes up to and 
including the level of the Autonomous Region or the Autonomous District.171 The 
Assam Official Language Act also provides that the Bengali language would be 
used for administrative and other official purposes upto and including the “district 
of Cachar until the Mohkuma Parishads and Municipal Boards of the district.”172 In 
addition to the above, the State Government also has the power to direct the use 
of the language in such parts of the State of Assam through notification.173 The 
cultural and linguistic interests of the citizens of Assam are protected by 
constitutional and statutory provisions. Thus, Section 6A of the Citizenship Act does 
not violate Article 29(1) of the Constitution for the above reasons. v. 
Section 6A(3) is constitutional 
103. Justice Pardiwala in his opinion has concluded that Section 6A(3) is 
unconstitutional for the following reasons: 
a. The low detection of immigrants who entered Assam between 1966-71 is 
attributable to the manifest arbitrariness of the mechanism prescribed by 
Section 6A(3); 
 
171 The Assam Official Language Act 1960, Section 4. The adoption of any other language for the 
administrative or official purposes of the region must be by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the 
members present and voting. 
172 The Assam Official Language Act 1960, “Section 5. The adoption of any other language for the 
administrative or official purposes of the region must be by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the 
members present and voting” 
173 The Assam Official Language Act 1960, Section 7. 

PART C 

b. Section 6A(3) mandates that for migrants to register as citizens, they must 
be detected as foreigners. However, the mechanism does not provide for 
self-declaration or voluntary detection as a foreigner. The process of 
detection can only be set in motion by the State174. This is a clear departure 
from the scheme of the Citizenship Act and Articles 6 and 7 of the 
Constitution which allows acquiring citizenship through registration175; and 
c. Section 6A(3) does not prescribe an outer time limit for the detection of an 
immigrant to Assam as a foreigner. This militates against the purpose of 
the provision and is arbitrary for the following reasons: 
i. The name of a person who is detected as a foreigner today would be 
deleted from the electoral rolls for ten years from the date of detection. 
This consequence is not in consonance with the object of the 
provision which was early detection, deportation and conferment of 
citizenship176; 
ii. Placing the onus on the State to detect a foreigner coupled with the 
absence of temporal limit allows immigrants to continue to be on the 
electoral rolls and enjoy being de-facto citizens177; and 
iii. Section 
6A(3) 
incentivizes 
undocumented 
immigrants 
from 
Bangladesh to stay in Assam indefinitely until they are detected as 
 
174 Paragraphs 121-123 of the judgment of Justice Pardiwala 
175 Ibid, 128 
176 Ibid, 159 “Thus, an immigrant whose name figures in the electoral roll, despite being a foreigner continues 
to be eligible to vote in the elections till that person is detected as a foreigner and the name of that person is 
struck off the electoral roll. There being no temporal limit to the applicability of Section 6A, this situation would 
continue in the years to come till the detection exercise is completed.” 
177 Ibid, 162 

PART C 

Foreigners since they will be able to acquire citizenship only if they 
are ‘ordinarily resident’ in Assam178. 
104. To recall, Section 6A(2) deems all persons of Indian origin who came to 
Assam from Bangladesh before 1 January 1966 to be citizens of India. Section 
6A(3) prescribes a procedure for persons of Indian origin who migrated from 
Bangladesh to Assam between 1 January 1966 to 24 March 1971 to acquire 
citizenship. The person must have been: 
a. An ordinary resident of Assam since the date of entry; and 
b. Detected to be a foreigner, for which the opinion of the Tribunal constituted 
under the Foreigners Tribunals Order will be deemed as sufficient proof. 
The person who satisfies the above conditions must register in accordance with 
the Rules framed by the Central Government in exercise of the power under 
Section 18. a. 
The interplay of NRC and the citizenship regime 
105. The Central Government prepared the National Register of Citizens179 in 
Assam in 1951 which consisted of information on all the citizens in Assam.180 In 
exercise of the power under Section 18(1) and (3), the Central Government notified 
the Citizenship (Registration of Citizens and Issue of National Identity Cards) Rules 
 
178 Ibid, 163 
179 “NRC” 
180 See Anil Roychoudhury, National Register of Citizens 1951, (Vol 16, Issue no. 8, 21 Feb 1981); Home and 
Political Department (Government of Assam), White Paper on Foreigners Issue (October 20 2012). 

PART C 

2003181.182 Rule 3 of the Citizenship Rules 2003 provides that the Registrar General 
of Citizen Registration must establish and maintain the National Register of Indian 
Citizens. The register must contain, inter alia, the following particulars with respect 
to every citizen: name, sex, date of birth, place of birth and national identity number. 
Rule 4 deals with the preparation of the National Register of Indian Citizens. To 
prepare the National Register of Indian Citizens, the Central Government must 
carry a house to house enumeration for the collection of specific particulars relating 
to each individual, including the citizenship status.183 The particulars collected are 
then required to be verified by the Local Registrar.184 During the verification process 
if the citizenship of any person is doubtful, the Local Registrar must enter their 
details with appropriate remarks in the population registrar for further enquiry. The 
individual must be immediately informed of the doubtful citizenship.185 Every 
person whose citizenship is doubtful would be given an opportunity of being heard 
before a final decision is taken to include or exclude their particulars in the National 
Register of Indian Citizens.186 The Draft NRC must be published by the Sub-district 
or the Taluk Registrar for inviting objections or for corrections.187 The Sub-district 
or the Taluk Registrar must consider the objections within a period of ninety days. 
The Rules also provide for an opportunity to appeal against the order to the District 
Registrar of Citizen Registration.188 
 
181 “ The Citizenship Rules 2003” 
182 Vide G.S.R. 937 (E), dated 10th December, 2003, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Sec.3 
(ii), dated 10th December, 2003 
183 The Citizenship Rules 2003; Rule 4 
184 The Citizenship Rules 2003, Rule 4(3) 
185 The Citizenship Rules 2003, Rule 4(4) 
186 The Citizenship Rules 2003, Rule 4(5)(a) 
187 The Citizenship Rules 2003, Rule 4(6)(a) 
188 The Citizenship Rules 2003, Rule 4(6) and Rule 4(7) 

PART C 

106. On 9 November 2009, the Central Government notified the Citizenship 
(Registration of Citizens and Issue of National Identity Cards) Amendment Rules 
2009189 including Rule 4A to the Citizenship Rules 2003.190 Rule 4A is a special 
provision for the preparation of NRC in the State of Assam.191 By virtue of the 
provision, the procedure prescribed in Rule 4 does not apply for the preparation of 
NRC in the State of Assam. Rule 4A(2) provides that the Central Government for 
the purpose of preparing NRC in Assam must invite applications from all residents 
including information on the citizenship status based on National Register of 
Citizens 1951 and the electoral rolls up to the midnight of 24 March 1971. The 2009 
Amendment Rules included a Schedule to the Citizenship Rules 2003 prescribing 
the manner of preparation of the NRC in the State of Assam. The Schedule 
prescribes a different procedure for the preparation of the NRC in the State of 
Assam. For preparing the NRC for the rest of India under Rule 4, information on 
the citizenship status must be collected by the Central Government on door-to-
 
189 “2009 Amendment Rules” 
190 By G.S.R. 803(E) dated 9 November 2009 
191 “4A. Special provisions as to National Register of Indian Citizens in the State of Assam— 
(1) Nothing in rule 4 shall, on and after the commencement of the Citizenship (Registration of Citizenship 
and Issue of National Identity Cards) Amendment Rules, 2009, apply to the State of Assam. 
 (2) The Central Government shall, for the purpose, of the National Register of Indian Citizens in the State. of Assam, cause to carry out throughout the State of Assam for preparation of the National Register of Indian 
Citizens in the State of Assam by inviting applications from all the residents, for collection of specified 
particulars relating to each family and individual, residing in a local area in the State including the citizenship 
status based on the National Register of Citizens 1951, and the [electoral rolls up to the midnight of the 24th 
day of March, 1971. 
 (3) The Registrar General of Citizens Registration. shall notify the period and duration of the enumeration 
in the Official Gazette. 
 (4) The manner of preparation of the National Register of Indian Citizens in the State of Assam shall be such 
as specified in the Schedule appended to these rules.” 

PART C 

door inspection.192 However, in the case of Assam, an application must be made 
by the residents of Assam.193 
107. According to the Schedule to the Citizenship Rules 2003, the procedure for 
the preparation of NRC in Assam is as follows: 
a. The District Magistrate must publish the copies of NRC 1951 and electoral 
rolls up to the midnight of the 24 March 1971;194 
b. All residents of Assam must file applications to the Local Registrar of 
Citizen Registration195; 
c. The Local Registrar of Citizen Registration must scrutinize all the 
applications and prepare a consolidated list which must contain the names 
of (i) persons who appear in electoral rolls prior to the year 1971 or NCR 
1951, and (ii) their descendants196; and 
d. The name of a person who has been declared as an illegal migrant or a 
foreigner must not be included in the consolidated list197. 
108. The NRC consolidates together the names of all citizens in relation to the 
State of Assam. At the same time, it is a process for the detection of foreigners. 
The Citizenship Act and the Rules framed thereunder and the Foreigners Act form 
a scheme on Indian citizenship which must be read as a whole. 
 
192 The Citizenship Rules 2003; Rule 4(1) 
193 The Citizenship Rules 2003; Paragraph 2(2) of the Schedule and Rule 4A(2) 
194 The Citizenship Rules 2003; Rule 2(1) of the Schedule 
195 The Citizenship Rules 2003; Rule 2(3) of the Schedule 
196 The Citizenship Rules 2003; Rule 2(3) of the Schedule 
197 The Citizenship Rules 2003; Rule 3(2) of the Schedule 

PART C 

109. The Central Government notified the Citizenship Rules 2009 in exercise of 
the powers conferred by section 18 of the Citizenship Act 1955. Part IV of the Rules 
deals with the provisions for the citizenship of persons covered by Assam Accord. 
Rule 19(1) stipulates that the Central Government may for the purposes of Section 
6A(3) appoint an officer not below the rank of Additional District Magistrate as the 
registering authority. Rule 19(2) states that an application must be made in Form 
XVIII198 annexed to the Rules, thirty days from the date of receipt of the order from 
 
198 The Citizenship Rules 2009 
Sch. 1, Form XVIII 
 
This Form when completed should be forwarded in triplicate to the Chief Secretary to the 
Government of the State in which the applicant is resident. 
 
Note. – Serial No. in this register should correspond with the number I the registration certificate. 
FORM XVIII 
[See rule 19(2)] 
 
THE CITIZENSHIP RULES, 2009 
(To be filed in quadruplicate) 
APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION UNDER SECTION 6A 
OF THE CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955 
 
1. Name in full of applicant 
 (Block Capitals, surname first)………………………………………………………………………………... 
 
2. Father’s/ Husband’s Name…………………………………………………………………………………... 
 
3. Date and Place of birth………………………………………………………………………………….……. 
 
4. Sex, Height, Colour of eyes…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
5. Whether of Indian origin-If so, how………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
6. Present Nationality……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
7. Occupation or profession……………………………….……………………………………………………. 
 
8. Date and place of arrival in Assam from Bangladesh……………………..……………..…………….. 

PART C 

the Foreigners Tribunal declaring the person as a Foreigner. The period may be 
extended to sixty days by the registering authority after recording reasons.199 Rule 
19(2A) was included by a notification dated 16 July 2013.200 Rule 19(2A) provides 
that a person who has been declared as a foreigner prior to 16 July 2013 and has 
not registered either because of the non-receipt of the order of the Foreigners 
Tribunal or the refusal of the registering authority to register such person as a 
Foreigner due to delay should make an application (in Form XVIII) within thirty days 
from the receipt of the order or from the date of publication of the notification. Form 
XVIII which is required to be filed by a person who is eligible to acquire citizenship 
under Section 6A(3) in terms of Rule 4 requires the submission of details relating 
to the order declaring such person as a foreigner.201 

9. First address in Assam after arrival………………………………………………….……………………….. 
 
10. Present address in Assam…………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
11. Date from which ordinarily resident in Assam……………………………………………..…………….. 
 
12. Date and place of detection as a foreigner……………………………………………………………... 
 
13. Name and address of the Tribunal declaring him 
 as a foreigner; case number and date of order……………………………………….………………… 
 
14. Name of husband/wife and children……………………………………………………………………… 
 
15. Physical identification marks of applicant…………………………………………………..…………….. 

16. Signature or thumb impression of applicant…………………………………………….…………...…… 
 
TO BE FILLED IN BY THE OFFICER OF THE REGISTERING AUTHORITY 
1. Registered at………………………………………on……………………………..20………... 
 
199 The Citizenship Rules 2009, Proviso to Rule 19(2) 
200 G.S.R 488(E) 
201 “[…] 
11. Date from which ordinarily resident in Assam 
12. Date and place of detection as a foreigner 

PART C 

110. As explained above, the object of Section 6A is not limited to conferring 
citizenship but also extends to excluding a class of migrants from securing 
citizenship. Section 6A is one of the provisions in the larger citizenship project. The 
legal regimes on detecting foreigners and the citizenship law overlap at more than 
one point. Section 6A is one pea in the pod of a long-time redressal of issues. The 
effectiveness (or the impact) of Section 6A must be viewed from this holistic 
perspective. b. Section 6A(3) is not unconstitutional on the ground of temporal 
unreasonableness 
111. The opinion of Justice Pardiwala refers to the doctrine of temporal 
unreasonableness to hold that even if Section 6A(3) was constitutional at the time 
of its enactment in 1985, it has acquired unconstitutionality by the efflux of time 
because the provision has not been effective enough to redress the problem. 
112. One of the settled principles of judicial review is that an enactment which 
was reasonable and valid at the time of enactment, may become arbitrary over 
time. In Motor General Traders v. State of Andhra Pradesh202, the constitutional 
validity of Section 32(b) of the Andhra Pradesh Buildings (Lease, Rent and 
Eviction) Control Act 1960 which exempted all buildings built on or after 26 August 
1957 from the purview of the Act was challenged. The petitioners challenged the 
provision on the ground that it had become unreasonable over the course of time. 
This argument was accepted by a two-Judge Bench of this Court. Justice ES 
 
13. Name and address of the Tribunal declaring him as a foreigner; case number and date of order.” 
202 (1984) 

PART C 

Venkataramiah (as the learned Chief Justice then was), writing for the Bench 
observed that a non-discriminatory provision may in the course of time become 
discriminatory and violative of Article 14.203 The learned Judge noted that 
legislation may become arbitrary over the course of time if the classification does 
not share a nexus with the object anymore: 
“23. […] The long period that has elapsed after the 
passage of the Act itself serves as a crucial factor in 
deciding the question whether the impugned law has 
become discriminatory or not because the ground on 
which the classification of buildings into two categories 
is made is not a historical or geographical one but is an 
economic one. Exemption was granted by way of an 
incentive to encourage building activity and in the 
circumstances such exemption cannot be allowed to 
last for ever. 
30. After giving our anxious consideration to the learned 
arguments addressed before us, we are of the view that 
clause (b) of Section 32 of the Act should be declared 
as violative of Article 14 of the Constitution because the 
continuance of that provision on the statute book 
will imply the creation of a privileged class of 
landlords without any rational basis as the 
incentive to build which provided a nexus for a 
reasonable classification of such class of landlords 
no longer exists by lapse of time in the case of the 
majority of such landlords. There is no reason why 
after all these years they should not be brought at par 
with other landlords who are subject to the restrictions 
imposed by the Act in the matter of eviction of tenants 
and control of rents. 

 (emphasis supplied) 
113. In Rattan Arya v. State of Tamil Nadu204, the issue for the consideration of 
a three-Judge Bench of this Court was whether Section 30(ii) of the Tamil Nadu 
Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act 1960 is constitutionally valid. Section 30(ii) 
 
203 (1984) [22] 
204 (1986) 

PART C 

exempted the application of the Act to any residential building occupied by any 
tenant if the monthly rent was higher than Rupees Four Hundred. Relying on Motor 
General Traders (supra), this Court held that the provision was unconstitutional 
because the justification for imposing a ceiling of Rupees Four Hundred in 1973 
had become unreal upon the passage of time because of the multi-fold increase in 
residential rents.205 The premise of the principle of temporal unreasonableness is 
that a classification which was reasonable when the law was enacted could 
become unreasonable over the course of time. Due to the change in circumstances 
with time, the classification may no longer have a reasonable nexus with the object 
sought to be achieved. In such a situation, the law attracts unconstitutionality. 
114. As identified above, the purpose of Section 6A was to deal with the influx of 
undocumented immigrants from East Pakistan to Assam. Section 6A provides that 
only undocumented immigrants who entered Assam before the cut-off date of 25 
March 1971 shall be given citizenship. The beneficiary class of migrants is further 
divided into two sections: those who entered before 1 January 1966 and those who 
entered after 1 January 1966 but before 25 March 1971. The difference between 
Section 6A(2) and Section 6A(3) is that in the case of the former, the migrants are 
deemed to be citizens while in the case of the latter, they acquire citizenship after 
ten years from the date of detection. In the interim period (ten years since the 
detection), they lose their electoral rights. The consequence of being detected to 
be a foreigner who entered between 1966 to 1971 is that they lose their right to 
political franchise for ten years. Upon their detection, they will have the same rights 
 
205 Also see Malpe Vishwanath Acharya v. State of Maharashtra, (1998) 

PART C 

and obligations as a citizen of India including the right to obtain a passport under 
the Passports Act 1967. Thus, undocumented migrants who fall in this category will 
be citizens of India upon detection for all purposes except the exercise of electoral 
franchise. The legislature in its good wisdom has proceeded on the basis that a 
consequence of such a great magnitude must only ensue upon detection as a 
foreigner through a quasi-judicial proceeding. 
115. In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 3 of the Foreigners Act, the 
Central Government notified the Foreigners Tribunals Order. Once the question of 
whether a person is a foreigner is referred to the Foreigners Tribunal206, the 
reference is decided based on the following procedure: 
a. Upon receiving the reference from the Central Government or any 
competent authority, the Tribunal must serve a show-cause notice on 
the person to whom the question relates207 within ten days from the 
receipt of the reference208; 
b. The notice must be served in English and the official language of the 
State. The notice must indicate that the burden is on the person 
proceeded against to prove that they are not foreigners209; 
c. The individual is given ten days to reply to the show-cause notice and 
an additional ten days to produce evidence to support their case;210 
 
206 The Foreigners (Tribunals) Order 1964; Paragraph 2 
207 The Foreigners (Tribunals) Order 1964, Paragraph 3(2) 
208 The Foreigners (Tribunals) Order 1964, Paragraph 3(3) 
209 The Foreigners (Tribunals) Order 1964, Paragraph 3(4) 
210 The Foreigners (Tribunals) Order 1964; Paragraph 3(8) 

PART C 

d. The individual must be given a reasonable opportunity to make a 
representation and produce evidence to support their case211; and 
e. The Tribunal must submit its opinion after hearing such persons who 
desire to be heard and after considering the evidence produced212. 
The case must be disposed of within a period of sixty days from the 
date of receipt of the reference213. 
116. In addition to the above, the Tribunals Order also prescribes detailed 
provisions regarding the service of notice indicating that the core tenets of natural 
justice must be provided to the person suspected to be a foreigner.214 The Tribunals 
have the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure 
1908 and the powers of a Judicial Magistrate First Class under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure 1973215. The order of the Foreigners Tribunal, being an order of a quasi-
judicial body is subject to judicial review before the High Court and then this Court. 
117. Clause 5.4 of the Assam Accord states that the foreigners who were 
detected to have entered between 1966 to 1971 were required to register before 
the Registration Officers in accordance with the provisions of the Registration of 
Foreigners Act 1939 and the Registration of Foreigners Rules 1939. The Assam 
Accord devised a model in which upon detection as a foreigner, they would have 
to register in the existing mechanism. 
 
211 The Foreigners (Tribunals) Order 1964; Paragraph 3(1) 
212 ibid 
213 The Foreigners (Tribunals) Order 1964; Paragraph 3(14) 
214 The Foreigners (Tribunals) Order 1964; Paragraph 3(5) (a) to (j) 
215 The Foreigners (Tribunals) Order 1964; Paragraph 4 

PART C 

118. However, Section 6A deviated from the Assam Accord in this regard. Section 
6A(3) stipulates that upon detection, the person must register themselves in 
accordance with the rules “made by the Central Government in this behalf under 
Section 18”. The Citizenship Rules were amended by a notification dated 15 
January 1987216 including Rules 16D, 16E and 16F. These Rules implement the 
substantive provisions of Section 6A(3). Rule 16D provides that a fresh reference 
must be made to the Foreigners Tribunal if the question of whether a person 
satisfies the condition under Section 6A arises. Rule 16E deals with the jurisdiction 
of Tribunals constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order 1964 to deal with 
references under Section 6A(3). Rule 16F provides for the registering authority and 
procedure for registration for the purpose of Section 6A(3).217 
119. The legislature by adopting Section 6A(3) in the current form required the 
State to make rules for its implementation. As explained above, the detection as a 
foreigner is an elaborate process that required the State to build manpower and 
infrastructure for its implementation. The Legislature conferred the State with the 
duty to implement the provision after it had built sufficient infrastructure for the 
 
216 See Notification No. GSR 25 (E), dt. 15.1.1987 
217 “16F. The registering authority for the purpose of section 6A(3) and form of application foe registration: 
(1) The registering authority, for the purpose of sub-section (3) of section 6A of the Act shall be such 
officer as maybe appointed by each district of Assam by the Central Government. 
(2) An application for registration under sub-section (3) of section 6A of the Act shall be filed in Form 
XXIII by the person with the registering authority for the district in which he is ordinarily resident- 
a. Whithin thirty days from the date ofhis detection as a foreigner, where such detection 
takes place after the commencement of the Citizenship(Amendment) Rules 1986; or 
b. Within thirty days of the appointment of the registering authority for the district concerned 
where such detection has taken place before the coomencement of the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Rules 1986 
(3) The registering authority shall, after entering the particulars of the application in a register in Form 
XXIV, return a copy of the application under his seals to the applicant. 
(4) One copy of every application received during a quarter shall be sent by the registering authority to 
the Central Government and the State Government of Assam along with a quarterly return in Form 
XXV. 
(5) The period referred to in sub-rule (2) may be extended for a period not exceeding sixty days by the 
registering authority for reasons to be recorded in writing. 

PART C 

same. The purpose of Section 6A(3) was to provide a long term solution to the 
issue of the large influx of migrants from Bangladesh to Assam. It is true that one 
of the causes of concern which led to the Assam Students’ Movement (and 
culminated with the Assam Accord) was the dilution of the electoral right of those 
native to Assam because of the inflow of migrants. However, the purpose of Section 
6A(3) cannot be limited to it. The objective behind the enactment of the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act 1985 was to deal with the larger problem of whether Bangladesh 
migrants of Indian Origin could secure citizenship in India. The objective of the 
provision must be understood in the backdrop of the Indian policy on post-partition 
migration and the Assam movement. The provision strives to bring about a balance 
between both the objectives. Having said that, the concerns of the petitioners 
regarding the burden on the resources of the State and on its demographic identity 
due the influx of illegal migrants in large numbers is not lost to the Court and is a 
matter of serious concern. The State must effectively create adequate state 
capacity to deal with undocumented migrants who migrated after the cut-off date 
prescribed by Section 6A as well as those who have migrated before the cut-off 
date but who do not fulfill the conditions for the grant of citizenship under the 
provision. 
120. In view of the above discussion, I am unable, with respect, to agree with the 
observation of my learned brother, Justice Pardiwala that the purpose of Section 
6A(3) is merely the speedy and effective identification of foreigners of the 1966-71 
stream. The principle of temporal unreasonableness cannot be applied to a 
situation where the classification is still relevant to the objective of the provision. 
The process of detection and conferring citizenship in Assam is a long-drawn out 

PART C 

process spanning many decades. To strike it down due to lapse of time is to ignore 
the context and object of the provision. vi. 
Section 6A(2) cannot be held unconstitutional for not prescribing a 
procedure for registration 
121. The petitioners submitted that Section 6A(2) is unconstitutional because the 
provision does not prescribe a procedure for conferring citizenship to those who 
migrated before 1 January 1966, unlike Section 6A(3) which prescribes a 
procedure for conferring citizenship to those who migrated between 1966-1971. 
122. Section 6A is a substantive provision conferring citizenship on persons who 
migrated from Bangladesh to Assam. The provision provides that persons who 
migrated from Bangladesh to Assam before 1 January 1966 shall deemed to be 
citizens of India from 1 January 1966. The import of the use of the legal fiction is 
that the law assumes a fact that does not exist.218 
123. The provisions of the Citizenship Act do not require every person to register 
to acquire citizenship. Sections 5 and 6 of the Citizenship Act provide for acquiring 
citizenship through registration and naturalisation. These two provisions require 
the applicant to follow a process of application. 
124. However, Sections 3 and 4 of the Act do not require registration for acquiring 
citizenship. Section 3 deals with citizenship by birth. Section 4 deals with 
Citizenship by descent. The law does not mandate that persons who are covered 
 
218 See Justice GP Singh, Principles of Statutory Interpretation (15th edition, Lexis Nexis), 294; JK Cotton 
Spinning & Weaving Mills Ltd. V. Union of India, AIR 1988 SC 191 

PART D 

in the categories prescribed by Sections 3 and 4 must register to acquire 
citizenship. Thus, registration is not the de-facto model of securing citizenship in 
India. The use of the deeming fiction obviates the need for registration. Any person: (a) of Indian origin who migrated from Bangladesh to Assam before 1 January 
1966; and (b) who has ordinarily been a resident in Assam since their date of entry 
is deemed to be a citizen of India. The provision does not contemplate a 
registration regime for persons who fall under this category, similar to Sections 3 
and 4 of the Citizenship Act. Section 6A(2) cannot be held unconstitutional for the 
only reason that it does not prescribe a process of registration. 
D. Conclusion 
125. In view of the discussion above, the following are the conclusions: 
a. Articles 6 and 7 of the Constitution prescribe a cut-off date for 
conferring citizenship for migrants from East and West Pakistan at the 
“commencement of the Constitution”, that is 26 January 1950. 
Section 6A of the Citizenship Act confers citizenship from 1 January 
1966 for those who migrated before that date. Those who migrated 
between 1 January 1966 and 24 March 1971, are conferred 
citizenship upon the completion of ten years from the date of detection 
as a foreigner. Section 6A confers citizenship from a later date to 
those who are not covered by Articles 6 and 7 of the Constitution. 
Thus, Section 6A is not violative of Articles 6 and 7 of the Constitution; 

PART D 

b. Section 6A satisfies the two-pronged reasonable classification test: 
i. The legislative objective of Section 6A was to balance the 
humanitarian needs of migrants of Indian Origin and the impact 
of the migration on the economic and cultural needs of Indian 
States; and 
 
ii. The two yardsticks employed in Section 6A, that is migration to 
Assam and the cut-off date of 24 March 1971 are reasonable. 
Though other states share a longer border with Bangladesh, 
the impact of migration in Assam in terms of numbers and 
resources is greater. Thus, the yardstick of migration to Assam 
is reasonable. The cut-off date of 25 March 1971 is reasonable 
because the Pakistani Army launched Operation Search light 
to curb the Bangladeshi nationalist movement in East Pakistan 
on 26 March 1971. Migrants before the operation were 
considered migrants of the Indian partition; and 
 
iii. Both the above yardsticks have a rational nexus with the object 
of Section 6A. c. Undocumented migrants could be registered as citizens under 
Section 5(1)(a) of the Citizenship Act before it was amended by the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2003 to exclude ‘illegal immigrants’. 
Thus, the claim of the petitioner that Section 6A is unconstitutional 
because instead of preventing migration to Assam, it incentivizes 

PART D 

migrants in other states to come to Assam to secure citizenship 
through Section 6A is erroneous. d. The constitutional validity of a legislation cannot be tested for violation 
of Article 355. Article 355 was included in the Constitution as a 
justification for the exercise of emergency powers by the Union over 
States; 
e. Section 6A does not violate Article 29(1) of the Constitution. Article 
29(1) guarantees the right to take steps to protect the culture, 
language and script of a section of citizens. The petitioners have been 
unable to prove that the ability of the Assamese people to take steps 
to protect their culture is violated by the provisions of Section 6A; 
f. Section 6A(3) cannot be held unconstitutional on the ground of 
temporal unreasonableness; and 
g. Section 6A(2) cannot be held unconstitutional for not prescribing a 
procedure for registration. 

PART D 

126. The reference is answered in the above terms. 
127. The Registry is directed to obtain administrative instructions from the Chief 
Justice for placing the matters before an appropriate Bench...….…….……………………………………CJI 
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 

New Delhi; 
 
October 17, 2024 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

IN RE: SECTION 6A OF THE CITIZENSHIP ACT 1955 
 
WITH 

AND 

JUDGEMENT 
 
SURYA KANT, J. (on behalf of himself, M.M. Sundresh J. and Manoj 
Misra, J.) 
 
Table of Contents 
A. BACKGROUND... 4 
B. TERMS OF REFERENCE... 33 
C. CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES... 36 

D. ISSUES... 41 
E. ANALYSIS... 42 
I. Prefatory challenges…………………………………………………………..43 
i. Judicial review... 43 

Concept of judicial review... 43 

Limits to judicial review... 46 
ii. Delay and maintainability of the writ petitions... 51 

Limitation period for writs... 52 

Applicability of doctrine of laches to the present case... 56 
II. Challenges regarding constitutionality…………………………………..60 
iii. 
The preambular notion of fraternity... 65 

Meaning of ‘fraternity’... 66 

Ethos of Section 6A is aligned with fraternity... 72 
iv. 
Part II and Section 6A... 76 

Section 6A and Articles 6, 7 and 11 of the Constitution... 76 

Section 6A and dual citizenship... 84 

Section 6A and the oath of allegiance... 88 
v. Article 14 and classification under Section 6A... 90 

Maintainability under Article 14... 92 

Section 6A vis-à-vis Article 14... 94 
vi. 
Manifest arbitrariness... 109 

Relation between Article 14 and arbitrariness... 111 

Constituents of manifest arbitrariness... 112 

Facets of the test of manifest arbitrariness... 113 

Extent of review under manifest arbitrariness... 115 

Cut-off dates in Section 6A... 118 

Process prescribed under Section 6A... 121 

Section 6A and Part II of the Constitution... 126 

‘Ordinarily resident’ in Section 6A... 126 
vii. Article 29 and Section 6A... 139 

Background of Article 29... 140 

Standing under Article 29(1)... 142 

Substance of Article 29(1)... 146 

Section 6A vis-à-vis Article 29... 149 
viii. Article 21 and Section 6A... 153 

‘Marginalization’ of a community... 153 

Right of self-governance... 154 

Right of sustainable development... 156 
ix. 
Article 326 and Section 6A... 158 

Background and evolution of adult suffrage... 159 

Aim of Article 326... 162 

Right of exclusion and Article 326... 164 
x. Article 355 and Section 6A... 168 

Intention behind Article 355... 170 

Sarbananda Sonowal v. Union of India... 172 

Section 6A vis-à-vis Article 355... 175 
xi. 
Citizenship Act vis-à-vis the IEAA... 177 
xii. Interface with international law... 181 
F. CONCLUSIONS AND DIRECTIONS... 182 

1. 
The present batch of matters involve the constitutional validity of 
Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (Section 6A). This provision 
was incorporated in 1985 to establish a framework and to delineate 
criteria for granting Indian citizenship to migrants who entered 
Assam before 25.03.1971. Briefly put, the provision created 
categories for the conferment of citizenship to immigrants who 
entered Assam – (i) deemed citizenship to immigrants who entered 
prior to 01.01.1966; and (ii) the process of registration for 
immigrants who entered between the period of 01.01.1966 and 
25.03.1971. However, by omission, no protection was granted to 
those entering Assam after 25.03.1971, thereby rendering their 
presence in India illegal and liable for deportation under other 
existing legislation. Expressing their anxiety over the problems that 
have been posed by the influx of immigration from Bangladesh into 
Assam, which the Petitioners contend have been compounded and 
legitimized by Section 6A, the present action has been brought 
before this Court. 
2. 
Citizenship and its penumbral dimension are at the core of the 
present challenge. Thus, before analyzing the challenges regarding 
the constitutionality and the scheme of citizenship under the 
Constitution of India and the Citizenship Act, 1955, (Citizenship 
Act) we shall endeavour to explore the jurisprudential scheme and 
framework of citizenship globally as well as in India. 
A. BACKGROUND 
Meaning of citizenship 
3. 
Jurisprudentially, the term ‘citizenship’ is an abstract concept 
which has carried various interpretations that have evolved over 

time.1 In ancient Greek society, philosophers like Aristotle 
distinguished citizens from other members of society – such as 
residents, children, slaves, and the elderly. According to Aristotle, 
citizens were individuals who held judicial or legislative authority 
within a state.2 Hence, society was divided into citizens and mere 
subjects, where being a citizen was a matter of privilege. Called the 
‘republican model’, this was also seconded by other philosophers 
such as Tacitus, Cicero, Machiavelli, Harrington and Rousseau.3 
With the growth of the Roman empire, the notion of ‘citizen’ was 
broadened to encompass individuals in conquered territories. This 
eventually transformed the meaning of citizenship, where instead 
of granting access to political office, the term ‘citizen’ meant 
acquiring legal status of being part of a community and receiving 
protection under law. 
4. 
Over time, the term citizenship thus moved from the ‘republican 
model’ to a ‘liberal model’, which diluted the status of citizenship 
from a political privilege to a more egalitarian right based upon the 
similarity of legal status shared by a common populace.4 
The meaning of citizenship in India 
5. 
In the domestic context, citizenship was ascertained by a 9-Judge 
Bench of this Court in State Trading Corpn. of India Ltd. v. 
CTO,5 as the ‘right to have rights’.6 It was held that citizenship is 

CITIZENSHIP, 
Stanford 
Encyclopedia 
of 
Philosophy, 
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/citizenship/. 
2 ARISTOTLE, Politics, Book III, Benjamin Jowett (trans.), Batoche Books, 1999, 53. 
3 CITIZENSHIP, supra note 1; ROUSSEAU, J.J., 1762, On the Social Contract with Geneva 
Manuscript and Political Economy, R. D. Masters (ed.), J. R. Masters (trans.), New 
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1978, Chapter 15. 
4 ULRICH PREUSS, The Ambiguous Meaning of Citizenship, University of Chicago Law 
School (2003). 
5, para 13. 
6 STEPHANIE DEGOOYER ET AL, The Right to Have Rights,Verso Books, 2018, 7; ROMILA 
THAPAR ET. AL., On Citizenship, Aleph Book Company, 2021, 35. the pre-requisite that leads to gaining legal status and other socio-
political rights in a country. However, although there is broad 
consensus on the fundamental concept of citizenship,7 the specific 
rights and privileges associated with citizenship vary from one 
jurisdiction to another. Additionally, countries differ in the 
mechanisms and criteria for acquiring citizenship. These variations 
reflect the unique historical, cultural, and legal contexts of each 
nation. 
6. 
In India, various rights are exclusively conferred upon citizens. 
These include the right to vote, the right to move freely, the right to 
form unions, the right to hold public office, the freedom of speech 
and expression, equality in public employment, etc. However, there 
are certain rights that are also made available to non-citizens, 
including the right to equality before the law, the prohibition of 
forced labour, etc. Additionally, the category of Overseas Citizen of 
India (OCI) represents a unique position within the spectrum of 
citizenship and non-citizenship since they have more rights than 
non-citizens (such as a lifelong visa for visiting India) but have 
fewer rights in comparison to citizens (such as the absence of the 
right to vote). 
7. 
The bundle of rights accompanying ‘citizenship’ differs in other 
countries. For instance, in the United Kingdom, the British 
Nationality Act, 1981 creates six different classes of people: British 
Citizen, British Overseas Territories Citizen, British Overseas 
Citizen, British Subject, British National (Overseas), and British 
Protected Person. These classes are based on varying levels of 
association with the United Kingdom and its overseas territories, 
former colonies, and protectorates; and they carry different sets of 
 
7 Perez v. Bromwell, [1958] 356 US 44, 46. rights. For instance, while British citizenship bestows the right to 
vote, it is also available to some Commonwealth citizens.8 
8. 
Similarly, Mexico establishes two distinct categories of “national” 
and “citizen”.9 A citizen is defined as a national who is 18 years of 
age and has an “honest way of life”.10 Once a national becomes a 
citizen, they get the right to vote, the right to assembly, the right to 
join the army, etc.11 Hence, while nationals and citizens can live in 
Mexico, only citizens get the extra right to vote. The situation is also 
similar in the United States of America (USA). Here, the residents 
of certain territories like American Samoa are only granted 
nationality and not citizenship of the USA. Like Mexico, such 
nationals can reside freely in the USA but cannot vote or hold 
certain elected offices.12 Further, while the residents of some other 
territories, like Puerto Rico, are granted citizenship, they still do not 
get the right to vote.13 
9. 
The trans-national comparison examined above aids us by 
providing three definite conclusions. First, globally, citizenship can 
be conceptualized as the right to be a member of a society. In that 
sense, citizenship is essential to one’s identity since it determines 
whether that person would be perceived as an alien or as ‘one of 
us’. This is particularly true given the historical context of the 
partition and subsequent relations among the nations and people 
in our subcontinent. In addition to such identification by fellow 
members of society, citizenship is also a key determinant in 
 
8 Representation of the People Act, 1983 (c. 2), Acts of Parliament, 1983 (United 
Kingdom), Section 4; Immigration Act, Acts of Parliament, 1971 (UK), Section 2. 
9 Constitution of Mexico of 1917, First Title, Chapter II & IV. 
10 Id, Article 34. 
11 Id, Article 35. 

AMERICAN 
SAMOA, 
U.S. 
Department 
of 
the 
Interior, 
https://www.doi.gov/oia/islands/american-samoa. 
13 Igartua De La Rosa v. United States [2000], 80 F.3d 29, (1st Cir. 2000). enabling an individual to achieve their aims and objectives; since 
citizenship grants access to certain exclusive rights in society. 
Additionally, citizenship provides a sense of belongingness and 
esteem, apart from furthering the self-actualization needs of 
individuals. Collectively, citizenship provides an ‘identity’ to 
individuals, which has a significant impact on the quality of their 
lives and their individual psyche. 
10. Second, beyond the conceptual understanding that citizenship 
grants an assemblage of certain rights in a community, the rights 
that may be conferred depend on the municipal policies of that 
country. While some countries like India reserve the right to vote 
exclusively for citizens, countries like the United Kingdom also 
extend it to Commonwealth citizens. Further, countries such as the 
USA do not bestow the right to vote even to some citizens. 
11. Third, most nations have multiple classes of citizenship or 
nationality instead of a rigid dichotomy of citizens and non-citizens. 
In addition to this division, countries also have categories such as 
overseas citizens, nationals, subjects, etc. However, while the 
basket of rights differs inter-se such categories, citizenship is 
generally the highest basket a person can be classified under. 
Hence, though citizenship is one sub-set among many possible 
ways of being a member of a polity, it is the most significant one. 
Nonetheless, reality is often more nuanced, with numerous 
exceptions, caveats, entrenched inequalities and discriminatory 
legal regimes. 
12. The conditions to acquire citizenship also vary across jurisdictions. 
Given that the Petitioners are challenging a specific mode of 
conferment of citizenship, it would be helpful to understand the 
manner in which citizenship is conferred both across the world and 

under our constitutional scheme. This will help us trace whether 
Section 6A is merely an aberration that does not fit into our 
domestic conceptualization of conferring citizenship or if it is 
another piece of a much more complicated puzzle. 
Modes of acquiring citizenship 
13. Broadly, there are three approaches for granting citizenship: (i) jus 
soli, i.e., on the basis of birth within that particular country; (ii) jus 
sanguinis, i.e., citizenship by blood/descent; and (iii) through 
special recognition by law, such as citizenship by registration, 
naturalization, incorporation of a foreign territory, etc. Globally, 
countries have adopted different models for constructing their 
citizenship regimes. While most countries in North America follow 
a jus soli regime, a majority of European nations follow a jus 
sanguinis regime. In contrast, Australia and the African nations 
follow a mixed regime.14 
14. There are varied academic perspectives deliberating as to the 
reasons why a country chooses one mode of conferring citizenship 
over another. As per one perspective, countries that wish to grant 
citizenship to immigrants who do not have familial links in the 
country choose the jus soli model.15 However, from another 
perspective, the choice of mode is often based on the significance 
of ethnicity for the citizen's identity resulting in adoption of a jus 
sanguinis model. Hence, if a nation emphasizes ethnic continuity 
through descent and lineage, it tends to choose the jus sanguinis 
model over the jus soli model. However, where the cultural identity 

KANGNI 
KPODAR, 
Citizenship 
and 
Growth, 
IMF 
eLibrary, 
https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/journals/022/0056/001/article-A014-en.xml. 
15 Id. is tied to the territory of the nation, the jus soli model is preferred.16 
Beyond these considerations, citizenship models can also be 
justified on the basis of inter-state relations (by which citizenship 
is granted based on historical links or treaties between nations),17 
or on economic considerations (which are instantiated by countries 
that allow citizenship by investment).18 
15. While providing an exhaustive account of all academic perspectives 
is neither feasible nor necessary for the current discussion, it is 
evident that various policy reasons inform the selection of one 
citizenship pattern over another. There is no single policy that 
universally dictates the framing of citizenship laws; rather, diverse 
considerations, including historical, cultural, economic, and 
political factors, influence the formulation of citizenship regimes.19 
Even though a uniform citizenship policy across the world could 
eliminate statelessness and multiple citizenships, the varying basis 
of granting citizenship is unavoidable because each country has its 
own unique policy considerations and political milieu. Since there 
is no single universally suitable model, no mode of granting 
citizenship can be called an aberration or an anomaly. Citizenship 
is purely a creation of law, which, in turn, is an instrument of policy 
based on different prevailing circumstances of each country. While 
some nations insist on connections in terms of descent and 
 
16 JAMES BROWN SCOTT, Nationality: Jus Soli or Jus Sanguinis, American Journal of 
International Law, 1930, 24(1), 60. 
17 This is particularly demonstrated by European states like the United Kingdom as 
discussed earlier, which, due to its historical ties extends citizenship to some 
individuals from Commonwealth countries. 

ACQUISITION 
OF 
CITIZENSHIP 
- 
AĠENZIJA 
KOMUNITÀ 
MALTA, 
https://komunita.gov.mt/en/services/acquisition-of-citizenship/. 
19 DAVID FITZGERALD, Nationality and Migration in Modern Mexico, Journal of Ethnic 
and Migration Studies, 2005, 31(1), 172. territory, some even grant citizenship for purely economic 
reasons.20 
16. Further, since the policy reasons underlying a citizenship regime 
are bound to remain in flux, constitutions around the globe are 
wary of setting citizenship norms in stone. For instance, a country’s 
demographic pattern might change, it might want to effect inter-
state arrangements, it might be engaged in a war, there could be 
international treaties granting rights to certain classes of people, 
etc. Therefore, rather than imposing rigid norms on citizenship, it 
is desirable for constitutions to grant the government the flexibility 
to determine laws regarding membership in the country's 
community. For this, either the constitutions such as the 
Australian Constitution, remain silent on the conditions of 
acquiring citizenship, or they prescribe the overarching norms for 
the time being and give the power to make and change specific 
conditions to the Parliament.21 
Citizenship under the Constitution of India 
17. In India, the approach of prescribing wide-ranging norms for 
citizenship was adopted at the commencement of the Constitution. 
Since the country was required to have norms for determining who 
could be a member of its community, the Constitution prescribed 
certain transitional conditions within Part II and made them 
subject to any laws that Parliament may make later.22 Prescribing 
such norms in the Constitution was all the more critical because 
the country had undergone two significant changes: first, there had 
 
20 CITIZENSHIP BY INVESTMENT COUNTRIES & PROGRAMS LIST IN 2024, Global Residence 
Index, https://globalresidenceindex.com/citizenship-by-investment/. 
21 Constituição da República Federativa do Brasil, Article 22; Grundgesetz für die 
Bundesrepublik, Article 18; Constitution of Kenya, Article 18. 
22 Constitution of India, Article 11. been a complete metamorphosis from a ruled territory to an 
independent nation; and second, there was the partition of the 
country, and some of its territories that were hitherto a part of it 
were declared a separate nation. After the creation of an 
independent India and the demarcation of its territory being 
complete, the next logical question of who an Indian was, emerged. 
Since the Parliament itself was nascent, the Constituent Assembly 
chose to incorporate transitionary norms of citizenship in the 
Constitution itself, instead of keeping the question of who an Indian 
was unsettled till later. 
18. In this context, the Constitution came to incorporate the provisions 
now enshrined in Part II of the Constitution. Articles 5 to 10 
prescribed the overarching norms of citizenship at the time of the 
commencement of the Constitution, while Article 11 granted 
Parliament the power to make any law regarding citizenship. 
19. Hence, the scheme of citizenship provided under the Constitution 
comprises broadly of the following provisions: 
“5. Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution 
— 
At the commencement of this Constitution, every person who 
has his domicile in the territory of India and— 
(a) who was born in the territory of India; or 
(b) either of whose parents was born in the territory of India; 
or 
(c) who has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India for 
not less than five years immediately preceding such 
commencement, shall be a citizen of India.” 
 
“6. Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have 
migrated to India from Pakistan — 
Notwithstanding anything in article 5, a person who has 
migrated to the territory of India from the territory now 

included in Pakistan shall be deemed to be a citizen of India 
at the commencement of this Constitution if— 
(a) he or either of his parents or any of his grand-parents was 
born in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 
(as originally enacted); and 
(b)(i) in the case where such person has so migrated before the 
nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been ordinarily resident 
in the territory of India since the date of his migration, or 
(ii) in the case where such person has so migrated on or after 
the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been registered as a 
citizen of India by an officer appointed in that behalf by the 
Government of the Dominion of India on an application made 
by him therefor to such officer before the commencement of this 
Constitution in the form and manner prescribed by that 
Government: Provided that no person shall be so registered 
unless he has been resident in the territory of India for at least 
six months immediately preceding the date of his application.” 
 
“7. Rights of citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan 
— 
Notwithstanding anything in articles 5 and 6, a person who 
has after the first day of March, 1947, migrated from the 
territory of India to the territory now included in Pakistan shall 
not be deemed to be a citizen of India: 
Provided that nothing in this article shall apply to a person 
who, after having so migrated to the territory now included in 
Pakistan, has returned to the territory of India under a permit 
for resettlement or permanent return issued by or under the 
authority of any law and every such person shall for the 
purposes of clause (b) of article 6 be deemed to have migrated 
to the territory of India after the nineteenth day of July, 1948.” 
 
“8. Rights of citizenship of certain persons of Indian 
origin residing outside India — 
Notwithstanding anything in article 5, any person who or 
either of whose parents or any of whose grand-parents was 
born in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 
(as originally enacted), and who is ordinarily residing in any 
country outside India as so defined shall be deemed to be a 
citizen of India if he has been registered as a citizen of India 
by the diplomatic or consular representative of India in the 
country where he is for the time being residing on an 
application made by him therefor to such diplomatic or 

consular 
representative, 
whether 
before 
or 
after 
the 
commencement of this Constitution, in the form and manner 
prescribed by the Government of the Dominion of India or the 
Government of India.” 
 
“9. Persons voluntarily acquiring citizenship of a 
foreign State not to be citizens — 
No person shall be a citizen of India by virtue of article 5, or be 
deemed to be a citizen of India by virtue of article 6 or article 
8, if he has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of any foreign 
State.” 
 
“10. Continuance of the rights of citizenship — 
Every person who is or is deemed to be a citizen of India under 
any of the foregoing provisions of this Part shall, subject to the 
provisions of any law that may be made by Parliament, 
continue to be such citizen.” 
 
“11. Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by 
law — 
Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall derogate 
from the power of Parliament to make any provision with 
respect to the acquisition and termination of citizenship and all 
other matters relating to citizenship.” 
 
Legislative scheme on citizenship 
20. Exercising the power granted by Article 11 of the Constitution, the 
Parliament enacted the Citizenship Act, which expanded on the 
conditions prescribed by the aforementioned provisions of the 
Constitution. The key provisions that provided the conditions for 
citizenship under the Act are set out below: 
“3. Citizenship by birth ― 
(1) Except as provided in sub-section (2), every person born in 
India― 
(a) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950, but before the 
1st day of July, 1987; 
(b) on or after the 1st day of July, 1987, but before the 
commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003 (6 of 

2004) and either of whose parents is a citizen of India at the 
time of his birth; 
(c) on or after the commencement of the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act, 2003 (6 of 2004), where― 
(i) both of his parents are citizens of India; or 
(ii) one of whose parents is a citizen of India and the other is 
not an illegal migrant at the time of his birth, shall be a citizen 
of India by birth. 
(2) A person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this 
section if at the time of his birth― 
(a) either his father or mother possesses such immunity from 
suits and legal process as is accorded to an envoy of a foreign 
sovereign power accredited to the President of India and he or 
she, as the case may be, is not a citizen of India; or 
(b) his father or mother is an enemy alien and the birth occurs 
in a place then under occupation by the enemy.” 
 
“4. Citizenship by descent ― 
(1) A person born outside India shall be a citizen of India by 
descent, ― 
(a) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950, but before the 
10th day of December, 1992, if his father is a citizen of India 
at the time of his birth; or 
(b) on or after the 10th day of December, 1992, if either of his 
parents is a citizen of India at the time of his birth: 
Provided that if the father of a person referred to in clause (a) 
was a citizen of India by descent only, that person shall not 
be a citizen of India by virtue of this section unless― 
(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one 
year of its occurrence or the commencement of this Act, 
whichever is later, or, with the permission of the Central 
Government, after the expiry of the said period; or 
(b) his father is, at the time of his birth, in service under a 
Government in India: 
Provided further that if either of the parents of a person 
referred to in clause (b) was a citizen of India 
by descent only, that person shall not be a citizen of India by 
virtue of this section, unless― 
(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one 
year of its occurrence or on or after the 10th day of December, 
1992, whichever is later, or, with the permission of the Central 
Government, after the expiry of the said period; or 

(b) either of his parents is, at the time of his birth, in service 
under a Government in India: 
Provided also that on or after the commencement of the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003 (6 of 2004), a person shall 
not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section, unless his 
birth is registered at an Indian consulate in such form and in 
such manner, as may be prescribed, ― 
(i) within one year of its occurrence or the commencement of 
the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003(6 of 2004), whichever 
is later; or 
(ii) with the permission of the Central Government, after the 
expiry of the said period: 
Provided also that no such birth shall be registered unless the 
parents of such person declare, in such form and in such 
manner as may be prescribed, that the minor does not hold 
the passport of another country. 
(1A) A minor who is a citizen of India by virtue of this section 
and is also a citizen of any other country shall cease to be a 
citizen of India if he does not renounce the citizenship or 
nationality of another country within six months of attaining 
full age. 
(2) If the Central Government so directs, a birth shall be 
deemed for the purposes of this section to have been registered 
with its permission, notwithstanding that its permission was 
not obtained before the registration. 
(3) For the purposes of the proviso to sub-section (1), any 
person born outside undivided India who was, or was deemed 
to be, a citizen of India at the commencement of the 
Constitution shall be deemed to be a citizen of India by descent 
only.” 
 
“5. Citizenship by registration ― 
(1) Subject to the provisions of this section and such other 
conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Central 
Government may, on an application made in this behalf, 
register as a citizen of India any person not being an illegal 
migrant who is not already such citizen by virtue of the 
Constitution or of any other provision of this Act if he belongs 
to any of the following categories, namely: ― 
(a) a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in India 
for seven years before making an application for registration; 
(b) a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in any 
country or place outside undivided India; 

(c) a person who is married to a citizen of India and is 
ordinarily resident in India for seven years before making an 
application for registration; 
(d) minor children of persons who are citizens of India; 
(e) a person of full age and capacity whose parents are 
registered as citizens of India under clause (a) of this sub-
section or sub-section (1) of section 6; 
(f) a person of full age and capacity who, or either of his 
parents, was earlier citizen of independent India, and is 
ordinarily resident in India for twelve months immediately 
before making an application for registration; 
(g) a person of full age and capacity who has been registered 
as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder for five years, and 
who is ordinarily resident in India for twelve months before 
making an application for registration. 
Explanation 1.―For the purposes of clauses (a) and (c), an 
applicant shall be deemed to be ordinarily resident in India if― 
(i) he has resided in India throughout the period of twelve 
months immediately before making an application for 
registration; and 
(ii) he has resided in India during the eight years immediately 
preceding the said period of twelve months for a period of not 
less than six years. 
Explanation 2.―For the purposes of this sub-section, a person 
shall be deemed to be of Indian origin if he, or either of his 
parents, was born in undivided India or in such other territory 
which became part of India after the 15th day of August, 1947. 
 (1A) The Central Government, if it is satisfied that special 
circumstances exist, may after recording the circumstances in 
writing, relax the period of twelve months, specified in clauses 
(f) and (g) and clause (i) of Explanation 1 of sub-section (1), up 
to a maximum of thirty days which may be in different breaks. 
(2) No person being of full age shall be registered as a citizen 
of India under sub-section (1) until he has taken the oath of 
allegiance in the form specified in the Second Schedule. 
(3) No person who has renounced, or has been deprived of, his 
Indian citizenship or whose Indian citizenship has terminated, 
under this Act shall be registered as a citizen of India under 
sub-section (1) except by order of the Central Government. 
(4) The Central Government may, if satisfied that there are 
special circumstances justifying such registration, cause any 
minor to be registered as a citizen of India. 

(5) A person registered under this section shall be a citizen of 
India by registration as from the date on which he is so 
registered; and a person registered under the provisions of 
clause (b)(ii) of article 6 or article 8 of the Constitution shall be 
deemed to be a citizen of India by registration as from the 
commencement of the Constitution or the date on which he 
was so registered, whichever may be later. 
 (6) If the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances 
exist which render it necessary to grant exemption from the 
residential requirement under clause (c) of sub-section (1) to 
any person or a class of persons, it may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, grant such exemption.” 
 
“6. Citizenship by naturalization ― 
(1) Where an application is made in the prescribed manner by 
any person of full age and capacity 3[not being an illegal 
migrant] for the grant of a certificate of naturalisation to him, 
the Central Government may, if satisfied that the applicant is 
qualified for naturalisation under the provisions of the Third 
Schedule, grant to him a certificate of naturalisation: 
Provided that, if in the opinion of the Central Government, the 
applicant is a person who has rendered distinguished service 
to the cause of science, philosophy, art, literature, world peace 
or human progress generally, it may waive all or any of the 
conditions specified in the Third Schedule. 
(2) The person to whom a certificate of naturalisation is 
granted under sub-section (1) shall, on taking the oath of 
allegiance in the form specified in the Second Schedule, be a 
citizen of India by naturalisation as from the date on which 
that certificate is granted.” 
 
“7. Citizenship by incorporation of territory ―If any 
territory becomes a part of India, the Central Government may, 
by order notified in the Official Gazette, specify the persons 
who shall be citizens of India by reason of their connection 
with that territory; and those persons shall be citizens of India 
as from the date to be specified in the order.” 
 
21. To understand the interplay of the norms prescribed by Part II of 
the Constitution and the provisions of the Citizenship Act, a brief 
overview of the different conditions is set out in the table below: 

Condition 
on birth 
Condition on 
residence 
Condition 
on descent 
Condition of 
registration 
Other 
conditions 
Ref. 
Citizenship by Birth (Jus Soli) 
▪ Born before 
26.01.1950. 
▪ Born 
in 
India. 
Had domicile in 
India 
at 
the 
commencement 
of 
the 
Constitution. 
- 
- 
Is not barred 
by Article 7.23 
Article 
5(a) 
▪ Born 
on/after 
26.01.1950 
but 
before 
01.07.1987. 
▪ Born 
in 
India. 
- 
Parents 
must 
not 
be covered 
by Section 
3(2).24 
- 
- 
Section 
3(1)(a) 
▪ Born 
on/after 
01.07.1987 
but 
before 
03.12.2004.

▪ Born 
in 
India. 
- 
▪ Either 
parent is 
a citizen 
of 
India 
at 
the 
time 
of 
birth. 
▪ Parents 
must not 
be 
covered 
by 
Section 
3(2). 
 
- 
- 
Section 
3(1)(b) 
▪ Born 
on/after 
03.12.2004. 
▪ Born 
in 
India. 
- 
▪ Both 
parents 
are 
citizens 
of India, 
- 
- 
Section
3(1)(c) 
 
23 Article 7 bars citizenship if a person has re-migrated to India from Pakistan without 
permit for resettlement or permanent return. 
24 Section 3(2) applies if either parent possesses immunity like foreign envoy and is 
not a citizen of India/Either parent is an enemy alien and person was born at enemy 
territory. 
25 The condition is before commencement of Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003, 
which 
came 
into 
force 
on 
03.12.2004, 
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2004/E_1031_2011_005.pdf. or 
one 
parent 
was 
a 
citizen of 
India, 
and 
the 
other was 
not 
an 
illegal 
immigran
t at the 
time 
of 
birth. 
▪ Parents 
must not 
be 
covered 
by 
Section 
3(2). 
Citizenship by descent (Jus Sanguinis) 
▪ Born before 
26.01.1950. 
▪ Born 
outside 
India. 
Had domicile in 
India 
at 
the 
commencement 
of 
the 
Constitution. 
Either 
parent was 
born 
in 
India. 
 
- 
Is not barred 
by Article 7. 
Article 
5(b) 
▪ Born 
on/after 
26.01.1950 
but 
before 
10.12.1992. 
▪ Born 
outside 
India. 
- 
Father was 
a citizen of 
India at the 
time 
of 
birth. 
Registration 
with 
the 
Indian 
consulate 
is 
required if the 
father 
is 
a 
citizen 
of 
India 
by 
descent only 
and was not 
in service of 
the 
government 
of India. 
- 
Section 
4(a) 
▪ Born 
on/after 
10.12.1992 
- 
Either 
parent was 
a citizen of 
India at the 
Registration 
with 
the 
Indian 
consulate 
is 
- 
Section 
4(b) 

but 
before 
03.12.2004. 
▪ Born 
outside 
India. time 
of 
birth. required 
if 
either parent 
is a citizen of 
India 
by 
descent only 
and was not 
in service of 
the 
government 
of India. 
▪ Born 
on/after 
03.12.2004. 
▪ Born 
outside 
India. 
- 
Either 
parent was 
a citizen of 
India at the 
time 
of 
birth. 
Compulsory 
registration is 
required with 
the 
Indian 
consulate. 
The 
parents 
shall 
declare 
that the minor 
does 
not 
possess 
a 
passport 
of 
another 
country. 
Section 
4(b) 
Citizenship by registration 
- 
Is 
ordinarily 
residing outside 
India (India as 
defined in Govt. of 
India 
Act, 
1935, 
hereinafter 
“Undivided 
India”) 
Person/Eit
her 
parent/Any 
grandparen
t was born 
in 
Undivided 
India. 
Compulsory 
registration 
with 
diplomatic/co
nsular 
representativ
e of India. 
- 
Article 
8 and 
Section 
5(5) 
- 
Ordinary 
resident26 
in 
India for seven 
years 
before 
making 
the 
application 
for 
registration. 
Person/Eit
her parent 
was born in 
Undivided 
India 
or 
territories 
that 
became 
part 
of 
Must 
be 
compulsorily 
registered. 
▪ Person who 
is 
not 
a 
minor must 
take 
the 
oath 
of 
allegiance. 
▪ Person must 
not be an 
Section 
5(1)(a) 
and 
Section 
5(2) 
 
26 Here specifically, ordinary resident means a person who: 
(i) has resided in India throughout the period of twelve months immediately before 
making an application for registration; and 
(ii) has resided in India during the eight years immediately preceding the said period 
of twelve months for a period of not less than six years. 

India after 
independen
ce. illegal 
immigrant 
- 
- 
Must 
be 
compulsorily 
registered. 
▪ Spouse 
must be a 
citizen 
of 
India. 
▪ Person who 
is 
not 
a 
minor must 
take 
the 
oath 
of 
allegiance. 
▪ Person must 
not be an 
illegal 
immigrant 
Section 
5(1)(c) 
and 
Section 
5(2) 
- 
Ordinary 
residents 
outside 
Undivided India 
or 
territories 
that 
became part of 
India 
after 
independence. 
Person/Eit
her parent 
was born in 
Undivided 
India 
or 
territories 
that 
became 
part 
of 
India after 
independen
ce. 
Must 
be 
compulsorily 
registered. 
▪ Person who 
is 
not 
a 
minor must 
take 
the 
oath 
of 
allegiance. 
▪ Person must 
not be an 
illegal 
immigrant. 
 
Section 
5(1)(b) 
and 
Section 
5(2) 
- 
- 
Parents are 
citizens 
of 
India. 
Must 
be 
compulsorily 
registered. 
▪ Person must 
be a minor 
child. 
▪ Person must 
not be an 
illegal 
immigrant 
Section 
5(1)(d) 
- 
- 
Parents are 
registered 
under 
S. 
5(1)(a) 
or 
naturalised 
under S. 6 
Must 
be 
compulsorily 
registered. 
▪ Person must 
be of full age 
and 
capacity27 
▪ Person must 
take 
the 
Section 
5(1)(e) 
and 
Section 
5(2) 
 
27 As per Section 2(4): “a person shall be deemed to be of full age if he is not a minor 
and of full capacity if he is not of unsound mind.” 

as citizens 
of India. oath 
of 
allegiance 
▪ Person must 
not be an 
illegal 
immigrant 
- 
Ordinary 
resident in India 
for 12 months 
before 
making 
an 
application 
for registration. 
Person/eit
her of the 
parents 
was earlier 
a citizen of 
independen
t India. 
Must 
be 
compulsorily 
registered. 
▪ Person must 
be of full age 
and 
capacity. 
▪ Person must 
take 
the 
oath 
of 
allegiance. 
▪ Person must 
not be an 
illegal 
immigrant 
Section 
5(1)(f) 
and 
Section 
5(2) 
- 
- 
Must 
be 
compulsorily 
registered. 
▪ Person must 
be registered 
as 
an 
Overseas 
Citizen 
of 
India 
Cardholder 
for 
five 
years. 
▪ Person must 
be of full age 
and capacity 
▪ Person must 
take 
the 
oath 
of 
allegiance 
▪ Person must 
not be an 
illegal 
immigrant 
Section 
5(1)(g) 
and 
Section 
5(2) 
Citizenship by naturalization 
- 
▪ Had domicile 
in the territory 
of India at the 
commenceme
- 
 
- 
Is not barred 
by Article 7. 
Article 
5(c) 

nt 
of 
the 
Constitution. 
▪ Was 
ordinarily 
residing 
in 
India 
for 
at 
least 
five 
years 
before 
the 
commenceme
nt 
of 
the 
Constitution. 
- 
▪ Was residing 
in India/was 
in service of 
the 
government of 
India/both for 
twelve months 
before making 
the 
application. 
▪ During the 14 
years 
preceding the 

months 
mentioned 
above, 
the 
person 
has 
resided 
in 
India/has 
been in the 
service of the 
government 
for 
an 
aggregate 
of 
11 years. 
▪ After 
getting 
citizenship, 
intends 
to 
reside 
in 
India/work 
with 
the 
government of 
India 
or 
an 
- 
Must apply to 
the govt. for 
getting 
the 
certificate 
of 
naturalisatio
n 
▪ Is of full age 
and capacity 
▪ Is 
not 
an 
illegal 
immigrant 
▪ Takes 
oath 
of allegiance 
▪ Is of a good 
character 
and 
adequately 
knows 
languages 
specified in 
the 
Eighth 
Schedule 
▪ Is 
not 
a 
subject/citiz
en 
of 
a 
country 
where 
Indian 
citizens are 
barred from 
becoming 
subjects/citi
zens 
▪ Person 
undertakes 
to renounce 
previous 
citizenship if 
Indian 
Section 
6(1) 
and 
Third 
Schedu
le 

international 
organization 
of which India 
is a member 
or 
a 
society/comp
any/body 
of 
persons 
established in 
India. citizenship 
is granted. 
Citizenship by incorporation of territory 
- 
- 
- 
- 
▪ The person 
must 
be 
connected to 
the territory 
that 
is 
incorporate
d in India 
and 
is 
extended 
Indian 
citizenship 
by 
the 
Government 
of India. 
▪ The person 
must 
fulfil 
the 
conditions 
prescribed 
by 
the 
government
al 
order 
granting 
citizenship. 
Section 

22. Apart from these general norms, the Constitution also prescribed 
citizenship norms for immigrants to and from Pakistan. For this, 
Article 6 provided citizenship to people who migrated from Pakistan 
if: (i) such person/either of their parents/ grand-parents were born 
in undivided India; (ii) if such person was an ordinary resident since 

the date of their migration; and (iii) such person was registered as 
a citizen of India if such migration was after 19.07.1948. As a 
corollary, Article 7 prohibited citizenship to people who migrated 
from India to Pakistan after 01.03.1947 and then sought 
citizenship after re-migrating to India, unless they came back 
under a permit for resettlement or permanent return. Similar to 
these provisions is Section 6A, which provides a framework 
addressing the conferment of citizenship to migrants entering the 
State of Assam based on their date of entry.28 
23. Section 6A, which is presently under challenge, was inserted into 
the Citizenship Act, via Act 65 of 1985 and came into force with 
effect from 07.12.1985. This provision created special conditions 
for the citizenship of migrants who entered into Assam in 
accordance with certain cut-off dates. As per the provision, first, 
those who entered Assam from Bangladesh prior to 01.01.1966 
were deemed to be Indian citizens, and second, those who entered 
into Assam between the period of 01.01.1966 and 25.03.1971 were 
conferred citizenship based on the fulfilment of specific procedures 
and conditions. Those who entered Assam after 25.03.1971 have 
been denied citizenship by implication. 
24. To analyze this provision comprehensively, it is imperative to go 
through Section 6A and the language it employs. Section 6A, as it 
was added in 1985 to the Citizenship Act reads as follows: 
 
28 We are also apprised of the fact that Parliament has promulgated the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act, 2019, and more recently on 11.03.2024 the Government of India 
has notified the Citizenship (Amendment) Rules, 2024. However, we are not dealing 
with these provisions given that neither of the parties relied upon these provisions 
over the course of the proceedings before us. Additionally, some of these provisions 
had not yet been notified as of the date of reserving these judgments. In any case, 
these provisions are not germane to the controversy at hand, and a challenge to these 
amendments is already sub-judice before another bench of this Court. 

“6A. Special provisions as to citizenship of persons 
covered by the Assam Accord – 
 
(1) For the purposes of this section 
(a) “Assam” means the territories included in the State of 
Assam immediately before the commencement of the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985; 
(b) “detected to be a foreigner” means detected to be a 
foreigner in accordance with the provisions of the Foreigners 
Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) and the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 
1964 by a Tribunal constituted under the said Order; 
(c) “specified territory” means the territories included in 
Bangladesh immediately before the commencement of the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985; 
(d) a person shall be deemed to be Indian origin, if he, or 
either of his parents or any of his grandparents was born 
in undivided India; 
(e) a person shall be deemed to have been detected to be a 
foreigner on the date on which a Tribunal constituted under 
the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 submits its opinion to 
the effect that he is a foreigner to the officer or authority 
concerned. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (6) and (7), all 
persons of Indian origin who came before the lst day of 
January, 1966 to Assam from the specified territory (including 
such of those whose names were included in the electoral rolls 
used for the purposes of the General Election to the House of 
the People held in 1967) and who have been ordinarily 
resident in Assam since the dates of their entry into Assam 
shall be deemed to be citizens of India as from the 1st day of 
January, 1966. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (6) and (7), every 
person of Indian origin who― 
(a) came to Assam on or after the lst day of January, 1966 but 
before the 25th day of March, 1971 from the specified territory; 
and 
(b) has, since the date of his entry into Assam, been ordinarily 
resident in Assam; and 
(c) has been detected to be a foreigner; 
shall register himself in accordance with the rules made by the 
Central Government in this behalf under section 18 with such 

authority (hereafter in this sub-section referred to as the 
registering authority) as may be specified in such rules and if 
his name is included in any electoral roll for any Assembly or 
Parliamentary constituency in force on the date of such 
detection, his name shall be deleted therefrom. 
Explanation ― In the case of every person seeking registration 
under this sub-section, the opinion of the Tribunal constituted 
under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 holding such 
person to be a foreigner, shall be deemed to be sufficient proof 
of the requirement under clause (c) of this sub-section and if 
any question arises as to whether such person complies with 
any other requirement under this sub-section, the registering 
authority shall, ― 
(i) if such opinion contains a finding with respect to such other 
requirement, decide the question in conformity with such 
finding; 
(ii) if such opinion does not contain a finding with respect to 
such other requirement, refer the question to a Tribunal 
constituted under the said Order hang jurisdiction in 
accordance with such rules as the Central Government may 
make in this behalf under section 18 and decide the question 
in conformity with the opinion received on such reference. 
(4) A person registered under sub-section (3) shall have, as 
from the date on which he has been detected to be a foreigner 
and till the expiry of a period of ten years from that date, the 
same rights and obligations as a citizen of India (including the 
right to obtain a passport under the Passports Act, 1967 and 
the obligations connected therewith), but shall not entitled to 
have his name included in any electoral roll for any Assembly 
or Parliamentary constituency at any time before the expiry of 
the said period of ten years. 
(5) A person registered under sub-section (3) shall be deemed 
to be a citizen of India for all purposes as from the date of 
expiry of a period of ten years from the date on which he has 
been detected to be a foreigner. 
(6) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 8― 
(a) if any person referred to in sub-section (2) submits in the 
prescribed manner and form and to the prescribed authority 
within sixty days from the date of commencement of the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, a declaration that he does 
not wish to be a citizen of India, such person shall not be 

deemed to have become a citizen of India under that sub-
section; 
(b) if any person referred to in sub-section (3) submits in the 
prescribed manner and form and to the prescribed authority 
within sixty days from the date of commencement of the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, or from the date on which 
he has been detected to be a foreigner, whichever is later, a 
declaration that he does not wish to be governed by the 
provisions of that sub-section and sub-sections (4) and (5), it 
shall not be necessary for such person to register himself 
under sub-section (3). 
Explanation. ― Where a person required to file a declaration 
under this sub-section does not have the capacity to enter into 
a contract, such declaration may be filed on his behalf by any 
person competent under the law for the time being in force to 
act on his behalf. 
(7) Nothing in sub-sections (2) to (6) shall apply in relation to 
any person― 
(a) who, immediately before the commencement of the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, is a citizen of India; 
(b) who was expelled from India before the commencement of 
the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, under the Foreigners 
Act, 1946. 
(8) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this section, the 
provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force.” 
 
25. A preliminary perusal of this provision and its associated rules 
contained in the Citizenship Rules, 2009, indicate various timelines 
and effects, resulting in the conferment of differing degrees of rights 
and obligations to immigrants entering into the State of Assam. 
These aspects are delineated below in a tabular format for greater 
ease of understanding. This tabular presentation aims to provide a 
structured overview of the different elements pertaining to 
immigrant entry into Assam, thereby aiding comprehension of the 
nuances involved. 

Right granted 
Conditions 
Procedure established 
Immigrants before 01.01.1966 
Sub-section (2) grants 
deemed 
citizenship. 
Such 
immigrants 
are 
considered citizens from 
01.01.1966 
 
Condition 
of 
birth 
or 
descent 
▪ As per sub-section (2), 
the deemed citizens are 
those persons who came 
to 
Assam 
before 
01.01.1966, along with 
those who were included 
in the electoral rolls in 
1967 and had to have 
been persons of ‘Indian 
origin.’ 
▪ The term ‘persons of 
Indian origin’ has been 
defined 
under 
sub-
section (1) (d) to mean 
that (i) the individual 
himself; or (ii) either of 
his parents; or (iii) any of 
his grandparents were 
born in undivided India. 
 
Condition of residence 
▪ Sub-section (2) requires 
these individuals to have 
been ordinarily resident 
in the State of Assam. 

Since 
sub-section 

grants deemed citizenship, 
it does not provide for a 
procedure for registration. 

Immigrants between 01.01.1966 to 25.03.1971 
 
Right granted 
Sub-section (3) grants 
citizenship 
by 
registration (the process 
is summarized in the last 
column) 

Condition 
of 
birth 
or 
descent 
▪ In similar parlance with 
sub-section (2), persons 
must 
be 
of 
‘Indian 
origin’. 

Procedure for citizenship 
by registration 
STEP 1: DECLARATION AS A 
FOREIGNER 
▪ The very first step under 
sub-section (3) is that 
the 
individual 
in 
question should have 

▪ For the first ten years 
after 
registration, 
persons will have the 
same 
rights 
and 
obligations as citizens 
of India except for 
inclusion 
in 
any 
electoral rolls29 (This 
also includes the right 
to obtain a passport). 
▪ Upon the expiry of 
these 10 years from 
the date of detection, 
these individuals will 
be 
deemed 
to 
be 
Indian citizens. 
Condition of residence 
▪ Sub-section 

also 
stipulates 
that 
the 
persons who entered into 
Assam 
between 
01.01.1966 
and 
25.03.1971 must have 
been ordinarily resident 
in Assam. 
 
Condition of detection 
▪ These individuals should 
be detected as foreigners 
under sub-section (3). 
▪ The term ‘detected to be 
a foreigner’ has been 
defined to be read in 
accordance 
with 
the 
provisions 
of 
the 
Foreigners Act, 1946 and 
the 
Foreigners 
(Tribunals) Order, 1964 
through 
a 
Tribunal 
constituted under the 
said Order. 
 
Condition of registration 
▪ After being detected to be 
a 
foreigner, 
such 
persons 
should 
also 
register 
themselves 
(procedure 
summarized 
in the next column) 

been detected to be a 
foreigner. 
▪ The 
opinion 
of 
a 
Tribunal 
constituted 
under the Foreigners 
(Tribunals) Order, 1964, 
would 
be 
sufficient 
proof 
to 
establish 
detection as a foreigner. 
 
STEP 2: REGISTRATION 
▪ Thereafter, persons can 
register 
themselves 
through Form XVIII in 
Schedule 
I 
to 
the 
Citizenship 
Rules, 
2009, 
with 
the 
registering authority of 
the concerned district 
within 30 days from the 
date of detection or 30 
days 
from 
the 
appointment 
of 
such 
registering authority. 
▪ The 
registering 
authority may also, for 
reasons 
recorded 
in 
writing, 
extend 
the 
period of 30 days up to 
60 days.30 
▪ Additionally, a person 
who has been declared 
as a foreigner by the 
Foreigners 
Tribunal 
prior to 16.07.2013 and 
who 
has 
not 
yet 
registered due to non-
receipt of the order of 
the Foreigners Tribunal 
or on account of refusal 
by 
the 
registering 
authority may within 
 
29 Citizenship Act, 1955, Section 6A(4). 
30 Rule 19, Citizenship Rules, 2009. thirty days from the 
date of receipt of such 
order or, from the date 
of publication of the 
notification 
dated 
16.07.2013, make an 
application 
for 
registration vide Form 
XVIII to the registering 
authority 
of 
the 
concerned district.31 
Immigrants on or after 25.03.1971 
Section 
6A 
does 
not 
prescribe the start date 
for the conferment of 
citizenship 
to 
these 
individuals beyond the 
date of 25.03.1971. 
Section 
6A 
does 
not 
prescribe any conditions in 
this regard. By implication, 
the provision declares the 
entry of an immigrant after 
25.03.1971 as illegal. 
Concomitantly, Section 6A 
does not prescribe any 
procedure as it intends to 
deny citizenship to those 
immigrants who entered 
after 25.03.1971. 

Sub-section (6) allows immigrants to opt-out of being conferred 
Indian citizenship. Under sub-section (6)(a), deemed citizens 
are granted the option of declaring that they do not wish to be 
a citizen of India. If they choose to declare so, they will 
thereafter not be deemed to be Indian citizens under sub-
section (6)(a). Further, under sub-section 6(b), individuals 
detected as foreigners can choose not to register themselves in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in sub-section (3). 
Consequently, these individuals will not be conferred 
citizenship. The persons who choose to renunciate their 
citizenship under sub-section (6) must declare the same vide 
Form XXI to the concerned District Magistrate of the area 
where such a person is ordinarily resident.32 This Form XXI is 
provided in Schedule I of the Citizenship Rules, 2009. 
 
31 Rule 2A, Citizenship (Amendment) Rules, 2013. 
32 Rule 22, Citizenship Rules, 2009. 

(ii) Sub-section (7) provides that Section 6A would not apply to 
persons who were Indian citizens prior to the commencement 
of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 or, on the contrary, 
to persons who were expelled from India prior to the 
commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 
under the Foreigners Act, 1946. 
(iii) Lastly, sub-section (8) is the non-obstante clause in this 
provision, which states that this section would have effect 
irrespective of anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force. 
27. Having understood the interplay between the modes of citizenship, 
as conferred by the Indian Constitution, the Citizenship Act and 
the provision of Section 6A itself, we will now examine the genesis 
of this controversy, the contentions put forth by the parties and the 
key issues that demand scrutiny. 
B. TERMS OF REFERENCE 
28. The first writ petition before this court in the present matter was 
filed in 2009 by Assam Public Works, an NGO, seeking the deletion 
of illegal migrants from electoral rolls in Assam and the updation 
of the National Register of Citizens (NRC), 1951. Thereafter, in 
2012, the Assam Sanmilita Mahasangha and other organisations 
challenged the constitutionality of Section 6A on the grounds that 
it was discriminatory, arbitrary, and illegal. Following this, a 2-
judge bench of this court started monitoring the NRC updation 
process. This Court, vide judgement dated 17.12.2014 in Assam 
Sanmilita Mahasangha v. Union of India,33 framed 13 questions 
regarding the constitutionality of Section 6A as arising from the 
 
33 Assam Sanmilita Mahasangha v. Union of India, (2015), para 33. abovementioned writ petitions and referred them for adjudication 
by a Constitution Bench. For reference, the questions as they were 
framed are put forth hereinbelow: 
“i. Whether Articles 10 and 11 of the Constitution of India 
permit the enactment of Section 6A of the Citizenship Act 
in as much as Section 6A, in prescribing a cut-off date 
different from the cut-off date prescribed in Article 6, can 
do so without a "variation" of Article 6 itself; regard, in 
particular, being had to the phraseology of Article 4 
(2) read with Article 368 (1)? ii. Whether Section 6A violates Articles 325 and 326 of the 
Constitution of India in that it has diluted the political 
rights of the citizens of the State of Assam; 
iii. What is the scope of the fundamental right contained 
in Article 29(1)? Is the fundamental right absolute in its 
terms? In particular, what is the meaning of the expression 
"culture" and the expression "conserve"? Whether Section 
6A violates Article 29(1)? iv. Whether Section 6A violates Article 355? What is the true 
interpretation of Article 355 of the Constitution? Would an 
influx of illegal migrants into a State of India constitute 
“external aggression” and/or “internal disturbance”? Does 
the expression "State" occurring in this Article refer only to 
a territorial region or does it also include the people living 
in the State, which would include their culture and 
identity? v. Whether Section 6A violates Article 14 in that, it singles out 
Assam from other border States (which comprise a distinct 
class) and discriminates against it. Also, whether there is 
no rational basis for having a separate cut-off date for 
regularizing illegal migrants who enter Assam as opposed 
to the rest of the country; and 
vi. Whether Section 6A violates Article 21 in that the lives and 
personal liberty of the citizens of Assam have been 
affected adversely by the massive influx of illegal migrants 
from Bangladesh. vii. Whether delay is a factor that can be taken into account in 
moulding relief under a petition filed under Article 32 of the 
Constitution? viii. Whether, after a large number of migrants from East 
Pakistan have enjoyed rights as Citizens of India for over 

40 years, any relief can be given in the petitions filed in 
the present cases? ix. Whether Section 6A violates the basic premise of 
the Constitution and the Citizenship Act in that it permits 
Citizens who have allegedly not lost their Citizenship of 
East Pakistan to become deemed Citizens of India, thereby 
conferring dual Citizenship to such persons? x. Whether Section 6A violates the fundamental basis 
of Section 5 (1) proviso and Section 5 (2) of the Citizenship 
Act (as it stood in 1985) in that it permits a class of 
migrants to become deemed Citizens of India without any 
reciprocity from Bangladesh and without taking the oath 
of allegiance to the Indian Constitution? xi. Whether the Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 
1950 being a special enactment qua immigrants into 
Assam, alone can apply to migrants from East 
Pakistan/Bangladesh 
to 
the 
exclusion 
of 
the 
general Foreigners Act and the Foreigners (Tribunals) 
Order, 1964 made thereunder? xii. Whether Section 6A violates the Rule of Law in that it gives 
way to political expediency and not to Government 
according to law? xiii. Whether Section 6A violates fundamental rights in that no 
mechanism is provided to determine which persons are 
ordinarily resident in Assam since the dates of their entry 
into Assam, thus granting deemed citizenship to such 
persons arbitrarily?” 
 
29. An application was then moved seeking this Court’s directions 
regarding the children who had been excluded from the final NRC 
list despite their parents having been included. Vide order dated 
06.01.2020, this Court noted the then Attorney General’s 
assurance that such children would not be separated from their 
parents and would not be sent to detention centers in Assam.34 In 
this context, it is also relevant to note that the final draft of the NRC 
list was published on 30.07.2018, whereby over 40 lakh persons 
out of 3.29 crore applicants stood excluded. The final NRC list was 
 
34 Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act 1955, W.P (C) No. 274/2009. published on 13.08.2019, whereby over 19 lakh persons out of 3.29 
crore applicants stood excluded. 
30. This Court, vide order dated 10.01.2023, viewed that the one main 
issue that arises for consideration is - “Whether Section 6A of the 
Citizenship Act, 1955 suffers from any constitutional infirmity.” 
Subsequently, vide order dated 20.09.2023, the present matter was 
titled ‘In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act 1955’. 
31. We now turn to the submissions made by the parties in support of 
their respective stance on the matter. 
C. CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES 
Petitioners’ submissions 
32. Mr. Shyam Divan, Mr. Vijay Hansaria and Mr. K.N. Choudhury, 
Learned Senior Advocates, appeared for the Petitioners. Their 
contentions are detailed hereinbelow: 
i. 
The Petitioners argued that the operation of Section 6A violates 
the preambular values enshrined in the Constitution. They 
urged that the Constitution upholds national fraternity, not 
global fraternity and that the presence of Bangladeshi 
immigrants in Assam poses a threat to the unity and integrity 
of the country. ii. 
They contended that Section 6A, which grants citizenship to 
immigrants, contradicts Articles 6 and 7 of the Constitution, 
which prescribe a different regime for granting citizenship to 
people who migrated to Pakistan or who migrated to India from 
Pakistan. Instead, they argued that the Parliament ought to 
have passed a constitutional amendment in this regard. The 
Petitioners also claimed that while Article 11 and Entry 17 of 

List I grant the Parliament the authority to alter these 
constitutional provisions, it does not include the power to 
override other provisions of Part II. iii. The Petitioners further contended that Section 6A violates 
Article 9 of the Constitution and Section 9 of the Citizenship 
Act, as it allows dual nationality by not requiring immigrants 
to renounce their previous citizenship. iv. They contended that Section 6A contradicts Section 5(2) of the 
Citizenship Act, which mandates every citizen to take the oath 
of allegiance. v. 
The Petitioners argued that Section 6A violates Article 14, 
treating equals unequally by applying the provision only to 
Assam without any intelligible differentia. They asserted that 
this geographical basis lacks justification. The Petitioners 
further urged that Section 6A goes against the principles of 
democracy, federalism, and the rule of law, being susceptible 
to being struck down on grounds of ‘manifest arbitrariness.’ 
They also highlighted the lack of rationale in the cut-off dates 
and the absence of a mechanism to determine ‘ordinary 
residence.’ 
vi. The Petitioners claimed that Section 6A infringes on Article 21 
by impinging upon the rights of the indigenous Assamese 
community and violating their right to self-governance under 
Article 1 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights (ICCPR). They contended that the inclusion of an 
unidentified migrant population burdens the country’s natural 
resources, which goes against sustainable development 
mandated under Article 21. vii. The Petitioners further urged that the demographic shift due 
to the influx of migrants from East Pakistan threatens 
Assamese culture and breaches Article 29(1). viii. They asserted that Section 6A violates the voting rights of the 
Assamese people under Article 326 and has led to the 
marginalisation of their political rights. ix. The Petitioners contended the violation of Article 355 on the 
ground that the continued presence of millions of Bangladeshi 
immigrants has precipitated violent ethnic clashes amounting 
to ‘external aggression’ and resulting in ‘internal disturbance’. 
They argued that, consequently, it becomes the duty of the 
Union to undertake necessary measures to protect the state of 
Assam. x. 
The Petitioners also argued that the Immigrants (Expulsion 
from Assam) Act, 1950 applies exclusively to the immigrants 
in Assam. xi. The Petitioners finally asserted that the writ petitions remain 
maintainable and should not be dismissed on the basis of 
delay. They contended that Section 6A can still be invoked and, 
therefore, constitutes a continuous wrong, providing a fresh 
cause of action. They argued against the application of the 
doctrine of laches, emphasizing that substantial questions of 
law are at the core of this case. 
Respondents’ submissions 
33. Mr. R. Venkataramani, learned Attorney General, Mr. Tushar 
Mehta, Learned Solicitor General, Mr. Kapil Sibal, Ms. Indira 
Jaising, Mr. Sanjay Hegde, Ms. Malvika Trivedi, Mr. P.V. 

Surendranath Learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Shadan Farasat, Dr. 
Vivek Sharma, Mr. Mehmood Pracha and Mr. Syed Shahi Rizvi 
appeared for the Respondents. Their contentions have also been 
summarized hereinbelow: 
i. 
At the very outset, it is the Respondents’ assertion that this 
Court should refrain from delving any further into the matter 
on account of the issues raised in the context of foreign policy. 
They contend that foreign policy is traditionally excluded from 
the purview of judicial review. ii. 
The 
Respondents 
countered 
the 
Petitioners’ 
claims, 
emphasizing that Section 6A, introduced in 1985, has faced 
challenge after a considerable delay of 27 years, invoking the 
doctrine of laches to argue against the removal of rights 
established during this period. They further urged that even if 
the damage may be construed to be continuing, it does not give 
a fresh cause of action to file the petition after an inordinate 
delay. iii. Regarding the term fraternity, the Respondents argued that it 
encompasses equal regard among individuals, preventing 
societal division into distinct groups. The Respondents further 
asserted that Section 6A reinforces the idea of fraternity, in the 
absence of which society would be broken into a division 
between ‘others’ and ‘us’. iv. Addressing concerns about Articles 6 and 7, the Respondents 
argued that the cut-off dates align with the permit system and 
are not violative of the Constitution. They asserted that Article 
11, in conjunction with Entry 17 of List I of the Seventh 
Schedule, grants Parliament the power to legislate on 

citizenship, superseding other provisions in Part II of the 
Constitution. v. 
The Respondents contended that Section 5(2)’s provision for 
the oath of allegiance is immaterial to Section 6A and is 
inconsequential. vi. Article 14, according to the Respondents, can only be invoked 
by those seeking benefits for similarly situated individuals, 
which the Petitioners do not claim. The Respondents argued 
that a statute cannot be struck down as violative of Article 14 
merely because it does not include all relevant classes, as the 
Parliament can decide the degrees of harm it wants to legislate. 
They further asserted that there is an underlying rationale for 
the cut-off dates and that the objective behind Section 6A and 
the Assam Accord reflects the constitutional tradition of 
accommodating 
differences 
through 
asymmetric 
federal 
arrangements. vii. The Respondents maintained that Article 21 protects the 
Assamese community and the rights of foreigners affected by 
Section 6A. They argued that the provision is not violative of 
Article 21 as it is a lawfully established procedure. viii. Dismissing claims of cultural change, the Respondents argued 
that demographic shifts attributed to Section 6A are unrelated, 
emphasizing 
Article 
29(1)’s 
endeavour 
to 
promote 
multiculturalism rather than cultural exclusivity. They also 
strived to underscore that accepting the Petitioner’s arguments 
would lead to cultural exclusivity, which is not constitutionally 
permissible. ix. Regarding the right to vote, the Respondents countered the 
Petitioners, stating that Section 6A confers citizenship upon 
the immigrants. Therefore, citizenship rights, including voting, 
would naturally flow. x. 
They further distinguished the decision of Sarbananda 
Sonowal v. Union of India,35 asserting that its ratio was 
based on classification under Article 14, and not Article 355. 
They contended that fulfilling the duty under Article 355 
justified enacting Section 6A to address ‘internal disturbance’. xi. The Respondents lastly argued for harmonizing domestic law 
with international norms, asserting that the prohibition of 
statelessness is a recognized international norm and rendering 
Section 6A unconstitutional would risk statelessness for the 
immigrants, justifying the provision’s validity. 
D. ISSUES 
34. Although the reference to this Court is simple, being one of the 
factors in determining the constitutional validity of Section 6A of 
the Citizenship Act, this issue can be broken down into several 
constituent questions for this Court’s determination. 
I. 
Prefatory issues 
a. 
Does the power of judicial review extend to analysing the 
constitutionality of Section 6A? b. 
Whether the present petitions are barred by delay and laches? 

35 Sarbananda Sonowal v. Union of India, (2005). 

II. 
Challenges regarding constitutionality 
c. 
Does Section 6A offend preambular values like fraternity? d. 
Is Section 6A ultra vires Part II of the Constitution? e. 
Does Section 6A create an unreasonable classification which 
violates Article 14? f. 
Does Section 6A suffer from manifest arbitrariness? g. 
Does Section 6A violate the rights provided to ‘indigenous’ 
communities under Article 29? h. 
Is Section 6A ultra vires Article 21 of the Constitution? i. 
Does Section 6A violate the political rights of Indian citizens in 
Assam under Article 326? j. 
Does the operation of Section 6A cause ‘external aggression’ 
and ‘internal disturbance’, culminating in the invocation of 
Article 355? k. 
Does the Citizenship Act conflict with provisions of the 
Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam Act), 1950? If so, how can 
the two legislations be harmoniously interpreted? l. 
Does Section 6A violate international laws? 
E. ANALYSIS 
35. Before examining the contentions of the parties on the merits of the 
core issue challenging the constitutional validity of Section 6A, it is 
incumbent first to address the prefatory issues arising from the 
Respondents' contentions on the maintainability of the present 
petition. 

PREFATORY CHALLENGES 
 
i. Judicial review 
36. At the very outset, the Respondents asserted that this Court should 
refrain from delving further into the matter, as the petition raises 
issues hovering around foreign policy, a domain traditionally 
excluded from the purview of substantive judicial review. 
Consequently, they argued that the Petitioners are barred from 
challenging Section 6A. 
37. The Petitioners, on the other hand, contended that Section 6A 
merely being a provision of the statute, it does not fall beyond the 
purview of judicial review. It is, thus, important for us to discuss 
and demarcate the principles and scope of judicial review in the 
instant case. 
(a) Concept of judicial review 
38. The principle of judicial review finds its roots in common law. It can 
effectively be traced back to Chief Justice Coke's ruling in Thomas 
Bonham v. College of Physicians,36 wherein it was asserted that 
common law had the authority to oversee Acts of Parliament and 
empowered the courts to invalidate an enactment conflicting with 
common right and reason. This principle entails subjecting all laws 
to scrutiny against a higher law, typically embodied in a 
constitution. 
39. This principle originated in the Supreme Court of the United States 
during the landmark case of Marbury v. Madison.37 In that 
decision, the Court asserted its authority by deeming the concerned 
 
36 Thomas Bonham v. College of Physicians [1610], 8 Co. Rep. 107 77 Eng. Rep. 638. 
37 Marbury v. Madison [1803], 5 U.S. 137 (1803). legislation unconstitutional, thereby constraining the powers of 
Congress. The Court therein held that: 
“Thus, the particular phraseology of the Constitution of the 
United States confirms and strengthens the principle, 
supposed to be essential to all written Constitutions, that a 
law repugnant to the Constitution is void, and that 
courts, as well as other departments, are bound by that 
instrument.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
40. The essence of our constitutional system is rooted in the concepts 
of constitutionalism and judicial review, which comprise three 
essential elements: first, the presence of a written Constitution 
establishing and constraining government organs; second, the 
Constitution serving as a superior law or standard by which the 
conduct of all organs is assessed; and third, the provision for 
sanctions to prevent, restrain, and if necessary, annul any violation 
of superior law. The third element, which seeks to safeguard 
superior law, is through judicial review. Despite the expansive 
powers granted to legislatures, they operate within the confines set 
by the Constitution. In a democratic nation governed by a written 
constitution, supremacy and sovereignty reside in the Constitution. 
However, the duty of protecting the rights given under the 
Constitution falls to courts through judicial review, making them, 
in 
the 
process, 
the 
ultimate 
arbiter 
of 
constitutional 
interpretation.38 
41. Constitutional courts, equipped with the powers of judicial review, 
function as custodians of justice, ensuring effective safeguard of 
citizens’ rights. Embedded in Article 13 of our Constitution, judicial 
review is recognized as a basic feature of our constitutional 
 
38 State (NCT of Delhi) v. Union of India, (2018). framework.39 It gives the Court the authority to scrutinize any 
violation of constitutional mandates by state organs. As articulated 
by Lord Steyn, the justification for judicial review arises from a 
combination of principles, such as the separation of powers, the 
rule of law, and the principle of constitutionality.40 
42. The power of judicial review does not undermine the doctrine of 
separation of powers. Instead, it fosters it by ensuring a system of 
checks and balances to prevent constitutional transgression by any 
organ of the state. Separation of powers should be seen as a 
connection or link, rather than as a limitation or impediment; 
allowing the Court to ensure that the constitutional order 
prevails.41 
43. In the present case, the Respondents urged that the matter entails 
policy considerations, and hence, the Court should not step into it. 
44. It is pertinent to iterate the language under Article 13(2) of the 
Constitution, which states that: 
“(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away or 
abridges the rights conferred by this Part and any law made 
in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of the 
contravention, be void.” The word “law” in Article 13 includes 
within its ambit, “any Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, 
regulation, notification, custom or usage having in the territory 
of India the force of law”. 
 
45. Upon a perusal of the above, it becomes clear that though the term 
‘policy’ is not expressly mentioned in Article 13, it becomes 
 
39 L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India, (1997): 1997 SCC (L&S) 577. 
40 STEYN, The Constitutionalisation of Public Law, 1999, 4, 6, 13-14. 
41 A. W. BRADLEY & K. D. EWING, Constitutional and Administrative Law, Pearson 
Longman, 2007; H. BARNETT, Constitution and Administrative Law, Cavendish, 2006; 
LAURENCE H. TRIBE, American Constitutional Law, Foundation Press, 2000. justiciable if it takes the shape of a law.42 In the event such a law 
is deemed void due to a violation of any fundamental rights outlined 
in Part III of the Constitution, it cannot be protected merely for 
being legislative policy. This view has been elucidated in A.L. Kalra 
v. Project & Equipment Corporation,43 wherein objections were 
raised on the grounds that the Court could not review the statute, 
as it entailed policy considerations. However, this Court, having 
taken these contentions into consideration, held that a legislative 
policy taking the concrete shape of a statute could be tested on the 
anvil of violation of fundamental rights. 
46. It is, therefore, abundantly clear that courts possess the authority 
to scrutinize whether legislative or executive actions contravene the 
Constitution, and the designation of a decision as a policy choice 
does not serve as a fetter to the exercise of this judicial power. This 
aligns with the principle of separation of powers, which bestows 
upon the judiciary the authority to serve as a guardian against the 
actions of the legislature and executive, intervening to safeguard 
the interests of citizens when necessary. 
(b) Limits to judicial review 
47. However, concurrently, it is imperative to acknowledge and respect 
the domain of the legislature and executive within the framework 
of the separation of powers. While the courts are entrusted with the 
authority to maintain checks and balances on the other branches 
concerning the constitution and other legal provisions, they are not 
empowered to supplant the legislature by delving into additional 
facets of policy decisions and governing citizens in its stead. This 
 
42 Bennett Coleman & Co. v. Union of India, (1972). 
43 A. L. Kalra v. Project and Equipment Corporation, (1984). sentiment resonated in Hindi Hitrakshak Samiti v. Union of 
India, wherein it was held that: 
“8. It is well settled that judicial review, in order to enforce a 
fundamental right, is permissible of administrative, legislative 
and governmental action or non-action, and that the rights of 
the citizens of this country are to be judged by the judiciary 
and judicial forums and not by the administrators or 
executives. But it is equally true that citizens of India are 
not to be governed by the judges or judiciary. If the 
governance is illegal or violative of rights and 
obligations, other questions may arise but whether, as 
mentioned hereinbefore, it has to be a policy decision by 
the government or the authority and thereafter 
enforcement of that policy, the court should not be, and 
we hope would not be an appropriate forum for 
decision.” 44 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
48. Similar views were echoed in Fertilizer Corporation Kamgar 
Union v. Union of India,45 where a 5-judge bench of this Court 
affirmed that, in accordance with the principle of separation of 
powers, the authority of the Court is confined to assessing whether 
legislative or executive actions comply with the law, without delving 
into judgments on their wisdom. Consequently, while the Court 
possesses the jurisdiction to interpret the law and scrutinize the 
legality of policy decisions, it is not empowered to substitute its 
discretion for that of the legislature or executive, nor to speculate 
on the appropriateness of such decisions.46 The courts do not 
operate as advisors to the executive in matters of policy 
formulation, a prerogative rightfully within the executive's domain. 

44 Hindi Hitrakshak Samiti v. Union of India, (1990), para 8. 
45 Fertilizer Corporation Kamgar Union v. Union of India, (1981), para 35. 
46 A. K. Roy v. Union of India, (1982), para 51 

49. Similarly, it is imperative to emphasize that courts also lack the 
authority to intervene in policy matters when based on the premise 
of policy errors or the availability of ostensibly superior, fairer, or 
wiser alternatives. The Court cannot do a comparative analysis of 
policy to determine which would have been better. As summarized 
by this Court in Directorate of Film Festivals v. Gaurav Ashwin 
Jain:47 
“16. […] the scope of judicial review when examining a policy 
of the Government is to check whether it violates the 
fundamental rights of the citizens or is opposed to the 
provisions of the Constitution, or opposed to any statutory 
provision or manifestly arbitrary. Courts cannot interfere 
with policy either on the ground that it is erroneous or 
on the ground that a better, fairer or wiser alternative 
is available. Legality of the policy, and not the wisdom 
or soundness of the policy, is the subject of judicial 
review”. 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
50. This is particularly true for complex areas requiring empirical 
knowledge, data inputs, and technical expertise,48 such as matters 
involving economic policy,49 scientific policy,50 or international 
relations.51 Complex social, economic, or commercial issues require 
a trial and error approach, the weighing of different competing 
aspects, and often intricate factual studies.52 Such matters raise 
complicated multi-disciplinary questions that do not fall within the 
 
47 Directorate of Film Festivals v. Gaurav Ashwin Jain, (2007), para 16. 
48 Union of India v. S. L. Dutta, (1991), para 18. 
49 State of M.P. v. Nandlal Jaiswal, (1986), para 34. 
50 Jacob Puliyel v. Union of India,, paras 91 and 93. 
51 Gaurav Kumar Bansal v. Union of India, (2015), para 9. 
52 Shri Sitaram Sugar Co. Ltd. v. Union of India, (1990), para 56. legal domain, are irreducible to one answer, and require 
adjustment of priorities amongst different stakeholders.53 
51. Since courts are not equipped to evaluate such factual aspects, 
they cannot be allowed to formulate policy. In contrast, the 
legislature has the correct institutional mechanism to deliberate on 
various considerations, as it facilitates decision-making by 
democratically elected representatives who possess diverse tools 
and skill sets to balance social, economic, and political factors.54 
Such policy matters thus ought to be entrusted to the legislature. 
This principle is succinctly encapsulated by Sanjeev Coke Mfg. Co. v. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd.,55 in which a 5-judge bench of this 
Court held that: 
“Scales of justice are just not designed to weigh competing 
social and economic factors. In such matters legislative 
wisdom must prevail and judicial review must abstain.” 
 
52. Furthermore, the Courts are not tasked with assessing the efficacy 
of policies. A policy may successfully achieve the objectives outlined 
in legislation, or it may possess limitations hindering the full 
realization of its aims. Regardless, the Court cannot sit in judgment 
over policy to determine whether revisions may be necessary for its 
enhancement. This has also been authoritatively elucidated by an 
11-judge bench of this Court in the case of Rustom Cavasjee 
Cooper (Banks Nationalisation) v. Union of India:56 
“63. This Court is not the forum in which these 
conflicting claims may be debated. […] The Parliament has 
under Entry 45, List I the power to legislate in respect of 
 
53 Santosh Singh v. Union of India, (2016), paras 23 and 24. 
54 Ashwani Kumar v. Union of India, (2020), paras 25 and 26. 
55 Sanjeev Coke Mfg. Co. v. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd., (1983), para 20. 
56 Rustom Cavasjee Cooper (Banks Nationalisation) v. Union of India, (1970), para 63. banking and other commercial activities of the named banks 
necessarily incidental thereto: it has the power to legislate for 
acquiring the undertaking of the named banks under Entry 42, 
List III. Whether by the exercise of the power vested in 
the Reserve Bank under the pre-existing laws, results 
could be achieved which it is the object of the Act to 
achieve, is, in our judgment, not relevant in considering 
whether the Act amounts to abuse of legislative power. 
This Court has the power to strike down a law on the 
ground of want of authority, but the Court will not sit 
in appeal over the policy of the Parliament in enacting 
a law. […]” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
53. In 
summary, 
the 
judicial 
review 
of 
government 
policies 
encapsulates determining whether they infringe upon the 
fundamental 
rights 
of 
citizens, 
contravene 
constitutional 
provisions, violate statutory regulations, or display manifest 
arbitrariness, capriciousness, or mala fides.57 The focus of judicial 
scrutiny is limited to the legality of the policy, excluding any 
evaluation of its wisdom or soundness. The Court cannot compel 
the government to formulate a policy, evaluate alternatives or 
assess the effectiveness of existing policies. This constraint stems 
from the principle of separation of powers, where the Court lacks 
the democratic mandate and institutional expertise to delve into 
such matters. Thus, while the Court can invalidate a policy, it lacks 
the authority to create one. 
54. However, to reiterate, while the Court cannot look into the 
aforementioned aspects, the Court can check the constitutional 
validity of a policy, particularly so when it is elevated as an act of 
the Legislature. 
 
57 Maharashtra State Board of Secondary & Higher Secondary Education v. Paritosh 
Bhupeshkumar Sheth, (1984). 

55. The present challenge concerns checking the validity of Section 6A, 
a statutory provision. We are, therefore, of the firm view that the 
Respondents’ plea regarding foreclosing the Petitioners’ challenge 
at the threshold, on the grounds of judicial review, cannot be 
accepted. ii. Delay and maintainability of the writ petitions 
56. In addition to the grounds of non-justiciability, the Respondents 
also protested against the maintainability of the writ petitions on 
account of inordinate delay and laches. They argued that while the 
subject provision was introduced in 1985, the writ petitions 
challenging the same have been filed after a long period of 27 years. 
Applying the doctrine of laches, the Respondents argued that the 
writ petitions must be held to be non-maintainable since the rights 
created during these 27 years cannot now be taken away. In 
support of their contentions, the Respondents have cited, inter alia, 
a 5-judge bench decision of this Court in Tilokchand Motichand 
v. H. B. Munshi,58 and urged that even if it is assumed that Section 
6A violates the fundamental rights of the Petitioners, it cannot be 
declared unconstitutional at this belated juncture. 
57., the Petitioners argued that inter partes, the question 
regarding maintainability has already been decided by this Court 
in Assam Sanmilita Mahasangha v. Union of India (supra). 
Hence, they contended that the writ petitions cannot be considered 
to have been filed after a delay. Alternatively, they urged that delay, 
per se, would not be fatal to their claim because the doctrine of 
laches is not applicable when substantial questions of law are 
 
58 Tilokchand Motichand v. H. B. Munshi, (1969). involved. In the instant case, since the dispute involves questions 
like the security of the state, the rights of Assamese people under 
Article 29, the discrimination against the State of Assam, etc., the 
petitions should not be barred at the threshold on the grounds of 
delay. 
58. The primary issue to be determined, therefore, is whether the 
current writ petitions should be dismissed outright due to delay 
without delving into the merits of the Petitioners' claims. 
(a) Limitation period for writs 
59. In India, the Limitation Act, 1963 sets out the maximum period 
within which suits, appeals, and applications must be filed before 
the court. Cases brought after this prescribed period are typically 
barred due to delay unless the court decides to condone the delay. 
However, it is important to note that the Limitation Act, 1963 does 
not apply to writ proceedings and, therefore, does not specify a 
particular time limit within which a writ needs to be filed.59 
Similarly, though the Supreme Court Rules, 2013 specify the time 
limit for certain petitions that the Limitation Act, 1963 does not 
cover (such as Special Leave Petitions),60 these Rules too do not 
specify the limitation period for filing a writ petition under Article 
32 of the Constitution. 
60. However, while such a period is not prescribed by the Limitation 
Act, 1963, or the Supreme Court Rules, 2013, a writ petition filed 
belatedly after a considerable delay is barred by the operation of 
the doctrine of laches.61 The said doctrine of laches is a common 
 
59 Tilokchand & Motichand v. HB Munshi, (1969), para 9. 
60 Supreme Court Rules, 2013, Order XXI Rule 1. 
61 Aflatoon v. Lt. Governor of Delhi, (1975), para 11; Narayani Debi 
Khaitan v. State of Bihar,, paras 8 and 13. law principle disallowing a claim because it has been brought to 
the court after an unreasonable lapse of time. It is based on the 
maxim ‘vigilantibus non dormientibus jura subveniunt’, which 
means that the law assists those who are vigilant with their rights 
and not those that sleep thereupon. Hence, even in the absence of 
the prescription of a statutory time limit for its filing, a claim that 
has been filed after a significant delay can be rejected at the 
threshold by invoking this doctrine. 
61. Indeed, the laches principle bears similarities to the Limitation Act, 
1963, as both are founded on similar policy considerations. A claim 
brought after considerable delay may not be entertained because 
third-party rights may have been established during this time-
lapse, and it would be unjust to prejudice innocent parties due to 
the tardiness of the claimant.62 Additionally, considering a delayed 
claim could be unfair to the opposing party, as they may have lost 
access to crucial evidence needed to defend against the claim. 
Reopening the case after a significant delay could thus place the 
opposing party at a disadvantage, potentially resulting in an unjust 
or inaccurate outcome. Moreover, it is essential to put a time limit 
on proceedings to provide certainty and prevent confusion from 
cases being in perpetual flux. It is also important to deny a delayed 
claim to encourage parties to be more diligent when enforcing their 
rights. 
62. While the doctrine of laches serves similar underlying purposes as 
the Limitation Act, 1963, it is less rigid in its application. Unlike 
the aforementioned Act, which prescribes specific time periods for 
filing claims, there is no fixed timeframe under the doctrine of 
 
62 Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India, (1979), para 35. laches. Instead, each case is evaluated based on its unique facts 
and circumstances. In the context of writ petitions, Hidayatullah, 
C.J., in Tilokchand Motichand (supra), held that while there is 
no upper or lower time limit for entertaining writ petitions, the 
Court shall consider whether the delay was avoidable and whether 
such delay affects the merits of the case. Similarly, in Shri Vallabh 
Glass Works Ltd. v. Union of India,63 it was held that the Court 
must consider the conduct of the parties, the change in 
circumstances, and the prejudice that would be caused to the other 
party or the general public. 
63. Hence, it is settled law that the doctrine of laches is not an 
inviolable legal rule but a rule of practice that must be 
supplemented with sound exercise of judicial discretion. While 
Courts must ordinarily apply this doctrine in light of the policy 
reasons discussed before, the doctrine allows the Court to conduct 
an individualized analysis of each case and entertain claims in the 
competing interests of justice, even when the claim may be delayed 
and third-party rights may have been created.64 
64. We may, however, hasten to clarify that the doctrine of delay and 
laches is not to be ipso facto excluded where a breach of 
fundamental rights is alleged. The 5-judge benches of this Court in 
Narayani Debi Khaitan v. State of Bihar,65 Daryao v. State of 
U.P.,66 and Tilokchand Motichand (supra), and a 3-judge bench 
in Amrit Lal Berry v. CCE,67 have reiterated that even in such like 
cases the court must see the effect of laches. However, that being 
said, there may be instances where considerations of justice 
 
63 Shri Vallabh Glass Works Ltd. v. Union of India, (1984), para 9. 
64 State of M.P. v. Nandlal Jaiswal, (1986), para 24. 
65, para 8. 
66 Daryao v. State of U.P.,, para 23. 
67 Amrit Lal Berry v. CCE, (1975), paras 16 and 23. demand that the court adjudicate on the merits of a case rather 
than summarily dismissing it based solely on procedural grounds 
such as delay.68 
65. One such factual circumstance is when the claim affects the public 
at large. In Kashinath G. Jalmi (Dr) v. The Speaker,69 this Court 
analyzed several precedents (including Tilokchand & Motichand 
(supra)) and differentiated them by holding that the doctrine of 
laches cannot be used to expel a claim that is made on behalf of 
the public. Judicial discretion, while applying this doctrine, must 
always be governed by the objective of promoting the larger public 
interest; and if a claim affects the public at large, the Court should 
go into the merits of the case.70 Where it is found that denial of 
consideration on merits is likely to affect society in general and can 
have a cascading effect on millions of citizens, the Court will carve 
out an exception and proceed to decide the lis on merits. 
66. Another vital circumstance where the doctrine of delay and laches 
would not be applicable strictly is in matters where the vires of a 
statute are challenged vis-à-vis the Constitution. This Court has, 
in the due course of time, accepted the idea of transformative 
constitutionalism, which conceptualizes the Constitution not as a 
still document cast in stone at the day of its formation but as a 
living and dynamic body of law, capable of constant updation and 
evolution as per changing societal mores. Should this Court deny 
a constitutional challenge solely based on delay, it would effectively 
establish an arbitrary cut-off beyond which laws could no longer be 
re-examined in light of changing circumstances. Such a rigid 
 
68 Tukaram Kana Joshi v. MIDC, (2013), paras 12 - 15; Vidya Devi v. 
State of Himachal Pradesh, (2020), para 12.12. 
69 Kashinath G. Jalmi (Dr) v. The Speaker, (1993), paras 28 and 30. 
70 Id, paras 34 and 35. approach 
cannot 
be 
countenanced 
as 
changing 
societal 
circumstances sometimes necessitate a reconsideration of the 
status quo—even when the challenge is brought after a 
considerable lapse of time. 
67. To instantiate, a Constitution Bench of this Court in Navtej Singh 
Johar v. Union of India,71 held Section 377 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 to be ultra vires of the Constitution, regardless of the 
fact that the provision was a part of the statute for over a century. 
The Court took note of the norms of contemporary society and 
declared them to be unconstitutional. If the doctrine of laches were 
to be applied strictly, time would run in favour of a constitutionally 
invalid statute, which cannot be allowed in the larger interests of 
justice and the transformative nature of the Constitution. 
(b) Applicability of doctrine of laches to the present case 
68. Adverting to the facts of the case, it seems that the two mitigating 
circumstances mentioned above are directly attracted. 
69. First, the Petitioners have raised various substantial questions that 
affect the public at large, including the erosion of the culture of 
indigenous communities, discrimination against the State of 
Assam, and the larger perceived threat to the security of the 
country from immigration. Therefore, instead of being an in 
personam dispute between two individuals, the questions raised by 
the Petitioners directly or indirectly affect a large citizenry. 
70. The question regarding the constitutionality of Section 6A raises 
significant public policy issues that involve ramifications for the 
original inhabitants of Assam, the rights of immigrants, and the 
 
71 Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India, (2018). security of the country. Hence, foreclosing such questions at the 
threshold on the grounds of technicality of delay would lead to an 
unjust outcome. Instead, considering it has been a long-standing 
issue and because any resolution will affect millions of individuals, 
a compelling policy rationale exists to adjudicate the matter on its 
merits and settle the issue conclusively. 
71. Second, since the controversy pertains to the constitutionality of a 
statutory provision, the doctrine of laches ought not to be applied 
strictly to bar the claim at the very threshold. As discussed in 
paragraph 66, such constitutional adjudication cannot be made 
subject to any straitjacket rule of limitation. Challenges regarding 
the constitutionality of a statute require the Court to take a liberal 
approach and permit a certain amount of flexibility. A contrary 
approach would set a wrong precedent and act as a bar against 
challenging anachronistic laws that might no longer align with the 
ideals of constitutionalism. This would constitute an unsound legal 
principle since oppressive laws should not persist solely because 
they have been tolerated by society for a certain period. 
72. Since the challenge in these cases relates to the constitutional 
validity of Section 6A, its consideration on merits ought not to be 
precluded on the grounds of delay. We reiterate that the doctrine of 
laches cannot be applied strictly. Whatever may be the ultimate 
view on the claims of the Petitioners, they are able to persuade us 
to examine the perceived harms, such as cultural erosion, the 
threat to the state’s security, damage to natural resources, etc., 
which cannot be strictly limited to a particular time-frame and 
could have occurred even after a lapse of time from the enactment 
of the impugned provision. In other words, even if Section 6A may 
not have been constitutionally invalid from the beginning, it might 

have incurred such invalidity subsequently. Hence, instead of 
closing the present challenge at the threshold, we shall proceed to 
analyse the merits of these claims to find out whether Section 6A 
has become ultra vires the Constitution with the passage of time 
and due to systematic failure of the legislative vision. 
73. The Petitioners, however, may not be correct in contending that the 
issue of delay between the same parties was previously settled by 
the reference order dated 17.12.2014.72 At the outset, we must note 
that the claim inter se the parties must not be construed strictly in 
constitutional adjudication such as the present one, since much 
larger questions of public importance are under consideration. 
Furthermore, it is imperative to note that a reference order does not 
represent a conclusive decision. Hence, the aforementioned 
contention of the Petitioners otherwise suffers from a factual error 
as the reference order cannot be construed as a final expression of 
views by this Court on any of the issues. 
74. That apart, and as has been noted previously, instead of 
conclusively deciding the question of delay, this Court framed one 
of the specific questions as to whether delay should be considered 
for moulding appropriate relief. Thus, while the Court discussed 
the principle of delay in challenging the vires of Section 6A, it left 
the question open to be dealt with by a larger bench. 
75. To conclude, while there has undoubtedly been a considerable 
delay in filing the instant writ petitions, the doctrine of laches 
cannot be applied strictly to disbar the claims at the threshold. This 
is so because the present proceedings raise substantial questions 
that affect the public at large and the constitutional validity of a 
 
72 Assam Sanmilita Mahasangha, supra note 33. statutory provision. If we were to decide otherwise, we would be, in 
essence, creating an artificial deadline for important constitutional 
issues. This would give rise to an unfair principle of law in the realm 
of constitutional adjudication. 
76. We thus conclude that the Petitioners’ claim overcomes the 
preliminary hurdles, and cannot be dismissed at the threshold on 
the grounds of lack of judicial review or doctrine of laches. 
******* 
CHALLENGES REGARDING CONSTITUTIONALITY 
77. Prior to examining the contentions articulated by the parties on the 
constitutionality of the provision and engaging in a discussion on 
the various legal issues involved, it is imperative to trace the history 
of this matter and have a holistic understanding of how the 
provision, Section 6A, came into being. This historical context 
sheds light on Assam’s evolving dynamics and challenges, which 
were marked by partition decisions and the subsequent 
establishment of regulatory frameworks governing movement and 
citizenship. 
78. Before we begin our discussion on the political history of Assam, it 
is crucial to emphasize that this serves as a broad overview based 
on the material cited by both parties. It is not to be construed as 
an exercise of determining the factual veracity of competing 
versions of historical narratives and is not strictly germane to our 
legal analysis. It merely serves as a contextual background for 
those who might be unfamiliar with the origins of Section 6A and 
the present issue. 

79. The region, known today as Assam, has historically been inhabited 
by diverse ethnic and linguistic communities. Throughout the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, it was predominantly 
governed by the Ahom political authority, albeit with a brief period 
of Mughal rule. Subsequently, like numerous other regions across 
the nation, it came under British colonial administration in 1826.73 
80. Prior to the beginning of the British colonial era, several parts of 
Assam fell under the dominion of the Burmese for a brief duration, 
during which the region underwent significant changes in its 
political and economic landscape. This period witnessed a 
substantial exodus of people from the valley, seeking refuge in the 
bordering towns of Bengal and other adjacent territories.74 
However, there was soon a change of hands in terms of control over 
these regions after the First Anglo–Burmese War.75 By the middle 
of the nineteenth century, most of the Brahmaputra valley of Assam 
had fallen under British rule, and the East India Company 
assumed control over Assam. In 1874, a distinct province of Assam, 
administered by a Chief Commissioner, was established by 
amalgamating Goalpara, Cachar, Garo, Khasi and Jaintia Hills, 
and Naga Hills, with its capital at Shillong.76 
81. Thereafter, in 1905, as part of the British partition of the Bengal 
Province, Assam became a constituent of the East Bengal region, 
with Dhaka serving as its capital, which is often regarded as the 
 
73 EDWARD GAIT, A History of Assam, Thacker, Spink & Company, 1906. 
74 MANOR DIN: ARUPJYOTI SAIKIA ON HOW THE BURMESE INVASION OF ASSAM TRANSPIRED 
DOWN TO EARTH, https://www.downtoearth.org.in/interviews/governance/manor-
din-arupjyoti-saikia-on-how-the-burmese-invasion-of-assam-transpired-93414. 
75 SANGEETA BAROOAH PISHAROTY, Assam: The Accord, the Discord, Penguin Random 
House, 2019, 221. 
76 ARUPJYOTI SAIKIA, The Quest for Modern Assam,Penguin Random House, 2023, 25. inception of 
friction 
between the Assamese and Bengali 
communities.77 
82. Initially, during the partition deliberations, Assam was intended to 
be amalgamated with Bengal. However, this proposal encountered 
significant opposition from political leaders in Assam, who opposed 
the integration. They perceived the proposed amalgamation as 
another attempt to subject Assam to Bengali dominance, resulting 
in their opposition to the British tendency to treat Assam as an 
extension of Bengal.78 
83. This period also witnessed first-hand, the blending of communities 
and groups between the two regions. Unlike present-day India, 
which has linguistically organised states, the then-eastern front of 
British 
India 
witnessed 
numerous 
culturally 
divergent 
communities living together. The population of Sylhet in modern-
day Bangladesh, for example, was then comprised of Bengali-
speaking as well as Assamese-speaking people. This was 
representative of the fact that unlike the western border, in the 
eastern border, issues of culture and language were more at play. 
84. After this period of unrest, the Nehru-Liaquat Pact of 1950 was 
signed between India and Pakistan, symbolising their mutual 
commitment to safeguard minorities and their interests in both 
nations. This period also denoted the Constitution of India coming 
into force, which contained a part prescribing different modes of 
citizenship, as already elucidated in paragraphs 19 and 21. In line 
with this, the Citizenship Act was enacted, empowering the Central 
 
77 SANGEETA BAROOAH PISHAROTY, supra note 75. 
78 Id, 231. 

Government to declare law on citizenship or nationality, the details 
of which have also been dealt with elaborately in the same. 
85. Parallelly, in 1948, a permit system was instituted between West 
Pakistan and India vide the West Pakistan (Control) Ordinance, and 
subsequently, in 1952, a formal passport and visa system was 
introduced along the eastern border.79 Until then, border traffic was 
almost entirely unregulated on the eastern borders. The span from 
1960 to 1985 was marked by significant political turmoil, civil 
unrest, and violence in the country’s northeastern parts. 
86. Amidst these developments, the NRC was initially prepared 
exclusively for the state of Assam in 1951. It intended to identify 
illegal immigrants entering the state from Bangladesh, utilizing 
data from the 1951 Census. 
87. However, the scenario changed dramatically on 25.03.1971, when 
Pakistan initiated ‘Operation Searchlight’ to quell the Bengali 
nationalist movement in East Pakistan. The following day, on 
26.03.1971, Bangladesh declared independence from Pakistan, 
triggering the Bangladesh Liberation War. Following these 
developments, in December 1971, India joined the war against 
Pakistan. While immigrants from East Pakistan (present-day 
Bangladesh) had been migrating to India since 1948, the wars of 
1971 led to an influx of immigrants from Bangladesh into the State 
of Assam and other Indian states.80 
88. Soon, there was anxiety surrounding the issue of electoral rolls in 
the Northeast region, fueled by concerns revolving around the 
 
79 Ministry of External Affairs Annual Report (1943-44), para 15. 
80 ANTARA DATTA, Refugees and Borders in South Asia: The Great Exodus of 1971, 
Routledge, 2015. influx of refugees from erstwhile East Bengal into Assam.81 During 
this period, the Assam Students Union (AASU) and the All Assam 
Gana Sangram Parishad (AAGSP) grew in popularity in the region. 
Thereafter, in 1979, the draft electoral rolls prepared for the bye-
elections in the Lok Sabha Constituency of Mangaldoi in Assam 
revealed the names of numerous Bangladeshi immigrants. This led 
the AASU and AAGSP to launch a 6-year-long agitation, now known 
as the ‘Assam Movement’, fearing that Bangladeshi immigrants 
would overwhelm the indigenous population of Assam.82 During 
this period, political tensions escalated, marked by fierce debates 
and demonstrations concerning the influx of immigrants into 
Assam. Simultaneously, there were counter-demonstrations in 
Bengal, 
expressing 
solidarity 
with 
the 
Bengali-speaking 
communities in Assam. These events had a detrimental impact on 
the economy and trade in Assam, and eventually, in 1981, the 
President’s rule was imposed in the State. 
89. In 1983, after more than a year of President’s rule, the Union of 
India decided to hold elections, despite a breakdown in negotiations 
over electoral roll revisions and escalating student-led protests.83 
However, these aspirations came to an end with the occurrence of 
the Nellie Massacre on 18.02.1983, resulting in a devastating 
massacre of people with severe casualties. It is believed that factors 
contributing to the tragedy included administrative failure, 
warnings of potential clashes being ignored, and underlying land-
related tensions. The Nellie Massacre marked a turning point, 
transforming the once-peaceful student protests into a violent 
agitation that garnered national and international attention. 
 
81 SANGEETA BAROOAH PISHAROTY, supra note 75, 27. 
82 ARUPJYOTI SAIKIA, supra note 76, 549. 
83 Id, 566. 

Thereafter, in 1984, negotiations between the Centre and AASU 
stalled, but in January 1985, the then Prime Minister expressed a 
willingness to resolve Assam’s disputes, leading to the repeal of 
contentious laws and concessions to calm the agitations.84 
90. The student-led Assam Movement finally came to an end on 
15.08.1985, with the signing of a Memorandum of Settlement 
known as the ‘Assam Accord’ between the Central Government and 
the leaders of AASU and AAGSP. The Assam Accord declared 
01.01.1966 as the base date for the detection of illegal immigrants 
and created three classes of immigrants: first, those who came 
before 01.01.1966, including those in the electoral list of 1967; 
second, those who came between 01.01.1966 and 24.03.1971; and 
third, those who came on or after 25.03.1971. The first class of 
persons were to be regularized under the Assam Accord, while 
those belonging to the second class were to be detected as 
foreigners, and their names were to be deleted from electoral rolls. 
It was further provided that their names would be restored after the 
expiry of ten years from their detection. The third class of persons, 
i.e., those who came on or after 25.03.1971, were to be detected 
and expelled as per the Assam Accord. Subsequently, Section 6A 
was inserted into the Citizenship Act through an amendment to 
give effect to the provisions of the Assam Accord. 
91. However, despite the enactment of Section 6A, the influx of illegal 
immigrants into the State of Assam from Bangladesh was stronger 
than ever. In 1998, the then Governor of Assam submitted a report 
to the then President of India highlighting the threat posed by large-
scale migration from Bangladesh into Assam. Currently, there exist 
thousands of migrants who have been accorded citizenship under 
 
84 SANGEETA BAROOAH PISHAROTY, supra note 75, 184. 

Section 6A and have been residing in the State of Assam for several 
years. Conversely, there are also hordes of immigrants who have 
entered and continue to enter the State of Assam illegally. Thus, 
there presently exist two sets of immigrants who need to be 
bifurcated and treated differently—one set who will be conferred 
citizenship in accordance with the auspices of Section 6A and the 
other set who are illegal immigrants. 
92. Having dealt with this historical and political context, and with this 
background, it is now pertinent to peruse the issues invoking 
constitutional challenge against the validity of Section 6A. iii. The preambular notion of fraternity 
93. The Petitioners seek to enforce the preambular notion of ‘fraternity’. 
They have urged that the idea of fraternity, as encapsulated in the 
Constitution of India, is to be interpreted in the context of the unity 
and 
integrity 
of 
the 
nation. 
They 
argued 
against 
a 
global/transnational construction of the term, wherein the notion 
of fraternity is extended beyond the citizens of India. They asserted 
that the constitutional mandate in the Preamble pertains to 
fraternity amongst citizens and that this notion of fraternity might 
be destroyed when a legislative enactment such as Section 6A 
threatens to destroy the cultural demography of that citizenry. The 
Petitioners further contended that the influx of immigrants from 
Bangladesh into the State of Assam has jeopardized the very ideal 
of fraternity in India. 
94. Contrarily, the Respondents submitted that the term fraternity 
means individuals having equal regard for each other and 
preventing relationships from being confined to specific clans. The 
Respondents stated that Section 6A reinforces the idea of fraternity, 

in the absence of which, society would be broken into a division 
between ‘others’ and ‘us’. 
95. Having bestowed our consideration to the contentions set out by 
the parties, we must examine the meaning of the term fraternity 
and determine whether Section 6A violates or enforces the idea of 
fraternity. 
(a) Meaning of ‘fraternity’ 
96. As articulated in the Preamble, the term ‘fraternity’ embodies a 
sense of collective brotherhood amongst all Indians. It serves as a 
critical element for national unity and social cohesion. Fraternity 
assumes paramount significance in reinforcing the ideals of 
equality and liberty, both of which are integral facets of the 
Preamble.85 
97. In order to have a holistic understanding of what fraternity as an 
ideal encompasses, it is integral to examine the meaning of 
‘fraternity’ as envisaged by the drafters of the Constitution, as well 
as in terms of other jurisdictions which also employ the notion. 
Delving into the Constituent Assembly Debates would not only 
shed light on the ambit of fraternity but would also reveal a 
consensus that the principles of equality, liberty and fraternity are 
to be perceived as an indivisible whole. 
98. The word ‘fraternity’ was initially not included as a part of the 
Objectives Resolution, which had been proposed by Jawaharlal 
Nehru on 13.12.1946 and thereafter adopted by the Constituent 
Assembly on 22.01.1947. In fact, this very resolution provided the 
basis for the inclusion of the Preamble to the Constitution of India. 
 
85 Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 11, 25.11.1949. 

Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, however, emphasized the significance of adding 
the term fraternity into the Preamble, defining it to mean a sense 
of shared brotherhood among all Indians, and highlighted that it 
was imperative for national unity and social solidarity.86 In 
pursuance thereto, Dr. Ambedkar stated as follows: 
“What does fraternity mean? Fraternity means a sense of 
common brotherhood of all Indians— if Indians being 
one people. It is the principle which gives unity and 
solidarity to social life. It is a difficult thing to achieve. 
The sooner we realise that we are not as yet a nation in the 
social and psychological sense of the world, the better for us. 
For then only we shall realise the necessity of becoming a 
nation and seriously think of ways and means of realising the 
goal.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
99. Dr. Ambedkar introduced the term ‘fraternity’ into the preambular 
values of the Constitution with the objective of advancing his vision 
of democracy and eradicating the issues posed by caste 
distinctions. His vision encompassed fostering a societal framework 
characterised by shared interests and interconnectedness amongst 
all Indians. Notably, neither the deliberations within the 
Constituent Assembly nor Dr. Ambedkar’s conceptualisation of 
fraternity suggests any inherent restriction of this principle to a 
specific community or segment of citizens. Instead, it was conceived 
as a concept intended to cultivate a sense of brotherhood amongst 
all individuals within society.87 Dr. B.R. Ambedkar elucidated this 
core idea of fraternity in the following words: 
“…What is your ideal society if you do not want caste is a 
question that is bound to be asked of you. If you ask me, my 
 
86 Id. 
87 DR. BABSAHEB AMBEDKAR WRITINGS AND SPEECHES, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation, Vol. 
1, 57, https://www.mea.gov.in/Images/attach/amb/Volume_01.pdf. ideal would be a society based on Liberty, Equality and 
Fraternity. And why not? What objection can there be to 
Fraternity? I cannot imagine any. An ideal society 
should be mobile, should be full of channels for 
conveying a change taking place in one part to other 
parts. In an ideal society there should be many interests 
consciously communicated and shared. There should be 
varied and free points of contact with other modes of 
association. In other words, there must be social 
endosmosis. This is fraternity, which is only another 
name for democracy. Democracy is not merely a form of 
Government. It is primarily a mode of associated living, of 
conjoint communicated experience. It is essentially an attitude 
of respect and reverence towards fellowmen.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
100. The idea of fraternity was therefore envisioned as a deep sense of 
well-being 
for 
others 
and 
understood 
as 
essential 
to 
counterbalance individualism, thereby preventing anarchy and 
sustaining moral order in society. It emphasized that a thriving 
democracy could be achieved through fraternity, which enabled the 
notions of liberty and equality to support each other rather than 
undermine one another. Further, it gave rise to the belief that the 
ideals of equality, liberty and fraternity could not be divorced from 
each other, as equality and liberty without fraternity would result 
in the supremacy of the few over the many.88 
101. During the deliberations of the Constituent Assembly, the concepts 
of equality, fraternity, and liberty were perceived as constituting a 
trinity, forming the very bedrock of democracy. The notion of 
equality was afforded considerable impetus on account of the 
prevailing graded inequality within Indian society, characterized by 
affluence for some and abject poverty for many. Recognizing that 
 
88 Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, supra note 85. various approaches might not eliminate disparities in social and 
economic aspects of the citizens' lives, they formulated the principle 
of “one man, one value”, intending to create a level playing field for 
all.89 However, the framers believed that equality devoid of liberty 
could lead to the forfeiture of individuality. Moreover, they 
recognized that in the absence of fraternity, the harmonious 
coexistence of liberty and equality would not be inherent or natural, 
necessitating external enforcement measures.90 
102. The genesis of the very notion of fraternity can be traced back to 
the French ideal of fraternity or fraternité, originating from the 
French Revolution and intricately connected with the principles of 
liberty and equality. This period in French history reflected a 
marked shift from feudalistic societies governed by hereditary 
status to a society aspiring to be a democratic ideal. This evolution 
was recognised as not just a political concept but as a period that 
emphasised collective rights over the individual.91 
103. The emergence of fraternity as a concept in the French context 
began to see recognition with the Declaration of the Rights of Man 
and Citizen, which prescribed communal participation in contrast 
to individual rights in the interests of society. This was, in essence, 
a clarion call for the notion of fraternity, though it had not been 
fully articulated at that point in time.92 It was only with the 
emergence of the Third Republic and the formation of the Paris 
Commune in 1871 that fraternity was articulated more clearly and 
reflected the people’s need for a society based on collective welfare 
and shared interests. The Constitution of the Third Republic then 
 
89 Id.. 
90 Id. 
91 GEORGES LEFEBVRE, The Coming of the French Revolution, R. R. Palmer (trans.), 
Princeton University Press, 1973. 
92 Id. included and recognised the principles of liberty, equality and 
fraternity as cornerstones of French society. In this context, 
fraternity was not restricted to the idea of social cohesion but also 
extended to ensuring the dignity of each individual in a manner in 
which national unity and integrity were fostered. The evolution of 
fraternity, from a mere idea encompassing social values into a 
principle now embedded into the fabric of a nation’s identity, is 
indeed fascinating.93 
104. Within 
the 
French 
context, 
fraternity 
transcended 
mere 
brotherhood, expanding to encompass a collective sense of 
solidarity among citizens. This journey of fraternity from a mere 
idea into a fundamental value shows the deeply entrenched 
political and social transformation that occurred in France. 
Fraternity, therefore, came to be understood as a sense of collective 
consciousness that unified individuals in their need for an 
equitable society. 
105. Although fraternity is embedded in the constitutional fabric of both 
India and France, the manner in which they have come to be 
construed inherently differs. A nuanced differentiation can be 
discerned by examining them through the lenses of French and 
Indian perspectives. In the French context, the principle of 
fraternity was initially envisaged to symbolize a commitment 
towards the collective well-being of citizens and to showcase a bond 
that unified them in their aspirations for a just society. However, 
over time, the notion of fraternity in France came to be somewhat 
eclipsed by equality, which was perceived to be paramount, with a 
 
93 THE NEW ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA: MACROPAEDIA (Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc.), 
1974. heightened emphasis on individual rights.94 Conversely, in India, 
fraternity was perceived by the Constituent Assembly, as seen in 
Dr. Ambedkar’s speeches, as a means to realize equality and uplift 
marginalised groups. The divergence in the interpretation of the 
term fraternity by these two nations in relation to equality is thus 
distinctly evident.95 
106. In the Indian context, the meaning of fraternity has thus entirely 
diverged from the French sense of the term and is intricately woven 
into the fabric of fostering social solidarity, uplifting marginalised 
groups, and achieving a more equitable society. Dr. B.R. 
Ambedkar’s introduction of the term ‘fraternity’ into the 
constitutional Preamble reflects a deliberate intention to use this 
principle as a means to promote unity and brotherhood.96 In light 
of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar's persistent efforts towards eradicating caste 
discrimination, his subsequent advocacy for fraternity among 
individuals appears to mirror his commitment to inclusivity. Unlike 
some Western perspectives, where fraternity may be overshadowed 
by an emphasis on individual rights, in India, fraternity is distinctly 
perceived as a vital instrument for realising equality and 
harmonising the diverse segments of society. It serves as a conduit 
for transcending societal disparities and working towards collective 
well-being.97 Therefore, in the Indian constitutional context, 
fraternity assumes a dynamic and inclusive role, aligning with the 
broader goals of social justice, equality, and upliftment. 
 
94 Decision 99-412 DC of June 15, 1999, Rec. 71 (European Charter for Regional or 
Minority Languages), para 10. 
95 JEREMIE GILBERT AND DAVID KEANE, Equality versus fraternity? Rethinking France 
and its minorities, International Journal of Constitutional Law, 2016, 14 (4), 901 and 
902. 
96 Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, supra note 85. 
97 Id. 

(b) Ethos of Section 6A is aligned with fraternity 
107. Having examined the contentions presented by the Petitioners, it is 
imperative to scrutinize whether the preambular value of fraternity 
would be applicable to the immigrants entering into the State of 
Assam under the aegis of Section 6A. 
108. In this regard, it would be apposite to consider whether such 
preambular values are justiciable in the first place. In the landmark 
case of Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala,98 this Court 
affirmed that while the Preamble may be employed to interpret 
ambiguous provisions of the Constitution, it, by itself, is not 
enforceable in a court of law. Indeed, our current comprehension 
of the preamble is evident. It serves as a tool for interpreting the 
Constitution and guiding our trajectory. However, akin to the 
Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP), it was not envisaged as 
being directly enforceable. Nevertheless, the discourse on 
‘fraternity’ holds relevance in the current context and will 
undeniably shape our interpretation of the pertinent laws at hand. 
109. At this juncture, it would be essential to take into consideration the 
evolution of the principle of fraternity in terms of judicial 
construction to get a complete understanding of the meaning and 
scope of fraternity as it stands today. The Preamble to the 
Constitution provides us insight into the values that embody the 
Constitution. The Preamble declares India to be a sovereign, 
socialist, secular, democratic, and republic and secures justice, 
equality, liberty, and fraternity for all its citizens. Though the 
Preamble does not grant any substantive rights and is not 
 
98 Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, (1973). enforceable in courts, a plethora of cases have engaged with the 
Preamble and considered it to be a guiding light in interpreting the 
provisions of the Constitution. 
110. Judicial 
precedents 
discussing 
fraternity 
will 
aid 
us 
in 
understanding whether fraternity remains to be seen as a beacon 
promoting togetherness amongst diverse groups or whether it has 
become more restrictive in its scope over time. This Court has dealt 
with the idea of fraternity or, at the very least, referred to it in a 
myriad of case laws. It has consistently held that the term 
‘fraternity’ means a sense of common brotherhood of all citizens.99 
This Court has also often reiterated that the ideals of liberty, 
equality, and fraternity should not be treated as separate entities 
instead, should be viewed as a trinity that secures empowerment 
and political justice for all citizens. Additionally, fraternity was 
interpreted as a principle that afforded the means to achieve 
national unity and the dignity of the individual.100 
111. This Court in Indian Medical Association v. Union of India,101 
addressed multiple petitions that had been filed challenging the 
exemptions provided under law, which allowed a private, non-aided 
educational institution to admit the children of army personnel 
exclusively. While examining the constitutionality of the challenged 
provision, the Court highlighted the significance of access to 
education as a means to foster fraternity and further promote social 
cohesion and unity. In the cited case, the Court determined that 
the restrictive admission policy was an impediment to achieving 
fraternity in society. Although not spelt out explicitly in the 
 
99 Shri Raghunathrao Ganpatrao v. Union of India, AIR 1993 SC 1267, para 109. 
100 Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, AIR 1993 SC 477, para 412; AIIMS Students’ 
Union v. AIIMS, AIR 2001 SC 3262, para 58. 
101 Indian Medical Association v. Union of India, AIR 2011 SC 2365. judgment, it is clear that the Court understood fraternity as 
encouraging the intermixing of people and one which discourages 
exclusivity or endogamous social structures. 
112. It was, however, in the seminal case of Nandini Sundar v. State 
of Chhattisgarh102 that this Court, in the course of addressing 
issues pertaining to the appointment of Special Police Officers 
(SPOs) for the Salwa Judum in Chhattisgarh, extensively dealt with 
the aspect of fraternity. For context, the Salwa Judum was a militia 
formed and deployed to counter Maoist activities in the State of 
Chhattisgarh. This case brought to the fore several constitutional 
principles, including the ideals of fraternity, equality, the right to 
life, and personal liberty. This Court held that Section 9 of the 
Chhattisgarh Police Act, 2007 which allowed for the appointment 
of SPOs, violated the Constitution and delved into the relevance of 
the constitutional principle of fraternity. 
113. In the aforesaid case, the Court interpreted fraternity as a 
safeguard against unchecked state power and an essential pillar for 
responsible governance. The Court held that state actions that de-
humanized citizens violated the constitutional objective of the 
welfare of all citizens and would be wholly against the idea of dignity 
and fraternity, as enshrined in the Preamble to the Constitution. 
The Court further went on to underscore the significance of 
fraternity in shaping economic policies and stated thus:103 
“The primary task of the State is the provision of 
security to all its citizens, without violating human 
dignity. This would necessarily imply the undertaking of 
tasks 
that 
would 
prevent 
the 
emergence 
of 
great 
dissatisfaction, and disaffection, on account of the manner 
 
102 Nandini Sundar v. State of Chhattisgarh, (2011). 
103 Id, para 25. and mode of extraction, and distribution, of natural resources 
and organization of social action, its benefits and costs.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
114. The very scope of fraternity beyond just being an ideal in the 
Preamble was thus expanded to be a principle that would create 
checks and balances on the system of governance and state 
actions. 
115. Having examined the notion of fraternity from various perspectives, 
it can be deduced that the essence of fraternity, therefore, is 
fundamentally geared towards fostering interconnectedness among 
Indians and was envisaged to be a principle for uplifting 
marginalised sections of society. 
116. Consequently, it might be antithetical to the essence of fraternity 
to deploy this inclusive constitutional value in a way which 
deliberately excludes large swathes of the population, who have 
been duly conferred citizenship through procedure established by 
law, from the protection of constitutional rights. In fact, our 
understanding of fraternity, as also applied by this Court in Indian 
Medical Association v. Union of India (supra), is that it 
encourages, if not compels, people to fraternise and intermingle 
with people dissimilar to them. 
117. In many ways, the Petitioners want fraternity to be interpreted in a 
highly restrictive manner, which allows them to choose their 
neighbours. Since this approach runs contrary to the very idea and 
ethos of fraternity that was envisaged by the Constituent Assembly 
and as subsequently interpreted by this Court, it cannot be 
accepted. Our reading of the Constitution and precedents is that 
fraternity requires people of different backgrounds and social 

circumstances to ‘live and let live’. The nomenclature of fraternity 
itself is self-explanatory to the extent that it exhibits the notion of 
inclusiveness 
and 
togetherness, 
as 
opposed 
to 
restricted 
applicability. Thus, it becomes imperative to refrain from employing 
this concept in a negative manner that selectively applies it to a 
particular segment while labelling another faction as ‘illegal 
immigrants’, solely based on the alleged unconstitutionality of 
Section 6A. 
118. In this light, when faced with the dilemma of disenfranchising 
millions or safeguarding a community's endogamous way of life, 
this Court would certainly be compelled by the principles of 
fraternity to prioritize the former. Thus, in our considered view, the 
Petitioners contentions in this regard deserve to be rejected. iv. Part II and Section 6A 
(a) Section 6A and Articles 6, 7 and 11 of the Constitution 
119. The Petitioners argued that our Constitution exhaustively 
addresses the conferment of citizenship to individuals who 
migrated from present-day Bangladesh and that the Parliament 
cannot legislate to the contrary without amending the Constitution. 
They asserted that Articles 6 and 7 prescribe a different regime for 
granting Indian citizenship to individuals who migrated from India 
to Pakistan or from Pakistan to India. They argued that ‘Pakistan’ 
encompasses Bangladesh, as it is a successor state to Pakistan, 
thus binding Parliament to the cut-off date of 19.07.1948 
stipulated in Article 6 of the Constitution. Since these are 
constituent provisions and the Parliament enacted Section 6A 
through its ordinary legislative power, it could not have prescribed 
a different cut-off date in this Section for granting citizenship to 

immigrants from Bangladesh. The Petitioners further claimed that 
Parliament should have sought a constitutional amendment 
instead. Consequently, they contended that Section 6A is 
unconstitutional for being in conflict with Articles 6 and 7. 
120., the Respondents put forth a different view. They urged 
that Section 6A does not violate Articles 6 and 7 because these 
Articles operate in different contexts, both in terms of time and 
geography. They provided additional context on the cut-off dates 
prescribed in Articles 6 and 7, asserting that these dates were a 
remnant of the permit system, which never applied to East 
Pakistan. Referring to the Constituent Assembly Debates, the 
Respondents also demonstrated that it was never intended for 
these provisions to apply to East Pakistan. Further, they argued 
that the spirit and intent behind Section 6A align with those of 
Articles 6 and 7 and that striking down Section 6A would not serve 
the objectives of these Constitutional provisions. 
121. The Respondents further argued that even if it is assumed that 
Section 6A conflicts with Articles 6 and 7, Article 11 of the 
Constitution is a non-obstante provision that grants Parliament the 
power to make laws regarding citizenship and that the other 
provisions of Part II of the Constitution cannot derogate from this 
power. In this regard, they relied upon Izhar Ahmed Khan v. 
Union of India,104 where it is held that the Parliament can make a 
valid law even when it is against such provisions. This power is 
supplemented by Entry 17 of List I of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution, which also empowers Parliament to legislate on the 
subject of citizenship. 
 
104 Izhar Ahmed Khan v. Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 1052. 

122. The Petitioners refuted this plea, asserting that while Article 11 and 
Entry 17 of List 1 confer power upon Parliament, they do not 
include the authority to supersede other provisions within Part II 
of the Constitution. They interpreted Article 11 as a residual clause, 
empowering Parliament to enact laws that do not contravene other 
provisions within Part II. They argued that even if Article 11 admits 
multiple interpretations, the Court should adopt the construction 
that promotes harmony with the rest of the Constitution. 
123. Considering these rival submissions, the issue that arises for 
consideration is whether Section 6A is violative of Articles 6 and 7 
of the Constitution, and whether the Parliament had the power to 
enact Section 6A. 
124. As we have specified previously in paragraphs 19 and 22 of this 
judgement, Article 6 specifies the conditions for granting 
citizenship to people who have immigrated to India from Pakistan. 
125. The language of Article 6 unambiguously suggests that there exist 
two sets of conditions under this provision: for persons who 
migrated before 19.07.1948, and for those who migrated after this 
date. In terms of the former, Article 6 prescribes two further 
conditions: first, is the condition of birth/descent, mandating that 
such an individual, or either his parents or his grandparents must 
have been born in India; and second, is the condition of residence, 
prescribing that such an individual must have been a resident of 
India since migration. A third set of conditions is also prescribed 
for the people who migrated after 19.07.1948. This condition 
pertains to registration, which requires such individuals to have 
been registered as Indian citizens by an officer appointed for this 
purpose by the Government of India. 

126. As a corollary to Article 6, and as previously discussed in 
paragraphs 19 and 22 above, Article 7 prescribes the condition for 
granting citizenship to people who migrated to Pakistan. 
127. Thus, Article 7 mandates that a person who migrated to Pakistan 
after 01.03.1947 cannot claim Indian citizenship unless they fulfil 
three conditions: first, the person must have returned to India; 
second, such return must have been under permit for resettlement 
or permanent return; and third, that person must satisfy the 
conditions prescribed in Article 6 for a person migrating to India 
after 19.07.1948. 
128. At this juncture, we may hasten to add that these conditions under 
Articles 6 and 7 covered both East and West Pakistan. This is 
visible from these provisions' text, which explicitly states “territory 
now included in Pakistan”. Since Pakistan, at the time of the 
commencement of the Constitution (i.e., 1950), included both East 
and West Pakistan, creating any artificial distinction would militate 
against the text of these provisions. Accordingly, the Respondents’ 
contention that these Articles would not cover East Pakistan 
cannot be accepted. 
129. While the Respondents have cited the speeches of various members 
of the Constituent Assembly to argue that Articles 6 and 7 were not 
intended to apply to East Pakistan, we cannot use the opinion of 
individual members of the Constituent Assembly to negate the text 
of the Constitution, which, by itself, is the best manifestation of the 
Assembly’s intention. While the usage of such external aid might 
have been possible had the text been ambiguous, it cannot be used 
in the present context because Articles 6 and 7 leave no room to 
doubt that that they extend to both East and West Pakistan. 

130. Having delineated the scope and ambit of these provisions, it is 
pertinent to comprehend the criteria outlined in Section 6A for 
bestowing citizenship upon immigrants from former East Pakistan, 
which was summarized previously in paragraph 25 of this 
judgement. 
131. A perusal of these different conditions reflects various points of 
congruency between Section 6A and Articles 6 and 7. First, Section 
6A prescribes that the immigrant must have been of Indian origin, 
defined in Section 6A(1)(d) to mean the person/either of whose 
parents/grandparents were born in undivided India. Hence, similar 
to Articles 6 and 7, the condition of birth/descent is present. 
Second, similar to Article 6, which does not stipulate the condition 
of registration before 19.07.1948 but necessitates it thereafter, 
Section 6A also lacks a requirement for registration before the 
specified cut-off date (i.e., 01.01.1966) but imposes it afterwards. 
Finally, mirroring the provisions of Articles 6 and 7, Section 6A (2) 
and (3) introduce the condition of residence, mandating that the 
immigrant must have resided in India since their immigration. 
132. Furthermore, Section 6A aligns with the fundamental purpose of 
Articles 6 and 7, which was to extend citizenship rights to those 
affected by the country's partition. Articles 6 and 7 aimed to 
safeguard the rights of individuals who were previously Indian 
citizens but found themselves residing in a foreign territory due to 
the political circumstances surrounding migration.105 Akin to this, 
Section 6A is also based on the same underlying policy reason of 
granting citizenship to the people of Indian origin migrating from 
Pakistan due to political disturbances in a foreign territory. 
 
105 R. K. Sidhwa, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 9, 11.08.1949. 

Accordingly, Section 6A is aligned with the Constitutional 
philosophy of Articles 6 and 7 and is not contrary to them. 
133. Regardless of these similarities, Section 6A diverges from Articles 6 
and 7 in terms of the cut-off dates. As discussed earlier, Articles 6 
and 7 prescribe the cut-off dates of 19.07.1948 and 01.01.1947, 
respectively. However, Section 6A prescribes two different cut-off 
dates: 01.01.1966 and 25.03.1971. Immigrants who entered 
Assam before 01.01.1966 are granted deemed citizenship, and 
immigrants who entered Assam between these two dates are 
granted citizenship once they fulfil certain conditions. Immigrants 
entering Assam on or after 25.03.1971 are not granted citizenship 
and are impliedly declared to be illegal immigrants who must be 
detected and deported. 
134. The Petitioners’ contention that Section 6A is unconstitutional as 
it prescribes different dates in comparison to Articles 6 and 7 
cannot be accepted because Article 6 does not prohibit the granting 
of citizenship after the cut-off date of 19.07.1948. It only specifies 
the fulfilment of certain conditions, which, as mentioned above, are 
also present in Section 6A (3). While Section 6A (2) grants deemed 
citizenship without these conditions, the competence of Parliament 
to prescribe different conditions—which will be analyzed in detail 
in the later part—is well embedded in Article 11. 
135. Similarly, while Article 7 prohibits citizenship to people who re-
migrated to India, this is only a sub-class of people who have been 
granted citizenship by Section 6A. Since Section 6A grants 
citizenship even to people who migrated for the first time, the class 
of re-migrants is severable from this provision. As will be discussed 
in the following paragraphs, the Parliament was competent to 
specify different conditions for this sub-class also. 

Whether the Parliament had the competence to specify 
different conditions under Article 11 
136. There is no quarrel among the parties that the Parliament has the 
power to enact laws on citizenship. This power is provided by Entry 
17 of List 1 of the Seventh Schedule, which reads “Citizenship, 
naturalisation and aliens”. Further, the present situation is also 
covered by Entry 19, which reads, “Admission into, and 
emigration and expulsion from, India; passports and visas”. 
However, the parties are discordant to the extent of such power and 
whether law made by the Parliament can derogate from Article 6 
and other provisions of Part II. 
137. In this regard, it is pertinent to consider the objective and scope of 
Article 11 of the Constitution, which provides Parliament with the 
power to make laws on any matter relating to citizenship. Upon 
perusal of the text of Article 11, which was reproduced before in 
paragraph 19 of this judgement, two important considerations 
come to light. First, the phrase “Nothing in the foregoing 
provisions of this Part shall derogate” clearly fortifies that Article 
11 confers overriding powers upon the Parliament to make laws 
even when they are against other provisions of Part II. 
138. This was also duly acknowledged by a 5-judge bench of this Court 
in Izhar Ahmed Khan (supra), where it was explicitly noted that 
Article 11 grants Parliament the sovereign right to make laws on 
citizenship and that such laws cannot be impeached on the ground 
that they go against Articles 5 to 10 of the Constitution. 

139. Incidentally, the overriding effect of Article 11 is also clearly 
established by various speeches in the Constituent Assembly. They 
highlight that the provisions of Part II were only meant to enact the 
law on citizenship for the time being at the commencement of the 
Constitution and the Parliament was empowered to enact 
provisions in the future, including making altogether new 
provisions.106 As discussed in paragraph 16 earlier, this is 
consistent with the global practice of laying down only overarching 
principles of citizenship in the Constitution and empowering the 
Parliament to define the specifics through statutes. 
140. From the phrase “Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part 
shall derogate”, the judicial pronouncement of this Court in Izhar 
Ahmed Khan (supra) and the accompanying speeches in the 
Constituent Assembly, we can appropriately conclude that Article 
11 gives the Parliament broad powers to enact laws on citizenship, 
notwithstanding any inconsistencies with any other provision in 
Part II of the Constitution. 
141. The second important aspect of Article 11, which lends support to 
this conclusion, is that it grants the Parliament the power to make 
‘any’ provision regarding citizenship. A critical amendment to the 
text of the draft Article 11 further fortifies this conclusion. Initially, 
the draft Article granted Parliament the power to make ‘further 
provisions’. However, during a session of the Constituent Assembly 
on 29.04.1947, the President of the Assembly argued that the word 
‘further’ might imply that Parliament should only make provisions 
in continuation of other Articles in Part II. Consequently, the word 
‘further’ was replaced with ‘any’. This amendment highlights the 
 
106 Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 9, 10.08.1949; Alladi 
Krishnaswamy Ayyar and H. N. Kunzru, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 9, 
12.08.1949; K. M. Munshi, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 3, 29.04.1947. framers’ intention to afford Parliament nearly unrestricted 
flexibility in crafting laws pertaining to citizenship. 
142. Based on the analysis presented in this section, it can be 
concluded, and we hold so, that the Parliament indeed possesses 
the legislative power to enact laws concerning citizenship and that 
this authority is not restricted by the provisions of Part II of the 
Constitution. 
(b) Section 6A and dual citizenship 
143. The Petitioners, having not limited their contentions to the violation 
of Articles 6 and 7, also urged that since the immigrants did not 
renounce their citizenship before they were granted Indian 
citizenship, Section 6A enables dual citizenship and is therefore 
unconstitutional for violating Article 9. While the Respondents have 
not directly addressed this issue, it is vital to provide a 
comprehensive analysis for the sake of completeness. 
144. The concept of dual citizenship means one has citizenship of two 
countries simultaneously. Across the world, there are various 
countries like China,107 Japan,108 Kuwait,109 etc. that prohibit dual 
citizenship. Internationally, too, several countries have come 
together at various points to counter multiple citizenships. For 
instance, European nations that were members of the Council of 
Europe entered into the Convention on the Reduction of Cases of 
Multiple Nationality and on Military Obligations in Cases of 
Multiple Nationality, 1963, which, inter alia, provides that a person 
acquiring an additional nationality shall lose their previous 
 
107 Nationality Law of People’s Republic of China, 1980, Article 9. 
108 Japan’s Nationality Law, 1950, Article 11. 
109 Kuwait, Ministerial Decree No. 15 of 1959 Promulgating the Nationality Law, 
Article 11. nationality. Similarly, countries that were a part of the League of 
Nations (including India) entered the Convention on Certain 
Questions Relating to the Conflict of Nationality Law, 1930, to 
establish a commitment to abolishing dual citizenship. 
145. In India, such citizenship is restricted by Article 9 of the 
Constitution and Section 9 of the Citizenship Act. Article 9 states 
that no person shall be granted Indian citizenship by Articles 5, 6, 
and 8 if such person has voluntarily acquired citizenship of a 
foreign state. As a corollary to this, Section 9 of the Citizenship Act 
provides: 
“Termination of citizenship — 
(1) Any citizen of India who by naturalisation, registration 
or otherwise voluntarily acquires, or has at any time 
between the 26th January, 1950 and the commencement of 
this Act voluntarily acquired, the citizenship of another 
country shall, upon such acquisition or, as the case may be, 
such commencement, cease to be a citizen of India: 
 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a 
citizen of India who, during any war in which India may be 
engaged, voluntarily acquires the citizenship of another 
country, until the Central Government otherwise directs. 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
146. While both Article 9 and Section 9 seemingly restrict dual 
citizenship, they operate in different time spheres. As was held by 
this court in Izhar Ahmed Khan (supra), while Article 9 
contemplates the denial of Indian citizenship to a person who had 
acquired foreign citizenship before the Constitution came into 
force, Section 9 deals with the acquisition of foreign citizenship 
after the commencement of the Constitution. 

147. However, while they operate in different time spheres, a common 
theme that runs across both these provisions is the restriction on 
dual citizenship. Using these provisions, the Petitioners have urged 
that since Section 6A does not mandate the express renunciation 
of the immigrants’ previous citizenship before granting them Indian 
citizenship, Section 6A runs counter to these two constitutional 
and statutory provisions. 
148. At the outset, even if it is assumed that Section 6A grants dual 
citizenship, it does not run counter to Article 9. We say so for the 
reason that these two provisions operate in different fields. As 
discussed above, Article 9 restricts a person possessing foreign 
citizenship from acquiring citizenship under Articles 5, 6, and 8. 
However, Section 6A does not grant citizenship under these 
provisions and is rather a separate method enacted by Parliament 
by virtue of its power under Article 11. The question of conflict 
between Article 9 and Section 6A, therefore does not arise at all. 
149. Further, Section 6A also does not conflict with Section 9 because 
Section 6A does not override the scheme of Section 9 and must be 
read complementarily thereto. In case an immigrant who has been 
granted citizenship by Section 6A is found to have dual citizenship, 
Section 9 can always be invoked to hold that such person has 
ceased to be an Indian citizen. By virtue of Section 9(2), read with 
Rule 40 of Citizenship Rules, 2009, the Central Government will 
determine the question of such acquisition of foreign citizenship as 
per the detailed procedure prescribed under Schedule III of the 
aforementioned Rules.110 Since Section 6A is not a safe harbor from 
 
110 Akbar Khan Alam Khan v. Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 70, para 5; State v. Syed 
Mohd. Khan,, para 6. 

Section 9 and is rather subject to the scheme of restricting dual 
citizenship, it is not in conflict with Section 9 of the Citizenship Act. 
150. However, Section 6A, by operation of law, presumes the 
renunciation of previous citizenship. As was discussed before in 
paragraph 25, Section 6A (2) and 6A (3) grant citizenship to 
immigrants, with a possibility of opting out of such citizenship by 
filing prescribed forms. If such forms are not filed, and the 
immigrants choose to retain Indian citizenship, the presumption is 
that the person is an Indian citizen only and has foregone their 
previous citizenship. For this, an analogy can be drawn with the 
foreign territories incorporated in India after independence, for 
which India passed various legislations that granted Indian 
citizenship without mandating the explicit renunciation of their 
previously acquired foreign citizenship.111 These legislations 
provide Indian citizenship by default and an opt-out mechanism 
similar to Section 6A. In the event the person does not opt-out, the 
law presumes renunciation of previous citizenship. 
151. Globally as well, various jurisdictions have held that citizenship 
can be lost through implied renunciation. For instance, Article 13 
of the Constitution of Panama explicitly provides implied 
renunciation of citizenship. In the USA, Section 349 of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act, 1952, provides for the automatic 
termination of citizenship when specific actions are taken. 
Similarly, in the case of Lorenzo v. McCoy,112 the Supreme Court 
of the Philippines held that express renunciation is not necessary 
 
111 Dadra and Nagar Haveli (Citizenship) Order, 1962; Goa, Daman and Diu, the Goa, 
Daman and Diu (Citizenship) Order, 1962; Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954, 
Section 12; Citizenship (Pondicherry) Order, 1962; Sikkim (Citizenship) Order, 1975. 
112 Lorenzo v. McCoy, 15 Phil., 559 (Philippines Supreme Court). for the forfeiture of one’s citizenship, and it could be terminated by 
the actions. 
152. Similarly, by electing not to opt-out, immigrants involved in the 
present context are presumed to have implicitly renounced their 
previous citizenship as per the law. However, it is essential to 
acknowledge that this presumption regarding renunciation of 
citizenship is not definitive and is rebuttable. As elaborated earlier, 
if an individual is found to have voluntarily availed themselves of 
the benefits of foreign citizenship despite not opting out of Indian 
citizenship, such a person would fall under the purview of Section 
9 of the Citizenship Act, allowing authorities to revoke their Indian 
citizenship and face consequential deportation. 
153. Therefore, based on the aforementioned reasons, we are of the 
considered opinion that the framework outlined by Section 6A is 
that an individual falling under Sections 6A (2) and 6A (3) can only 
assert Indian citizenship. Such individuals are presumed to have 
relinquished their previous citizenship. If authorities have reasons 
to believe that the previous citizenship is still being exercised, they 
are empowered under Section 9 of the Citizenship Act and 
associated rules to take steps to revoke the Indian citizenship of 
the delinquent individuals. Consequently, it can be deduced that 
Section 6A does not contradict Section 9 of the Citizenship Act, and 
we declare so. 
(c) Section 6A and the oath of allegiance 
154. The Petitioners also contended that Section 6A contradicts Section 
5 of the Citizenship Act (Section 5), which requires every citizen to 
take an oath of allegiance. 

155. The Respondents refuted this argument by asserting that the 
failure to take the oath was inconsequential, and as such, an oath 
was not mandated for them. 
156. A bare reading of Section 5(2) reflects that it requires the oath of 
allegiance specifically to be taken by persons who seek citizenship 
under Section 5(1), which, as summarized previously in paragraph 
21, provides citizenship by registration upon making an application 
to the Central Government. 
157. Hence, Section 5(2) requires an oath for a specific mode of 
acquisition of citizenship. Similarly, under the Citizenship Rules, 
2009, the oath is limited to certain modes, such as citizenship by 
registration under Section 5, citizenship by naturalization under 
Section 6, etc. Since Section 5(2) does not mandate the oath for 
every form of citizenship, the immigrants cannot be said to have 
violated Section 5 by not taking the oath. Likewise, it is difficult to 
hold that the immigrants have contravened any constitutional 
provision, as the Constitution does not explicitly mandate an oath 
for citizenship. 
158. Moreover, the absence of such an oath does not absolve the 
immigrants from their obligation to respect the law and order of 
India. Even when such oath is not taken before acquiring 
citizenship, every citizen has to compulsorily abide by the norms of 
the Constitution, statutory laws, and other rules and regulations. 
We need not further emphasise that once the immigrants have 
become Indian citizens by operation of Section 6A, they are 
regulated by the Constitution of India, the laws framed under it and 
the values enshrined within them. Hence, the explicit lack of an 
oath of allegiance before the conferral of citizenship by Section 6A 

does not absolve the immigrants covered under this provision from 
following the laws of our country, just as any other citizen of India. 
159. Hence, on account of the above-stated reasons, Section 6A cannot 
be run down on the premise that it does not mandate an oath of 
allegiance. v. Article 14 and classification under Section 6A 
160. In addition to the numerous other grounds, the Petitioners have 
vehemently contended that Section 6A falls foul of Article 14 as it 
treats equals unequally. They argued that the selective application 
of Section 6A solely to the State of Assam exhibits hostility against 
it in comparison to other states. They contended that since the 
issue of illegal immigration from East Pakistan was also prevalent 
in States like West Bengal or, rather, was significantly greater in 
comparison, hence singling out Assam is unconstitutional. The 
Petitioners further argued that such recourse is unjustifiable and 
that geographical considerations could not be the determining 
factor for applying laws differently. In support of their contention 
that the classification under Article 14 has to be on a reasonable 
basis and based on lawful object, the Petitioners cited, inter alia, 
Nagpur Improvement Trust v. Vithal Rao113 and Subramanian 
Swamy v. CBI.114 
161. In 
response, 
the 
Respondents 
have 
first 
contested 
the 
maintainability of the Petitioners’ plea by asserting that Article 14 
can only be invoked by individuals who are alleged to have been 
unfairly excluded from benefits granted to others and not by those 
singled out and subjected to restrictions alone. It is the 
 
113 Nagpur Improvement Trust v. Vithal Rao, (1973). 
114 Subramanian Swamy v. CBI, (2014). 

Respondents’ case that Article 14 ensures equality in benefits 
provided but not in liabilities imposed. Given that the Petitioners’ 
claim falls into the latter category, the Respondents contended that 
the same would not be maintainable. Second, the Respondents 
argued that a statute cannot be struck down as violating Article 14 
merely because it does not encompass all classes, as the Parliament 
wields discretion in legislating for varying degrees of harm. Citing 
precedents such as the State of M.P. v. Bhopal Sugar Industries 
Ltd115 and Clarence Pais v. Union of India,116 the Respondents 
countered the Petitioners’ arguments by asserting that Parliament 
can make reasonable classifications and enact different laws based 
on territorial basis, thus justifying the differential treatment in 
granting citizenship. Third, the Respondents argued that Assam’s 
unique 
situation, 
marked 
by 
historical 
conflict, 
warrants 
differential treatment under Section 6A, ensuring that equals are 
not treated unequally. In this light, the central issue that arises for 
our consideration is whether Section 6A contravenes Article 14 of 
the Constitution. 
162. Article 14, as widely understood, guarantees that the State shall 
not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal 
protection of laws within the territory of India. Typically, a claim 
under Article 14 is brought forth by an individual contending that 
they have been unfairly excluded from the benefits or protection 
under law. However, the Petitioners’ argument diverges from this 
norm since they do not assert that they have been excluded from a 
benefit extended to similarly situated individuals. Instead, the 
Petitioners are contending that their rights under Article 14 are 
infringed because they alone have been statutorily compelled to 
 
115 State of M.P. v. Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd, (1964). 
116 Clarence Pais v. Union of India, (2001). bear the burden of Bangladeshi immigrants. Before examining 
whether Section 6A treats equals unequally, it is crucial to address 
whether the Petitioners have the locus to invoke a claim under 
Article 14 in the first place. 
(a) Maintainability under Article 14 
163. A bare reading of Article 14 indicates that it confers individuals 
with equality before the law and is not restricted to mere equality 
for the benefits provided under law. This provision came to be 
interpreted in the State of W.B. v. Anwar Ali Sarkar.117 In this 
case, a 7-judge Bench of this Court dealt with the challenge against 
the West Bengal Special Courts Act, 1950, which allowed the State 
government to refer certain offences to special courts. This Court 
noted that the procedure in such special courts was separate from 
the Code of Criminal Procedure and curtailed the rights of the 
accused. Accordingly, it held that since the Act singled out certain 
cases and imposed restrictions on them, it violated Article 14. For 
this, the Court enunciated the principle that as per Article 14, “all 
persons similarly circumstanced shall be treated alike both in 
privileges conferred and liabilities imposed”.118 
164. The argument of the Petitioners is similar. They contest that 
Section 6A has singled out the State of Assam alone vis-à-vis other 
Indian States situated alongside the Bangladesh border and has 
curtailed the rights of only its original inhabitants. Accordingly, 
their plea of violation of Article 14 requires determination on merits. 
165. This position is also clearly buttressed in John Vallamattom v. 
Union of India,119 in which the Court was concerned with a similar 
 
117 State of W.B. v. Anwar Ali Sarkar, (1952), para 7. 
118 Id. 
119 John Vallamattom v. Union of India, (2003). question regarding the imposition of restrictions upon Indian 
Christians alone and not on citizens belonging to other religions. 
Not only did the Court treat such a claim as maintainable under 
law, but it also held the provision to be violative of Article 14 
because it applied restrictions on one class alone: 
“28. The provision relating to making of testamentary 
disposition by the citizens of India vis-à-vis those professing 
the religion of Christianity must be judged on the 
touchstone of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. It 
is true that they form a class by themselves but ex facie 
I do not find any justifiable reason to hold that the 
classification made is either based on intelligible 
differentia or the same has any nexus with the object 
sought to be achieved.” 
“61. (…) The impugned provision is also attacked as 
discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 15 of the 
Constitution inasmuch as the restriction on bequest for 
religious and charitable purposes is confined to 
Christians alone and not to members of other 
communities. In my opinion, the classification between 
testators who belong to the Christian community and 
those 
belonging 
to 
other 
religions 
is 
extremely 
unreasonable. All the testators who bequeath property for 
religious and charitable purpose belong to the same category 
irrespective of their religious identity and so the impugned 
provision, which discriminates between the members of one 
community as against another, amounts to violation of Article 
14 of the Constitution. (…)” 
[Emphasis applied] 
 
166. Given the law cited above, the Petitioners’ assertion founded upon 
Article 14 cannot be invalidated at a preliminary stage merely 
because they are seeking equality in regard to a restriction as 
opposed to a benefit. Hence, the Respondents’ objection regarding 
the maintainability of the Petitioners’ claim under Article 14 is 
liable to be rejected. 

(b) Section 6A vis-à-vis Article 14 
167. The Petitioners argued that the exclusive application of Section 6A 
to Assam violates Article 14. They contended that by burdening 
Assam alone with the obligation to accommodate immigrants, 
Section 6A has detrimentally affected its natural resources and 
indigenous population. Furthermore, they asserted that since 
immigrants were also present in other States, there was no 
reasonable basis for discriminating against Assam and applying 
Section 6A solely to this State. 
168. It is now a settled principle of law that the right to equality 
enshrined under Article 14 is not a mechanical idea of parity. 
Article 14 requires the legislature to treat equals equally, but it also 
allows for differential treatment if the characteristics of the classes 
differ.120 In fact, treating unequal entities alike and subjecting them 
to the same laws could potentially lead to greater injustice. 
Therefore, rather than enforcing a fixed procrustean notion of 
equality, Article 14 permits the legislature to classify individuals 
into different groups and apply distinct norms accordingly. 
169. While the legislation can indeed classify persons into different 
groups and apply distinct standards, such classification must be 
reasonable. This Court has acknowledged that the precise 
parameters of what constitutes ‘reasonable’ has not been firmly 
established, and there is no single test to determine the 
reasonableness of a classification.121 However, while there is no 
straitjacket 
formula 
to 
determine 
reasonableness, 
certain 
 
120 Special Courts Bill, 1978, In re, (1979), para 72. 
121 Transport & Dock Workers Union v. Mumbai Port Trust, (2011), para 
24. yardsticks can be used to evaluate it, broadly categorized into the 
form and object of the classification. 
Yardsticks to check the reasonableness of classification 
170. In terms of the form, the classification should not be based on 
arbitrary criteria and must instead be based on a logic which 
distinguishes individuals with similar characteristics i.e., the 
equals from the persons who do not share those characteristics—
the unequals. Apart from requiring such differentia, this prong 
requires that the classification must be intelligible, such that it can 
be reasonably understood whether an element falls in one class or 
another.122 If the class is so poorly defined that one cannot 
reasonably understand its constituents, it will fail this test of 
‘intelligible’ differentia. Therefore, instead of being based on 
arbitrary selection, the classification must be supported by valid 
and lawful reasons.123 
171. Hence, using an intelligible criterion, the classes must be 
constituted in a manner that distinguishes the components of that 
class from the elements that have been left out of the class. This is 
instantiated by State of Kerala v. N.M. Thomas,124 where a 7-
judge bench was dealing with the challenge of exemption granted 
to Scheduled Castes from the departmental test required for 
promotion. The Court held that the same was based on intelligible 
differentia, as the persons belonging to the exempted class, i.e., the 
Scheduled Caste, differed from those excluded from this class. 
 
122 THE OXFORD HANDBOOK ON INDIAN CONSTITUTION, Oxford University Press, 2016, 
940. 
123 State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar, supra note 117, para 18. 
124 State of Kerala v. N. M. Thomas, (1976). 

172. At this juncture, it is essential to raise the question that if every 
person or object shares similarities and differences with others in 
numerous ways, how do we determine whether they are similar 
enough to be categorized together? To put this into context using 
an oft-quoted example–assume a law is enacted to create two 
classes of vehicles, one allowed inside the park and another 
prohibited.125 In this scenario, a motorcycle is similar to a child’s 
bicycle in that both these locomotives have two wheels but are 
dissimilar to the extent that the former operates with an engine and 
can achieve higher speeds. Further, while a bicycle differs from a 
motorcycle, it possesses characteristics similar to those of an 
electric motorcycle since both these vehicles do not emit pollution 
in the park. Simultaneously, an electric motorcycle is comparable 
to a fuel-based motorcycle due to their shared propulsion method 
by an engine, despite their disparity in pollution emissions. In light 
of these considerations, would such a classification be deemed 
reasonable if bicycles and electric motorcycles were grouped 
together as one class, excluding fuel-based motorcycles? Since 
different variables exist for checking the similarities and 
dissimilarities, how do we ascertain that ‘similar’ elements are 
effectively grouped together? 
173. This Court has held that the classification must withstand the test 
akin to the Wednesbury principles such that the classification shall 
consider all the ‘relevant’ similarities and disregard insubstantial 
or microscopic differences.126 However, this also does not answer 
the question conclusively, as one must still know the criterion for 
gauging ‘relevance’. For instance, in the example above, we still do 
 
125 H.L.A. HART, Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals, Harvard Law 
Review, 1958, 71(4), 607. 
126 Ramesh Chandra Sharma v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2024), para 45; 
Roop Chand Adlakha v. DDA, 1989 Supp (1) SCC 116, para 19. not know whether being propelled by an engine should be a 
relevant criterion or not causing pollution should be the basis of 
classification! 
174. This leads to the second prong of the test, which requires the 
classification to be as per the object of the statute.127 This Court 
has held that while determining who qualifies ‘similarly situated’ 
individuals in the given circumstances, the court must see the 
purpose of law:128 
“54. A reasonable classification is one which includes all who 
are similarly situated and none who are not. The question 
then is: what does the phrase “similarly situated” 
mean? The answer to the question is that we must look 
beyond the classification to the purpose of the law. A 
reasonable classification is one which includes all 
persons who are similarly situated with respect to the 
purpose of the law. The purpose of a law may be either the 
elimination of a public mischief or the achievement of some 
positive public good.” 129 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
175. Hence, in the hypothetical above, the purpose of the law behind 
restricting the entry of vehicles inside the park will provide the 
standard of relevance for differentiating vehicles into separate 
classes. For instance, if the purpose is to stop pollution inside the 
park, electric motorcycles and bicycles can be grouped in the class 
of permissible vehicles. In contrast, vehicles based on petrol or 
diesel can be grouped into separate classes of restricted vehicles. 
However, if the purpose of the statute is to prevent people inside 
 
127 Special Courts Bill, supra note 120, para 72; D.S. Nakara v. Union of India, (1983), para 11. 
128 State of Gujarat v. Shri Ambica Mills Ltd., (1974), para 54. 
129 Id; Roop Chand Adlakha v. DDA, supra note 126, para 16. the park from getting hurt, children’s bicycles might be allowed, 
but other vehicles might be grouped and restricted. 
176. This prong of the test is also echoed in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper 
v. Union of India,130 in which an 11-judge Bench of this Court held 
that the object of the statute was to foment economic development 
through the assistance of banks, and from a resource standpoint, 
this development could be more effectively facilitated by 14 banks 
in particular. Consequently, the Court ruled that classifying these 
14 banks in a separate class was based on reasoning that had a 
nexus with the object of the statute. 
177. To sum up, a classification is reasonable if it differentiates between 
similar and dissimilar elements, if such distinction is intelligible, 
and if the similarities and dissimilarities have nexus with the 
purpose of the statute.131 
178. Further, within this twin-test framework of checking the form and 
object of classification, this Court has held that the effect of the 
statute must also be considered.132 Instead of a mere formalistic 
study of checking the intelligible differentia and nexus with the 
object, this Court would undertake a normative analysis and strike 
down a classification if the object itself is discriminatory or leads to 
 
130 Rustom Cavasjee Cooper (Banks Nationalisation), supra note 56, paras 178-180. 
131 Provisions similar to Article 14 exist in Singapore (Article 12) and Malaysia (Art. 
8(1)), which also use this twin test framework; PO YEN JAP, Constitutional Dialogue in 
Common Law Asia, Oxford University Press,2015; Similar provisions also exist in the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (Article 7), the International Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights (Article 26), and Constitutions of other countries such as 
Bhutan (Article 7(15)), Brazil (Article 5), Canada (Article 15), China (Article 33), 
France (Article 1), Germany (Article 3), Italy (Article 3), Japan (Article 14), Nepal 
(Article 18), Switzerland (Article 8), and the USA (Article 1). 
132 Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India, supra note 71, para 409; State of T.N. v. 
National South Indian River Interlinking Agriculturist Association, (2021), para 21. a prejudicial outcome not conducive to constitutional morality.133 
This effectively prevents the test of reasonable classification from 
becoming a mere formula and, instead, ensures that constitutional 
values are protected when the object itself is unjust. 
Qualifications regarding the yardsticks 
179. Having established the yardsticks for the reasonableness of 
classification, it is important to note two crucial qualifications to 
complete the understanding of this test. First, while establishing a 
nexus with the object of the statute is necessary, it is not essential 
to demonstrate that the classification was the optimal method to 
achieve the object in question. To this end, this Court has held 
that:134 
“33. The nexus test, unlike the proportionality test, is 
not tailored to narrow down the means or to find the 
best means to achieve the object. It is sufficient if the 
means have a “rational nexus” to the object. Therefore, 
the courts show a greater degree of deference to cases 
where the rational nexus test is applied. A greater 
degree of deference is shown to classification because 
the legislature can classify based on the degrees of 
harm to further the principle of substantive equality, 
and such classification does not require mathematical 
precision. The Indian courts do not apply the proportionality 
standard to classificatory provisions (…).” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
180. Second, when gauging the reasonableness of classification, the 
Court must adopt a pragmatic view and refrain from deeming a 
classification unconstitutional solely because it is marginally 
under-inclusive.135 In adjudicating the validity of a statute, the 
 
133 Ramesh Chandra Sharma, supra note 126, paras 34 and 40. 
134 South Indian River Interlinking, supra note 132, para 33. 
135 Shri Ambica Mills, supra note 128, para 55. concept of under-inclusiveness arises when a classification within 
the law fails to encompass all individuals similarly situated with 
respect to the law’s intended purpose.136 The approach of Indian 
courts towards under-inclusive legislation generally exhibits 
tolerance137 on the premise that the legislature is “free to recognize 
degrees of harm”138 and is allowed to “hit evil where it is most 
felt”.139 Moreover, this Court has also justified some under-
inclusive classifications on the 
grounds of administrative 
convenience and legislative experimentation.140 
181. Likewise, in Basheer v. State of Kerala,141 this Court upheld the 
validity of the law as long as it could be reasonably discerned based 
on intelligible differentia that advanced the object of the statute. 
The Court emphasized that merely because there is marginal 
under-inclusivity or the presence of cases falling on both sides of 
the dividing line, the law would not be declared as ultra vires of 
Article 14. In this vein, it held that: 
“20. Merely because the classification has not been 
carried out with mathematical precision, or that there 
are some categories distributed across the dividing line, 
is hardly a ground for holding that the legislation falls 
foul of Article 14, as long as there is broad discernible 
classification based on intelligible differentia, which 
advances the object of the legislation, even if it be class 
legislation. As long as the extent of overinclusiveness or 
underinclusiveness of the classification is marginal, the 
 
136 Id. 
137 Special Courts Bill, supra note 120, para 78; State of Uttar Pradesh v. Deoman 
Upadhyaya,. 
138 Charanjit Lal Chowdhury v. Union of India, 1950 SCC Online SC 49. 
139 B. K. MILLER, Constitutional Remedies for Underinclusive Statutes: A Critical 
Appraisal of Heckler v. Mathews, Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review, 
1985, 20, 86. 
140 South India River Interlinking, supra note 132; Superintendent & Remembrancer 
of Legal Affairs v. Girish Kumar Navalakha, (1975), para 10; Javed v. 
State of Haryana, (2003), para 17. 
141 Basheer v. State of Kerala, (2004), para 20. constitutional vice of infringement of Article 14 would not infect 
the legislation.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
182. This principle was reiterated in Subramanian Swamy v. Raju,142 
where it was argued that individuals under the age of 18 could 
demonstrate maturity, suggesting that age requirements should, 
therefore, be flexible under Article 14. While rejecting this 
argument, the Court held that categorization does not have to 
create classes with arithmetic precision, and instead, it would 
suffice if the classes are broadly comparable. 
183. Having identified the criteria for evaluating the constitutionality of 
classifications, we can now proceed to analyse whether Section 6A 
is constitutionally valid. 
Reasonableness of classification as per Section 6A 
184. To assess the reasonableness of the classification made by Section 
6A, it is imperative to delve into the background of this provision. 
185. As discussed earlier, Section 6A grants citizenship to those who 
migrated from East Pakistan into India before 25.03.1971. This 
grant of citizenship was prompted by several factors, with two 
primary considerations: 
(a) First, as exemplified by the remarks in the Parliament during 
the discussion on the bill to introduce Section 6A, 
humanitarian concerns played a significant role in granting 
citizenship because it was deemed inhumane to repatriate 
thousands of people who had migrated during times of war. 
 
142 Subramanian Swamy v. Raju, (2014), para 63. 

(b) Second, considerations of inter-state relations were pivotal, as 
India sought to extend cooperation to the newly formed nation 
of Bangladesh and help it in restoring normalcy. As part of this 
understanding, it was agreed to grant citizenship in India to 
immigrants who arrived before 1971.143 
 
186. The pertinent question that arises now is why such citizenship was 
granted 
exclusively 
to 
immigrants 
entering 
Assam. 
As 
acknowledged by the Union of India in its affidavit, the issue of 
immigration also existed in West Bengal. Therefore, if individuals 
from Bangladesh were immigrating to other States as well, we must 
ask what criteria justified conferring citizenship solely in Assam. 
187. The answer to this question lies in history, specifically when 
Section 6A was enacted. Between 1980 and 1985, the Government 
of India engaged in extensive negotiations with representatives of 
various bodies in Assam. Eventually, an agreement was reached 
among the Government of Assam, the Government of India, the 
AASU, and the AAGSP. According to this agreement, the 
movement's representatives against foreigners in Assam agreed to 
call off the agitation in exchange for granting Indian Citizenship to 
only a limited category of immigrants in Assam. As a result, the 
government also extended benefits to those involved in the agitation 
and committed to focusing on the socio-economic development of 
Assam, with particular emphasis on building educational 
institutions. Known as the Assam Accord, this agreement 
represented a political compromise that specifically granted 
 
143 Bholanath Sen, Lok Sabha Debate (CAB, 1985), 20.11.1985. citizenship to immigrants in Assam based on the terms agreed 
upon in the Accord. 
188. Section 6A was inserted to advance this political settlement 
established through the Assam Accord. The long title of the 
Citizenship Amendment Act, 1985 captures this by stating that, 
“Whereas for the purpose of giving effect to certain provisions of 
the Memorandum of Settlement relating to the foreigners’ 
issue in Assam (Assam Accord) which was laid down before the 
House of Parliament on the 10th day of August, 1985 it is necessary 
to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.” 
189. Since section 6A was predicated on the terms of the Assam Accord, 
it extended citizenship solely to immigrants in Assam because the 
Union of India had exclusively engaged in this accord with Assam. 
This serves as the basis of intelligible differentia vis-à-vis other 
States. As discussed earlier, in assessing the reasonableness of 
classification, the Court must ascertain whether relevant factors 
were considered and whether similarly situated individuals were 
grouped in alignment with the law's objective. Both these criteria 
are met in this instance. Section 6A duly considered the pertinent 
factors, notably that the Assam Accord pertained solely to the State 
of Assam. Since a piquant situation such as that in Assam did not 
exist in any of the other States, Section 6A’s objective did not 
extend to allowing such citizenship in these other States. Hence, 
the classification between the State of Assam and other States had 
a direct nexus with the object of the statute. 
190. The next question that arises before us is whether the Court should 
go one layer further and hold that since such an agreement was 
entered only with the State of Assam, the said exercise is liable to 
be construed as violative of Article 14 or whether the Union of India 

ought to have entered into similar agreements with other States? 
This has to be answered in the negative since such a determination 
falls outside the scope of judicial review, as this Court being not a 
representative body, should refrain from substituting its judgment 
for that of the elected representatives. The decision to enter into 
political compromises and agreements is a prerogative of the 
political entities involved, based on the specific circumstances and 
negotiations at hand. In the case of Assam, the unique situation 
and the negotiations conducted between 1980 and 1985 led to the 
Assam Accord, wherein certain benefits were extended to the State. 
However, it may not be appropriate for us to venture into the 
exercise of analysing whether similar agreements should have been 
pursued with other States like West Bengal. 
191. Apart from the cases discussed while analyzing Issue i (Judicial 
Review) (supra), such judicial restraint has also been advocated by 
foreign courts. Lord Ruskill, in a 5-judge bench of the House of 
Lords in Council for Civil Service Union v. Minister for the Civil 
Service,144 elucidated that: 
“(…) Prerogative powers such as those relating to the 
making of treaties, the defence of the realm, the prerogative 
of mercy, the grant of honours, the dissolution of Parliament 
and the appointment of ministers as well as others are not, I 
think susceptible to judicial review because their nature 
and subject matter are such as not to be amenable to 
the judicial process. The courts are not the place 
wherein to determine whether a treaty should be 
concluded or the armed forces disposed in a particular 
manner or Parliament dissolved on one date rather than 
another.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
144 Council for Civil Service Union v. Minister for the Civil Service, 1985 AC 374, para 
177. 

192. Indeed, India's federal structure allows for diverse relationships 
between the Union and its constituent States, enabling the 
Parliament to engage in different agreements based on distinct 
regional 
aspirations, 
political 
needs, 
and 
state-specific 
requirements. The Assam Accord, along with the introduction of 
Section 6A, is not the only instance of such political compromises. 
Historical records document numerous occurrences, such as 
Article 371A of the Constitution, which was inserted pursuant to 
the agreement between the Government of India and leaders of the 
Naga 
Peoples 
Convention.145 
Similarly, 
Article 
371G 
was 
incorporated pursuant to a memorandum of settlement between 
the Government of India, the Government of Mizoram and the Mizo 
National Front.146 Identical is the basis of Article 332(6), which was 
based on the agreement between the governments of India and 
Assam and the Bodo Liberation Tigers.147 These agreements and 
provisions are based on asymmetric federalism, recognizing that 
different States may have unique circumstances and requiring 
differentiated treatment. 
193. Moreover, this conclusion is also supported by various decisions of 
this Court, which have held that based on the unique historical 
circumstances of each State, the States may be grouped under 
different classes for the purpose of reasonable classification under 
Article 14.148 

145 The Constitution (Thirteenth) Amendment Bill, 1962, Statement of Objects and 
Reasons. 
146 The Constitution (Fifty-Third) Amendment Bill, 1986, Statement of Objects and 
Reasons. 
147 The Constitution (Ninetieth) Amendment Bill, 2003, Statement of Objects and 
Reasons. 
148 Ram Krishna Dalmia v. S.R. Tendolkar,, para 11; Gopi 
Chand v. Delhi Administration,, para 11. 

194. We thus do not find any fault with the government, nor do we 
dictate that similar agreements should have been made with other 
States when Parliament entered into a political agreement with 
Assam alone based on its unique historical situation. 
196. As against these considerations, the Petitioners have not been able 
to conclusively establish that other States were similarly placed. It 
is an established principle of law that there exists a presumption of 
constitutionality that underpins legislative enactments unless 
proven otherwise.149 With respect to Article 14 specifically, this 
Court has dismissed claims pertaining to discrimination when 
insufficient material was presented to support the claim.150 It has 
been repeatedly held that to succeed with a claim under Article 14, 
a mere plea regarding differential treatment is insufficient, and the 
Petitioner must show that similarly placed classes were 
discriminated against unjustifiably.151 
197. While Mr. Divan, learned Senior Counsel representing the 
Petitioners, argued that the burden would shift unto the State once 
the Petitioners established prima facie evidence of unequal 
treatment, this shift primarily occurs when the classification is ex 
facie arbitrary, such that the unjust discrimination is so apparent 
that no proof is required.152 In such circumstances, the onus must 
shift because the claimant cannot be burdened to disprove the 
absence of reasons when there are none. 

149 Id.; Mohd. Hanif Quareshi v. State of Bihar,, para 15. 
150 Bhagwati Saran v. State of Uttar Pradesh,, para 15. 
151 State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd.,, para 11. 
152 Ameerunnissa Begum v. Mahboob Begum, (1952), para 19; Ram 
Prasad Narayan Sahi v. State of Bihar, (1953), para 12. 

198. However, unless the legislation is clearly arbitrary, this onus 
cannot be reversed liberally, as sought by the Petitioners. In the 
present case, the classification was not ex-facie arbitrary as it was 
grounded in the legitimate context of the unique circumstances 
prevailing in Assam. In addition, as discussed in paragraph 192, 
many States in India share a sui generis relationship with the 
Union, thereby raising the threshold for establishing ex-facie 
arbitrariness of Section 6A. Accordingly, the burden rested upon 
the Petitioners to rebut this presumption and demonstrate that 
other States were also comparably situated and faced similar levels 
of violence. 
199. The illustrated burden has not been discharged by the Petitioners, 
and this Court is not engaging in a fact-finding endeavor at this 
stage. We are, therefore, bound to uphold the presumption of 
constitutionality and assume that the legislature has duly applied 
its mind and has taken into consideration relevant circumstances. 
200. Further, the implementation of the Assam Accord and Section 6A 
brought quietus to the then-ongoing discord while concurrently 
enabling India to uphold its diplomatic commitments to 
Bangladesh and address humanitarian concerns. Although there is 
merit in the concern surrounding Assam alone having to shoulder 
the burden of these immigrants, it must be noted that this is not 
attributable to Section 6A alone. It is well documented, both by 
historians and by previous decisions of this Court, that incessant 
migration from Bangladesh has continued post-1971. It was 
neither the intention nor the effect of Section 6A to give shelter to 
this latter class of immigrants. Indeed, a large cause of the 
Petitioners’ grievance is the government’s failure to give effect to 
this latter part of the Assam Accord and our citizenship regime–

which envisages timely detection and deportation of these post-
1971 immigrants. 
201. However, even if it is assumed that other States are similarly placed 
and should have been included thereunder, this alone would not 
render Section 6A unconstitutional. 
Under-inclusiveness and unconstitutionality of Section 
6A 
202. As was discussed previously in paragraphs 180 to 182 of this 
judgement, Courts are generally tolerant of marginally under-
inclusive legislations and recognize that similar cases may fall on 
both sides of the dividing line, provided that there is a broad 
discernible classification based on intelligible differentia.153 While 
analyzing validity under Article 14, the Court has to be cognizant 
of the fact that any division done by a classification cannot be 
mathematically precise and accurate. As long as the broad purpose 
of the law is being fulfilled, a classification cannot be deemed 
unreasonable. 
203. We are thus of the considered opinion that even if there are States 
that could share similar characteristics with Assam, the 
comparison should be between two broad classes: Assam and the 
rest of India, rather than each individual constituent of these two 
classes. Since other States, in general, were not facing similar 
issues, the differentiation in classes was reasonable. Hence, even if 
some States like West Bengal were placed similarly to Assam, that 
in and of itself would not lead to holding Section 6A 
unconstitutional. Accepting the Petitioners’ contention and striking 
down Section 6A on the grounds of non-inclusion only of West 
 
153 Basheer, supra note 141. 

Bengal would amount to allowing an under-inclusivity challenge in 
disguise, which, as discussed before, is not generally permitted by 
this Court. 
204. Instead of comparing borderline cases such as West Bengal with 
Assam, the comparison ought to be between Assam and an average 
constituent of the other class, i.e. the rest of India. As analysed in 
previous sections, Assam and the rest of India are distinguishable 
on the basis of the unique political situation created in Assam by 
the influx of immigrants. The classification under Section 6A, 
therefore, is not violative of Article 14 simply because it is 
applicable to the State of Assam alone. 
205. On the basis of the aforesaid reasoning, it is held that Section 6A 
is not ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India. vi. Manifest arbitrariness 
206. Citing Shayara Bano v. Union of India,154 the Petitioners argued 
that a provision can be struck down as unconstitutional if it is 
manifestly arbitrary. To prove that Section 6A is manifestly 
arbitrary, the Petitioners contended that: 
(a) Section 6A is against the overarching principles of democracy, 
federalism and the rule of law and is liable to be struck down 
on the grounds of manifest arbitrariness. 
(b) The cut-off dates in Section 6A, namely 01.01.1966 and 
25.03.1971, have no rationale and have been set arbitrarily. 

154 Shayara Bano v. Union of India, (2017). 

(c) There is no machinery for evaluating, assessing and 
determining the grant of citizenship under Section 6A (2), thus 
allowing anyone above the age of 57 years in Assam to claim 
citizenship without claiming ancestry or provenance. 
207. The Petitioners also contended that the expression ‘ordinarily 
resident’ is vague as it does not prescribe any yardstick for the 
number of days required to qualify the same. In this light, the 
Petitioners have cited this Court’s decision in Harakchand 
Ratanchand Banthia v. Union of India155 to contend that when 
key concepts in a provision are vague, the same ought to be struck 
down. 
208., the Respondents contended that the challenge to 
Section 6A under Article 14 on the grounds of being ‘manifestly 
arbitrary’ is untenable as there is an underlying rationale for the 
cut-off dates. It was submitted that the validity of 01.01.1966 as 
the cut-off date is severable from the validity of 25.03.1971. Hence, 
even if it is held to be arbitrary, Section 6A as a whole cannot be 
held to be unconstitutional. The Respondents also contended that 
the very objective behind Section 6A and the Assam Accord, as a 
whole, reflect a constitutional tradition of accommodating 
differences within Indian polity through asymmetric federal 
arrangements. Lastly, the Respondents have submitted that the 
term ‘ordinarily resident’ has been defined by this Court in 
Arunachal Pradesh v. Khudiram Chakma156 and hence is not 
vague. 
209. The issues that fall for our consideration are four-fold: 
 
155 Harakchand Ratanchand Banthia v. Union of India, (1969). 
156 Arunachal Pradesh v. Khudiram Chakma, 1994 Supp (1) SCC 615. i. 
Is there any rationale for the cut-off dates, i.e., 01.01.1966 and 
25.03.1971? Whether they are manifestly arbitrary? ii. 
Whether the process envisaged under Section 6A and the 
Citizenship Rules, 2009 for the migrants is unreasonable and 
suffers from the vice of ‘manifest arbitrariness’? iii. 
Is Section 6A is so ‘manifestly arbitrary’ that it offends Part II 
of the Constitution? iv. 
Is the term ‘ordinarily resident’ in Section 6A undefined and 
vague? If yes, does Section 6A deserve to be struck down on 
the grounds of being manifestly arbitrary? 
(a) Relation between Article 14 and arbitrariness 
210. At the outset, it is pertinent to address that apart from the 
reasonable classification aspect of non-discrimination discussed in 
the preceding section, Article 14 also prohibits manifestly arbitrary 
actions. The principle underlying the same is that if an act is 
arbitrary and no rational basis exists for its application, it may lead 
to differential application on similarly situated persons. Hence, 
such arbitrariness is not only antithetical to the notion of equality, 
it is also prohibited under Article 14. 
211. The absence of arbitrariness, or non-arbitrariness, as an essential 
component of the rule of law and a concomitant need in Article 14 
is sufficiently evident. The relation between rule of law and 
arbitrariness was also traced in Indira Nehru Gandhi v. Shri Raj 
Narain157 and thereafter, in E. P. Royappa v. State of Tamil 
Nadu,158 wherein equality was observed to be antithetical to 
 
157 Indira Nehru Gandhi v. Shri Raj Narain, 1975 Supp SCC 1. 
158 E. P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, (1974). arbitrariness. Furthermore, it was underscored that when an act is 
arbitrary, it inherently embodies inequality in political logic and 
constitutional jurisprudence, thus contravening the principles 
enshrined in Article 14. It is imperative to understand the 
significance of logic as one of the critical facets behind state action, 
the absence of which would render such action susceptible to 
arbitrariness. 
212. This Court further elaborated upon the relationship between Article 
14 and the conception of non-arbitrariness in the seminal case of 
Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India,159 wherein after emphasizing 
the dynamic nature of ‘equality’ and citing the ‘arbitrariness’ 
doctrine as formalized through EP Royappa (supra), it was 
observed by PN Bhagwati, J. (as His Lordship then was) that: 
“7. […] Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness in State action and 
ensures fairness and equality of treatment. The principle of 
reasonableness, which legally as well as philosophically, is 
an essential element of equality or non-arbitrariness pervades 
Article 14 like a brooding omnipresence and the procedure 
contemplated by Article 21 must answer the test of 
reasonableness in order to be in conformity with Article 14. 
[…]” 
 
(b) Constituents of manifest arbitrariness 
213. The test of ‘manifest arbitrariness’ itself was crystallized in the 
authoritative precedent set out in Shayara Bano v. Union of 
India (supra), where this Court dealt with the challenge to the 
practice of ‘triple talaq’ as recognized in the Muslim Personal Law 
(Shariat) Application Act, 1937. In that case, this Court over-ruled 
its previous decision in State of AP v. McDowell & Co.,160 wherein 
 
159 Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978), para 7. 
160 State of Andhra Pradesh v. McDowell & Co., (1996). it held that an enactment cannot be struck down on the grounds 
of it being arbitrary or unreasonable and that some constitutional 
infirmity has to be found before invalidating an Act. 
214. Thus, the test of ‘manifest arbitrariness’ was set out in Shayara 
Bano (supra) as follows: 
“101. […] Manifest arbitrariness, therefore, must be something 
done by the legislature capriciously, irrationally and/or 
without adequate determining principle. Also, when 
something 
is 
done 
which 
is 
excessive 
and 
disproportionate, such legislation would be manifestly 
arbitrary.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
215. The test of ‘manifest arbitrariness, as propounded in Shayara 
Bano (supra), was eventually relied on in a catena of decisions 
including Joseph Shine v. Union of India,161 and is the prevailing 
law on this issue. 
(c) Facets of the test of manifest arbitrariness 
216. The term ‘irrationality’ refers to the lack of reason or logic. While 
highlighting the need for the presence of clear reason or logic, this 
Court in Cellular Operators Assn. of India v. TRAI,162 
determined that the legislation, statute or provision being 
challenged must be supported by a rationale. The rationale 
demonstrates the application of intelligent care and observation in 
the enactment of such laws or provisions. To this end, it was held 
that: 
“48. (…) We cannot forget that when viewed from the angle of 
manifest arbitrariness or reasonable restriction, sounding in 
 
161 Joseph Shine v. Union of India, (2019). 
162 Cellular Operators Assn. of India v. TRAI, (2016). 

Article 14 and Article 19(1)(g) respectively, the Regulation 
must, in order to pass constitutional muster, be as a result of 
intelligent care and deliberation, that is, the choice of 
a course which reason dictates. Any arbitrary invasion of 
a fundamental right cannot be said to contain this quality. (…)” 
[Emphasis applied] 
 
217. Further, in Joseph Shine (supra), this Court emphasized the 
underlying logic while striking down the provision prohibiting 
adultery: 
“30. [...] The offence and the deeming definition of an aggrieved 
person, as we find, is absolutely and manifestly arbitrary 
as it does not even appear to be rational and it can be 
stated with emphasis that it confers a licence on the husband 
to deal with the wife as he likes which is extremely excessive 
and disproportionate. We are constrained to think so, as it 
does not treat a woman as an abettor but protects a woman 
and simultaneously, it does not enable the wife to file any 
criminal prosecution against the husband. Indubitably, she 
can take civil action but the husband is also entitled to take 
civil action. However, that does not save the provision as being 
manifestly arbitrary. That is one aspect of the matter. If the 
entire provision is scanned being Argus-eyed, we notice that 
on the one hand, it protects a woman and on the other, it does 
not protect the other woman. The rationale of the provision 
suffers from the absence of logicality of approach and, 
therefore, we have no hesitation in saying that it suffers 
from the vice of Article 14 of the Constitution being 
manifestly arbitrary.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
218. Still further, while the test of manifest arbitrariness requires the 
presence of logicality, such reasoning does not have to be stated 
explicitly 
and 
can 
be 
discernable 
from 
the 
facts 
and 
circumstances.163 However, it should be noted that the converse 
may not hold. In other words, even if the reason or rationale behind 
 
163 J.S. Luthra Academy v. State of Jammu and Kashmir, (2018). the impugned provision is expressly stated, it does not 
automatically guarantee non-arbitrariness. Such reason also needs 
to align with constitutional morality and public interest, and must 
bear a nexus with the object of the statute. The aspect of 
irrationality, as found in the test for ‘manifest arbitrariness’, thus, 
does not solely imply the absence of reason but also requires 
alignment with constitutional morality. Hence, the legitimacy of the 
reason or logic behind the impugned legislation should be viewed 
from the lens of constitutional ideals. This was so observed by this 
Court in Joseph Shine (supra), wherein it was clarified that 
irrationality does not merely denote the absence of reason but also 
requires 
that 
such 
reasoning 
be 
in 
harmony 
with 
constitutionalism. 
219. We may hasten to add that, the legitimacy of the reason behind the 
legislation that has been impugned must be viewed from the lens 
of public interest also. This Court, in Hindustan Construction Co. 
Ltd. v. Union of India,164 struck down Section 87 of the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 1996, on the ground of manifest arbitrariness 
by observing that it was against public interest. This was also 
observed in Manish Kumar v. Union of India (supra), that the 
golden thread running through this ground, making up the 
doctrine of manifest arbitrariness, is the absence of public interest. 
(d) Extent of review under manifest arbitrariness 
220. The standard for applying the test of ‘manifest arbitrariness’ is 
reflected in the word ‘manifest’, which signifies that the 
arbitrariness should be palpable and visible on the face of it.165 
 
164 Hindustan Construction Co. Ltd. v. Union of India, (2020). 
165 Vivek Narayan Sharma (Demonetisation Case-5 J.) v. Union of India, (2023), para 255. 

Hence, while examining whether a provision is manifestly arbitrary, 
Courts should practice judicial restraint and must not substitute 
their will against that of lawmakers.166 Using this test, Courts 
cannot question the wisdom of the policy but can only test its 
legality in terms of the aforementioned grounds. 
221. Such judicial restraint becomes all the more necessary while 
testing the arbitrariness behind a bright-line test. In law, the 
bright-line test is a clearly defined norm that does not leave a scope 
of interpretation. For instance, consider a legal requirement 
stipulating that individuals must be 18 years old to marry. Such a 
rule leaves no room for interpretation. In this context, it could be 
argued that if maturity is the rationale behind marriageable age, 
the use of the bright-line test introduces arbitrariness into legal 
standards, as a person aged 17.5 years old may in theory be more 
mature and suitable for marriage than someone aged 18.5 years 
old. 
222. The fallacy in this argument can be elucidated by the Sorites 
paradox, a logical quandary generated by vague terms, with blurred 
boundaries of application. To give an oft-quoted example, consider 
defining the term ‘heap of wheat’ based on the number of wheat 
grains. If a collection of N number of grains is called a heap, 
removing one grain would not alter the assessment because the 
difference between a heap and non-heap cannot be of one single 
grain. By the same reasoning, removing two wheat grains would 
not change the classification. Extending this logic incrementally, by 
deducting one wheat grain at a time, one could argue that even a 
 
166 K.S. Puttaswamy (Privacy-9J) v. Union of India, (2017), para 310. heap with N minus N grains would not be a heap, leading to a 
fallacious conclusion. 
223. Applying this paradox to the above illustration, if an individual of 
18 years is deemed mature enough for marriage, then logically, 
someone who is 18 years minus one day should also be considered 
mature. Following the same reasoning, one could argue that a 
person who is 18 years minus 365 days, effectively 17 years old, 
would also meet the maturity criterion and therefore, the 
stipulation of 18 years as the minimum age appears arbitrary, as it 
fails to account for the potential maturity of individuals who are 
younger. As already explained, there exists an inherent fallacy in 
this argument, and hence, it ought to be rejected. 
224. In that sense, every bright-line test, to some extent, is arbitrary. 
However, not every arbitrariness crosses permissible limits 
inherent in law. Indeed, the law sometimes prescribes these 
heuristic devices because the cost of arbitrariness is less than the 
gains received by prescribing a clear standard instead of keeping it 
vague. To put it differently, where arbitrariness is necessitated for 
a legislative distinction, the object of such a legislative act is also 
to prevent manifest arbitrariness. 
225. To explain using another analogy, let us consider the context of 
setting speed limits. Juxtapose two scenarios: one, where a sign is 
posted saying “do not drive faster than 60 kmph”; and second, 
where the sign says, “do not drive fast”. Following the logic 
discussed earlier, the 60 kmph standard appears arbitrary because 
if 60 kmph is deemed fast, then 59 kmph should also be considered 
fast, yet it would not be restricted. However, if the standard is left 
vague as “fast”, the consequences could be unjust and manifestly 
arbitrary. Some cars might exceed 80 kmph, leading to potential 

legal disputes when stopped. The lack of precise regulation could 
result in ineffective traffic control and costly litigation for public 
institutions. Conversely, if law enforcement clamps down to limit 
fast driving, it could create a chilling effect, slowing traffic even 
below the optimal speeds. Thus, while a 60 kmph limit may appear 
arbitrary, yet implementing that as a bright-line test would be more 
reasonable overall. 
226. Therefore, while testing the arbitrariness of bright-line tests, the 
Courts must be mindful of the inherent limitations in such norms 
and therefore a microscopic review should be avoided. Instead, as 
discussed above, the effort should be to determine if the bright-line 
norm crosses the prescribed limit of ‘manifest arbitrariness’ and is 
irrational and capricious enough to be struck down. If the norm is 
backed by a policy reason, the Court must refrain from excessively 
questioning the specific standard and should exercise judicial 
review cautiously. 
(e) Cut-off dates in Section 6A 
227. The Petitioners vehemently challenged the cut-off dates and argue 
that those dates are arbitrary. As explained above, a bright-line test 
given by cut-off dates cannot be arbitrary unless it is shown to be 
unreasonable. This Court has, in a catena of decisions, maintained 
that the determination of cut-off dates falls within the domain of 
the Executive and the Court should not interfere with the fixation 
of the same, unless it appears to be, on the face of it, blatantly 
discriminatory and arbitrary.167 To this effect, this Court has even 
held that the choice of a cut-off date cannot always be dubbed as 
arbitrary, even if no particular reason is forthcoming for the choice, 
 
167 State of Punjab v. Amar Nath Goyal, (2005). unless it is demonstrated to be capricious or whimsical.168 This 
stance aligns with the understanding of the inherent arbitrariness 
of bright-line tests, as discussed above in paragraphs 221 to 224. 
228. Adverting to the rationale behind the cut-off date of 01.01.1966, it 
seems there are historical circumstances, and the said date 
appears to be based on two significant policy reasons: 
(a) Humanitarian grounds: As discussed in paragraph 185 of this 
judgement, Section 6A was predicated on humanitarian 
grounds, where citizenship was granted to the people displaced 
by wars and political turmoil. Between 1964 and 1965, a 
significant influx of refugees prompted the Union to issue 
instructions to register such persons as citizens.169 The 
humanitarian grounds for the grant of citizenship apparently 
influenced the rationale for choosing this cut-off date. 
(b) Administrative convenience: Further, the immigrants who 
migrated before 1966 were added to the electoral rolls prepared 
as on 01.01.1966. These rolls served as the nearest definite 
document that could be drawn upon to determine citizenship, 
especially with a view to desist from disturbing the status quo 
amidst the large-scale migration and consequent settlement of 
people before 01.01.1966.170 It was also administratively 
convenient to select this cut-off date because of the 
impracticality of requesting documents from individuals who 
migrated much earlier, such as in 1951. Although 1961 was 
initially proposed as the cut-off date, but after due 
deliberations, eventually, the cut-off date of 01.01.1966 was 
 
168 Union of India v. Parameswaran Match Works, (1975). 
169 T. S. MURTY, Assam, The Difficult Years: A Study of Political Developments in 1979-
83, Himalayan Books, 1983. 
170 Id. agreed to, and thus, the period before and after 1966 was dealt 
with in a differential manner. 
229. It can thus be concluded that the date of 01.01.1966 was not set 
arbitrarily but based on proper application of mind. 
230. As regards to the reasoning behind the cut-off date of 25.03.1971, 
the same can be traced to the launch of Operation Searchlight by 
Pakistan, an event which also marked the onset of the Bangladesh 
Liberation War. Subsequently, on the very next day, on 26.03.1971, 
Bangladesh officially declared independence. In response to these 
developments, the Prime Minister of Bangladesh committed to “by 
every means, the return of all the refugees who had taken shelter in 
India since March 25, 1971, and to strive, by every means to 
safeguard their safety, human dignity and livelihood”.171 
231. Soon thereafter, the President of Bangladesh promulgated the 
Bangladesh Citizenship (Temporary Provisions) Order, 1972, on 
15.12.1972, with retrospective validity from 26.03.1971. The 1972 
Order 
essentially 
introduced 
a 
framework 
of 
constituent 
citizenship, signifying the initial acquisition of citizenship through 
the operation of the law. The 1972 Order put forth a discernible 
distinction and provided citizenship from 25.03.1971, ameliorating 
the issue of statelessness. Since the war had ended and a new 
nation was formed on 25.03.1971, the concern regarding providing 
citizenship based on humanitarian grounds was also assuaged. 
This appears to be the rationale behind prescribing the date of 
25.03.1971 as a cut-off for obtaining citizenship in India. 
 
171 Joint Communique issued at the end of the visit of the Prime Minister of 
Bangladesh, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, to India, 08.02.1972. 

232. This background indicates that the cut-off dates in Section 6A were 
not incorporated in a vacuous manner but were a result of 
considerable deliberation and discussion, and were also backed by 
a well-considered rationale. Furthermore, keeping in mind the 
humanitarian considerations that would have gone into the grant 
of citizenship under Section 6A, we cannot hold that the rationale 
behind the cut-off dates militates against any constitutional values 
or the concept of constitutional morality. Instead, Section 6A 
acknowledged the political and social realities of that period along 
with the impracticability of reversing the changes that had 
occurred. 
233. Nevertheless, and as noted earlier, the determination of a cut-off 
date falls within the ambit of the policy makers and the Court would 
be reluctant to impinge into such fixation, save and except when 
the assigned date is vitiated with discriminatory and arbitrary 
considerations. Since the cut-off dates in Section 6A have been 
found not to offend the aforementioned principles, we are not 
inclined to interfere in the prescription of such cut-off dates. 
234. We may hasten to add here that Section 6A does not operate 
perpetually and since it does not rescue those immigrants who 
entered the State of Assam on or after 25.03.1971 and has become 
redundant qua them, the cut-off dates prescribed therein cannot 
be said to be tainted with the element of manifest arbitrariness. 
(f) Process prescribed under Section 6A 
235. The Petitioners also claimed that the process as prescribed under 
Section 6A is also manifestly arbitrary. Let us now proceed to 
consider whether the process in built in Section 6A suffers with the 

vice of manifest arbitrariness, regardless of the number of 
conditions prescribed therein for claiming citizenship. 
236. The conditions for an individual who migrated prior to 01.01.1966 
are such that first, the person must be of Indian origin; second, 
they should have migrated to Assam from the specified territory 
before 01.01.1966; and third, the person must have been ordinarily 
resident in Assam since the date of their entry into Assam. 
Additionally, the persons whose names were included in the 
electoral rolls for the 1967 elections were also to be conferred 
deemed citizenship. Section 6A (1) further defines the meaning of 
the terms contained in Section 6A (2). Section 6A (1) (a) explains 
‘Assam’ to mean “territories included in the State of Assam 
immediately 
before 
the 
commencement 
of 
the 
Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act, 1985”. Section 6A (1) (c) defines ‘specified 
territory’ to mean “territories included in Bangladesh immediately 
before the commencement of the Citizenship Act, 1985”. Further, the 
person is deemed to be of ‘Indian origin’, as per Section 6A (1) (d), 
if “he, or either of his parents or any of his grandparents was born 
in undivided India”. The meaning of ‘ordinarily resident in Assam’ 
is also clear and has been discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Hence, conferring deemed citizenship under Section 6A (2) is not 
arbitrary but subject to the abovementioned conditions. 
237. Further, the migrants who came to Assam on or after 01.01.1966 
and before 25.03.1971, will have to be subjected to the following 
conditions and processes, in addition to the conditions stipulated 
above: 
i. 
Such persons should have been detected to be foreigners. 
Section 6A (1) (e) makes it clear that a person is deemed to 
have been a foreigner on the date on which a Tribunal 

constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 
submits its opinion to the effect that he is a foreigner to the 
officer or authority concerned. ii. 
Such persons, thereafter, should register themselves in 
accordance with the provisions of the Citizenship Rules, 2009, 
with a registering authority as specified therein. Rule 19 of the 
Citizenship Rules, 2009 deals with the Registering Authority, 
who would be an officer not below the rank of the Additional 
District Magistrate. iii. 
Thereafter, per Rule 19 (2), an application for registration 
under Form XVIII would have to be made by the persons so 
detected by the Tribunals, before the Registering Authority 
within 30 days of such detection. Such application must be 
made within 30 days of the appointment of the Registering 
Authority. iv. 
The 
Registering 
Authority 
would 
thereafter 
enter 
the 
particulars of the application in Form XIX and return a copy of 
the application under his seal to the applicant. v. 
The Authority would send such a copy of the application to the 
Central and State governments with a quarterly return in Form 
XX. vi. 
Further, as per Section 6A (4), a person registered under the 
process mentioned above would be entitled from the date of his 
detection as a foreigner and till the expiry of ten years from 
that date, the same rights and obligations as an Indian citizen 
except for the right to vote. vii. 
Rule 20 of the Citizenship Rules, 2009 also allows the 
Registering Authority to make a fresh reference to the 
Tribunals upon receipt of an application from an applicant 
when any question arises whether such person fulfils the 
necessary criteria or the Tribunal has not recorded a finding to 
that effect. 
238. From the above, it is clear that there are legibly delineated 
conditions and a reasonable process envisaged under Section 6A 
and the Citizenship Rules, 2009 for migrants who came before 
01.01.1966, as well as for those who came on or after 01.01.1966 
and before 25.03.1971. 
239. Still further, apart from these conditions prescribed within Section 
6A itself, various other statutes supplement the issue of migrants 
in Assam. As will be detailed in the later part of this judgement 
under Issue xi (Citizenship Act vis- à-vis the IEAA) (infra), these 
statutes include the Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 1950, 
Foreigners Act, 1946, the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964, the 
Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 and the Passport Act, 1967. 
In these statutes, the Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 
1950 prescribes the mechanism for the expulsion of immigrants 
acting against the public interest, and the Foreigners Act, 1946 as 
well as the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 prescribe, inter alia, 
the mechanism for detection of foreigners, the norms regarding 
their stay in India before they are granted citizenship, and 
deportation of illegal immigrants post-1971. Additionally, the 
Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 can also be used to penalize 
illegal immigrants who entered India without a valid passport. The 
Passport Act, 1967 can be used for penalizing immigrants travelling 
out of India without such a passport. 

240. The above statutes, for the reasons assigned in the later part, 
supplement Section 6A and are to be read together to create a 
harmonious code. The process which runs through all of these 
legislations does not appear to be capricious or irrational. We 
cannot therefore approve the Petitioners’ approach of singularly 
reading Section 6A in isolation, calling it incomplete and terming it 
manifestly arbitrary for not prescribing all conditions exhaustively. 
241. There also appears to be an explicit and legitimate reason behind 
the process of segregating migrants into different classes, as 
provided in Section 6A. This is so, since the over-arching objective 
of Section 6A and the Assam Accord was to achieve a 
comprehensive and lasting solution to the complex issue of 
migration in Assam; balancing legal, political, and humanitarian 
considerations. 
242. At this juncture, it is crucial to distinguish between the prescribed 
process under the provision and its actual implementation. While 
the legislature had anticipated that the procedure outlined in 
Section 6A, along with other complementary statutes mentioned in 
paragraph 239 above, would suffice to address the issue of 
immigration into Assam, this intention has not been realized. 
Instead of adequately addressing the immigrants who entered the 
state before 1971 and timely identifying and deporting those who 
entered illegally post-1971, the Respondents have not properly 
implemented this legal regime, leading to a scenario where the 
latter category of immigrants have been residing in Assam like 
ordinary citizens. However, this failure is not attributable to Section 
6A but rather to its inadequate implementation. 

243. Certainly, had the law granted Indian citizenship to undocumented 
immigrants from another country on an ongoing basis without any 
intelligible criteria or discernible principle, it could have been 
susceptible to challenge. However, this is not the case here. As 
previously analyzed, Section 6A conferred citizenship only upon 
certain immigrants who met certain specified conditions up to a 
particular cut-off date. Functioning alongside other statutes, its 
aim was not only to legitimize the stay of a particular class of 
immigrants but also to facilitate the detection and deportation of 
others. Section 6A is clearly not manifestly arbitrary. 
(g) Section 6A and Part II of the Constitution 
244. The Petitioners further argued that individuals declared as citizens 
in Part II of the Constitution, along with successive generations, 
constitute the basic structure of the Constitution, and any statute 
or statutory provision which interferes with this basic structure, 
without reasonable care and fairness, should be deemed 
‘manifestly arbitrary’ thus rendering Section 6A as liable to be 
struck down. 
245. Since we have already dealt with Part II of the Constitution in the 
preceding parts, this issue need not be iterated again. It would be 
sufficient to observe that Section 6A does not go against the notion 
of citizens under Part II of the Constitution, and the same does not 
sustain a challenge based on either the ‘basic structure’ theory or 
‘manifest arbitrariness’. 
(h) ‘Ordinarily resident’ in Section 6A 
246. The Petitioners submitted that the expression ‘ordinarily resident’, 
as contained in Section 6A, is vague as it does not prescribe any 
yardstick for the number of days required to qualify the same. In 

this light, the Petitioners cited this Court’s holding in Harakchand 
Ratanchand Banthia v. Union of India (supra), to contend that 
when key concepts in a provision are vague, the same ought to be 
struck down. 
247. Vagueness as one of the grounds for striking down a provision 
under 
Article 

can 
be 
understood 
through 
judicial 
pronouncements made by this Court. In the Indian Social Action 
Forum v. Union of India,172 a 2-judge Bench of this Court dealt 
with a challenge to certain provisions of the Foreign Contribution 
(Regulation) Act, 2010 and the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) 
Rules, 2011. While particularly analyzing the words ‘activity, 
ideology and programme’ in Section 5 (1) of the above enactment, 
this Court affirmed the High Court’s view that the abovementioned 
words do not suffer from the vice of vagueness, and would not invite 
the wrath of Article 14. This Court observed as follows: 
“16. […] The High Court held that the words “activities of the 
organisation, the ideology propagated by the organisation and 
the programme of the organisation” having nexus with the 
activities of a political nature are expansive but cannot be 
termed as vague or uncertain. Sufficient guidance is provided 
by Parliament in Section 5 and it is for the rule-making 
authority to lay down the specific grounds. We are in 
agreement with the High Court that Section 5(1) does 
not suffer from the vice of vagueness inviting the wrath 
of Article 14. […]” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
248. The vagueness doctrine was further developed in Nisha Priya 
Bhatia v. Union of India173 which observed that a duly enacted 
law cannot be struck down merely on the grounds of vagueness, 
 
172 Indian Social Action Forum v. Union of India, (2021). 
173 Nisha Priya Bhatia v. Union of India, (2020). unless such vagueness transcends into arbitrariness. With this 
background, we shall now examine the test for assessing vagueness 
and whether Section 6A falls foul of the same. 
Vagueness in law 
249. Vagueness is an inherent feature of language. The same intention 
can be expressed with a variety of words and expressions, and any 
given choice of words can relate to multiple different intentions. 
This problem is particularly exacerbated with vague terms, which 
often have a wide variety of referents, leading to comparatively 
greater open-endedness and variability. It is well known that unless 
the law prescribes a bright-line test, which too has its own set of 
interpretative problems as discussed before, most standards in law 
have some degree of open texture, and inevitably harbor some 
vagueness or multiple meanings. 
250. The following example may be considered to understand the 
import of a word with an open texture. Suppose a statute uses the 
term ‘tall’ instead of prescribing a particular numerical test for 
height. Now, the meaning of this term can vary depending on the 
context and the purpose of the statute. The standard of tallness 
might differ for a ride at an amusement park and perhaps in 
discerning the maximum height of vehicles on motorways. Hence, 
in that sense, the term is vague and open to wide interpretation. 
251. Vagueness in law, however, exists on a spectrum, and different 
scenarios necessitate different degrees of tolerance towards 
vagueness. Excessive vagueness in law can make the statute 
overbroad and might make the exercise of discretion a capricious 
exercise. At the same time, it might sometimes be desirable in the 
interest of justice to retain some open texture in statutes, to cover 

future eventualities that the legislature might not have anticipated 
but intended to address based on the overarching purpose of the 
law. In that sense, the sliding scale of vagueness in law determines 
whether the law is just and inclusive, or unjust and capricious. 
252. To instantiate, consider Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963, 
which allows the condonation of delay if ‘sufficient cause’ has been 
delineated by such applicant. In this context, instead of prescribing 
a mathematically precise formula in regards to what is a sufficient 
cause, it was considered necessary to use words that provide a 
broad spectrum and enable a fact-based analysis for each case. 
Since lawmakers could not possibly envisage all potential 
situations that may arise in the future at the time of legislating, it 
was therefore considered prudent to leave it to the facts and 
circumstances of each individual case. 
253. Apart from enabling individualized application of the broad legal 
directive, a certain degree of vagueness is also necessary to address 
evolving societal needs. An excellent example of this is reflected in 
the jurisprudence of Article 21. In this scenario, if the framers of 
the Constitution had sought to include a laundry list encompassing 
a myriad of conditions to which Article 21 would be applicable, the 
ramifications would have been substantial. Any interpretation of 
the right to privacy would have required a constitutional 
amendment. Therefore, it may often be beneficial to prescribe a 
broad standard and allow enough flexibility to address changing 
needs of the society. Judicial discretion in that sense is often 
wedded unto the law and cannot be eliminated by invoking 
excessive formalism. 
254. This takes us to the question that if vagueness is inherent in law 
and may even be desirable on some level, then what ought to be the 

test and standard for striking down a law on grounds of being 
vague. In this regard, we will now analyze the test and standard for 
vagueness, which would make a statute or legislation liable to be 
struck down on that basis. 
Test for void-for-vagueness 
255. Vagueness needs to be viewed from the perspective of: (a) the 
authorities applying the impugned law; and (b) the persons being 
regulated by the impugned law, as was held in Shreya Singhal v 
Union of India,174 where this Court dealt with the constitutionality 
of Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2000. This Court, 
after referring to terms in Section 66A, such as ‘grossly offensive’ 
or ‘menacing’, observed the same to be very vague and held that 
neither the prospective offender under Section 66A nor the 
authorities who are to apply Section 66A would have any 
manageable standard to charge a person for an offence under 
Section 66A. It was observed as follows: 
“85. […] Quite obviously, a prospective offender of Section 
66-A and the authorities who are to enforce Section 66-A 
have absolutely no manageable standard by which to book a 
person for an offence under Section 66-A […].” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
256. With respect to the first limb, i.e., the perspective of the person 
applying the law, the standards are made clear in State of Madhya 
Pradesh v. Baldeo Prasad,175 where while dealing with a 
constitutional challenge to the validity of the Central Provinces and 
Berar Goondas Act, 1946, it was observed that the definition of the 
word ‘goonda’ does not give necessary assistance to the District 
 
174 Shreya Singhal v Union of India, (2015). 
175 State of Madhya Pradesh v. Baldeo Prasad, (1961). 

Magistrate, in deciding whether a particular citizen falls under the 
category of ‘goonda’ or not. Further, in Maneka Gandhi (supra), a 
Constitution Bench of this Court, while trying to construe the 
import of the words ‘in the interests of general public’ in Section 
10(3)(c) of the Passport Act, 1967, observed that the law is well 
settled to the effect that “when a statute vests unguided and 
unrestricted power in any authority to affect the rights of a person 
without laying down any policy or principle which is to guide the 
authority in exercise of this power, it would be affected by the vice of 
discrimination…”. After noting that the impugned words in the 
provision are taken ipsissima verba from Article 19(5) of the 
Constitution, it was held as follows: 
“16. (…)We are clearly of the view that sufficient guidelines 
are provided by the words “in the interests of the 
general public” and the power conferred on the Passport 
Authority to impound a passport cannot be said to be 
unguided or unfettered(…).” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
257. This view has also been endorsed in Harakchand Ratanchand 
Banthia (supra), where a Constitution Bench of this Court dealt 
with the constitutional validity of the Gold Control Act, 1968. The 
challenge made by the Petitioners therein, against Section 27 of the 
Act, mainly contended that the conditions imposed through the 
section for the grant or renewal of licenses were uncertain, vague 
and unintelligible, thus conferring broad and unfettered power 
upon the statutory authorities in the matter of grant or renewal of 
license. 
258. Hence, to satisfy the first facet regarding the person applying the 
law, the impugned law must be clear enough to provide necessary 

guidelines regarding application, and must not confer unfettered 
discretion. 
259. When evaluating the issue from the second perspective, which 
focuses on the individuals affected by the law, it is essential to 
adopt an objective standard reflecting the viewpoint of a person of 
average intelligence within the affected group. Thus, it follows that 
a person of ordinary intelligence amongst such a class of persons 
on which the impugned law operates should be able to understand 
the scope or sphere of application of the law. This standard was 
observed by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Kartar Singh v. 
State of Punjab,176 where it dealt with the constitutionality of 
specific provisions in the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1987, analyzed the term ‘abet’ and gave it a 
reasonable construction to avoid the vice of vagueness. It was 
observed that vague laws offend important values and reinforce the 
need for laws to give a person of ordinary intelligence a reasonable 
opportunity to know what is prohibited. 
260. Nisha Priya Bhatia (supra), was a case where a challenge to Rule 
135 of the Research and Analysis Wing (Recruitment, Cadre and 
Services) Rules, 1975 was laid. This Court observed that such a 
challenge on the ground of vagueness could only be sustained if the 
Rule does not provide a person of ordinary intelligence with a 
reasonable opportunity to know the scope of the sphere in which 
the Rule would operate. This position was further developed, in line 
with the perspective of the persons upon which the provision 
operates, by observing that this standard is to be applied from the 
 
176 Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab, (1994). point of view of a member working in the organization as an 
intelligence officer, more particularly, a Class I intelligence officer. 
261. Furthermore, this standard was also seen to have been applied in 
the Federation of Obstetrics & Gynaecological Societies of 
India (FOGSI) v. Union of India,177 wherein the constitutional 
validity of Sections 23 (1) and 23 (2) of the Pre-conception and Pre-
natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act, 
1994 was being challenged. While holding against such a challenge, 
it was observed by this Court that the provisions are not vague and 
that a responsible doctor is expected to know what they are 
undertaking and what their responsibilities are. In this light, the 
standard of a ‘person of ordinary intelligence’ was also seen to be 
employed and the Court went on to observe that a person of 
ordinary intelligence can comprehend the provisions of the Act and 
they can have fair notice of what is prohibited and what omission 
they should make. A nuanced understanding of the term ‘ordinary 
intelligence’ can be gained from this Court’s ruling in Seksaria 
Cotton Mills Ltd. v. State of Bombay,178 where, albeit in a 
different context, while interpreting the meaning of the word 
‘possession’, it was observed as follows: 
“21. But we need not go into all this. Here is an order which is 
to affect the business of hundreds of persons, many of whom 
are small petty merchants and traders, the sort of men who 
would not have lawyers constantly at their elbow; and even if 
they did, the more learned their advisers were in the law the 
more puzzled they would be as to what advice to give, for it is 
not till one is learned in the law that subtleties of thought and 
bewilderment arise at the meaning of plain English words 
which any ordinary man of average intelligence, not 
 
177 Federation of Obstetrics & Gynaecological Societies of India (FOGSI) v. Union of 
India, (2019). 
178 Seksaria Cotton Mills Ltd. v. State of Bombay, (1953), para 21. versed in the law, would have no difficulty in 
understanding [...]” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
262. To sum up this facet, the impugned law is to be tested from the 
perspective of a person of ‘ordinary intelligence’ from the class to 
which the law applies. We have also delineated cases where the 
impugned law operates on a specialized class of persons, such as a 
Class-I intelligence officer of the Research and Analysis Wing, as 
seen in Nisha Priya Bhatia (supra), and medical practitioners or 
doctors as seen in FOGSI (supra). In any case, even if the persons 
being regulated are not a specialized class of persons, the Court 
would adopt the standard of an ordinary man of average 
intelligence, who, though not well versed in law, would have no 
difficulty in understanding the plain meaning of the words 
contained in the impugned law, when confronted with it. 
263. Given the above, it is observed that the test for striking down a law 
on the grounds of vagueness can be viewed through two 
perspectives, both of which are to be taken into account, and the 
standards for the same have to be satisfied to sustain a challenge 
on the grounds of a law or provision being void for vagueness. Thus, 
a statute or its provision can be struck down for vagueness if: 
i. 
The authority interpreting and applying the impugned law or 
provision is not sufficiently guided by such law or provision 
and is conferred unfettered discretion by virtue of the same; 
and 
ii. 
When confronted with the plain meaning, a person of ordinary 
intelligence, amongst the persons regulated by the impugned 

law or provision, faces difficulty in understanding the sphere 
of their application. 
The extent of review for the test of ‘void for vagueness’ 
264. It is also well settled that ordinarily, courts should endeavour to 
draw a demarcating line and infer some reasonable meaning from 
an impugned provision, rather than hastening to intervene and 
striking down the entire provision on the grounds of vagueness. 
This view was also echoed in K.A. Abbas v. Union of India,179 
where a Constitution Bench of this Court dealt with the 
constitutionality of Section 5B of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 and 
laid down the thresholds for applicability of the vagueness doctrine. 
It was held that if a law is vague, it should be accorded the 
interpretation which best suits the legislature’s intention and 
advances the purpose of the legislation. If that was not possible, 
and the legislation was marred with uncertainty which prima facie 
appeared to take away a guaranteed freedom, it could be struck 
down. However, this Court also cautioned that such recourse be 
resorted to sparingly, and the Court should instead endeavor to 
draw the line of demarcation where possible. 
265. Similarly, another important principle governing this doctrine is 
that vagueness ought to be inversely proportional to the gravity of 
the consequences involved—i.e., the more penal the consequences, 
the less vague the legislation should be. Vagueness, especially in 
criminal laws, ought to be used to protect the individual facing 
penalty.180 

179 K.A. Abbas v. Union of India, (1970). 
180 Shreya Singhal, supra note 174. 

Whether Section 6A is void for being vague 
266. Now turning to the issue at hand, the Petitioners’ apprehension 
concerns the meaning of the phrase ‘ordinarily resident in Assam’, 
as provided in Section 6A, and more particularly in clauses (2) and 
(3) thereof. 
267. At the very threshold, we must note that the consequences of 
Section 6A are relevant for our determination of vagueness, as 
discussed in paragraph 263 of this judgement. Section 6A confers 
citizenship upon a sub-class of immigrants into Assam, and can 
therefore not be classified as criminal or penal. Instead, by 
legitimizing the stay of certain immigrants in India, Section 6A is 
more akin to a beneficial legislation. Given this, we are inclined to 
extend greater laxity when testing the term ‘ordinarily resident’ for 
vagueness. 
268. First, while examining the expression ‘ordinarily resident’ from the 
viewpoint of the authority interpreting and applying the law, it 
could be observed that there is little vagueness in this term, given 
that this Court has already dealt with the same and extracted its 
import, particularly within the context of its usage in Section 6A. 
Khudiram Chakma (supra), dealt with the case of the Chakmas, 
who were a group of people who had migrated to Assam in 1964 
and had shifted to Arunachal Pradesh thereafter, and were 
claiming citizenship under Section 6A. It was held that ‘ordinarily 
resident’ within Section 6A meant “ordinarily resident in Assam 
from the date of entry till the incorporation of Section 6-A, namely, 
07.12.1985”. To further understand the nuanced import of 
‘ordinarily resident’, this Court, after placing reliance on Smt. 

Shanno Devi v. Mangal Sain181 observed the same to mean that 
“it is not necessary that for every day of this period he should have 
resided in India. In the absence of the definition of the words 
‘ordinarily resident’ in the Constitution it is reasonable to take the 
words to mean ‘resident during this period without any serious 
break.’” In Smt. Shanno Devi (supra), this Court was interpreting 
the term ‘ordinarily resident’ as appearing in Article 6 of the 
Constitution, which applies in the case of citizenship for persons 
who migrated to India from Pakistan. The term ‘ordinarily resident’ 
under Section 6A can thus hardly be said to be undefined or vague. 
269. In addition, it must also be noted that the phrase ‘ordinarily 
resident’ is used in various Indian legislations, in contexts not too 
dissimilar from Section 6A. Besides the Indian Constitution, it finds 
mention in Sections 5 and 10 of the Citizenship Act, 1955, in the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950, in the Life Insurance 
Corporation Act, 1956, the Income Tax Act, 1961 and the Patents 
Act, 1970, among other statutes. Given such frequent usage, it 
would be difficult to term ‘ordinarily resident’ as vague. This Court 
has held the same in Premium Granites v. State of T.N.,182 where 
it was noted that the term ‘public interest’ had acquired the 
character of being a ‘definitive concept’ in Indian jurisprudence, 
owing to its widespread usage in the Constitution and other 
enactments, apart from its interpretation in several judicial 
pronouncements. 
270. Hence, the words ‘ordinarily resident in Assam’, as contained in 
Section 6A (2) and (3), cannot be seen to suffer from the vice of 
vagueness, keeping in view the fact that the judicial officers 
 
181 Smt. Shanno Devi v. Mangal Sain, (1961). 
182 Premium Granites v. State of T.N., (1994). constitute the Foreigners Tribunals; their orders are subject to 
review by superior courts; and there are civil administration officers 
aiding the Tribunals, all of whom are well conversant with the 
nuances of the procedure contemplated under Section 6A. 
271. When proceeding to apply the second limb of the test of vagueness, 
i.e., from the perspective of persons regulated by the impugned law, 
the relevant class of persons for consideration would be the 
immigrants who came to Assam from erstwhile East Pakistan 
before the cut-off date of 25.03.1971. 
272. Such an analysis would indicate that an immigrant from East 
Pakistan of ordinary intelligence, who has come before 25.03.1971 
to Assam and who is not versed in law, when confronted with the 
plain meaning of the words ‘ordinarily resident since the date of his 
entry in Assam’, would readily be able to understand the scope or 
sphere or application of the words. The emphasis here is whether 
a person of ordinary intelligence can understand the meaning 
simpliciter and gain a basic idea of the scope or sphere of 
application of the same within the context of the impugned law, 
and not a nuanced or exact legal understanding. On application of 
such a threshold with respect to the persons being regulated, it 
would be difficult to hold that such persons would be unable to 
understand the simpliciter contour and indicative meaning of the 
phrase ‘ordinarily resident’, and would find it so vague as to be 
unable to the meaning of the words. This observation is further 
bolstered by the fact that none from the affected class of 
immigrants has contended before us that they found the term 
‘ordinarily resident’ to be vague or evasive. 

273. We thus hold that Section 6A does not suffer from manifest 
arbitrariness because: (a) there is application of mind behind the 
incorporation of the cut-off dates; (b) the process under Section 6A 
is not arbitrary; (c) Section 6A does not violate Part II; and (d) the 
term ‘ordinary residence’ is not vague enough to be void. vii. Article 29 and Section 6A 
274. The Petitioners have attempted to claim endogamous community 
rights through the route of Article 29 of the Constitution. They 
contended that there has been a drastic demographic change in the 
State of Assam due to the influx of illegal migrants from erstwhile 
East Pakistan, which has resulted in Assamese culture being lost. 
They further argued that the right under Article 29(1) is absolute 
and provides a group the freedom to shape their cultural identity. 
This, they argue, gets jeopardized when there is a forcible 
imposition of a foreign culture, as is happening through the 
unchecked migration of Bangladeshi immigrants into Assam. 
275. Countering 
the 
Petitioners’ 
contentions, 
the 
Respondents 
submitted 
that 
demographic 
changes 
could 
not 
be 
a 
constitutionally valid metric for measuring cultural change. 
Changes to religious demographics could be traced to several 
different factors, including state reorganisation and internal 
migration. Further, they contended that the objective of Article 
29(1) is to establish a multicultural society, and not an 
endogamous one. They argued that accepting the Petitioners’ 
argument would lead to cultural exclusivity, which they felt was not 
constitutionally permissible. Further, they also urged that a 
constitutional culture exists in India, which ought not to be 
endangered on the basis of demographic change. 

(a) Background of Article 29 
276. Article 29(1) of the Constitution, which is included in Part III, 
confers upon any section of citizens residing in the territory of 
India, the right to conserve its language, script or culture. The text 
of the provision reads as follows: 
“29. Protection of interests of minorities. — (1) Any section of 
the citizens residing in the territory of India or any part thereof 
having a distinct language, script or culture of its own shall 
have the right to conserve the same.” 
 
277. Incorporated into the constitutional framework with a distinctive 
approach to bestowing rights upon a segment of the populace, this 
provision underwent extensive debate and scrutiny within the halls 
of the Constituent Assembly. The deliberations surrounding this 
provision serve as an invaluable resource for comprehensively 
understanding the significance of Article 29, affording us insight 
into the overarching intent of its framers during the formulation of 
this particular provision. 
278. Article 29, which was then draft Article 23 prior to its inclusion into 
the Constitution, was the subject matter of intense debate, with 
respect to both the terms used in the provision itself and the import 
of the rights it conferred. Although draft Article 23 initially used the 
term ‘minority’, it was substituted for the words ‘section of citizens’. 
This change was made keeping in mind the diversity of India and 
with the aim of ensuring that children received education in the 
language of their choice, while simultaneously making sure that 
they continued to learn the language of whichever State they may 
be a part of.183 Thereafter, the term ‘section of citizens’ got 
 
183 Begum Aizaz Rasul, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 7, 08.12.1948. crystallised to the extent that attempts to replace it with the term 
‘minority’ were negatived by the Assembly.184 With that, Article 29, 
as we are familiar with today, found its place as a part of the 
Constitution. 
279. Provisions akin to Article 29(1), which establish a right to preserve 
culture, can be identified in numerous Constitutions across 
various jurisdictions. For instance, Article 20(2) of the Constitution 
of Albania grants the right to 'preserve and develop' ethnic, 
cultural, and linguistic identity. A similar right is articulated in 
Article 56 of the Armenian Constitution, Article 11 of the Georgian 
Constitution, Article 59 of the Kosovan Constitution, Article 114 of 
the Latvian Constitution, and Article 35(1) of the Polish 
Constitution. While these provisions share the common objective of 
cultural preservation, they vary slightly from Article 29(1) by 
incorporating the term 'develop'. 
280. The Petitioners in the present case allege a violation of their right 
specifically under Article 29(1). This article aims to protect and 
guarantee the right conferred upon every citizen of India to 
conserve their language, script or culture. When read in 
conjunction with Article 30, the overarching objective of Article 29 
is to allow minority communities to establish educational 
institutions to preserve and fortify their cultural, linguistic, or 
scriptural heritage. However, given the specific allegations 
presented by the Petitioners, our scrutiny will be confined 
exclusively to assessing a potential violation of Article 29(1). 

184 Z. H. Lari, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 7, 08.12.1948. 

(b) Standing under Article 29(1) 
281. Article 29(1) effectively has two key aspects that need to be 
determined: first, whether there is a ‘section of citizens’ seeking to 
conserve their language, script or culture and second, that such 
language, script or culture in question is ‘distinct’. 
282. Article 29(1) begins with the term ‘any section of citizens’. Though 
the term ‘minority’ is used in the marginal heading, the scope of 
Article 29(1) is not restricted to minorities as understood in the 
technical sense.185 It instead extends to any section of citizens 
residing in the territory of India. This was a conscious choice on 
the part of the framers of our Constitution,186 as is apparent from 
the following words of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar: 
“For instance, for the purposes of this article 23, if a certain 
number of people from Madras came and settled in Bombay 
for certain purposes, they would be, although not a minority in 
the technical sense, cultural minorities. Similarly, if certain 
number of Maharashtrians went from Maharashtra and 
settled in Bengal, although they may not be minorities 
in the technical sense, they would be cultural and 
linguistic minorities in Bengal. The article intends 
to give protection in the matter of culture, language and 
script not only to a minority technically, but also to a 
minority in the wider sense of the terms as I have 
explained just now. That is the reason why we dropped the 
word “minority” because we felt that the word might be 
interpreted in the narrow sense of the term, when the intention 
of this House, when it passed article 18, was to use the word 
“minority” in a much wider sense, so as to give cultural 
protection to those who were technically not minorities 
but minorities nonetheless. It was felt that this 
protection was necessary for the simple reason that 
people who go from one province to another and settle 
there, do not settle there permanently. They do not 
 
185 Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 7, 08.12.1948. 
186 Id. uproot themselves from the province from which they 
have migrated, but they keep their connections. They go 
back to their province for the purpose of marriage. They 
go back to their province for various other purposes, and if 
this protection was not given to them when they were 
subject to the local Legislature and the local Legislature 
were to deny them the opportunity of conserving their 
culture, it would be very difficult for these cultural 
minorities to go back to their province and to get 
themselves assimilated to the original population to 
which they belonged. In order to meet the situation of 
migration from one province to another, we felt it was 
desirable that such a provision should be incorporated in the 
Constitution.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
283. Thus, Article 29(1), while conferring the right to conserve, does not 
restrict itself only to the notion of a minority as understood in the 
technical sense but includes any group that may seek to conserve 
a distinct language, script or culture. 
284. This interpretation of Article 29(1) has also been established by a 
9-judge bench of this Court in Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College 
Society v. State of Gujarat,187 wherein it held that: 
“6. It will be wrong to read Article 30(1) as restricting the right 
of minorities to establish and administer educational 
institutions of their choice only to cases where such 
institutions are concerned with language, script or culture of 
the minorities. The reasons are these. First, Article 29 
confers the fundamental right on any section of the 
citizens which will include the majority section whereas 
Article 30(1) confers the right on all minorities. Second, 
Article 29(1) is concerned with language, script or 
culture, whereas Article 30(1) deals with minorities of 
the nation based on religion or language. Third, Article 
29(1) is concerned with the right to conserve language, 
 
187 Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College Society v. State of Gujarat, (1974), 
para 6. script or culture, whereas Article 30(1) deals with the 
right 
to 
establish 
and 
administer 
educational 
institutions of the minorities of their choice. Fourth, the 
conservation of language, script or culture under Article 
29(1) may be by means wholly unconnected with 
educational institutions and similarly establishment 
and administration of educational institutions by a 
minority under Article 30(1) may be unconnected with 
any motive to conserve language, script or culture. A 
minority may administer an institution for religious 
education which is wholly unconnected with any 
question of conserving a language, script or culture.” 
“238. […] Article 29(1) gives security to an interest: 
Article 30(1) gives security to an activity.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
285. The Petitioners herein have sought to protect their ‘culture’. While 
there is no single definition of the term, academicians and scholars 
have defined culture as “that complex whole which includes 
knowledge, belief, arts, morals, law, custom and any other 
capabilities and habits acquired by a man as a member of society”188 
or as “the handiwork of man and as the medium through which he 
achieves his ends.”189 Hence, although a precise definition of the 
term ‘culture’ cannot explicitly be delineated, its comprehensive 
connotation is expansive, encompassing diverse elements inherent 
to a specific group or community. 
286. Considering these aspects, the next point which arises for 
consideration is whether the right under Article 29(1) can be 
invoked by the entire section of citizens aiming to preserve their 
culture or language or if it can be invoked by a few individuals on 
behalf of the larger section of citizens. In this context, it becomes 
 
188 PASCUAL GISBERT, Fundamentals of Sociology, Orient Longman, 1973 (3rd ed.), 342. 
189 BRONISLAW MALINOWSKI, A Scientific Theory of Culture and Other Essays, The 
University of North Carolina Press, 1944, 67.) 

essential to examine previous decisions of this Court where a 
violation of Article 29(1) has been put forth to ascertain who the 
invoking party was. 
287. In State of Karnataka v. Associated Management of English 
Medium Primary and Secondary Schools,190 the imposition of a 
particular language by the State in primary schools was under 
challenge. Rights under Article 29(1) were asserted by an 
association representing private schools. Similarly, in State of 
Bombay v. Bombay Education Society and others,191 the right 
of the Anglo-Indian community to conserve their culture and 
language under Article 29(1) was upheld. The parties invoking the 
right were the Bombay Society and its two directors, which sought 
to ensure value-based education for the underprivileged. Thus, 
notwithstanding the language of Article 29(1), it is not necessary 
that the right must be invoked by the entirety of the section of 
citizens belonging to a particular community, or that such 
community must collectively seek redressal. 
288. In the instant case, the Petitioners include various Assamese 
student organisations like the Assam Sanmilita Mahasangha and 
All Assam Ahom Sabha; their invocation of Article 29(1) is, 
therefore, maintainable. Furthermore, it is not in dispute before us 
that there exists a distinct Assamese culture. Indeed, Assam 
proudly serves as a testament to our nation’s rich culture and 
diversity, with various groups and sub-groups co-existing 
harmoniously, including the Koch-Rajbangsi, Bodo, Sonowal 
Kacharis, Dimasas, and more.192 This cohabitation reflects a 
 
190 State of Karnataka v. Associated Management of Medium Primary and Secondary 
Schools, (2014). 
191 State of Bombay v. Bombay Education Society, (1954). 
192 CULTURE OF ASSAM – ASSAM STATE PORTAL, https://static.mygov.in/saas/s3fs-
saas/assam/mygov_149761430071181.pdf. cooperative and peaceful integration of diverse cultures within the 
region. Furthermore, adding to the cultural mosaic, Assam also 
boasts of linguistic diversity, with over 13 million residents 
conversing in Assamese and Bengali while also embracing local 
languages like Karbi, Mishing, Rabha, Tiwa, Dimaca, and more.193 
Indeed, the crux of the matter at hand does not revolve around 
whether Article 29(1) applies to the Petitioners. Instead, the focal 
point is whether Section 6A by its operation has curtailed the 
Petitioners’ rights under Article 29 to conserve their distinct 
culture. 
(c) Substance of Article 29(1) 
289. As discussed previously, Article 29(1) aims to ‘conserve’ the 
language, culture or script of a section of citizens. Instead of 
obligating the State to make any special provisions for the 
development of such language, script, or culture, the ambit of the 
term ‘conserve’ is to prohibit state intervention in these aspects.194 
This intent to proscribe interference, though not apparent, has 
been explicitly emphasized in the discussions of the Constituent 
Assembly and has consistently been underscored by this Court in 
various decisions. 
290. A dialogue between K. Santhanam and Hasrat Mohani during the 
Assembly debates notably encapsulates this dimension of non-
intervention. It suggests that the objective of Article 29(1) was 
envisioned to forestall any potential harm to cultures by fascist 
regimes, should such a scenario arise.195 K. Santhanam, in 
particular, had stated in this regard as follows: 
 
193 CENSUS OF INDIA, 2011. 
194 Govind Ballabh Pant, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 7, 08.12.1948 
195 K. Santhanam, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 7, 08.12.1948. 

“Sir, you will remember that throughout Europe, after the first 
World War, all that the minorities wanted was the right to have 
their own schools, and to conserve their own cultures 
which the Fascist and the Nazis refused them. In fact, 
they did not want even the State schools. They did not want 
State aid, or State assistance. They simply wanted that 
they should be allowed to pursue their own customs and 
to follow their own cultures and to establish and 
conduct their own schools. Therefore, I do not think it 
is right on the part of any minority to depreciate the 
rights given in article 23(1).” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
291. Likewise, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar gave his perspective on the matter, 
echoing the sentiment that the State should refrain from 
intervening and imposing any culture, whether local or otherwise, 
upon a community. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar further underscored that 
the provision does not levy any burden or obligation upon the 
State.196 In this regard, he articulated the following: 
“I think another thing which has to be borne in mind in reading 
article 23 is that it does not impose any obligation or burden 
upon the State. It does not say that, when for instance the 
Madras people come to Bombay, the Bombay Government 
shall be required by law to finance any project of giving 
education either in Tamil language or in Andhra language or 
any other language. There is no burden cast upon the State. 
The only limitation that is imposed by article 23 is that 
if there is a cultural minority which wants to preserve 
its language, its script and its culture, the State shall 
not by law impose upon it any other culture which may 
be either local or otherwise […]” 
 
“[…] The original article as it stood in the Fundamental Rights 
only cast a sort of duty upon the State that the State shall 
protect their culture, their script and their language. The 
original article had not given any Fundamental Right to 
these various communities. It only imposed the duty and 
 
196 Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, supra note 185. added a clause that while the State may have the right 
to impose limitations upon these rights of language, 
culture and script, the State shall not make any law 
which may be called oppressive, not that the State had 
no right to make a law affecting these matters, but that 
the law shall not be oppressive. Now, I am sure about it 
that the protection granted in the original article was very 
insecure. It depended upon the goodwill of the State. The 
present situation as you find it stated in article 23 is 
that we have converted that into a Fundamental Right, 
so that if a State made any law which was inconsistent 
with the provisions of this article, then that much of the 
law would be invalid by virtue of article 8 which we have 
already passed.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
292. The nature of the protection afforded by Article 29 also came up 
before this Court in D.A.V. College v. State of Punjab,197 which 
analysed a counterfactual and held that had the State intervened 
in compelling affiliated colleges, including minority institutions, to 
provide instruction in the Punjabi language, it would have impeded 
the right to conserve their language, script, and culture. It held that 
such an intervention would have amounted to stifling the language 
and script of other sections of citizens and encroaching on their 
right to conserve their own culture and language. 
293. At this juncture, it is imperative to recognize that Article 29 does 
not advocate for absolute governmental abstention in matters 
involving culture, language or script. In fact, to some extent, 
government intervention is unavoidable as regulation is essential 
for the maintenance of public order and for upholding 
constitutionalism. 
State 
actions 
and 
regulations 
with 
an 
insignificant or merely incidental effect on a community’s cultural 
 
197 D.A.V. College v. State of Punjab, (1971). rights might also not be caught in the crosshairs of Article 29(1). 
This is also seconded by various decisions of this Court, where 
some such regulatory interventions by the State were held to not 
constitute a curtailment of Article 29(1) rights.198 In addition, 
although not germane to the controversy at hand, we must add a 
word of caution that not all cultural practices of a section of 
citizens—for example, those blatantly running against the spirit 
and grain of our Constitution, like casteism and gender 
discrimination—would be protected by Article 29(1). 
294. A violation of Article 29, therefore hinges on the ‘nature’ and 
‘degree’ of State intervention and not merely on the simpliciter fact 
of intervention. In other words, the violation of Article 29 is 
necessarily a question of law which requires adjudication of the 
circumstances, intention and effect of the state intervention on the 
aggrieved section of citizens, as well as the society at large. 
295. To sum up our discussion, the rights conferred by Article 29(1) 
require that the State not take any steps to erode a community's 
culture, language or script; and concomitantly accords to such 
section of citizens the freedom and independence to preserve and 
conserve their culture, language and script, by themselves. At the 
same time, the right under Article 29(1) does not necessitate the 
Government to enact specific provisions for its enforcement and 
also does not altogether restrict the State from enacting 
regulations. 
(d) Section 6A vis-à-vis Article 29 
296. Having scrutinized the fundamental basis on which the 
applicability of Section 6A needs to be examined, it is imperative at 
 
198 S. P. Mittal v. Union of India, (1983). this juncture to systematically address each of the Petitioners' 
contentions. 
297. The Petitioners contended that the presence of immigrants from 
Bangladesh has led to an erosion of their culture. However, it is not 
their contention, nor is it our opinion, that the scheme of Section 
6A was intended to take away these cultural rights. Section 6A does 
not address culture at all; it focuses solely on establishing the 
criteria that migrants from the East Pakistan region must fulfil 
within specified dates to obtain citizenship upon entering Assam. 
The impact on Assamese culture, if any, would be only incidental 
and not direct or intentional. 
298. In addition, the onus is on the Petitioners to not only show effect, 
but also demonstrate causation. The Petitioners need to establish 
both, that there has been an adverse impact on Assamese culture 
over time and that such impact is attributable to the legitimisation 
of the citizenship status of pre-1971 immigrants. The Petitioners 
have been unable to establish the latter. Indeed, the respondents 
have proffered various other plausible explanations, like internal 
migration, state reorganization and unchecked immigration post-
1971 which fall outside the umbrella of Section 6A. Additionally, 
Section 6A does not compel pre-1971 immigrants to keep residing 
within the territory of Assam once they have obtained Indian 
citizenship, given that they would enjoy Article 19(1)(e) rights like 
any other citizen of India. 
299. To substantiate the former limb on effect, the Petitioners have cited 
data showing changes in Assam’s religious and linguistic 
demographics. These metrics by themselves are not ‘culture’ within 
the meaning of Article 29(1). Although significant changes to the 
demographics of a region can affect the interests of its original 

inhabitants, the ‘culture’ of a region by itself is a far more complex 
and dynamic phenomenon—involving an interplay of various 
competing forces and interconnected elements. 
300. Though we are not oblivious to the Petitioners’ demographic 
anxiety, we must be cautious of the impact our findings would have 
on the greater national landscape. Accepting the Petitioners’ 
assertion that a mere change in demographics is sufficiently 
actionable evidence of erosion of rights under Article 29(1) would 
have far reaching consequences. We say so, for the reason that it 
would undermine the idea of fraternity envisaged by our 
Constitutional drafters, and bring to life their fears by threatening 
the cohesion of our diverse nation. It would open the floodgates for 
similar challenges by residents of other states who might seek to 
undermine Article 19(1)(e) rights and inter-state migration under 
the guise of protecting their indigenous culture under Article 29(1). 
The Constitution of India, and indeed this Court as well, does not 
envision India as a union of endogamous-homogenous territories. 
The cascading ramifications of accepting the Petitioners’ stand on 
federalism and national harmony would be significant, deleterious 
and not improbable. 
301. The Petitioners further asserted that the influx of migrants from 
East Pakistan has led to a substantial acquisition of land and 
scarce resources by these immigrants, consequently resulting in 
the marginalization of the original Assamese inhabitants within 
their own territory. It was their specific contention that such 
acquisition not only poses a threat to Assamese people but 
specifically to the culture and heritage of endangered tribes in 
Assam. 

302. Though the material on record does not substantiate such claim, 
regardless thereto, such a plea has no legally sustainable 
foundation. All citizens have the right to own property and, unless 
restricted by statute or other law, they are free to enter into private 
land transactions. Once such a transaction has taken place 
between two private individuals, this Court cannot set the clock 
back in the teeth of Article 300A of the Constitution merely because 
when seen collectively it results in a pattern of land ownership 
which 
is 
considered 
undesirable by some other groups. 
Simultaneously, 
individual 
allegations 
of 
involuntary 
land 
transactions are best not dealt with us, considering that we are 
examining a question of constitutional interpretation, while sitting 
in writ jurisdiction. 
303. At this stage, and given the restricted ambit of the present 
proceedings, this Court cannot embark on a complex or 
microscopic fact-finding exercise to determine whether factually 
there has been any cultural erosion as alleged by the Petitioners. 
304. We thus sum up our analysis of the Petitioners’ claim under Article 
29, holding that though they have the standing to make such a 
claim but on the facts of the present case, they have failed to show 
either an actionable impact on Assamese culture, or trace the cause 
of it to Section 6A. On the contrary, Section 6A when read along 
with the larger statutory regime surrounding citizenship and 
immigration, mandates timely detection and deportation of illegal 
immigrants, a large portion of whom entered Assam post-1971. 
Seen from this perspective, it is the non-implementation of the 
statutory regime which is the cause of the Petitioners’ concerns; 
their attack on the constitutionality of Section 6A is misplaced. viii. Article 21 and Section 6A 
305. The Petitioners contended that Section 6A is violative of Article 21 
because it infringes upon the rights of the ‘indigenous’ Assamese 
community. They argued that immigration has led to the 
marginalization and disruption of their socio-economic aspirations. 
Further, relying on Article 1 of ICCPR, they urged that their right of 
self-governance is being violated by Section 6A. Lastly, the 
Petitioners claimed that the inclusion of an unidentified migrant 
population burdens the country’s natural resources, particularly 
impacting the citizens residing in a State and hindering sustainable 
development, along with depriving the Assamese community from 
enjoying the full spectrum of socio-economic rights. 
306., the Respondents argued that instead of contravening 
Article 21, Section 6A enforces the same because foreigners’ rights 
are also protected thereunder. Additionally, they contend that 
Section 6A, in fact, gives quietus to a long-standing dispute. 
According to the Respondents, the provision does not violate Article 
21 as Section 6A is to be construed as a “procedure established by 
law”. 
307. The issue that arises for consideration therefore is whether Section 
6A is violative of Article 21. Though Article 21 needs no 
introduction, it provides that no person can be deprived of life and 
personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. 
(a) ‘Marginalization’ of a community 
308. In this regard, the Petitioners have put forth an argument akin to 
their claim under Article 29 and have argued that Section 6A 
violates Article 21 as it affects the way of life of original inhabitants. 

309. Although the rights conferred by Article 21 differ from those under 
Article 29 of the Constitution; the burden to be discharged by the 
Petitioners to support their claims would remain broadly similar. It 
would be otiose for us to delineate the legal tests and the substance 
of the rights provided by Article 21 in the context of the Petitioners’ 
cultural claims, given that the Petitioners have failed to provide 
material beyond mere averments. 
310. As elaborated in paragraph 298 of this judgement, the Petitioners 
need to establish both a deleterious effect of Section 6A on their 
indigenous communities as well as trace the cause of such effect to 
Section 6A. In light of our conclusions in the preceding segment re: 
Article 29, namely, that the Petitioners have been not been able to 
show a constitutionally actionable impact on their communities, 
and if at all there is any such impact it can be attributed to several 
factors beyond Section 6A. The Petitioners’ challenge on the ground 
of violation of Article 21, thus deserves to be closed at the threshold 
itself. 
(b) Right of self-governance 
311. In addition to asserting that their community is being marginalized, 
the Petitioners have also laid claim to the right of self-governance. 
In support of this assertion, they have referenced Article 1 of the 
ICCPR, which affirms that all “peoples” possess the right to self-
governance. The expression ‘peoples’ has a wide connotation and it 
is nearly impossible to outline its exact constituents. It is however, 
a settled proposition that Article 1 referred to above, is a collective 
right, which cannot be claimed by an individual. 

312. In any case, India has declared its reservation regarding this Article 
and has stated that:199 
“The Government of the Republic of India declares that the 
words ‘the right of self-determination’ appearing in [this 
article] apply only to the peoples under foreign 
domination and that these words do not apply to sovereign 
independent States or to a section of a people or nation--
which is the essence of national integrity.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
313. Further, we are of the considered opinion that the perceived right 
under Article 1 of the ICCPR is not enforceable through writ 
jurisdiction. Even otherwise, it cannot be invoked by the 
Petitioners, more so in light of India’s explicit reservation against 
its application in India, and given that it generally is applicable only 
to people under foreign domination. 
314. That apart, it is difficult to countenance the assertion that 
immigration has impacted the self-governance of the original 
inhabitants of Assam. The Petitioners have not demonstrated how 
Section 6A affects their right to govern themselves democratically. 
In India, the right of self-governance has to be understood within 
the contours of the Constitution and the laws framed under it, 
which provides self-governance at the level of political units such 
as Panchayats and District Councils, in addition to the national-
level Parliament and various state-level Legislatures.200 In addition, 
as discussed in Issue ix (Article 326 and Section 6a) (infra), 

PERMANENT 
MISSION 
OF 
INDIA, 
HUMAN 
RIGHTS 
COMMITTEE 
https://pmindiaun.gov.in/pageinfo/ODY3#:~:text=Article%201%3A%20The%20Go
vernment%20of,which%20is%20the%20essence%20of. 
200 Constitution, supra note 22, Part IX, IXA, Sixth Schedule. 

India allows the opportunity for self-governance by providing the 
right to vote on the basis of adult franchise. 
315. We must also note that the Petitioners’ have not claimed that any 
of these Constitutional or other electoral legislations have been 
violated. We are therefore not inclined to entertain the Petitioners’ 
claim on self-governance, which in a way amounts to a prayer for 
creation and recognition of an extra-Constitutional right. In any 
case, our analysis in this context would border on adjudicating the 
appropriateness and sufficiency of the electoral framework created 
by the Constitution. 
316. It is clarified that, the arguments surrounding dilution of the voting 
ability of the indigenous Assamese have been addressed in the next 
section. Without repeating our observations on demographic 
anxiety in paragraph 300 of this judgement, it would suffice to state 
that we are unable to agree with the Petitioners’ argument that 
conferring citizenship to a subset of immigrants from East Pakistan 
with a different language or culture would amount to undermining 
the self-governance rights of the Assamese. 
(c) Right of sustainable development 
317. The Petitioners have contended that Article 21 has been infringed 
by Section 6A, as it permits immigrants to utilize natural resources, 
thereby contravening the public trust doctrine. They argued that 
had the immigrants been resettled in other States, the strain on 
natural resources in Assam would have been mitigated, and the 
government could have managed resources more effectively. The 
Petitioners have also contended that allowing increased access to 
Assam's natural resources contradicts the principles of sustainable 
development. 

318. In this vein, the doctrine of public trust provides that the State 
holds the natural resources as the trustee of the general public, 
and as a consequence, bears a duty to protect them.201 This 
doctrine mandates that resources should be used in a manner that 
does not efface other people’s and subsequent generations’ right to 
use such resources in the long term. A 5-judge bench of this Court 
has held that the task of adjudicating whether public trust has 
been violated or not, would not entail a comparative analysis of 
alternative deployments of such natural resources. The Court 
ought to only assess whether the deployment under challenge as 
implemented by the government, is fair or not.202 
319. We therefore need to examine whether the Parliamentary 
enactment contravenes the constitutional principles for having 
expropriated natural resources in an unfair, wasteful or 
exploitative manner, such that larger collective or community 
rights have been undermined. 
320. In our considered opinion, the mere fact that a sub-class of 
immigrants whose status has been legitimised by Section 6A also 
has access to these resources does not automatically imply a 
disruption of ecological balance or a violation of the original 
inhabitants' rights to resource usage. This argument conflates the 
idea of “unfair usage” with “more usage”—a premise that cannot be 
accepted. 
321. Sustainable development and population growth can coexist 
harmoniously and need not be mutually exclusive. A nation can 
accommodate immigrants and refugees, while simultaneously 
 
201 M. C. Mehta v. Kamal Nath, (1997), para 34. 
202 Natural Resources Allocation, In re, Special Reference No. 1 of 2012, (2012), para 146. prioritizing sustainable development and equitable allocation of 
resources. By implementing policies that encourage environmental 
conservation, 
efficient 
resource 
management, 
and 
social 
integration, a country can effectively address the challenges posed 
by demographic changes while safeguarding its long-term 
prosperity. The logic underlying the Petitioners’ argument, if 
allowed, can tomorrow be extended to seek controls on even 
domestic inter-state movement. The Petitioners' challenge on the 
basis of sustainable development under Article 21 therefore, must 
be rejected. ix. Article 326 and Section 6A 
322. The Petitioners contended that the application of Section 6A on the 
State of Assam violates the Assamese people’s right to vote under 
Article 326 of the Constitution. It was asserted that the right to vote 
and the right to be registered on the electoral rolls is specific only 
to the citizens of India and not to illegal immigrants. They further 
contended that the process of Section 6A conferring political rights 
upon millions of Bangladeshi immigrants has resulted in the 
marginalisation of the political rights of the people of Assam, which, 
in turn, is not in the interest of the security and integrity of the 
State. They asserted that continuance of these immigrants on 
Indian soil poses severe threat to the identity of the indigenous 
people of Assam, as well as the security of the nation. 
323. The Respondents argued that the contentions advanced by the 
Petitioners in the present case amount to a reverse reading of 
Article 326 of the Constitution. They submitted that considering 
the persons falling under Section 6A would be valid citizens, the 
right under Article 326 would therefore naturally follow to such 
‘citizens’. Additionally, they also urged that Section 6A is not 

concerned with the preparation of the electoral roll and only deals 
with the grant of citizenship to the categories of persons covered 
thereunder. 
324. Thus, in examining the purported violation of the Petitioners’ 
rights, it is imperative to first delve into the historical progression 
of adult suffrage in India, given that Article 326 explicitly addresses 
the conferment of voting rights upon Indian citizens. 
(a) Background and evolution of adult suffrage 
325. In response to the clamour for adult suffrage, the issue of franchise 
in India was heavily deliberated upon in the Round Table 
Conference in 1931, and the Indian Franchise Committee was set 
up. However, the Committee's report, presented with an air of 
caution, vehemently discouraged the adoption of universal adult 
franchise in India, citing the widespread illiteracy rates. Instead, 
the Committee’s proposal for franchise resulted in the enactment 
of the Government of India Act, 1935. The Act put forth several 
parameters regarding voter eligibility, including the extent of 
property owned, amount of taxes paid, residence, etc. Yet, despite 
these efforts, only a mere one-fifth of the adult population found 
themselves deemed worthy of the electoral badge of honour at that 
pivotal juncture in history.203 
326. In any case, the 1935 Act was short-lived, with the onset of Indian 
independence 
and 
the 
subsequent 
establishment 
of 
the 
Constituent Assembly. The Constituent Assembly itself was 
constituted as a formal constitution-making body under the 
Cabinet Mission Plan, 1946. The provincial assemblies elected the 
 
203 ORNIT SHANI, How India Became Democratic: Citizenship and the Making of the 
Universal Franchise, Cambridge University Press, 2017. 

389 members that comprised the Constituent Assembly based on 
a 
single 
transferable 
vote 
system 
having 
proportional 
representation. These members were, thus, indirectly elected 
representatives tasked with the mammoth project of drafting a 
Constitution for India. The Constituent Assembly sat for a period 
of two years, eleven months and seventeen days, between 
06.12.1946 and 24.01.1950, to write the Constitution of India. 
327. On the issue of adult franchise, the notion was initially met with 
opposition by the likes of M. Thirumala Rao and Brajeshwara 
Prasad, who considered universal adult franchise to be a violation 
of the tenets of democracy on account of the largely illiterate 
populace of the country.204 Other members, such as Hriday Nath 
Kunzru, believed that while franchise being bestowed based on 
parameters such as property was antithetical to the idea of a 
democracy, universal adult suffrage at such a nascent stage would 
prove troublesome. Instead, he recommended enfranchising 
approximately half the population and then extending it to the 
remaining population in a phased manner over a period of fifteen 
years.205 
328. However, during the final days of the Assembly, several Assembly 
members began to express their views in favour of universal adult 
franchise, arguing that the inclusion of adult franchise into the 
Constitution would contribute towards the cause of nation-building 
and secure the betterment of the common man. Hence, universal 
adult franchise was incorporated into the Indian Constitution, as 
enshrined in Article 326. The inaugural general elections of 
Independent India were conducted between 25.10.1951 and 
 
204 M. Thirumala Rao, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 11, 22.11.1949; 
Brajeshwar Prasad, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 8, 16.06.1949. 
 
205 Hriday Nath Kunzru, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 11, 22.11.1949. 

21.02.1952. This monumental exercise witnessed the participation 
of a sixth of the world’s population, rendering it the largest election 
globally at that juncture. 
329. The historic inclusion of universal adult suffrage as a constitutional 
value 
in 
India 
was 
noteworthy 
for 
accommodating 
an 
unprecedented number of voters, and its revolutionary nature. 
What is now considered a matter of fact was, at that time, perceived 
as a daring and potentially risky endeavour. The embrace of 
universal adult suffrage in India, devoid of property, taxation, or 
literacy qualifications, was deemed a ‘bold experiment’, particularly 
given the country’s vast geographical expanse and population. This 
stride was even monumental, especially when juxtaposed with the 
trajectory of more economically advanced nations, such as the 
United States of America, which achieved universal adult franchise 
only in 1965.206 India’s adoption of adult franchise also positioned 
it in close proximity to the timelines of countries like France and 
Britain, where universal adult suffrage commenced in 1945 and 
1928, respectively. 
330. This historical background, coupled with the Constituent Assembly 
deliberations, unmistakably signify that the incorporation of 
universal adult suffrage through Article 326 was undertaken with 
the avowed purpose of granting voting rights and empowerment to 
every adult citizen of India, devoid of any unjustifiable limitations 
or constraints. Thus, the drafters of the Constitution crystallized 
their vision of ‘one man, one value, one vote’ by enshrining it in 
Article 326.207 
 
206 Voting Rights Act of 1965. 
207 Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 11, 25.11.1949. 

(b) Aim of Article 326 
331. The text of Article 326 provides that “the elections to the House of 
the People and to the Legislative Assembly of every State shall be on 
the basis of adult suffrage.” Article 326 further lays down the 
qualifications for being a voter, subject to statutory limitations 
concerning disqualification, corrupt practices, detention, etc. As 
established previously, these Articles were encapsulated within the 
Constitution to provide the right to vote to large swathes of people, 
irrespective of their literacy or ownership of property. Nevertheless, 
it is imperative to delineate the nature of the right to vote. This 
analysis will serve as a crucial foundation in conclusively 
determining the validity of the contentions presented by the 
Petitioners regarding the alleged violation and adverse impact on 
their right to vote stemming from the influx of migrants from 
Bangladesh. 
332. The right to vote has been the subject of considerable deliberation 
and judicial interpretation. This Court has evolved the notion of the 
right to vote, per constitutional and statutory principles, to 
empower voters further. One of the very first cases to discuss the 
issue pertaining to the nature of the right to vote was N.P. 
Ponnuswami v. Returning Officer, Namakkal Constituency, 
where this Court categorically held that “the right to vote or stand 
as a candidate for election is not a civil right but is a creature of 
statute or special law and must be subject to limitation imposed by 
it.”208 This view was upheld in the case of Jyoti Basu v. Debi 
Ghosal, 209 holding that the right to elect is neither a fundamental 
 
208 N.P. Ponnuswami v. Returning Officer, Namakkal Constituency, AIR 1952 SC 64. 
209 Jyoti Basu v. Debi Gosal, AIR 1982 SC 983. nor a common law right but a statutory right. This was, thereafter, 
the consistent view that was laid down in a plethora of decisions.210 
333. There were diverging views expressed in the case of the People’s 
Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India, wherein this Court 
held that though the right to vote may not be construed as a 
fundamental right, it is nonetheless a constitutional right.211 The 
debate on this issue was finally laid to rest by this Court in Rajbala 
v. State of Haryana212 in the course of adjudicating the 
constitutionality of the Haryana Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 
1935. The Court therein held that the right to vote under Article 
326 was not merely a statutory right but was a constitutional right 
that conferred upon citizens the right to vote, subject to certain 
limitations. It may thus be seen that with the aid of judicial 
construction in the context of the nature of the right to vote, it has 
been upgraded from being a mere statutory right to a constitutional 
right. More recently, this view was once again affirmed by this 
Court in Anoop Baranwal v. Union of India.213 
334. It is also crucial to take into consideration that Articles 325 and 
326 contained in Part XV of the Constitution, deal with rights and 
duties in the context of elections. These provisions broadly 
encompass the powers and duties conferred upon various bodies, 
with the objective of ensuring that elections are conducted in a free 
and fair manner. For instance, Article 324 vests the Election 
Commission with powers to supervise elections, thereby ensuring 
free and fair elections. Similarly, Article 329 limits the Supreme 
Court’s jurisdiction in election matters. Any challenge to an election 
 
210 Shyamdeo Prasad Singh v. Nawal Kishore Yadav, (2000), para 25; 
Krishnamoorthy v. Sivakumar, (2015). 
211 People’s Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India, (2013). 
212 Rajbala v. State of Haryana, (2016). 
213 Anoop Baranwal v. Union of India, (2023). can be made after the election has been completed through an 
election petition under the Representation of People Act, 1951.214 
These provisions have been included with the intent of 
strengthening the political rights of the citizens of the country. It is 
trite law that provisions which pertain to the same subject matter 
must be read as a whole and in their entirety, each throwing light 
and illuminating the meaning of the other. 
335. The objective of these provisions, and more specifically Article 326, 
is, therefore, to enfranchise people as opposed to disenfranchising 
them. As illuminated by the historical trajectory of adult suffrage 
in India and the meticulous deliberations of the framers in instating 
Article 326, the evident purpose of its inclusion was to bestow upon 
every individual citizen the right to exercise their vote and choose 
their elected representatives. Hence, in contemplating the 
contentions put forth by the Petitioners, the question which arises 
is whether the right under Article 326 can be invoked to exclude 
certain individuals. 
(c) Right of exclusion and Article 326 
336. Article 326, while conferring the right to vote, also broadly provides 
that this right would be subject to certain statutory limitations. A 
brief perusal of the Constituent Assembly Debates, along with 
contemporary jurisprudence, clearly indicates that Article 326 
confers the right to vote upon individuals and does not elaborate 
on the procedure of exclusion of persons from this entitlement. In 
order to ascertain where the power of exclusion has been 
enumerated, we will analyse the following: (i) Constituent Assembly 
 
214 Inderjit Barua v. Election Commission of India, AIR 1984 SC 1911. 

Debates; (ii) the practice in comparative jurisdictions; (iii) relevant 
statute; and (iv) contemporary jurisprudence. 
337. Primarily, the considerations of the Constituent Assembly during 
the discourse on the right to vote emphasized that determinations 
regarding disqualifications and exclusions from the right to vote 
should be outlined by the legislature through suitable statutes. In 
this context, focused deliberations were conducted, particularly 
addressing the prescription of qualifications for the right to vote, 
with Dr. B.R. Ambedkar asserting that the establishment of such 
qualifications ought to be entrusted to the legislature.215 Similar 
observations were articulated by other members of the Assembly 
during discussions on the qualifications and disqualifications to 
the right to vote and inclusion of individuals in the electoral rolls.216 
338. Furthermore, 
an 
examination 
of 
practices 
in 
comparable 
jurisdictions underscores that the authority to exclude individuals 
from voting is usually entrusted to the legislature. For instance, in 
the United Kingdom, the rationale and procedure for the exclusion 
of any individual from voting are delineated in the Representation 
of the People Act, 1918. Similarly, in the USA, the power and 
discretion to enforce the right to vote of citizens are bestowed upon 
Congress.217 
339. In India, too, the Representation of People Acts, 1950 and 1951 
delineate provisions relating to the disqualification from voting, 
removal of disqualification, the right to vote, and prohibitions 
against seeking votes by appealing to divisive factors. In fact, the 
1951 Act also elucidates the right to vote under Section 62 and 
 
215 B.R. Ambedkar, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 8, 02.06.1949. 
216 Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 11, 
23.11.1949. 
217 South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 U.S. 301 (1966). establishes limitations and disqualifications surrounding it. The 
Representation of People Act, 1950 has in place a scheme and 
procedure for effectuating changes onto the electoral roll if it is 
considered erroneous under Section 22. This provision states that 
if the electoral registration officer for a constituency, upon an 
application made to him or on his own motion, is satisfied that an 
entry in the electoral roll of a constituency is defective or erroneous, 
should be transposed to another place on account of the concerned 
person having changed his place of ordinary residence, or if the 
person is dead or is not entitled to be registered on that roll, then 
the officer may amend, transpose or delete such an entry. By virtue 
of the aforementioned sections, the Act thus clearly envisages 
mechanisms and procedures for disqualifying individuals from 
voting and removing the names of people from the electoral roll. 
340. These deliberations and instances further strengthen the assertion 
that the aspect of exclusion from the right to vote cannot be invoked 
merely by alleging the violation of Article 326. In absence of any 
such right guaranteed under Article 326, and in light of there being 
such provision under the Representation of People Acts of 1950 and 
1951, the question of exclusion of individuals from the right to vote 
needs to be viewed from the lens of the aforementioned two 
statutes.218 
341. This leads us to the contention raised by the Petitioners that the 
inclusion of individuals in the electoral rolls by virtue of Section 6A 
has resulted in a violation of Article 326. To summarise our 
foregoing analysis, Article 326 bestows upon individuals the right 
to vote and the right to be included in electoral rolls unless 
disqualified by the legislature or other constitutional provisions. 
 
218 Lakshmi Charan Sen v. A.K.M. Hassam Uzzaman, (1985), para 22. 

However, the crucial question that arises is the nature of the right 
conferred by Article 326—particularly, whether it allows the 
Petitioners to seek an en masse removal of an entire block of people 
based upon generalised assertions surrounding their impact on 
another group of citizens and their voting rights. 
342. We cannot answer this in the affirmative, not only because allowing 
such a plea would militate against the spirit of Article 326 and the 
centuries-old struggle for enfranchisement that it embodies, but 
also because the language of Article 326 unambiguously devolves 
the power to set out the mechanism for excluding people from the 
voter list to the legislature. If there is an inclusion of ineligible 
migrants in the voter list, persons aggrieved are free to invoke the 
existing provisions under the Representation of the People Acts of 
1950 and 1951, to seek the removal of such individual voters from 
the voter list. Upon receipt of such an application, if the electoral 
Registration Officer, after due consideration, determined that an 
error existed in the inclusion of these individuals, the officer would 
have rectified the situation by amending, transposing, or deleting 
the relevant entries as per the prevailing legal provisions. We are 
unable to persuade ourselves to read an additional ground for 
disqualification and removal of voters directly into Article 326. 
343. Additionally, the Petitioners’ arguments on this count demonstrate 
a fundamental misreading of Article 326. They fail to note that once 
deemed citizens by operation of Section 6A, the erstwhile-
immigrants would enjoy equal rights as any other Indian citizen, 
including the right to vote, irrespective of the mode or time of 
acquisition of citizenship. Such constitutional rights cannot be 
summarily revoked or infringed upon. 

344. We are, therefore, not inclined to accept the Petitioners’ contention 
that the influx of immigrants in the State of Assam has affected the 
right of the Assamese people to vote. Moreover, there has been no 
violation of the right of the Petitioners under Article 326 as it merely 
grants them the right to vote and be included in the electoral rolls, 
which continues to subsist to this day devoid of any interruption. 
As stated earlier, the Petitioners have not claimed any violation of 
their statutory rights and have failed to demonstrate the violation 
of any rights under Article 326 of the Constitution. x. Article 355 and Section 6A 
345. The Petitioners contended that Section 6A is violative of Article 355 
of the Constitution on account of the continued presence of millions 
of illegal Bangladeshi immigrants in Assam, purportedly, leading to 
a transformation in the demographic composition of the State. They 
contended that the continuing influx has resulted in a scenario 
where the indigenous population of Assam finds themselves 
effectively reduced to a minority in their own State. 
346. Drawing upon the precedent in Sarbananda Sonowal (supra), the 
Petitioners posit that Assam is currently grappling with a state of 
‘external aggression’ and ‘internal disturbance’ due to the said 
influx of immigrants. Consequently, they argue that it becomes the 
duty of the Union, as provided in Article 355, to undertake 
necessary measures for the protection of Assam. In such 
circumstances, the Petitioners contend that Section 6A, in its 
current form, contravenes Article 355 and should, therefore, be 
deemed unconstitutional and struck down. 
347. The Petitioners further argued that the Union's obligation, as 
outlined in Article 355, to safeguard a ‘State’ from ‘external 

aggression’ encompasses not only a responsibility towards the 
territorial integrity but also extends to the inhabitants of the State, 
encompassing their culture and identity. According to the 
Petitioners, this duty mandates the State to shield itself from 
cultural aggression arising from extensive migration. 
348. Au contraire, the Respondents maintained that the conclusions 
drawn in Sarbananda Sonowal (supra) are distinguishable, as 
that case primarily focused on the inadequate detection and 
deportation of illegal migrants entering after the year 1971, without 
delving into the provisions related to the grant of citizenship under 
Section 6A. Moreover, it is asserted that the prerequisite for 
‘external aggression’ is the principle of ‘animus belligerendi’, and 
since the migration in question was distress-driven, intending to 
seek refuge in India, it should not fall within the purview of Article 
355. 
349. The Respondents also contend that Article 355 should not be 
considered an independent and standalone basis for challenging 
Section 6A. They argue that any challenge to Section 6A based on 
the alleged violation of Article 355 would be unsuccessful unless 
the claimed deprivation of rights can be directly linked to Part III of 
the Constitution. Additionally, the Respondents assert that the 
primary objective of Section 6A was to provide a lasting solution to 
the disturbances in Assam and to facilitate the governance of the 
state in conformity with the constitutional provisions. According to 
the Respondents, Section 6A therefore does not contravene the 
provisions of Article 355; instead, it strengthens and reinforces the 
principles enshrined therein. 

350. Against this backdrop, the Court is confronted with deciding 
whether Section 6A is unconstitutional for being violative of Article 
355. 
(a) Intention behind Article 355 
351. In order to comprehend the reason behind the inclusion of Article 
355, it is vital to understand its intended objective. Article 355 
states that it is the duty of the Union to protect every State against 
‘external aggression’ and ‘internal disturbance’ and to ensure that 
the Government of every State is carried on in accordance with the 
provisions of this Constitution. Article 355, expounded in Part XVIII 
of the Indian Constitution, which pertains to 'Emergency 
Provisions,' was initially not present in the Draft Constitution of 
1948. However, it was subsequently introduced in 1949 by the 
Chairman of the Drafting Committee in the Constituent 
Assembly.219 At that time, Article 355 was denoted as Article 277A 
and was presented for discussion in the Constituent Assembly 
along with draft Articles 278 and 278A, now recognized as Articles 
356 and 357 of the Indian Constitution. 
352. In the context of the introduction of draft Article 277A, later 
designated as Article 355, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar elucidated its 
underlying purpose. He emphasized that despite the numerous 
provisions conferring overriding powers on the Center, the Indian 
Constitution was fundamentally federal, with States having 
primacy in legislating over their designated domains. Accordingly, 
if the Centre was to interfere in the administration of provincial 
affairs through Article 356 and 357 (draft Articles 278 and 278A of 
the Indian Constitution), there ought to be some obligation which 
 
219 Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 9, 03.08.1949 and 
04.08.1949. the Constitution imposes upon the Center. It was emphasized that 
such an ‘invasion’ by the Centre of the Provincial field “must not be 
an invasion which is wanton, arbitrary and unauthorized by law.” 
Thus, it was succinctly stated that “in order to make it quite clear 
that Draft Arts. 278 and 278A are not deemed as a wanton invasion 
by the Centre upon the authority of the provision, we propose to 
introduce Article 277A.” 
353. Similar 
clauses 
appear 
in 
the 
Australian 
and 
American 
Constitutions. Dr. Ambedkar stated that Article 355 incorporated 
an additional clause to the principle enunciated in these other 
constitutions, namely, that it shall also be the duty of the Union to 
protect the Constitutional mandate in the Provinces. For context, 
Article 355 is seen to be borrowed from Article IV, Section 4 of the 
Constitution of the United States and Section 119 of the Australian 
Constitution. Article IV, Section 4 of the Constitution of the United 
States provides as follows: 
“The United States shall guarantee to every State in this Union a 
Republican Form of Government, and shall protect each of them 
against Invasion; and on Application of the Legislature, or of the 
Executive (when the Legislature cannot be convened) against 
domestic violence.” 
 
354. Similarly, Section 119 of the Australian Constitution provides as 
follows: 
“The Commonwealth shall protect every State against invasion 
and, on the application of the Executive Government of the State, 
against domestic violence.” 
 
355. The key differentiation, evident from the aforementioned provisions 
of the American and Australian Constitutions, as opposed to Article 
355, lies in the terminology employed—specifically, the use of 

‘invasion’ and ‘domestic violence’ in contrast to ‘external 
aggression’ and ‘internal disturbance’ as outlined in Article 355. 
Another notable distinction is that, in the corresponding provisions 
of the American and Australian Constitutions, it is mandated that 
the State must apply to the Centre for protection against domestic 
violence. In contrast, no such condition is stipulated in India under 
Article 355. 
(b) Sarbananda Sonowal v. Union of India 
356. In Sarbananda Sonawal (supra), the petitioner, a citizen of 
Assam, filed a writ petition challenging the constitutional validity 
of the Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983 
(IMDT Act), which was made applicable to the state of Assam for 
the detection and deportation of illegal immigrants entering into 
India, on or after 25.03.1971. The petitioner therein alleged, inter 
alia, that the IMDT Act had failed to effectuate the detection and 
deportation of such illegal immigrants. In comparison, the 
Foreigners Act, 1946, which was applicable to the rest of the 
country, was asserted to be more effective in deporting illegal 
immigrants. The petitioner therein argued that since the unabated 
illegal immigration posed a threat to the security of the State, the 
IMDT Act would be violative of Article 355 of the Constitution. 
357. The Court analyzed the provisions of the IMDT Act and noted that 
it laid down a high threshold for establishing an individual as an 
illegal immigrant. Moreover, if a citizen of India wanted to inform 
the authorities regarding the whereabouts of an illegal immigrant, 
such a citizen needed to be a resident of the same police station 
where the immigrant was purportedly residing. Since the 
immigrants were constantly on the move, this condition was held 
to be arbitrary. In essence, the Court held that the IMDT Act had 

been purposefully enacted to provide shelter to the immigrants who 
entered Assam from Bangladesh after 25.03.1971. 
358. The Court thereafter held that the Union has the duty to protect its 
citizens. While interpreting Article 355, the Court held that the term 
‘aggression’ is of wide import and is different from the term ‘war’, 
which involves a contest between two nations for the purpose of 
vanquishing each other. On the contrary, the term ‘aggression’ is a 
broader term that may include complex situations depending on 
the fact situation and its impact. Accordingly, illegal immigration 
was held to be included in ‘external aggression’. Consequently, the 
Court held as follows: 
“62. […] The Governor of Assam in his report dated 8-11-1998 
sent to the President of India has clearly said that unabated 
influx of illegal migrants of Bangladesh into Assam has 
led to a perceptible change in the demographic pattern 
of the State and has reduced the Assamese people to a 
minority in their own State. It is a contributory factor 
behind the outbreak of insurgency in the State and 
illegal migration not only affects the people of Assam 
but 
has 
more 
dangerous 
dimensions 
of 
greatly 
undermining our national security. Pakistan's ISI is very 
active in Bangladesh supporting militants in Assam. Muslim 
militant organisations have mushroomed in Assam. The report 
also says that this can lead to the severing of the entire 
landmass of the North-East with all its resources from the rest 
of the country which will have disastrous strategic and 
economic consequences. The report is by a person who has 
held the high and responsible position of the Deputy Chief of 
the Army Staff and is very well equipped to recognise the 
potential danger or threat to the security of the nation 
by the unabated influx and continued presence of 
Bangladeshi nationals in India. Bangladesh is one of the 
world's most populous countries having very few industries. 
The economic prospects of the people in that country being 
extremely grim, they are too keen to cross over the border and 
occupy the land wherever it is possible to do so. The report of 
the Governor, the affidavits and other material on record show 
that millions of Bangladeshi nationals have illegally 
crossed the international border and have occupied vast 
tracts of land like “Char land” barren or cultivable 

land, forest area and have taken possession of the same 
in the State of Assam. Their willingness to work at low 
wages has deprived Indian citizens and specially people of 
Assam of employment opportunities. This, as stated in the 
Governor's report, has led to insurgency in Assam. 
Insurgency is undoubtedly a serious form of internal 
disturbance which causes grave threat to the life of 
people, creates panic situation and also hampers the 
growth and economic prosperity of the State of Assam 
though it possesses vast natural resources.” 
 
“63. This being the situation there can be no manner of 
doubt that the State of Assam is facing “external 
aggression and internal disturbance” on account of 
large-scale illegal migration of Bangladeshi nationals. 
It, therefore, becomes the duty of the Union of India to 
take all measures for protection of the State of Assam 
from such external aggression and internal disturbance 
as enjoined in Article 355 of the Constitution. Having 
regard to this constitutional mandate, the question arises 
whether the Union of India has taken any measures for that 
purpose.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
359. Thereafter, the Court held that as compared to the Foreigners Act, 
1946, the IMDT Act was not as effective in the detection and 
deportation of illegal immigrants and created insurmountable 
hurdles regarding the same. Hence, this Act was held to be 
beneficial for illegal immigrants, whose numbers ran into the 
millions and who were creating a scenario of insurgency in the 
State of Assam. Accordingly, the Act was held to be violative of 
Article 355. 
360. We respectfully agree with Sarbananda Sonowal (supra) in its 
holding that the term aggression in Article 355 is of a wide import 
and can include unabated migration if it poses a threat to the 
security of the state. Therefore, in such cases, the Union indeed 
bears a duty to protect the State from such unabated immigration 

that it amounts to external aggression or internal disturbance; and 
those statutes which violate this duty can be held unconstitutional. 
361. Having established that, we shall now consider whether Section 6A 
falls flat because of being violative of Article 355. 
(c) Section 6A vis-à-vis Article 355 
362. In this regard, the Respondents have argued that the claim under 
Article 355 is not maintainable since migration cannot be termed 
as external aggression, and because a statute cannot be held 
unconstitutional for being violative of Article 355 simpliciter. 
However, as seen above, this contention has already been negatived 
in Sarbananda Sonowal (supra), to which we profoundly agree. 
Therefore, their objection against the maintainability of Petitioners’ 
claim is rejected. 
363. That being said, the Respondents are seemingly right to contend 
that the cited decision is not applicable to the facts at hand 
presently. As may be seen from the reproduction of the analysis in 
Sarbananda Sonowal (supra) at paragraph 358 above, this Court 
held that migration could constitute ‘external aggression’. Although 
the present situation is similar in nature to Sarabananda 
Sonowal (supra), but it differs in degree. There, this Court was 
dealing with a situation where millions of illegal immigrants had 
been coming into the State of Assam incessantly post-1971 and 
were posing a security threat for the country. This understanding 
of ‘external aggression’ is also in tune with the case of Extra-
Judicial Execution Victim Families Assn. v. Union of India,220 
wherein this Court interpreted the term and held that it threatens 
 
220 Extra-Judicial Execution Victim Families Assn. v. Union of India, (2016), para 169. the security of the country. In Constituent Assembly Debates as 
well, the term ‘external aggression’ was interpreted to include 
situations similar to war, without its actual declaration.221 
364. However, in the present case, Section 6A is limited in its ambit and 
does not by itself create unabated migration or legitimize its 
continuance. As was seen in paragraph 25 of this judgement, 
Section 6A segregates immigrants from East Pakistan to Assam 
into three classes. It grants deemed citizenship only to the 
immigrants who migrated before 01.01.1966, and citizenship by 
registration to immigrants between 01.01.1966 and 25.03.1971. 
Further, when read along with other legislations on immigration 
and citizenship, it declares by implication, immigration into the 
State post-1971, as illegal. In fact, Section 6A adopts a practical 
solution for the problem of incessant illegal immigration into Assam 
by devising an implementable solution keeping in mind India’s 
commitments, international relations and administrative realities. 
365. Not only this, as was deliberated in the section on ‘manifest 
arbitrariness’, the migrants also need to satisfy certain conditions 
for invoking Section 6A, apart from being persons of Indian origin 
and ordinary residents in India. Hence, unlike the immigration 
scrutinized in Sarbananda Sonowal (supra), Section 6A 
addresses a controlled and regulated form of immigration that in 
our opinion would fall short of ‘external aggression’. 
366. Along similar lines, the migration legitimized by Section 6A also 
does not constitute internal disturbance. As was discussed before, 
Section 6A was a crucial step in bringing quietus to the political 
upheaval in Assam and marked the culmination of various 
 
221 H.V. Kamath, Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 9, 02.08.1949 

agitations surrounding illegal immigration and the rights of 
indigenous communities. Given this background, it is difficult to 
accede to the proposition that Section 6A caused ‘internal 
disturbance’. 
367. Hence, the claim of the Petitioners regarding Section 6A being 
contrary to Article 355 cannot be accepted. However, that being 
said, upholding the constitutionality of Section 6A should not be 
construed as an impediment in implementing existing citizenship 
and immigration legislations, or giving effect to other judicial 
decisions controlling the field. xi. Citizenship Act vis-à-vis the IEAA 
368. The Petitioners have finally contended that the Immigrants 
(Expulsion from Assam) Act, 1950 (IEAA), being a special statute 
qua the immigrants in Assam, alone can apply to the exclusion of 
the Foreigners Act, 1946. Accordingly, the Petitioners assailed the 
phrase ‘detected to be a foreigner’ in Section 6A, in so far as it 
applies to the Foreigners Act, 1946 and not the IEAA. In addition 
to this, the Petitioners contended that the IEAA, is a Parliamentary 
Statute, and its main purpose being that of expulsion, should apply 
exclusively to the immigrants in Assam. 
369. The Respondents have not made any particular submissions in this 
regard. However, for the sake of the comprehensiveness of analysis, 
we shall address this issue as well. 
370. Having taken into account these contentions, the issues that arise 
for our consideration are twofold–(i) whether the IEAA should apply 
to the immigrants in Assam, to the exclusion of the Foreigners Act, 
1946; and (ii) whether the IEAA is in conflict with the intent and 
aim of Section 6A. 

371. We must note here that the Petitioners have argued that the IEAA 
should override the provisions of other enactments like the 
Foreigners Act, 1946 or Section 6A, as they presume some conflict 
between these legislations. However, we find that this fundamental 
assumption made by the Petitioners, as to the existence of a 
conflict, is misplaced. Indeed, it is not only possible but also our 
endeavor to read all the enactments controlling the field 
harmoniously, supplementing and complementing each other. 
372. The intent behind the IEAA can be understood from its Statement 
of Objects and Reasons stipulating that: 
“During the last few months a serious situation had arisen 
from the immigration of a very large number of East Bengal 
residents into Assam. Such large migration is disturbing the 
economy of the province, besides giving rise to a serious law 
and order problem. The Bill seeks to confer necessary powers 
on the Central Government to deal with the situation.” 
 
373. This intention is manifested in Section 2 of IEAA, which grants 
Central Government the power to direct the removal of immigrants 
who are detrimental to the interests of India. 
374. Similar to this, the preamble of Foreigners Act, 1946 reads: 
“Whereas it is expedient to provide for the exercise by the 
Central Government of certain powers in respect of the entry 
of foreigners into India, their presence therein and their 
departure therefrom.” 
 
375. In light of this objective, Section 3 (1) of the Foreigners Act, 1946 
empowers the Central Government to make provisions concerning 
foreigners' entry, departure, presence, or continued presence in 
India. Without diminishing the expansive authority granted by 
Section 3 (1), Section 3 (2) confers upon the Central Government 
the power to issue comprehensive orders regarding foreigners, 

which include directives such as prohibiting a foreigner from 
remaining in India or any specified area, requiring the individual to 
meet the cost of removal from India, or compliance with specified 
conditions, etc. 
376. We find from a perusal of both, the IEAA and the Foreigners Act, 
1946, that these legislations seek to regulate the residence and 
departure of foreigners in India. To that extent, there is thus no 
conflict between the Statutes and both of them supplement and 
complement each other within the framework of Section 6A. This is 
also seconded by Sarbananda Sonawal (supra), which held: 
“83. To sum up our conclusions, the provisions of the Illegal 
Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983 are ultra vires 
the Constitution and are accordingly struck down. The Illegal 
Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Rules, 1984 are also 
ultra vires and are struck down. As a result, the Tribunals and 
the Appellate Tribunals constituted under the Illegal Migrants 
(Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983 shall cease to function. 
The Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920, the Foreigners 
Act, 1946, the Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 
1950 and the Passport Act, 1967 shall apply to the 
State of Assam […]” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
377. That apart, and as held by the Court in Sarbanda Sonawal 
(supra), apart from the IEAA, there are various other statutes—
including the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920, the Foreigners 
Act, 1946, the Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 1950 and 
the Passport Act, 1967—which are applicable to the State of Assam. 
378. In light of the brief foregoing analysis of various statutes, we are of 
the considered opinion that Section 6A need not be construed in a 
restrictive manner to mean that a person shall be detected and 
deported only under the Foreigners Act, 1946. If there is any other 

piece of legislation such as the IEAA, under which the status of an 
immigrant can be determined, we see no reason as to why such 
statutory detection shall also not be given effect to, for the purposes 
of deportation. We thus hold that the provisions of IEAA shall also 
be read into Section 6A and be applied along with the Foreigners 
Act, 1946 for the purpose of detection and deportation of foreigners. 
379. Similarly, in light of this, we find it difficult to accept the second 
contention of the Petitioners that the IEAA is a complete code in 
dealing with the situation of immigrants in Assam, and that Section 
6A cannot prescribe contrary norms by granting immigrants 
citizenship. As discussed above, IEAA is only one of the statutes 
that addressed a specific problem that existed in 1950. The issue 
of undesirable immigration in 1950 necessitated the promulgation 
of the IEAA and the granting of power to the Central government to 
expel such immigrants. On the contrary, the provisions of Section 
6A have to be viewed from the focal point of 1971, when Bangladesh 
was formed as a new nation and an understanding was reached to 
grant citizenship to certain classes of immigrants who had migrated 
from erstwhile East Pakistan, as has been detailed in paragraphs 
230 and 231 of this judgement. Hence, Section 6A, when examined 
from this perspective, is seen to have a different objective—one of 
granting citizenship to certain classes of immigrants, particularly 
deemed citizenship to those immigrants who came to India before 
01.01.1966 and qualified citizenship, to those who came on or after 
01.01.1966 and before 25.03.1971. 
380. Since the two statutes operate in different spheres, we find no 
conflict existing between them. The Parliament was fully 
conversant with the dynamics and realities, while enacting both the 
Statutes. The field of operation of the two enactments being distinct 

and different and there being a presumption of the Legislature 
having informed knowledge about their consequences, we decline 
to hold that Section 6A is in conflict with a differently situated 
statute, namely the IEAA. 
381. Instead, we are satisfied that IEAA and Section 6A can be read 
harmoniously along with other statutes. As held in Sarbananda 
Sonawal (supra), none of these Statutes exist as a standalone code 
but rather supplement each other. 
382. We may also hasten to add that the present reference is restricted 
and limited to the constitutional validity of Section 6A, and the 
extent of applicability of IEAA is not the subject matter of reference. 
As discussed earlier, there are multiple statutory enactments to 
address the influx of immigrants in Assam, namely Section 6A of 
the Citizenship Act, the Foreigners Act, 1946, the Foreigners 
(Tribunals) Order, 1964, the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 
and the Passport Act, 1967. Hence, in our view, the IEAA must be 
effectively applied along with all other Statutes which occupy 
similar or related fields and are, in a way, complementary to each 
other. xii. Interface with international law 
383. In support of the constitutionality of Section 6A, the Respondents 
have argued that an international norm against statelessness 
exists, and thus, the Court should harmonize the interpretation of 
domestic law with international law. They contend that holding 
Section 6A unconstitutional would potentially render these 
immigrants stateless, and therefore, the Court should refrain from 
invalidating this provision. 

384. In light of the discussion in the foregoing sections, since we have 
not been able to persuade ourselves to strike down Section 6A on 
the strength of the contentions of Petitioners, the need to examine 
the issue of statelessness does not arise and is rendered academic. 
385. The Petitioners too have invoked Article 27 of the ICCPR, to argue 
that since Section 6A impacts the culture of original inhabitants, it 
therefore violates Article 27. 
386. Similar to Article 29 of the Constitution of India, Article 27 of the 
ICCPR also restricts intervention in one’s culture.222 In this regard, 
since we have already analysed in detail that Section 6A per se does 
not intervene in culture of Assamese people, we see no need to re-
agitate the issue here. In any case, it is an established principle 
that international law cannot trump domestic law.223 Therefore, 
Section 6A cannot be assailed on the ground of the perceived 
violation of Article 27 of the ICCPR as well. 
F. CONCLUSIONS AND DIRECTIONS 
387. Drawing upon the comprehensive analysis presented in the 
preceding sections, we thus hold that Section 6A falls within the 
bounds of the Constitution and does not contravene the 
foundational principles of fraternity, nor does it infringe upon 
Articles 6 and 7, Article 9, Article 14, Article 21, Article 29, Article 
326, or Article 355 of the Constitution of India. Furthermore, 
Section 6A does not clash with the IEAA or established principles 
 
222 Länsman v Finland (511/92); Diergaardt et al. v. Namibia, Communication No. 
760/1997 (25 July 2000); Lubicon Lake Band v. Canada, Communication No. 
167/1984 (26 March 1990), U.N. Doc. Supp. No. 40 (A/45/40) at 1 (1990); Rakhim 
Mavlonov and Shansiy Sa’di case (Mavlonov v. Uzbekistan), Communication No. 
1334/2004, UN Doc. CCPR/C/95/D/1334/2004 (2009) 
223 Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, supra note 98. of international law. Hence, the constitutional validity of Section 
6A, as contested before us, is resolved accordingly. 
388. Nevertheless, it is imperative to acknowledge and address the valid 
concerns raised by the Petitioners regarding the persistent 
immigration in the State of Assam post 25.03.1971. Although 
Section 6A conferred citizenship rights exclusively to immigrants 
arriving before this cut-off date, there seems to still be an ongoing 
influx of migrants through various border States of India. Due to 
porous borders and incomplete fencing, this unceasing migration 
imposes a significant challenge. 
389. On account of these concerns, we passed an order on 07.12.2023 
and directed the Respondent Union of India to provide data, inter 
alia, the estimated inflow of illegal migrants into India after 
25.03.1971, the number of cases presently pending before the 
Foreigner Tribunals for such immigrants and the extent to which 
border fencing has been carried out. 
390. Regarding the inquiry into the estimated influx of illegal migrants 
post 25.03.1971, the Union of India was unable to provide precise 
figures due to the clandestine nature of such inflows. This 
underscores the necessity for more robust policy measures to curb 
illicit movements and enhance border regulation. Additionally, it 
was disclosed that approximately 97,714 cases are pending before 
the Foreigner Tribunals, and nearly 850 kilometres of border 
remain unfenced or inadequately monitored. 
391. We hold that while the statutory scheme of Section 6A is 
constitutionally valid, there is inadequate enforcement of the 
same—leading to the possibility of widespread injustice. Further, 
the intention of Section 6A, i.e., to restrict illegal immigration post-

1971 has also not been given proper effect. Accordingly, we deem it 
fit to issue following directions: 
(a) In view of the conclusion drawn in paragraph 387, it is held 
that Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 falls within the 
bounds of the Constitution and is a valid piece of legislation; 
(b) As a necessary corollary thereto, (i) immigrants who entered 
the State of Assam prior to 1966 are deemed citizens; (ii) 
immigrants who entered between the cut off dates of 
01.01.1966 and 25.03.1971 can seek citizenship subject to the 
eligibility conditions prescribed in Section 6A (3); and (iii) 
immigrants who entered the State of Assam on or after 
25.03.1971 are not entitled to the protection conferred vide 
Section 6A and consequently, they are declared to be illegal 
immigrants. Accordingly, Section 6A has become redundant 
qua those immigrants who have entered the State of Assam on 
or after 25.03.1971; 
(c) The directions issued in Sarbananda Sonowal (supra) are 
required to be given effect to for the purpose of deporting the 
illegal immigrants falling in the category of direction (b) (iii) 
above; 
(d) The provisions of the Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 
1950 shall also be read into Section 6A and shall be effectively 
employed for the purpose of identification of illegal immigrants; 
(e) The statutory machinery and Tribunals tasked with the 
identification and detection of illegal immigrants or foreigners 
in Assam are inadequate and not proportionate to the 
requirement of giving time-bound effect to the legislative object 
of Section 6A read with the Immigrants (Expulsion from 

Assam) Act, 1950, the Foreigners Act, 1946, the Foreigners 
(Tribunals) Order, 1964, the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 
1920 and the Passport Act, 1967; and 

The implementation of immigration and citizenship legislations 
cannot be left to the mere wish and discretion of the 
authorities, necessitating constant monitoring by this Court. 
392. For this purpose, let this matter be placed before Hon’ble the Chief 
Justice of India for constituting a bench to monitor the 
implementation of the directions issued hereinabove. 
393. These writ petitions are accordingly disposed of in terms of this 
judgment. 
394. Pending applications (if any) are also disposed of. 

………..………………… J. 
[SURYA KANT] 

…………………………… J. 
[M.M. SUNDRESH] 

…………………………… J. 
[MANOJ MISRA] 
 
NEW DELHI 
DATED: 17.10.2024 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

IN RE: SECTION 6A OF THE CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955 
 
WITH 

AND 

JUDGMENT 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

J.B. PARDIWALA, J.: 
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following 
parts: - 
 
I. 
 SALIENT FEATURES OF THE JUDGMENT PENNED BY JUSTICE 
 
 SURYA KANT.... 3 
II. FACTUAL MATRIX... 13 
A. 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND... 13 
i. Colonial... 13 
ii. Post-Independence... 17 
iii. Assam Accord... 23 
B. 
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE ASSAM ACCORD... 31 
III. SUBMISSIONS ON THE DAMAGE CAUSED DUE TO THE INFLUX 
 
 OF ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS INTO ASSAM... 37 
IV. ISSUE FOR DETERMINATION... 42 
V. ANALYSIS... 45 
A. 
SCHEME AND MECHANISM OF SECTION 6A... 45 
B. 
HOW MANY IMMIGRANTS ELIGIBLE UNDER SECTION 6A(3) OF THE ACT 
 
HAVE REGISTERED TILL DATE?... 57 
C. 
OBJECT SOUGHT TO BE ACHIEVED BY THE PRESCRIPTION OF TWO 
 
SEPARATE CUT-OFF DATES... 60 
D. 
WHETHER THE ONUS OF DETECTION OF FOREIGNERS OF THE 1966-
 
1971 STREAM LIES ON THE STATE?... 67 
E. 
TEMPORAL REASONABLENESS... 71 
i. Whether there is a temporal limit on the applicability of Section 6A(3)?. 76 
ii. Whether placing temporal limitations on the period of applicability is an 
 
objective implicit in the scheme of Section 6A?... 78 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

SRS 

06.09.24 18:30PM 
iii. Absurd consequences Section 6A(3) in the absence of any 
 
temporal limits to its application... 85 
F. 
MANIFEST ARBITRARINESS VIS-À-VIS TEMPORAL UNREASONABLENESS.. 94 
G. 
DAMAGE CAUSED BY THE SCHEME OF SECTION 6A... 98 
H. 
DOCTRINE OF PROSPECTIVE OVERRULING... 110 
VI. CONCLUSION... 120 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

1. I have had the benefit of reading a very erudite judgment penned by my 
learned brother, Justice Surya Kant – holding Section 6A of the Citizenship 
Act, 1955 (“the Citizenship Act”) to be constitutionally valid. However, 
with all humility at my command, I beg to differ with the views expressed by 
Justice Surya Kant on certain issues. 
 
2. I have examined the matter from a different dimension, more particularly by 
applying the doctrine of temporal reasonableness. I propose to hold Section 
6A of the Citizenship Act invalid with prospective effect, for the reasons I 
shall assign hereinafter in my judgment. 
 
3. However, before I proceed to express my views, I would like to highlight a 
few salient features of the judgment penned by Justice Surya Kant. 

I. 
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE JUDGMENT PENNED BY 
JUSTICE SURYA KANT. 
 
4. Justice Surya Kant, in his judgment, after giving an overview of the 
jurisprudence regarding the concept of citizenship and the associated 
statutory framework in India and various other international jurisdictions, has 
framed and discussed twelve issues. The first two issues are preliminary in 
nature and deal with the scope and extent of judicial review and the 
applicability of doctrine of delay and laches to the present case. The 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

remaining ten issues pertain to the various challenges to the constitutionality 
of Section 6A of the Citizenship Act as raised by the Petitioners. 
 
5. In the present judgment, I have dealt with the issues pertaining to the manifest 
arbitrariness and temporal unreasonableness of Section 6A of the Citizenship 
Act. Hence, I do not deem it appropriate to express my views on all the issues 
as framed by Justice Surya Kant in his judgment. I have expressed my 
concurrence or disagreement, as the case may be, with the views taken by 
him, only where I deemed it to be completely necessary for the purposes of 
answering the questions framed by me in this judgment. 
 
6. On the first prefatory issue pertaining to the scope and extent of judicial 
review, Justice Surya Kant has held that it is well within the domain of this 
Court to examine the challenges raised by the petitioners against the vires of 
Section 6A of the Citizenship Act. He has considered and rejected the 
objections of the respondents that Section 6A, being in the nature of foreign 
policy, should not be examined on the touchstone of constitutionality1. 
 
7. Further, Justice Surya Kant has delineated the extent of judicial review and 
has observed that while examining the constitutionality of a policy, the courts 
have to examine whether the policy infringes upon the fundamental rights of 
 
1 Paragraphs 45-46 of the judgment of Justice Surya Kant. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

the citizens, contravenes constitutional or statutory provisions or displays 
manifest arbitrariness, capriciousness or mala fides. At the same time, he has 
clarified that this Court should not sit in judgment over a policy to determine 
whether revisions are necessary for its enhancement. 
 
8. On the second preliminary issue pertaining to delay and laches, Justice Surya 
Kant has held that although there has been a considerable delay in filing of 
the present batch of petitions, yet they do not deserve to be dismissed at the 
outset as they raise substantial questions that pertain to the constitutional 
validity of a statutory provision and affect the public at large2. I concur with 
the views expressed by him on both the prefatory issues. 
 
9. On the substantive issues, Justice Surya Kant has first dealt with the 
submission of the petitioners that Section 6A of the Citizenship Act is 
violative of the preambular notion of fraternity. After elaborating on the idea 
of fraternity as understood by the framers of our Constitution in detail, he has 
held that the ethos underlying Section 6A align with the concept of fraternity, 
as envisaged by our Constitution and interpreted by our courts. He has held 
that the concept of fraternity cannot be applied in a restrictive manner to 
protect and promote the endogamous way of life of any specific community3. 
 
2 Id., paragraphs 72, 75. 
3 Id., paragraphs 117-118. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

10. Justice Surya Kant has thereafter examined if Section 6A of the Act is 
violative of Articles 64 and 75 respectively of the Constitution and whether 
the Parliament in exercise of its powers under Article 116 of the Constitution 
could have enacted such a provision. He has held that it was within the 
competence of the legislature to enact the provision and that the conditions 
mentioned under Section 6A are similar to those under Articles 6 and 7 of 
the Constitution, thereby indicating that Section 6A aligns with the 
 
4 6. Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to India from Pakistan.—
Notwithstanding anything in article 5, a person who has migrated to the territory of India from 
the territory now included in Pakistan shall be deemed to be a citizen of India at the 
commencement of this Constitution if— 
(a) he or either of his parents or any of his grand-parents was born in India as defined in the 
Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted); and 
(b)(i) in the case where such person has so migrated before the nineteenth day of July, 1948, 
he has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India since the date of his migration, or 
(ii) in the case where such person has so migrated on or after the nineteenth day of July, 1948, 
he has been registered as a citizen of India by an officer appointed in that behalf by the 
Government of the Dominion of India on an application made by him therefor to such officer 
before the commencement of this Constitution in the form and manner prescribed by that 
Government: 
Provided that no person shall be so registered unless he has been resident in the territory of 
India for at least six months immediately preceding the date of his application. 
5 7. Rights of citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan.— Notwithstanding anything in 
articles 5 and 6, a person who has after the first day of March, 1947, migrated from the territory 
of India to the territory now included in Pakistan shall not be deemed to be a citizen of India: 
Provided that nothing in this article shall apply to a person who, after having so migrated to the 
territory now included in Pakistan, has returned to the territory of India under a permit for 
resettlement or permanent return issued by or under the authority of any law and every such 
person shall for the purposes of clause (b) of article 6 be deemed to have migrated to the 
territory of India after the nineteenth day of July, 1948. 
6 11. Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law.— Nothing in the foregoing 
provisions of this Part shall derogate from the power of Parliament to make any provision with 
respect to the acquisition and termination of citizenship and all other matters relating to 
citizenship. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

underlying object of both these Articles, which was to grant citizenship to 
people affected by the partition of India7. 
 
11. While I agree with my learned brother’s view that the Parliament, 
undoubtedly, has the jurisdiction to specify conditions for the conferment of 
citizenship and thus Section 6A of the Citizenship Act is not rendered void 
for the lack of competence of the legislature, I wish to express my 
disagreement with the fundamental premise of his reasoning that Section 6A 
is similar in form and identical in spirit with Articles 6 and 7 respectively of 
the Constitution. 
 
12. A close reading of both the aforesaid Articles would indicate that unlike 
Section 6A(3) of the Citizenship Act which entrusts the State with the duty 
of detecting immigrants and conferring citizenship on them, Article 6 
prescribes for a registration system that places the onus of individually 
undertaking such registration on the person who wishes to avail citizenship. 
Secondly, unlike Section 6A(3) of the Citizenship Act which has no 
prescribed end-date for the completion of registration, Article 6 prescribes 
that an application for registration has to be made before the date of 
commencement of the Constitution. As discussed by me in detail in the later 
 
7 Paragraph 132 of the judgment of Justice Surya Kant. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

parts of this judgment, these two crucial differences are the underlying 
reasons for shrouding Section 6A of the Citizenship Act with a cloak of 
unconstitutionality. 
 
13. Justice Surya Kant has further dealt with the challenge raised by the 
petitioners that Section 6A of the Citizenship Act is violative of Article 148 
of the Constitution. While rejecting the preliminary objection raised by the 
respondents that the petitioners cannot seek equality in regard to a restriction 
as opposed to a benefit9, Justice Surya Kant, after a detailed consideration of 
the arguments and precedents, has rejected the contention of the petitioners 
and has held that Section 6A does not violate Article 14. He has held that 
Section 6A is a result of a political settlement between the Government and 
the people of Assam, namely the Assam Accord, and thus is not violative of 
Article 14 for treating Assam differently from the rest of the States10. 
 
14. Further, on the question of Section 6A of the Act being ‘manifestly arbitrary’ 
and thus violative of Article 14, Justice Surya Kant has held that neither the 
cut-off dates11 prescribed in the scheme of Section 6A of the Citizenship Act 
 
8 14. Equality before law.— The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or 
the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India. 
9 Paragraphs 164 and 166 of the judgment of Justice Surya Kant. 
10 Id., paragraphs 187-190. 
11 Id., paragraphs 230-232. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

nor the criteria and the procedure12 provided for conferment of citizenship 
under the said provision are devoid of reason or are palpably arbitrary. For 
these reasons, he has held that Section 6A does not suffer from manifest 
arbitrariness. 
 
15. I am in agreement with the view taken by Justice Surya Kant that it was 
permissible for the legislature to enact Section 6A of the Citizenship Act 
solely for the State of Assam in view of the extraordinary conditions 
prevailing therein and the Assam Accord which was entered into as a 
culmination of such circumstances. Further, I concur with his view that 
Section 6A cannot be said to be violative of Article 14 for being under-
inclusive. However, I differ from his views on the aspect of manifest 
arbitrariness for the reasons that I have assigned in the later parts of this 
judgment. I am also of the considered view that Section 6A has acquired 
unconstitutionality subsequent to its enactment in 1985 by efflux of time and 
has thus become violative of Article 14 for being temporally unreasonable. I 
have dealt with this aspect too in detail in the later parts of this judgment. 
 
16. The next issue which my learned brother has dealt with pertains to the 
violation of the Article 2913 of the Constitution on account of Section 6A of 
 
12 Id., paragraphs 238-241. 
13 29. Protection of interests of minorities.— (1) Any section of the citizens residing in the 
territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct language, script or culture of its own shall 
have the right to conserve the same. (2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

the Citizenship Act. The view taken by him is that Section 6A does not deal 
with culture, but merely prescribes the conditions for conferment of 
citizenship on certain categories of immigrants. Thus, any impact on culture 
is only incidental and not direct or intentional. He has also held that Section 
6A does not compel the pre-1971 immigrants to continue to reside within the 
territory of Assam after having obtained Indian citizenship which entitles 
them to reside and settle in any part of the country14. In the ultimate analysis, 
he has held that due to the failure of the petitioners to establish an actionable 
impact on Assamese culture, Section 6A cannot be held to be violative of 
Article 29 of the Constitution15. 
 
17. Justice Surya Kant has also considered the issue as to whether Section 6A of 
the Citizenship Act is violative of Article 2116 of the Constitution, and has 
held that the petitioners have failed to show a constitutionally actionable 
impact. He has taken the view that the impact caused in the State of Assam 
due to immigration can be attributed to several factors other than just Section 
6A of the Citizenship Act. For such reasons, he has held Section 6A to be 
non-violative of Article 21 of the Constitution17. educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds 
only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them. 
14 Paragraphs 297-298 of the judgment of Justice Surya Kant. 
15 Id., paragraphs 300, 304. 
16 21. Protection of life and personal liberty.— No person shall be deprived of his life or 
personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. 
17 Paragraphs 310 and 315 of the judgment of Justice Surya Kant. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

18. The next issue considered by Justice Surya Kant is whether Article 32618 of 
the Constitution stood violated by Section 6A of the Citizenship Act. After 
traversing the history and evolution of adult franchise in India and the case 
laws on this aspect, he has held that the petitioners have failed to show how 
their rights under Article 326 have been violated by Section 6A. He has also 
observed that the language of Article 326 unambiguously confers the power 
to set out the mechanism for excluding people from the electoral rolls on the 
legislature. It is, thus, open to the petitioners to follow the mechanism 
prescribed under the Representation of People Act, 1951 to seek the removal 
of individual immigrants, wherever such immigrants are wrongly enrolled on 
the electoral rolls19. 

19. Justice Surya Kant has also examined the contention raised by the petitioners 
that whether on account of continued presence of illegal immigrants, Section 
6A of the Citizenship Act is violative of Article 35520 of the Constitution. 
 
18 326. Elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of States to 
be on the basis of adult suffrage.— The elections to the House of the People and to the 
Legislative Assembly of every State shall be on the basis of adult suffrage; that is to say, every 
person who is a citizen of India and who is not less than 2 [eighteen years] of age on such date 
as may be fixed in that behalf by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature and is 
not otherwise disqualified under this Constitution or any law made by the appropriate 
Legislature on the ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal 
practice, shall be entitled to be registered as a voter at any such election. 
19 Paragraph 342 of the judgment of Justice Surya Kant. 
20 355. Duty of the Union to protect States against external aggression and internal 
disturbance.— It shall be the duty of the Union to protect every State against external 
aggression and internal disturbance and to ensure that the Government of every State is carried 
on in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

Relying on the decision of this Court in Sarbananda Sonowal v. Union of 
India reported in (2005), he has rejected the preliminary 
contention of the respondents that Section 6A of the Citizenship Act cannot 
be held unconstitutional for violating Article 355 simplicter. However, he 
has held that the magnitude and degree of immigration in the case governed 
by Section 6A is much lesser than that referred to in the Sarbananda 
Sonowal (supra) case, and thus doesn’t amount to external aggression21. 
 
20. Justice Surya Kant has also considered the interplay of Section 6A of the 
Citizenship Act with Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 1950 
(“IEAA, 1950”) and has held that Section 6A should be read harmoniously 
with the other existing provisions and thus it cannot be said to be contrary to 
the object of the IEAA, 195022. 
 
21. Finally, Justice Surya Kant has held that Section 6A of the Citizenship Act 
is not violative of any international covenant, treaty or any other obligation 
imposed on India by any international law23. 

21 Paragraph 364-366 of the judgment of Justice Surya Kant. 
22 Id., paragraphs 380-382. 
23 Id., paragraph 386. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

II. 
FACTUAL MATRIX 
 
22. For a more comprehensive understanding of the issues raised in the present 
case, it is necessary to refer to the historical and sociological context in which 
these issues have arisen. 
 
A. 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND 
 
i. 
Colonial 
23. Between 1817 and 1826, there were multiple invasions by the Burmese into 
Assam. This brought the Kingdom of Ava, i.e., the sovereign kingdom that 
ruled Upper Burma into conflict with the British East India Company. 
 
24. There was a great deal of mistrust and friction between the British and the 
Burmese. This culminated into the first Anglo-Burmese war in 1824 which 
ended with the signing of the Yandabo Peace Treaty on 24.02.1826 between 
the East India Company and the Burmese Kingdom of Ava. The treaty, inter-
alia, stipulated for the ceding of the territories of Assam, Manipur, Arakan, 
and the Taninthayi to the British. However, two more wars were fought 
between the British and Burmese before annexation of Burma was completed 
by the British. 
 
25. Through subsequent treaties, the regions included in the erstwhile Ahom 
Kingdom were integrated within the Bengal Presidency. Adjacent territories, 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

including those forming the present-day states of Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland, were designated as the ‘frontier tracts’ and 
were annexed in due course. The British province that came to be known as 
‘Assam’ roughly took shape by 1873. Subsequently, in the same year, the 
British introduced inner line under the Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation of 
1873 to restrict the migrants.24 
 
26. In 1836, Bengali was declared as the official language of the Bengal province 
of which Assam was a constituent. In 1839, with the annexation of 
Maran/Matak territory in upper Assam, the British control over Assam was 
complete and the British saw it fit to extract the most out of Assam’s fertile 
lands. 
 
27. The charter granted to the East India Company in 183325 marked the triumph 
of the British industrial interests over its mercantile interest and had a 
significant impact on the settlement of the newly conquered Assam. The 
Charter permitted the Europeans to hold land outside the Presidency towns 
on a long-term lease or with free-hold rights. This paved the path for a 
colonial plantation economy. The Assam Company which was started in 
 
24 Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation, 1873, Regulation 2, Regulation 5 of 1873. 
25 The Charter Act, 1833, Chapter No. 85, Acts of Parliament (U.K.). 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

1839 became the first joint-stock company of India to be incorporated with 
limited liabilities under an Act of Parliament in August, 184526. 
 
28. In 1858, with India coming under the rule of the British Crown as a unified 
territory, the growing demand of labour in tea-plantations and the expanding 
agriculture provided an opportunity to the planters to import cheap 
indentured labour from across India to the fertile valleys of Brahmaputra 
River in Assam. 
 
29. This migration was accompanied by an influx of Bengali speaking 
population into positions of administrative services. The British dismantled 
the existing structure of governance, made Bengali the official language and 
recruited Bengali speaking populace to run the administration.27 Assam was 
more sparsely populated than East Bengal. As a result, the Bengali speaking 
population coming from East Bengal reclaimed thousands of acres of land, 
cleared vast tracts of dense jungle along the south bank of the Brahmaputra, 
and occupied flooded lowlands all along the river.28 

26 The Assam Company Act, 1845, No. 19 of 1845, Acts of Parliament (U.K.). 
27 Myron Weiner, The Political Demography of Assam’s Anti-Immigrant Movement, 9, POPUL. 
DEV. REV., 283 (1983). 
28 Id. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

30. However, owing to the inconvenience of governing the Assam districts as a 
division of the Bengal Presidency and on the demand of the tea planters, 
Assam Proper, Cachar, Goalpara, Sylhet and Hill District were constituted as 
a separate Chief Commissioner’s province of Assam, also known as the 
North East Frontier, with capital at Shillong. With this development, 
Assamese, which had been replaced with Bengali as the official language 
during the annexation of Assam in 1830s, was reinstated alongside Bengali 
as the official language. However, Assam’s status as a separate province 
came to an end on 16.10.1905 and it was reconstituted as a part of the newly 
born composite province of Eastern Bengal and Assam. 
 
31. The partition of Bengal was short-lived because of the rise of anti-British 
sentiment on account of their policies which led the British to attempt to 
bring about political stability in the territory of India. At the Delhi Durbar 
held on 12.12.1911, the partition of Bengal was annulled by a royal 
declaration. Assam-Sylhet was formally reverted to its old status as a Chief 
Commissioner’s province with effect from 01.04.1912. The province of East 
Bengal was reorganized by removing Assam from East Bengal, and Assam 
was constituted as a separate administrative province. 
 
32. In 1937, the Government of India Act, 1935 (“GOI Act, 1935”) came into 
force. With the introduction of the GOI Act, 1935, the territory of Burma 
ceded from India and Assam was incorporated as a territory of India. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

ii. 
Post-Independence 
33. The Indian Independence Bill, 1947 proposed that all of Sylhet would 
become a part of East Bengal. After partition, Sylhet district was transferred 
to East Pakistan by a referendum. 
 
34. The Indian Independence Act, 1947 was passed on 18.07.1947, dividing 
erstwhile India into two new nations, i.e., India and Pakistan. Considering 
the incessant migration at the time of partition, the Influx from West Pakistan 
(Control) Ordinance, 1948 was promulgated, putting into place a permit 
system. The ordinance was subsequently replaced by the Influx from 
Pakistan (Control) Ordinance, 1948. Thereafter, on 22.04.1949, the Influx 
from Pakistan (Control) Act, 1949 was enacted. 
 
35. It was the understanding during the drafting of the Constitution that as Assam 
and East Bengal shared a long history of migration, thus it would not be 
prudent to apply the permit system for migration in East India vis-à-vis the 
permit system that was in place for the territory of North-West India and 
erstwhile West Pakistan. Consequently, the permit system was never 
implemented in relation to the border with East Pakistan. 
 
36. At the time of independence, Assam occupied one-fifteenth of India’s total 
land surface and had a very fluid border. The muddy and riverine border with 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

East Pakistan led to regular trouble as disputes over territory surfaced. There 
were claims and counter-claims about the territorial jurisdiction of India and 
East Pakistan. 29 
 
37. In 1950, keeping in mind the excessive migration taking place into Assam 
post-independence, the Government of India sought to stabilize the situation 
and protect the resources of the country from excess migration and enacted 
IEAA, 1950. During this period, there were instances of communal 
disturbance and some immigrants living in the districts of Goalpara, Kamrup 
and Darrang in Assam fled to East Pakistan, leaving their properties behind.30 
 
38. Inter-alia in light of the aforesaid developments, an agreement between the 
Governments of India and Pakistan respectively was signed on 08.04.1950, 
popularly known as the Nehru-Liaquat Agreement31, whereby refugees were 
allowed to return to dispose of their properties. 
 
39. On 26.12.1952, the Influx from Pakistan (Control) Repealing Act, 1952 was 
enacted to repeal the Influx from Pakistan (Control) Act, 1949 and this ended 
the permit system w.e.f. 15.10.1952. 

29 ARUPJYOTI SAIKIA, QUEST FOR MODERN ASSAM: A HISTORY (Penguin Books 2023). 
30 Id. 
31 Agreement Between the Government of India and Pakistan Regarding Security and Rights 
of Minorities (Nehru-Liaquat Agreement), India-Pak., Apr. 8, 1950, New Delhi. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

40. The Citizenship Act, 1955 came into force on 30.12.1955, inter-alia, 
prescribing and laying down the various manners and conditions under which 
the citizenship of India was to be obtained or granted. 
 
41. Post the partition of the country, there were constant skirmishes between the 
two newly born nations, and the India-Pakistan war of 1965 occasioned a 
large-scale migration of people from East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) into 
India, particularly into the states of Assam and West Bengal, creating fresh 
security concerns. 
 
42. Until 1963, the task of detection, prosecution and deportation of illegal 
immigrants was solely done by the police forces. Concerned by the excessive 
migration to Assam as well as the lack of judicial scrutiny in the procedure 
of detection and deportation of immigrants, the Government decided to 
establish tribunals in Assam to bring in an element of judicial scrutiny and as 
such the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 was issued. The tribunals 
constituted under the said order were entrusted with the task of deciding 
whether a person was a foreigner or not as defined by the Foreigners Act, 
1946. 
 
43. Meanwhile, in the absence of any resolution of ongoing disputes between the 
East and the West Pakistan, the War of Independence broke out in March, 
1971 in Bangladesh. By early April, several thousands of Bangladeshi 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

citizens were killed resulting in a massive flow of refugees into India which 
took the form of a huge humanitarian crisis. 
 
44. During this period, Assam was undergoing significant territorial changes 
with States such as Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura coming into existence 
as well as the formation of the Union Territories of Mizoram and Arunachal 
Pradesh. 
 
45. On 19.03.1972, a treaty of friendship, co-operation and peace, popularly 
known as the Indira-Mujib Agreement32 was signed between India and 
Bangladesh. 
 
46. A Joint Communiqué between the Prime Ministers of India and Bangladesh 
respectively was signed in Calcutta. Inter alia, it stated thus: 
“The Prime Minister of Bangladesh solemnly re-affirmed his 
resolve to ensure by every means the return of all the refugees 
who had taken shelter in India since March 25, 1971, and to 
strive by every means to safeguard their safety, human 
dignity and means of livelihood”33 

47. On 15.12.1972, the Bangladesh Citizenship (Temporary Provisions) Order, 
197234, came to be promulgated by the Government of Bangladesh, which 
 
32 Treaty of Peace and Friendship Between the Government of India and the Government of the 
People's Republic of Bangladesh, India-Bangl., Mar. 19, 1972, Dacca. 
33 Joint Communiqué between the Prime Minister of Bangladesh Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and 
the Prime Minister of India, India-Bangl., Feb. 8, 1972, (Calcutta). 
34 Bangladesh Citizenship (Temporary Provisions) Order, 1972, No. 149, President’s Order, 
1972, (Bangl.). 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

provided that any person whose father or grand-father was born in 
Bangladesh and who was a permanent resident of Bangladesh on 25.03.1971 
and continued to reside in the present-day Bangladesh as on 25.03.1971, shall 
be a citizen of Bangladesh. In other words, all persons who migrated to India 
before 25.03.1971, were not entitled to Bangladeshi citizenship. 
 
48. With the influx of Bengali speaking migrants from East Pakistan, the 
situation at the ground level in Assam underwent a significant change. The 
confrontation between Bengali and Assamese speakers took multiple forms. 
On the one hand, Assamese-speaking students boycotted classes, whereas on 
the other there was an increasing demand for state-support for the Bengali 
language.35 
 
49. In March, 1972, when Guwahati University provided the students with an 
option of writing their exams in Bengali language, it evoked strong protest 
from Assamese students, who cited this as an attack on their identity and 
culture. This created a grave security situation in the area.36 
 
35 ARUPJYOTI, supra note 29. 
36 Sarat Chandra Sinha, Chief Minister, Assam, Letter to K.C. Pant, Union Minister, Home 
Affairs, State (Jun. 23, 1972) (on file with Gauhati University, File No. CMS 39/72, Assam 
State Archives) ‘When the people of Cachar presented their apprehension to the Government, 
we informally suggested to the University authorities the need to reconsider their earlier 
decision in keeping with the spirit of the relevant provisions in the Assam Official Language 
Act’. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

50. Thereafter, it was proposed that a separate university, fully funded by the 
Central Government, would be established in Cachar. However, this did not 
go down well with the Assamese speakers. The Asam Sahitya Sabha and the 
All-Assam Students Union (“AASU”), followed by many others, opposed 
the idea of a separate central university in Assam and that of bilingual 
instruction in the universities of Assam37. An Assam Bandh, called by the 
AASU, was observed.38 Clashes took place with instances of riot, loot, 
burning of homes, etc., taking place. Several people, including students died 
in the ensuing unrest. 39 
 
51. Due to the protest and agitations in Assam, the Government withdrew its 
decision to open a university in Cachar and also introduced compulsory 
learning of Assamese till high school.40 A formal announcement of the end 
of the agitation was also made by AASU.41 However, the groundwork for 
future conflicts between the Bengali and Assamese speakers was gradually 
being prepared with hostilities continuing in some manner or the other. 
 
37 Jatindra Nath Goswami, General Secretary, Asam Sahitya Sabha, Letter to Chief Minister, 
Assam (Sept. 30, 1972) (on file with Gauhati University, File No. CMS 39/72, Assam State 
Archives); Prasanna Narayan Choudhury, General Secretary, Post-Graduate Students’ Union, 
Gauhati University, Letter to Members of Academic Council, Gauhati University (June 3, 
1972) (on file with Gauhati University, File No. CMS 39/72, Assam State Archives); Telegram 
from DC, Nagaon to Principal Private Secretary to Chief Minister (Sept. 29, 1972) (on file with 
Gauhati University, File No. CMS 39/72, Assam State Archives); Dainik Asam, Oct. 1, 1972. 
38 Dainik Asam, Oct. 4, 1972; Times of India, Oct. 6, 1972; Times of India, Oct. 7, 1972. 
39 Uddipan Dutta, The Role of Language Management and Language Conflict in the Transition 
of Post-Colonia Assamese Identity, (2012). 
40 Assam Tribune, Nov. 12 1972. 
41 Times of India, Nov. 13 1972. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

iii. 
Assam Accord 
52. By June 1978, the students belonging to the All-Guwahati Students Union 
(“AGSU”) and AASU staged several protests and demonstrations. They 
demanded, inter alia, that the flow of outsiders into Assam be checked, only 
the youth from Assam be employed in government undertakings and that 
they be allowed to write the Assam Public Service Commission examination 
in Assamese.42 The AASU took to the streets, boycotted classes and 
eventually enforced a strike on 22.09.1978 which brought the state to a halt.43 
 
53. The Chief Election Commissioner in 1978 made a statement that a large 
number of foreigners had entered the electoral rolls in the North-Eastern 
states of India. The news about discrepancies in the electoral rolls soon found 
its way into the Assamese popular press.44 
 
54. In 1979, during the routine update of the electoral rolls, various illegal 
immigrants were detected therein causing the AASU to observe its first state-
wide strike to protest against the infiltration of illegal immigrants. The 
publication of the electoral rolls of the Mangaldoi parliamentary constituency 
ahead of a bye-election in 1979 is widely considered as the proximate episode 
which kickstarted the six-year long student-led movement in Assam. 
 
42Assam Tribune, Jun. 2 and 3, 1978. 
43 Dainik Asam, Sept. 23, 1979; Assam Tribune, Sept. 23, 1979. 
44 ARUPJYOTI, supra note 29. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

55. The reports that the number of eligible voters in Mangaldoi had increased by 
a vast margin since the last election held two years ago, led many in the state 
to make formal complaints that challenged the citizenship of many voters 
included in the electoral rolls. This came in the wake of multiple, well-
publicised accounts detailing the continuous high levels of migration from 
Bangladesh into Assam. Shortly after this, in June, 1979, the AASU 
demanded the detection, disenfranchisement and deportation of foreigners. 
 
56. In 1980, the then Prime Minister once again invited leaders of the Assam 
movement for deliberations over the prevailing issues. The student leaders 
met the Prime Minister and submitted a memorandum detailing their 
demands, the economic situation and a future roadmap for Assam. Their 
demands included a register of citizens, detection of all foreigners who came 
to live in Assam since 1951 and their deportation. However, consensus could 
not be arrived at between the Central Government and the leaders of the 
Assam movement leading to the continuation of the agitation. The student 
leaders were given the option of accepting 1967 as the cut-off date for the 
detection and deportation of illegal citizens but the offer was turned down.45 
 
57. Between 1980 and 1983, talks with the student leaders continued at the 
highest level of the Central Government. However, the Assamese leaders 
 
45 SANGEETA BAROOAH PISHAROTY, ASSAM: THE ACCORD, THE DISCORD (Penguin 2019). 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

stuck to the 1951 benchmark for grant of citizenship as per the Citizenship 
Act. 
 
58. Arupjyoti Saikia has observed that the student-led movement presented “no 
specific charter or program for bringing political and economic change to 
Assam. Instead, it focused on two demands that the agitators believed would 
bring the desired change – first, push back the foreigners and secondly, 
increase Assam’s share in the Union budget.”46 He has also observed that 
“the movement at its essence was largely in the hands of student leaders – 
both rural and urban. Students across the rural and urban divide had 
withdrawn from classrooms, the large majority missing class for an entire 
year in 1980.” 
 
59. In 1981, both the Central government and the Assam leaders tried to seek an 
answer to the definition of ‘illegal’ foreigners47, and the former was willing 
to deport those who came after 1966.48 However, by the end of 1982, the 
dispute was mainly about the fate of those who had entered Assam between 
1961 and 197149. The Central Government agreed that those who had entered 
Assam post-1971 would be deported from India—a decision believed to have 
been supported by various political groups in Assam. 
 
46 ARUPJYOTI, supra note 29. 
47 Indian Express, Jul. 1, 1981. 
48 Indian Express, Aug. 1 1981. 
49 Indian Express, Oct. 2, 1982. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

60. After a little less than a year of the President’s Rule in Assam, the Union 
government tried to get the support of the opposition parties to hold elections 
for the constitution of the Seventh Assam Legislative Assembly. The Union 
government, without specifying the legal and political modalities for the 
identification of a foreigner, offered to drop from the electoral rolls the names 
of foreigners and identify those who had come to Assam between 1966 and 
24.03.1971 (the date is linked with the Bangladesh Liberation War which 
began on 25.03.1971), but the offer was rejected by the Assamese student 
leaders.50 
 
61. As the Central Government decided to proceed with the state legislative 
assembly elections in Assam in February 1983, protests turned violent and 
many were reportedly killed in the ensuing violence. What was till then 
largely seen as a powerful, popular and relatively peaceful movement came 
at the center of national and international attention after this unfortunate turn 
of events. 
 
62. The holding of elections in Assam in February 1983 was a constitutional 
requirement after a one-year period of President’s Rule. However, the 
fundamental demand of the protestors for holding elections, i.e., the revision 
 
50 Dainik Asam, Jan. 6, 1983. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

of electoral rolls was not fulfilled.51 The Assamese leaders were steadfast in 
their demand that “no election should be held to the Assembly or Parliament 
before the deletion of the names of foreigners from the electoral rolls.”52 
 
63. Despite the unstable political environment existing in Assam at that time, the 
Central Government decided to proceed with the elections. However, the 
elections took place in the backdrop of distrust between the student-led 
movement and the Central government. As per news reports, on the day of 
voting, many polling stations returned empty ballot boxes. 
 
64. On the morning of 18.02.1983, the unfortunate tragedy of Nellie unfolded. 
Attackers, reportedly armed with guns, knives, spears, bows and arrows 
attacked the people of Nellie. 
 
65. Post the Nellie incident, the situation became more tense and volatile than 
ever before. As per various reports, the religious narrative overtook the 
regional, economic and political character of the anti-foreigner movement, 
and there was heavy communal, linguistic and ethnic polarization. The social 
relations between communities – based on economic exchanges and agrarian 
 
51 Report of the Non-Official Judicial Inquiry Commission on the Holocaust of Assam Before 
During and After Election 1983, Order of R.K. Trivedi, Chief Election Commissioner, India, 
Annexure F, 201 (Jan. 7, 1983). 
52 Report of the Non-Official Judicial Inquiry Commission on the Holocaust of Assam Before 
During and After Election 1983, Note Submitted by S.L. Khosla, Chief Electoral Officer, 
Assam to R.V. Subramaniam, Advisor to Governor, Assam, Annexure E, 193 (Sept. 29, 1982). 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

relations – had been less polarized prior to 1980. The Nellie incident was not 
an isolated event and many places reported widespread clashes. 
 
66. In light of the ongoing instability and violence in the State, the main issue 
was the fate of the people in Assam who had migrated from East Pakistan or, 
later, from Bangladesh. The discord was about the cut-off date, as it was 
called, that is the year until which the migrants would be accepted as Indian 
citizens by the leaders of the movement. The Central Government, in their 
early negotiations with the Assamese leaders, suggested 1971 as this date, 
which was generally agreed upon by the opposition political parties. Given 
the humanitarian crisis, this consensus was crucial. However, the Assamese 
leaders insisted on 1951 as the cut-off date. 
 
67. However, after February 1983, the mass support for the agitational programs 
reportedly began to wither. The intensity of popular mobilization had fizzled 
out by the second half of 1983. The events of early 1983 had created a sense 
of cluelessness; many were tormented by the violent turn the movement had 
taken, and the movement began to lose its unifying appeal. 
 
68. In 1983, the Government of India enacted the Illegal Migrants 
(Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983 (“IMDT Act”) by which tribunals 
were established for determining whether a person is an illegal migrant and 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

to enable the Central Government to expel or deport those determined as 
such. The IMDT Act was made applicable to anyone who came into India 
after 25.03.1971 and was made applicable only to the State of Assam. 
However, in 2005, a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Sarbananda 
Sonowal (supra) struck down the IMDT Act and the rules made thereunder. 
 
69. However, after a period of ebb, the agitation briefly resurfaced in mid-1984. 
This was largely an outcome of the State Government’s determination to 
correct the electoral rolls in June, 1984 without securing any political 
consensus. Once again, students took to the streets and called for bandhs and 
picketing.53 
 
70. However, as the movement became long drawn, the leaders too recognized 
the ground reality – that it was time for a settlement with the Central 
Government. After years of popular protest, the number of street agitators 
had declined and the outlook of the leaders of the movement also changed 
accordingly.54 
 
71. After a series of negotiations held in Shillong, agreement was arrived at on 
some of the most contentious issues on 30.07.1985.55 Early in the morning 
 
53 Assam Tribune, Jun. 15 and 16, 1984. 
54 Lok Sabha Debates, Statement of A.K. Sen, Minister of Law and Justice on Statutory 
Resolution Regarding Disapproval of Representation of the People (Amendment) Ordinance 
and Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill., at cols. 190–93, (Jan. 23, 1985). 
55 Assam Tribune, Jul. 28, 1985. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

of 15.08.1985, the Central Government and the leaders of the movement 
signed the Assam Accord, which promised that all immigrants who had 
arrived in Assam after 1965 would be disenfranchised and immigrants who 
arrived after 24.03.1971 would be deported. The Prime Minister also assured 
the student leaders that the state legislature, elected in the disputed poll of 
1983, would be dissolved, with a caretaker government in control until fresh 
elections could be held. This was seen as the biggest victory for the leaders 
of the movement. Apart from the promises to accelerate the economic 
development of Assam, legislative and administrative safeguards were also 
promised by the Central Government to protect the cultural, social and 
linguistic identity and heritage of the Assamese people. Concerning those 
who had come to Assam post-1965, the then Home Minister clarified that 
though their right to vote would be suspended, they would not be harassed in 
any way and would continue to enjoy all other legal and constitutional 
rights.56 The date of the beginning of the Bangladesh War, that is, 
25.03.1971, was accepted as the cut-off date for the deportation of 
foreigners.57 The Central Government also promised in the accord to erect a 
fence along the riverine and open part of the Indo-Bangladeshi border. This 
 
56 K.C. Khanna, Minefield of Uncertainties: The Assam Accord and After, TIMES OF INDIA, (20 
August 1985). 
57 MANI SHANKAR AIYAR, RAJIV GANDHI’S INDIA: A GOLDEN JUBILEE RETROSPECTIVE, 
NATIONHOOD, ETHNICITY, PLURALISM AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION, (Atlantic Publishers 
1998); Hiteswar Saikia acknowledged that, to him, ‘the Accord was good because, for the first 
time, those who came to Assam right from 1947 to 1971 after the Partition were recognised’ 
as citizens of India. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

officially marked the end of the six-year-long anti-foreigner movement in 
Assam. 
 
72. On the basis of the Assam Accord, the Government of India introduced 
Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, whereby it sought to codify the political 
settlement arrived at through a series of negotiations and provide clarity, 
inter-alia, on the status of citizenship of immigrants between 1950 to 1971. 
 
B. 
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE ASSAM ACCORD 
 
73. As a result of the student movement and the ensuing negotiations between 
the Central Government, State Government, AASU, and the All Assam Gana 
Sangram Parishad (“AAGSP”), a Memorandum of Settlement was arrived at 
on 15.08.1985, which is commonly known as the “Assam Accord”. Terms of 
the Assam Accord are reproduced below for ease of reference: - 
 “MEMORANDUM OF SETTLEMENT 
 
1. Government have all along been most anxious to find a 
satisfactory solution to the problem of Foreigners in Assam. 
The All Assam Students' Union (AASU) and the All Assam 
Gana Sangram Parishad (AAGSP) have also expressed their 
Keenness to find such a solution. 
 
2. The AASU through their Memorandum dated 2nd 
February, 1980 presented to the Late Prime Minister Smt. 
Indira Gandhi, conveyed their profound sense of 
apprehensions regarding the continuing influx of foreign 
nationals into Assam and the fear about adverse effects upon 
the political, social, cultural and economic life of the State. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

3. Being fully alive to the genuine apprehensions of the 
people of Assam, the then Prime Minister initiated the 
dialogue with the AASU/AAGSP. Subsequently, talks were 
held at the Prime Minister’s and Home Ministers levels 
during the period 1980-83. Several rounds of informal talks 
were held during 1984. Formal discussions were resumed in 
March, 1985. 
 
4. Keeping all aspects of the problem including 
constitutional 
and 
legal 
provision, 
international 
agreements, national commitments and humanitarian 
considerations, it has been decided to proceed as follows:- 
 
Foreigners Issue: 
 
5. 1. For purpose of detection and deletion of foreigners, 1-
1-1966 shall be the base date and year. 
 
5.2. All persons who came to Assam prior to 1-1-1966, 
including those amongst them whose names appeared on the 
electoral rolls used in 1967 elections, shall be regularized. 
 
5.3 Foreigners who came to Assam after 1-1-1966 
(inclusive) and upto 24th March, 1971 shall be detected in 
accordance with the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 
and the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1939. 
 
5.4 Names of foreigners so detected will be deleted from the 
electoral rolls in force. Such persons will be required to 
register themselves before the Registration Officers of the 
respective districts in accordance with the provisions of the 
Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939 and the Registration of 
Foreigners Rules, 1939. 
 
5.5 For this purpose, Government of India will undertake 
suitable strengthening of the governmental machinery. 
 
5.6 On the expiry of the period of ten year following the date 
of detection, the names of all such persons which have been 
deleted from the electoral rolls shall be restored. 
 
5.7 All persons who were expelled earlier, but have since re-
entered illegally into Assam, shall be expelled. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

5.8 Foreigners who came to Assam on or after March 25, 
1971 shall continue to be detected, deleted and expelled in 
accordance with the law. Immediate and practical steps 
shall be taken to expel such foreigners. 
 
5.9 The Government will give due consideration to certain 
difficulties express by the AASU/AAGSP regarding the 
implementation of the Illegal Migrants (Determination by 
Tribunals) Act, 1983. 
 
Safeguards and Economic Development: 
 
6. Constitutional, legislative and administrative safeguards, 
as may be appropriate, shall be provided to protect, preserve 
and promote the cultural, social, linguistic identity and 
heritage of the Assamese people. 
 
7. The Government takes this opportunity to renew their 
commitment for the speedy all round economic development 
of Assam, so as to improve the standard of living of the 
people. Special emphasis will be placed on the education 
and Science & Technology through establishment of 
national institutions. 
 
Other Issues: 
 
8.1 The Government will arrange for the issue of citizenship 
certificate in future only by the authorities of the Central 
Government. 
 
8.2 Specific complaints that may be made by the 
AASU/AAGSP 
about 
irregular 
issuance 
of 
Indian 
Citizenship Certificates (ICC) will be looked into. 
 
9. The international border shall be made secure against 
future infiltration by erection of physical barriers like walls 
barbed wire fencing and other obstacles at appropriate 
places. Patrolling by security forces on land and riverine 
routes all along the international border shall be adequately 
intensified. In order to further strengthen the security 
arrangements, to prevent effectively future infiltration, an 
adequate number of check posts shall be set up. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

9.2 Besides the arrangements mentioned above and keeping 
in view security considerations, a road all along the 
international border shall be constructed so as to facilitate 
patrolling by security forces. Land between border and the 
road would be kept free of human habitation, wherever 
possible. Riverine patrolling along the international border 
would be intensified. All effective measures would be 
adopted to prevent infiltrators crossing or attempting to 
cross the international border. 
 
10. It will be ensured that relevant laws for prevention of 
encroachment of government lands and lands in tribal belts 
and blocks are strictly enforced and unauthorized 
encroachers evicted as laid down under such laws. 
 
11. It will be ensured that the law restricting acquisition of 
immovable property by foreigners in Assam is strictly 
enforced. 
 
12. It will be ensured that Birth and Death Registers are duly 
maintained. 
Restoration of Normalcy: 
 
13. The All-Assam Students Unions (AASU) and the All 
Assam Gana Sangram Parishad (AAGSP) call off the 
agitation, assure full co-operation and dedicate themselves 
towards the development of the Country. 
 
14. The Central and the State Government have agreed to: 
a. Review with sympathy and withdraw cases of disciplinary 
action taken against employees in the context of the agitation 
and to ensure that there is no victimization; 
b. Frame a scheme for ex-gratia payment to next of kin of 
those who were killed in the course in the agitation. c. Give sympathetic consideration to proposal for relaxation 
of upper age limit for employment in public service in Assam, 
having regard to exceptional situation that prevailed in 
holding academic and competitive examinations etc. in the 
context of agitation in Assam: 
d. Undertake review of detention cases, if any, as well as 
cases against persons charged with criminal offences in 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

connection with the agitation, except those charged with 
commission of heinous offences. e. Consider withdrawal of the prohibitory orders/ 
notifications in force, if any: 
 
15. The Ministry of Home Affairs will be the nodal Ministry 
for the implementation of the above. 
 
Signed/- 
Signed/- 
R.D. Pradhan 
Home Secretary 
Govt. of India 
P.K. Mahanta 
President 
All Assam 
Students Union 

Signed/- 

Signed/- 

Signed/- 
 
(B.K. Phukan) 
General 
Secretary 
All Assam 
Students Union 
 
(Biraj Sharma) 
Convenor 
All Assam Gana 
Sangram Parishad 
 
(Smt. PP 
Trivedi) 
Chief 
Secretary 
Govt. of Assam 

In the presence of 
Signed/- 
(RAJIV GANDHI) 
PRIME MINISTER OF INDIA 
 
Date: 15th August, 1985 
Place: New Delhi” 
 
74. The clauses of the Accord dealt with, inter-alia, the following issues: - 
• The foreigners’ issue in Assam; 
• Constitutional, legislative and administrative safeguards for cultural, 
social and linguistic identity and heritage of the Assamese people; 
• Economic development of Assam; 
• Security of the international border; 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

• Restricting acquisition of immovable property by foreigners; 
• Prevention of encroachment of government lands; 
• Registration of births and deaths; 
• Call-off of the agitation by the protesting groups; 
• Withdrawal of cases against persons involved in the agitation; and 
• Framing of scheme for payment of ex-gratia compensation to next of 
kin of those who were killed during the agitation, etc. 
 
75. For the purpose of the present discussion, it is important to highlight the 
features of clause 5 of the Accord which deals with the foreigners’ issue and 
also forms the basis of Section 6A of the Citizenship Act. 
 
76. Clause 5.1 provided that foreigners who have entered into Assam after 
25.03.1971 will continue to be detected and their names will be deleted from 
the electoral rolls and they will be deported from India. 
 
77. Clause 5.2 provided for the regularization of citizenship of all the 
immigrants who had entered into Assam on or before 31.12.1965 including 
those whose names appeared in electoral rolls published in 1967. 
 
78. Further, Clause 5.9 provided that “the Government will give due 
consideration to certain difficulties expressed by AASU/AAGSP regarding 
the implementation of IMDT Act, 1983”. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

79. Clause 5 also provided for detection of people entering into Assam between 
01.01.1966 and 24.03.1971. For this category of immigrants, citizenship was 
to be granted in terms of Clause 5.3 of the Accord. As per the said Clause, 
immigrants belonging to the aforesaid category were to be detected in 
accordance with the Foreigners Act, 1946 and the Foreigners (Tribunals) 
Order, 1964. As per Clause 5.4, upon detection the names of such immigrants 
were to be deleted from the electoral rolls and subsequently they would be 
required to get themselves registered for grant of citizenship in accordance 
with the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939 and the Registration of 
Foreigners Rules, 1939, failing which they would be liable to get deported. 
Ten years post such detection, their names would be reinstated on the 
electoral rolls. Clause 5.3 subsequently became the basis of Section 6A(3) of 
the Citizenship Act. 
 
III. 
SUBMISSIONS ON THE DAMAGE CAUSED DUE TO THE 
INFLUX OF ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS INTO ASSAM 
 
80. It is the case of the petitioners that the acute problem of illegal immigration 
has led to a major change of demography in the State of Assam, and is posing 
a serious threat to the unity, integrity and security of India. It was submitted 
before us that Section 6A of the Citizenship Act has directly impacted the 
political landscape of the State by granting citizenship to a large number of 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

immigrants from Bangladesh thereby rendering the local population a 
minority. 
 
81. It was submitted by the petitioners that the grant of citizenship in the manner 
provided under Section 6A of the Citizenship Act has altered the 
demographics of the State of Assam, which has led to the marginalization of 
the citizens belonging to various indigenous and ethnic groups living in the 
State prior to the coming into force of Section 6A. 
 
82. The petitioners relied on a report relating to the unabated influx of people 
from Bangladesh into Assam dated 08.11.1998 submitted to the President by 
the then Governor of Assam, Lt. General (retd.) Shri S.K. Sinha.58 The 
following key findings of the report were highlighted during the course of 
the hearing: 
 
a. The report was prepared keeping in mind the demographic change 
in Tripura and Sikkim to highlight the issues that have arisen and 
that may arise with the unabated influx of immigrants which has 
been legitimized/attempted to be legitimized with Section 6A of the 
Citizenship Act. 
 
58 Governor of Assam Report to the President of India on Illegal Migration into Assam, D.O. 
No. GSAG.3/98, (Nov. 8, 1998). 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

b. The report stated that the issue of unchecked immigration threatens 
to reduce the native Assamese population to a minority in the State 
of Assam. c. The Governor in his report was conscious of the fact that in the 
absence of any census being carried out to determine the number of 
illegal immigrants, precise and authentic figures regarding the same 
were not available.59 However, the Governor on the basis of 
estimates, extrapolations and various indicators indicated that the 
number of immigrants ran into millions. The Governor drew 
attention towards the speech of Mr. Indrajit Gupta, the then Home 
Minister of India, who, while making a speech in the Parliament on 
06.05.1997, stated that there were ten million illegal immigrants 
residing in India.60 
d. The report estimated the number of immigrants by considering the 
shortfall of population growth in Bangladesh. In 1970, the total 
population of East Pakistan was 75 million but in 1974 it had come 
down to 71.4 million. On the basis of 3.1 percent annual population 
growth rate during that period, the population of Bangladesh in 
 
59 Id. at para 13. 
60 Id. at para 16. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

1974 should have been 77 million. The shortfall of about six million 
people could only be explained by large-scale immigration.61 
 
83. The petitioners, placing reliance on a study titled “The Change of Religion 
and Language Composition in the State of Assam in Northeast India: A 
Statistical Analysis Since 1951 to 2001”62 conducted by Dr. Bhupender 
Kumar Nath and Prof. Dilip Nath, submitted that the districts bordering 
Bangladesh witnessed a significantly high growth of Bengali speakers post 
partition. The study indicated that from 1951 to 2011, the percentage of 
Bengali speaking population in Assam increased by 36.36% (from 21.2% to 
28.91% of the total population of Assam), but during this period the 
proportion of Assamese speaking people in the State had declined by 30.18% 
i.e. (from 69.3% to 48.38% of the total population of Assam). However, rest 
of the districts did not experience a substantial change in linguistic 
composition. As far as the other languages are concerned, no major change 
was seen for Hindi, Nepali and other language groups.63 Dr. Bhupender Nath, 
while relying on the empirical analysis based on district-level census data, 
concluded that the proportion of Bengali-speaking and Muslim population 
rapidly rose between 1951-2001, more than any other religion and 
 
61 Id. at para 18(c). 
62 Dr. Bhupendra Nath & Dilip C Nath, The Change of Religion and Language Composition in 
the State of Assam in Northeast India: A Statistical Analysis Since 1951 to 2001, 5 INT. J. SCI. 
RES. PUB. 2, (2012). 
63 Id., at 5. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

language.64 The same stands true as per the data available from the 2011 
census as well. As per Dr. Nath, this unusually high growth could not be 
attributed to natural increase, and thus, could only be attributed to the influx 
of Bangladeshi immigrants into Assam. This could adversely affect the future 
of the Assamese language given the rate at which the immigration has been 
regularized.65 
 
84. In other words, the submission of the petitioners is that while the proportion 
of Bengali speaking population has risen over the past few decades, the 
proportion of Assamese speakers has declined in all the districts of Assam. 
Such a change in the demography of Assam has led to many adverse 
consequences and may continue to cause damage to the interests of the State. 
The influx of immigrants into the State has accelerated population growth, 
altered demographic attributes, increased border fluidities and has created 
economic and political pressure on the country.66 
 
85. In response to the aforesaid concerns raised by the petitioners, the learned 
Solicitor General fairly accepted that the negative consequences of the 
unabated influx on the people of Assam, as pointed out by the petitioners, 
 
64 Id. 
65 Id. 
66 Nandita Saikia, William Joe, Apala Saha & Utpal Chutia, Cross Border Migration in Assam 
during 1951-2011: Process, Magnitude, and Socio-Economic Consequences, Report submitted 
to ICSSR 38, (2016). 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

cannot be denied. He further submitted that the problem is a serious and a 
continuing one. However, the aforesaid ongoing issues cannot form the basis 
for declaring Section 6A of the Citizenship Act as unconstitutional as the said 
provision is confined to a particular period of time. 
 
IV. 
ISSUE FOR DETERMINATION 
 
86. During the course of hearing, it was submitted by Mr. Shyam Divan, the 
learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioners, that there is no temporal 
limit to the operation of Section 6A(3) of the Citizenship Act which means 
that the provision continues to remain applicable till this date. He submitted 
that an immigrant of the 1966-71 stream can make an application even today 
for the purpose of seeking benefit under the said provision. He further argued 
that in the absence of any time-limit for working out the provision, it will 
remain on the statute book indefinitely and will continue to act as an 
incentive attracting immigrants to Assam. It was argued by him that in the 
absence of any prescribed time period for seeking the benefit of the 
provision, the same has also proved to be a fertile ground for local industries 
with regard to counterfeiting of documents, etc. 
 
87. Mr. Divan further submitted that the power of the Central Government under 
Section 2 of the IEAA, 195067 to direct a person to remove himself is coupled 
 
67 2. Power to order expulsion of certain immigrants.— If the Central Government is of 
opinion that any person or class of persons, having been ordinarily resident in any place 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

with a duty to conduct expeditious detection and deportation of the 
immigrants. However, in the absence of any time-limit for working out 
Section 6A(3) of the Citizenship Act, it is difficult to balance the duty cast 
by Section 2 of the IEAA, 1950. He also submitted that for taking the benefit 
of registration under Section 6A(3), detection as a foreigner is a condition 
precedent. However, there is no method by which an immigrant can make a 
self-declaration, thereby shifting the onus of detection solely on the state and 
making it an endless exercise. 
 
88. Mr. Vijay Hansaria, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for another set of 
petitioners, relied upon the constitutional scheme under Article 6(b)(ii) to 
argue that to be able to seek the benefit of citizenship under Article 668, a 
 
outside India, has or have, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, come into 
Assam and that the stay of such person or class of persons in Assam is detrimental to the 
interests of the general public of India or of any section thereof or of any Scheduled Tribe in 
Assam, the Central Government may by order — 
(a) direct such person or class of persons to remove himself or themselves from India or 
Assam within such time and by such route as may be specified in the order; and 
(b) give such further directions in regard to his or their removal from India or Assam as 
it may consider necessary or expedient: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any person who on account of civil 
disturbances or the fear of such disturbances in any area now forming part of Pakistan has 
been displaced from or has left his place of residence in such area and who has been 
subsequently residing in Assam. 
68 6. Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to India from Pakistan.—
Notwithstanding anything in article 5, a person who has migrated to the territory of India from 
the territory now included in Pakistan shall be deemed to be a citizen of India at the 
commencement of this Constitution if— 
(a) he or either of his parents or any of his grand-parents was born in India as defined in the 
Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted); and 
(b)(i) in the case where such person has so migrated before the nineteenth day of July, 1948, 
he has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India since the date of his migration, or 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

person migrating to India from Pakistan after 19.07.1948 had to make an 
application before the commencement of the Constitution. Thus, the scheme 
of Section 6A, in the absence of a temporal-limit on its functioning and the 
sole onus of detection on the state, marks a departure from the prevalent 
statutory scheme and leads to absurd consequences. Mr. Hansaria further 
submitted that the benefit of Section 6A should only be limited to the 32,381 
people already detected as foreigners of the 1966-71 stream till date, as stated 
by Union of India in its affidavit, and should not continue any further. 
 
89. The petitioners, in the alternative, submitted that the impugned provision 
may be struck down with prospective effect as the provision was inserted for 
a historic and limited purpose i.e., for granting citizenship to those 
immigrants who came in between the years 1966 and 1971. The petitioners 
relied upon the decision of this Court in Somaiya Organics (India) Ltd. & 
Another v. State of U.P. & Another reported in (2001) and 
Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. v. State of U.P. reported in (1990) to buttress their submission. 

(ii) in the case where such person has so migrated on or after the nineteenth day of July, 1948, 
he has been registered as a citizen of India by an officer appointed in that behalf by the 
Government of the Dominion of India on an application made by him therefor to such officer 
before the commencement of this Constitution in the form and manner prescribed by that 
Government: 
Provided that no person shall be so registered unless he has been resident in the territory of 
India for at least six months immediately preceding the date of his application. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

90. Thus, having read into the line of reasoning as assigned by my learned 
brother Justice Surya Kant and also having regard to the specific submissions 
canvassed on behalf of the petitioners, more particularly, the submissions on 
temporal limits and manifest arbitrariness, the only question that needs to be 
addressed in my considered view is as under: 
 
“Whether the absence of any temporal limits in the scheme of Section 
6A of the Citizenship Act has rendered the said provision manifestly 
arbitrary and thus violative of Article 14 of the Constitution? To put it 
in other words, whether the efflux of time has rendered Section 6A of 
the Citizenship Act temporally unreasonable and thus liable to be 
struck down in consequence of violation of Article 14?” 
 
V. 
ANALYSIS 
 
A. 
SCHEME AND MECHANISM OF SECTION 6A 
 
91. Pursuant to the signing of the Assam Accord, the Citizenship Act was 
amended by the Parliament in order to give effect to the mandate of the 
Accord and accordingly Section 6A came to be inserted by the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act, 1985. The Statement of Object and Reasons which 
accompanied the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 1985 reads as under: - 
“The core of the Memorandum of Settlement (Assam Accord) 
relates to the foreigners' issue, since the agitation launched by the 
A.A.S.U. arose out of their apprehensions regarding the continuing 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

influx of foreign nationals into Assam and the fear about adverse 
effects upon the political, social, cultural and economic life of the 
State. 
 
Assam Accord being a political settlement, legislation is required to 
give effect to the relevant clauses of the Assam Accord relating to 
the foreigners' issue. 
 
It is intended that all persons of Indian origin who came to Assam 
(including such of those whose names were included in the electoral 
rolls used for the purpose of General Election to the House of the 
People held in 1967) and who have been ordinarily resident in 
Assam ever since shall be deemed to be citizens of India as from the 
1st day of January, 1966. Further, every person of Indian origin 
who came on or after the 1st January, 1966 but before the 25th 
March, 1971 from territories presently included in Bangladesh and 
who has been ordinarily resident in Assam ever since and who has 
been detected in accordance with the provisions of the Foreigners 
Act, 1946 and the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 shall, upon 
registration, be deemed to be a citizen for all purposes as from the 
date of expiry of a period of ten years from the date of detection as 
a foreigner. It is also intended that in the intervening period of 10 
years, these persons should not suffer from any other disability vis-
a-vis citizens, excepting the right to vote and that proper record 
should be maintained of such persons. To inspire confidence, 
judicial element should be associated to determine eligibility in 
each and every case under this category. 
 
The Bill seeks to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955 to achieve the 
above objectives.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
92. The Preamble to the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 reads as follows: - 
“THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1985 
No. 65 of 1985 
[7th December, 1985] 
An Act further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955. 
 
Whereas for the purpose of giving effect to certain provisions of the 
Memorandum of Settlement relating to the foreigners’ issue in 
Assam (Assam Accord) which was laid before the Houses of 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

Parliament on the 16th day of August, 1985 it is necessary to amend 
the Citizenship Act, 1955; 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows” 
 
93. A perusal of Section 6A of the Citizenship Act69, more particularly the use 
of the words “Special provisions” and “Assam Accord” in the marginal note 
 
69 6A. Special provisions as to citizenship of persons covered by the Assam Accord. — 
(1) For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “Assam” means the territories included in the State of Assam immediately before the 
commencement of the Citizenship (Amend-ment) Act, 1985; 
(b) “detected to be a foreigner” means detected to be a foreigner in accordance with 
the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) and the Foreigners (Tribunals) 
Order, 1964 by a Trib-unal constituted under the said Order; 
(c) “specified territory” means the territories included in Bangladesh immediately 
before the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985; 
(d) a person shall be deemed to be of Indian origin, if he, or either of his parents for 
any of his grandparents was born in undivided India; 
(e) a person shall be deemed to have been detected to be a for-eigner on the date on 
which a Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 submits its 
opinion to the effect that he is a foreigner to the officer or authority concerned. 
 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (6) and (7), all persons of Indian origin who came 
before the 1st day of January, 1966 to Assam from the specified territory (including such of 
those whose names were included in the electoral rolls used for the purposes of the General 
Election to the House of the People held in 1967) and who have been ordinarily resident in 
Assam since the dates of their entry into Assam shall be deemed to be citizens of India as from 
the 1st day of January, 1966. 
 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (6) and (7), every person of Indian origin who: — 
(a) came to Assam on or after the 1st day of January, 1966 but before the 25th day of 
March, 1971 from the specified territory; and 
(b) has, since the date of his entry into Assam, been ordinarily resident in Assam; and 
(c) has been detected to be a foreigner, shall register himself in accordance with the 
rules made by the Central Government in this behalf under section 18 with such authority 
(thereafter in this sub-section referred to as the registering authority) as may be specified 
in such rules and if his name is included in any electoral roll for any Assembly or 
Parliamentary constituency in force on the date of such detec-tion, his name shall be 
deleted therefrom. 
 
Explanation. — In the case of every person seeking registration under this sub-section, the 
opinion of the Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 holding such 
person to be a foreigner, shall be deemed to be sufficient proof of the requirement under clause 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

(c) of this sub-section and if any question arises as to whether such person complies with any 
other requirement under this sub-section, the registering authority shall,— 
(i) if such opinion contains a finding with respect to such other requirement, decide the 
question in conformity with such finding; 
(ii) if such opinion does not contain a finding with respect to such other requirement, 
refer the question to a Tribunal constituted under the said Order hang jurisdiction in 
accordance with such rules as the Central Government may make in this behalf under 
section 18 and decide the question in conformity with the opinion received on such 
reference. 
 
(4) A person registered under sub-section (3) shall have, as from the date on which he has been 
detected to be a foreigner and till the expiry of a period of ten years from that date, the same 
rights and obligations as a citizen of India (including the right to obtain a passport under the 
Passports Act, 1967 (15 of 1967) and the obligations connected therewith), but shall not be 
entitled to have his name included in any electoral roll for any Assembly or Parliamentary 
constituency at any time before the expiry of the said period of ten years. 
 
(5) A person registered under sub-section (3) shall be deemed to be a citizen of India for all 
purposes as from the date of expiry of a period of ten years from the date on which he has been 
detected to be a foreigner. 
 
(6) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 8, — 
(a) If any person referred to in sub-section (2) submits in the prescribed manner and form 
and to the prescribed authority within sixty days from the date of commencement of the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, for year a declaration that he does not wish to be a 
citizen of India, such person shall not be deemed to have become a citizen of India under 
that sub-section; 
 
(b) If any person referred to in sub-section (3) submits in the prescribed manner and form 
and to the prescribed authority within sixty days from the date of commencement the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, for year or from the date on which he has been 
detect-ed to be a foreigner, whichever is later, a declaration that he does not wish to be 
governed by the provisions of that sub-sec-tion and sub-sections (4) and (5), it shall not 
be necessary for such person to register himself under sub-section (3). 
 
Explanation. — Where a person required to file a declaration under this sub-section does not 
have the capacity to enter into a contract, such declaration may be filed on his behalf by any 
person competent under the law for the time being in force to act on his behalf. 
 
(7) Nothing in sub-sections (2) to (6) shall apply in relation to any person— 
(a) who, immediately before the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 
1985, for year is a citizen of India; 
(b) who was expelled from India before the commencement of the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act, 1985, for year under the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946). 
 
(8) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this section, the provisions of this section shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

makes it abundantly clear that the said provision was in the nature of a special 
provision pertaining to citizenship and was intended only for a limited class 
of persons in Assam who were covered by the Assam Accord which, as stated 
earlier, was a political settlement meant to tackle the exigencies prevailing in 
the State of Assam at the time of signing of the Accord. 
 
94. A close reading of Section 6A reveals that the benefit of citizenship to the 
immigrants from Bangladesh, as envisaged under the Assam Accord, has 
been conferred under the said provision in two distinct ways. 
 
95. First, Section 6A sub-section (2) provides that persons of Indian origin who 
came into Assam from the territories now part of Bangladesh before 
01.01.1966 and subsequent to their entry have been ordinarily resident in 
Assam are deemed to be citizens of India. 
 
96. In other words, immigrants falling under the aforesaid category are 
automatically conferred citizenship by virtue of a legal fiction. For an 
immigrant to be entitled to the benefits under sub-section (2), the following 
requirements have been prescribed: - 
 
i. 
Immigrant is a Person of Indian Origin70; and 
 
70 Id., § 6A sub-section (1) cl. (d), “a person shall be deemed to be of Indian origin, if he, or 
either of his parents for any of his grandparents was born in undivided India”. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

ii. 
Has entered into Assam71 from Bangladesh72; and 
iii. 
Has entered into Assam prior to the cut-off date of 01.01.1966; and 
iv. 
Has been ordinarily resident in Assam since the date of entry. 
 
97. Secondly, Section 6A sub-section (3) provides that persons of Indian origin 
who came into Assam from the territories now part of Bangladesh on or after 
01.01.1966 but before 25.03.1971 and since then have been ordinarily 
resident in Assam and subsequently have been detected to be a foreigner, 
shall be liable to have their names deleted from the electoral rolls for a period 
of ten years from the date of their detection. The provision further stipulates 
that persons belonging to this category will be entitled to get themselves 
registered as citizens with the appropriate authority as per the prescribed 
procedure and the rules only upon detection as a foreigner and upon 
consequent deletion of their name from the electoral rolls. 
 
98. Thus, unlike section 6A sub-section (2), the benefit under sub-section (3) is 
not automatically conferred but rather has to be availed by an immigrant after 
he or she has been detected as a foreigner by a tribunal constituted under the 
Foreigners (Tribunal) Order, 1964. In other words, to be able to avail the 
benefit under Section 6A sub-section (3), the following requirements have to 
be fulfilled: - 
 
71 Id., § 6A sub-section (1) cl. (a), “Assam” means the territories included in the State of Assam 
immediately before the commencement of the Citizenship (Amend-ment) Act, 1985. 
72 Id., § 6A sub-section (1) cl. (c), “specified territory” means the territories included in 
Bangladesh immediately before the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

i. 
Immigrant must be a Person of Indian Origin; and 
ii. 
Has entered into Assam from Bangladesh; and 
iii. 
Has entered into Assam on or after 01.01.1966 but before 
25.03.1971; and 
iv. 
Has been ordinarily resident in Assam since the date of entry73; and 
v. 
Has been detected to be a foreigner subsequent to the date of entry; 
and 
vi. 
Having been detected, has registered himself with the appropriate 
authority designated by the Central Government in accordance with 
the Rules made under Section 18 of the Citizenship Act. 
 
99. The White Paper on Foreigners Issue74 published by the Government of 
Assam in 2012 (“White Paper”) explained the working mechanism of 
Section 6A as follows: 
“Border Police Personnel (“BPP”) are deployed in all the 
districts of Assam for detection of suspected foreigners and 
deportation/push back of declared foreigners. BPP would 
conduct survey work for the identification of suspected 
foreigners by seeking assistance from local people. The 
survey work is generally conducted in areas of new 
settlements, construction sites, encroached land, government 
land, forest land, etc. If any doubtful person is found then they 
are asked to produce documents in support of their 
citizenship. If the documents produced are found to be 
unauthenticated or unreliable, then an enquiry is initiated 
with the approval of the Superintendent of Police (“SP”). If 
the SP is satisfied with the enquiry report, then he could make 
a reference to the Foreigners Tribunal (“FT”) constituted 
under the Foreigners (Tribunal) Order, 1964. If the suspected 
 
73 Id., § 6A sub-section (1) cl. (e), “a person shall be deemed to have been detected to be a 
foreigner on the date on which a Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) 
Order, 1964 submits its opinion to the effect that he is a foreigner to the officer or authority 
concerned.” 
74 Govt. of Assam, White Paper on Foreigner’s Issue, (October 2012). 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

person is able to produce any document establishing arrival 
in India before 01.01.1966, then he is treated as a citizen in 
accordance with s. 6A(2) of the Act. If the suspected person 
fails to establish arrival before 01.01.1966, but produces any 
document establishing his entry into India between 
01.01.1966 to 24.03.1971, then an enquiry is initiated whether 
he is a suspected foreigner of the 1966-1971 stream. Their 
names are then removed from the electoral roll for a period 
of 10 years and they are required to register with the 
registering authority within a period of 60 days, failing which 
they are liable to be deported.” 
 
100. The rules for giving effect to Section 6A of the Citizenship Act were inserted 
in the Citizenship Rules, 1956 (“Rules, 1956”) vide the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Rules, 1986 which were brought into force by the notification 
dated 15.01.198775. After the said amendment, Rule 16D76 of the Rules, 1956 
provided for reference to tribunals constituted under the Foreigners 
(Tribunals) Order, 1964 as prescribed under the Explanation (ii) to Section 
6A(3) of the Citizenship Act. Rule 16E77 provided for the jurisdiction of the 
Foreigners Tribunal to decide upon the references received under Rule 16D. 
 
75 Notification No. G.S.R. 25(E) dated 15.01.1987 w.e.f. 15.01.1987. 
76 16D. Reference to Tribunal.— Where in the case of a person seeking registration under 
sub-section (3) of section 6A of the Act - 
(a) Any question arises as to whether such person complies with any requirement contained 
in the said sub-section, or 
(b) The opinion of the Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 
in relation to such person does not contain a finding with respect to any requirement contained 
in the said sub-section other than the question that he is a foreigner, the registering authority 
shall, within fifteen days of receipt of an application in Form XXIII from such person, make a 
fresh reference to the Tribunal in this regard. 
77 16E. Jurisdiction of the Tribunal.— A Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners 
(Tribunals) Order, 1964 having jurisdiction over a district or part thereof in State of Assam 
shall exercise jurisdiction to decide references received from the registering authority of that 
district in relation to all references made under sub-section (3) of section 6A of the Act in 
respect of the corresponding area covered by the Tribunal. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

Rule 16F78 prescribed the registering authority for the purpose of Section 
6A(3) and the appropriate form79 to be filled for the purpose of registration. 
Finally, Rule 16G80 laid down the procedure for making a declaration under 
Section 6A(6) of the Citizenship Act. 
 
101. The relevant rules pertaining to Section 6A of the Citizenship Act were 
incorporated virtually pari materia in the Citizenship Rules, 2009 (“the 
Rules, 2009”) thereby replacing the Rules, 1956. For the sake of clarity, the 
provisions pertaining to Section 6A of the Citizenship Act contained in the 
Rules, 1956 and their corresponding provisions in the Rules, 2009 are listed 
in the following table: 
 
78 16F. The registering authority for the purpose of section 6A (3) and form of application 
for registration.— 
(1) The registering authority, for the purpose of sub-section (3) of section 6A of the Act shall 
be such officer as maybe appointed for each district of Assam by the Central Government. 
(2) An application for registration under sub-section (3) of section 6A of the Act shall be filed 
in Form XXIII by the person with the registering authority for the district in which he is 
ordinarily resident- 
 (a) Within thirty days from the date of his detection as a foreigner, where such 
detection takes place after the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Rules, 
1986; or 
(b) Within thirty days of the appointment of the registering authority for the district 
concerned where such detection has taken place before the commencement of the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Rules, 1986. 
(3) The registering authority shall, after entering the particulars of the application in a register 
in Form XXIV, return a copy of the application under his seal to the applicant. 
(4) One copy of every application received during a quarter shall be sent by the registering 
authority to the Central Government and the State Government of Assam along with a quarterly 
return in Form XXV. 
(5) The period referred to in sub-rule (2) may be extended for a period not exceeding sixty day 
by the registering authority for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
79 Form XXIII, Schedule I, Citizenship Rules, 1956. 
80 16G. Declaration under section 6A(6).— The declaration referred to in clauses (a) and 
(b) of sub-section (6) of section 6A of the Act shall be made to the District Magistrate of the 
area within whose jurisdiction the person concerned is ordinarily resident in Form XXVI. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

The Citizenship Rules, 1956 
The Citizenship Rules, 2009 
Rule 16D 
Rule 20 
Rule 16E 
Rule 21 
Rule 16F 
Rule 19 
Rule 16G 
Rule 22 
 
102. Rule 19 of the Rules, 2009 was further amended by the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Rules, 2013. The amended Rule 19 came into effect vide 
notification dated 16.07.2013. The amendment stipulated that all immigrants 
belonging to the 1966-71 stream, who had been detected as a “foreigner” by 
a foreigners tribunal before 16.07.2013 and who couldn’t register as per the 
prescribed procedure either due to the non-receipt of the order of the tribunal 
or due to the refusal of the registering authority owing to the delay in 
registration, would be provided one last opportunity to register themselves 
within the period prescribed in the amended Rule 19. A comparative chart 
showing Rule 16F of the Rules, 1956; Rule 19 of the Rules, 2009; and Rule 
19 of the Rules, 2009 as amended by the Citizenship (Amendment) Rules, 
2013 is produced below: 
16F. The registering 
authority 
for 
the 
purpose of section 6A 

and 
form 
of 
19. 
Registering 
authority 
for 
the 
purpose 
of 
sub-
section (3) of section 
19. 
Registering 
authority 
for 
the 
purpose of sub-section 
(3) of section 6A and 
form for registration- 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

application 
for 
registration 
6A and form for 
registration- 
(1) The registering 
authority, 
for 
the 
purpose of sub-section 
(3) of section 6A of the 
Act 
shall 
be 
such 
officer 
as 
maybe 
appointed 
for 
each 
district of Assam by the 
Central Government. 

(2) An application for 
registration under sub-
section (3) of section 
6A of the Act shall be 
filed in Form XXIII by 
the person with the 
registering 
authority 
for the district in which 
he 
is 
ordinarily 
resident- 
 
(a) Within thirty days 
from the date of his 
detection 
as 
a 
foreigner, where such 
detection takes place 
after 
the 
commencement of the 
Citizenship 

Rules, 
1986; or 
 
(b) Within thirty days 
of the appointment of 
the 
registering 
authority 
for 
the 
district 
concerned 
where such detection 
has taken place before 

The 
Central 
Government may, for 
the purposes of sub-
section (3) of section 
6A, appoint an officer 
not below the rank of 
Additional 
District 
Magistrate 
as 
the 
registering authority 
for every district of 
the State of Assam. 
 
(2) An application for 
registration 
under 
sub-section 

of 
section 6A shall be 
made in Form XVIII, 
by the person to the 
registering authority 
for the district in 
which he is ordinarily 
resident, 
within 
a 
period of thirty days 
from the date of his 
detection 
or 
identification as a 
foreigner or, as the 
case may be, within a 
period of thirty days 
of the appointment of 
the 
registering 
authority 
in 
the 
district. 

The 
Central 
Government may, for 
the purposes of sub-
section (3) of section 
6A, appoint an officer 
not below the rank of 
Additional 
District 
Magistrate 
as 
the 
registering 
authority 
for every district of the 
State of Assam. 
 
(2) An application for 
registration 
under 
sub-section 

of 
section 6A shall be 
made in Form XVIII, 
by the person to the 
registering authority 
for the district in 
which such person is 
ordinarily a resident 
within a period of 
thirty days from the 
date of receipt of order 
of 
the 
Foreigners 
Tribunal 
declaring 
such person as a 
foreigner; 
Provided 
that the registering 
authority 
may, 
for 
reasons to be recorded 
in writing, extend the 
said period to such 
further period as may 
be justified in each 
case but not exceeding 
sixty days. 
 
(2A) A person who 
has been declared as a 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

the commencement of 
the 
Citizenship 

Rules, 
1986. 

(3) The 
registering 
authority shall, after 
entering 
the 
particulars 
of 
the 
application 
in 
a 
register in Form XXIV, 
return a copy of the 
application under his 
seal to the applicant. 
 
(4) One copy of every 
application 
received 
during a quarter shall 
be 
sent 
by 
the 
registering authority to 
the 
Central 
Government and the 
State Government of 
Assam along with a 
quarterly 
return 
in 
Form XXV. 
 
(5) The 
period 
referred to in sub-rule 
(2) may be extended for 
a period not exceeding 
sixty 
day 
by 
the 
registering 
authority 
for 
reasons 
to 
be 
recorded in writing. 

(3) The registering 
authority shall, after 
entering 
the 
particulars 
of 
the 
application 
in 
a 
register in Form XIX, 
return a copy of the 
application under his 
seal to the applicant. 
 
(4) One copy of every 
application received 
during a quarter shall 
be 
sent 
by 
the 
registering authority 
to 
the 
Central 
Government and the 
State Government of 
Assam along with a 
quarterly return in 
Form XX. 
 
(5) The registering 
authority may, and for 
the reasons to be 
recorded in writing, 
extend 
the 
period 
specified in sub-rule 
(2) for a period not 
exceeding sixty days. foreigner 
by 
the 
Foreigners Tribunal 
prior to 16th July, 
2013 and has not been 
registered under sub-
section (3) of Section 
6A for the reason of 
non-receipt of order 
of 
the 
Foreigners 
Tribunal or refusal by 
the 
registering 
authority to register 
such person as a 
foreigner on account 
of delay may, within a 
period of thirty days 
from 
the 
date 
of 
receipt of the order 
passed 
by 
the 
Foreigners Tribunal, 
or, from the date of 
publication 
of 
this 
notification, make an 
application 
for 
registration in Form 
XVIII 
to 
the 
registering authority 
of the district in which 
such 
person 
is 
ordinarily a resident: 
Provided 
that 
the 
registering authority 
may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, 
extend the said period 
to such further period 
as may be justified in 
each case but not 
exceeding 
one 
hundred eighty days 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

(As 
amended 
by 
Notification 
dated 
16.07.2013) 
 
 (3) The registering 
authority shall, after 
entering 
the 
particulars 
of 
the 
application 
in 
a 
register in Form XIX, 
return a copy of the 
application under his 
seal to the applicant. 
 
(4) One copy of every 
application 
received 
during a quarter shall 
be 
sent 
by 
the 
registering 
authority 
to 
the 
Central 
Government and the 
State Government of 
Assam along with a 
quarterly 
return 
in 
Form XX. 
 
B. 
HOW MANY IMMIGRANTS ELIGIBLE UNDER SECTION 6A(3) OF THE ACT 
HAVE REGISTERED TILL DATE? 
 
103. Although exact figures on the extent of immigration from Bangladesh into 
Assam are not available, yet the debates that took place in the Rajya Sabha 
during the introduction of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 give an 
approximate number of immigrants who came into Assam from Bangladesh 
during the time-period covered under section 6A81: - 
 
81 Session No. 136, Rajya Sabha Deb., Statement of Shri. Baharul Islam on The Citizenship 
(Amendment) Bill, 1985 at cols. 323-324, (Dec. 2, 1985). 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

1. 1951 to 31.12.1965: 15,33,000 of which nearly 6,59,000 
figured in the electoral rolls. 
2. 01.01.1966 to 24.03.1971: 5,45,000 of which nearly 
2,34,000 figured in the electoral rolls. 
 
104. The White Paper mentions the following about the working of foreigners 
tribunals prior to the student-led agitation: - 
“The number of Foreigner's Tribunals established has varied 
from time to time, according to the requirements of the situation. 
The Foreigner's Tribunals established after 1964 were gradually 
wound up between December 31, 1969 and March 1, 1973 in 
phases when they were no longer found necessary as most of the 
infiltrators had been deported. Besides, with the issue of revised 
procedure for deportation of Pakistani infiltrators in June 1969, 
it was decided that fresh references for the Foreigners Tribunals 
were to be dispensed with and the existing Tribunals were to 
continue only till the old pending cases were disposed of. For the 
residue work, the task was to be by the normal course of law. 
However, the Foreigner's Tribunals were revived in 1979, and 10 
Foreigners Tribunals were constituted on July 4, 1979. The 
Foreigner's Tribunals co-existed with IM(D)Ts with the signing 
of the Assam Accord. While IM(D)Ts took up cases of suspected 
foreigners of the post March 25th 1971 stream, the existing 
Foreigners Tribunals were entrusted with the responsibility of 
disposing of cases pertaining to pre-March 25th 1971 stream of 
suspected foreigners.” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
105. It can be seen from the above that the detection of foreigners gained pace on 
the commencement of the student-led agitation in Assam. It could be 
presumed that certain number of immigrants of the 1966-71 stream would 
have either been detected and deported prior to the enactment of Section 6A 
in 1985, or might have left Assam apprehending such detection and 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

deportation. However, even after taking into consideration such variations, 
the data on the number of immigrants detected by virtue of Section 6A, as 
presented to us by the Union of India, is not commensurate to the extent of 
influx that took place during the relevant period. 
 
Number of immigrants belonging to the 1966-71 stream detected/registered: 
 
S. No. 
Particulars 
White Paper on 
Foreigner’s Issue 
(October, 2012) 
Affidavit dated 
11.12.2023 filed by 
the Union of India 
1. Number of immigrants of 
the 
1966-71 
stream 
declared 
as 
foreigners 
between 1985 - July, 2012 
32,537 
 
Not Applicable 
2. Number of immigrants of 
the 
1966-71 
stream 
declared as foreigners by an 
order of the Foreigners 
Tribunal (till 31.10.2023) 
Not Applicable 
32,381 
3. Number 
of 
immigrants 
belonging to the 1966-71 
stream to whom citizenship 
has been granted under 
Section 6A(3) 
Not Available 
17,861 
(persons who had 
registered with the 
FRRO till 
31.10.2023) 
 
Note: Although the white paper was published in 2012, yet the number of 
immigrants of the 1966-71 stream who have been detected as foreigners 
indicated therein is higher than that indicated in the Affidavit dated 
11.12.2023. 
 
106. As is evident from the table above, the number of immigrants belonging to 
the 1966-71 stream and detected as “foreigner” is significantly smaller in 
comparison to the approximate number of immigrants who had entered into 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

Assam from Bangladesh between 01.01.1966 and 24.03.1971. This, in my 
considered opinion, doesn’t appear to be solely due to the inadequate 
implementation of Section 6A, but rather due to the inherent and manifest 
arbitrariness in the mechanism prescribed under the provision, which I shall 
elaborate upon in later parts of this judgment. 
 
C. 
OBJECT SOUGHT TO BE ACHIEVED BY THE PRESCRIPTION OF TWO 
SEPARATE CUT-OFF DATES 
 
107. From the aforesaid discussion, it is clear that Section 6A creates three 
categories of immigrants by prescribing two distinct cut-off dates. The first 
two categories of immigrants are those who had immigrated on or before 
24.03.1971 (i.e., those entitled to citizenship), and the third category consists 
of those who immigrated into Assam after 24.03.1971 and are considered as 
illegal immigrants who are liable to be deported. However, a different 
mechanism has been prescribed for acquisition of citizenship even within the 
first two classes, as indicated by the following table: 
 
CATEGORY I – 
Immigrants who came 
before 01.01.1966 
CATEGORY II – 
Immigrants who came between 
01.01.1966 – 24.03.1971 
CATEGORY III – 
Immigrants who came 
after 24.03.1971 
Governed by Section 
6A(2) 
of 
the 
Citizenship Act. 
Governed by Section 6A(3) of 
the Citizenship Act. 
Not entitled to citizenship 
under Section 6A of the 
Citizenship Act. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

108. At this juncture, it is important to examine whether it was open to the 
legislature to prescribe two cut-off dates, thereby creating two different 
classes of immigrants who are entitled to citizenship by two distinct 
mechanisms. The determination of this question requires ascertaining 
whether there is any intelligible differentia between the two classes of 
immigrants, that is, those who immigrated prior to 01.01.1966 and those 
who immigrated between 01.01.1966 and 24.03.1971. The observations 
made by Justice Surya Kant in paragraphs 170 and 171 respectively speak 
for themselves. The said paragraphs are reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“170. In terms of the form, the classification should not be based 
on arbitrary criteria and must instead be based on a logic which 
distinguishes individuals with similar characteristics i.e., the 
equals from the persons who do not share those characteristics—
the unequals. Apart from requiring such differentia, this prong 
requires that the classification must be intelligible, such that it 
can be reasonably understood whether an element falls in one 
class or another. If the class is so poorly defined that one cannot 
reasonably understand its constituents, it will fail this test of 
‘intelligible’ differentia. Therefore, instead of being based on 
arbitrary selection, the classification must be supported by valid 
and lawful reasons. 
 
171. Hence, using an intelligible criterion, the classes must be 
constituted in a manner that distinguishes the components of that 
class from the elements that have been left out of the class. This 
is instantiated by State of Kerala v. N.M. Thomas, where a 7-
judge bench was dealing with the challenge of exemption granted 
to Scheduled Castes from the departmental test required for 
promotion. The Court held that the same was based on intelligible 
differentia, as the persons belonging to the exempted class, i.e., 
the Scheduled Caste, differed from those excluded from this 
class.” 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

109. The cut-off date of 01.01.1966 clearly categorizes the immigrants into two 
discernible and determinable categories. The first category is conferred 
citizenship by the mechanism prescribed under Section 6A sub-section (2) 
and the second category is conferred citizenship by the procedure 
prescribed under Section 6A sub-section (3). 
 
110. Further, it is necessary to decipher the object sought to be achieved by 
creating two distinct categories of immigrants with fundamentally different 
procedure under Section 6A for the purpose of conferring the same benefit, 
that is, the benefit of conferment of citizenship on the immigrants from 
Bangladesh. 
 
111. Indisputably, Section 6A was enacted to give statutory effect to the political 
settlement arrived at in the form of Assam Accord. The Accord was a result 
of years of negotiation that took place between the Central Government, 
State Government, AASU and AAGSP. The sui-generis scheme of Section 
6A also reflects this process of negotiation, or “give and take”, so to say. 
 
112. I have already discussed in paragraph 54 of this judgment that the 
proximate event which led to protests and demonstrations over the 
immigrant issue in Assam was the publication of the electoral rolls for the 
bye-elections to be held for the Mangaldoi constituency in 1979. The 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

apprehension of the local population was that a large number of illegal 
immigrants had managed to get themselves on the electoral rolls thereby 
rendering the local population a minority in the coming bye-elections. The 
resentment soon translated into state-wide movement against illegal 
immigration, which was led at the forefront by several student-run 
organisations. 
 
113. As Sangeeta Barooah Pisharoty has discussed in her book, Assam: The 
Accord, The Discord82, and as also discussed in paragraph 56 of this 
judgment, initially, the demand of the protesting students was that the 
National Register of Citizens (“NRC”) prepared in the year 1951 should 
act as the baseline for detection and deportation of illegal immigrants. 
However, during the course of negotiations, an understanding was reached 
that 24.03.1971 would act as the cut-off date for detection and deportation 
of illegal immigrants. However, to avoid deadlocks and expedite the 
settlement, a further cut-off date of 01.01.1966 was decided as the cut-off 
date for disenfranchisement as opposed to deportation of the immigrants 
belonging to the 1966-71 stream. In other words, the said cut-off date was 
decided as the baseline for detection of immigrants and their consequent 
deletion from the electoral rolls. 

82 SANGEETA BAROOAH PISHAROTY, supra, note 45. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

114. Thus, it appears from an overview of the historical context that the only 
purpose behind the introduction of an additional cut-off date of 01.01.1966 
and the corresponding concept of detection and deletion from the electoral 
rolls was to assuage the apprehensions of the protesting students. By 
mandating the deletion of all the immigrants belonging to the 1966-71 
stream from the electoral rolls, it was hoped that the effect of wrongful 
inclusion of immigrants in the electoral rolls on the upcoming elections 
would be mitigated. 
 
115. However, as discussed in the later paragraphs of this judgment, the object 
of removal of the immigrants belonging to the 1966-71 stream from the 
electoral rolls could only be meaningful if it was given effect through an 
exercise of en-masse detection and deletion conducted within a fixed time-
period. It can be seen from paragraph 62 of this judgment that the protesting 
leaders in Assam at the relevant point of time were opposed to the conduct 
of elections to the Parliament and State Legislature unless and until the 
names of immigrants were dropped from the electoral rolls. 
 
116. Another purpose which is clearly discernible from the scheme of Section 
6A is the intention of the legislature to confer citizenship on the immigrants 
in a graded manner. To illustrate, an immigrant who crossed the border and 
came into Assam sometime before 01.01.1966, was conferred with 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

automatic deemed citizenship on the date of coming into force of Section 
6A, that is, 07.12.1985. On the other hand, an immigrant who crossed the 
border to come into Assam between 01.01.1966 and 24.03.1971 had to 
undergo detection, deletion and registration as specified in Section 6A(3). 
Further, any immigrant who came into Assam after 24.03.1971 was not 
considered entitled to citizenship at all. Thus, it is evident that within the 
first two categories, the conditions for acquisition of citizenship were more 
stringent for the immigrants belonging to the 1966-71 stream, while there 
was a complete denial of citizenship to immigrants belonging to the post-
1971 stream. 
 
117. The mechanism of graded conferment of citizenship was introduced to 
arrive at a common ground during the negotiations, which otherwise might 
have ended in a failure, due to the reluctance of the student protestors to 
agree to a blanket conferment of citizenship up to the cut-off date in 1971. 
 
118. It could be said that Section 6A was a humanitarian and beneficial 
provision for the immigrants. However, to say that the sole object sought 
to be achieved by Section 6A was to confer benefits on the immigrants 
alone would amount to taking a reductive view of the historical context in 
which the provision was enacted. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

119. In the aforesaid context, I may only say that if such was the sole object of 
the provision, then there was no need for the legislature to create two 
distinct categories of immigrants who were eligible for citizenship. The 
legislature could have simply conferred deemed citizenship on every 
immigrant who came into Assam before 24.03.1971 from the date of 
coming into force of Section 6A. The very fact that a second category of 
immigrants (1966-71) was statutorily created and subjected to undergo a 
more stringent test of procedure for the purpose of obtaining citizenship 
would indicate that conferment of citizenship was not the sole object of 
Section 6A(3). The object behind insertion of Section 6A(3) seems to have 
been to pacify the apprehension of the people of Assam that conferment of 
citizenship would not have an immediate impact on the then upcoming 
elections in the State of Assam due to the inclusion of a large number of 
immigrants. The apprehension was taken care of by the scheme of Section 
6A(3) which provides for the removal of the immigrants belonging to the 
1966-71 stream from the electoral rolls for a period of ten years from the 
date of their detection. Section 6A(3) embodies the approach of the 
government of the day in finding a middle ground between two competing 
interests prevailing at that time – on one hand, adopting a humanitarian 
approach towards the immigrant population in Assam; and on the other, 
ensuring that large scale immigration doesn’t result into the loss of culture, 
economy and the political rights of the people of Assam. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

120. While construing the object of enactment of Section 6A, one should not 
lose sight of an important fact that Section 6A was enacted to give a 
statutory avatar to certain clauses of the Assam Accord. The provision, 
thus, could be said to have been multifaceted in design and purpose and 
representative of the interests of all the parties to the negotiation. I am of 
the view that the intention of the parties while signing the Accord should 
be kept in mind while construing the object of Section 6A of the 
Citizenship Act. 
 
D. 
WHETHER THE ONUS OF DETECTION OF FOREIGNERS OF THE 1966-71 
STREAM LIES ON THE STATE? 
 
121. From a perusal of Section 6A and the associated rules, it is clear that there 
is 
no 
provision 
which 
prescribes 
or 
provides 
for 
self-
declaration/registration or voluntary detection as a foreigner within a given 
time period for availing the benefit of citizenship by registration under 
Section 6A(3). 
 
122. The mechanism of implementation of Section 6A is set into motion with 
the first step of reference of a suspected foreigner to the foreigners tribunal. 
As soon as a reference is made to the tribunal, the onus is on the suspected 
person to either establish that he or she is an Indian citizen, or to establish 
that he or she is an immigrant eligible to avail the benefit available under 
Section 6A. Once the tribunal holds that the suspected person is a foreigner 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

of the 1966-71 stream of immigrants, then again, the onus is on the said 
person to get registered in accordance with the Citizenship Rules, 2009 
failing which his or her claim to citizenship would abate. 

123. While the statute is clear that the onus completely shifts on the suspected 
foreigner once a reference is made to the tribunal, it appears to me as 
illogically unique that a person wanting to avail the benefit of citizenship 
by registration under Section 6A(3) has to await identification as a 
suspicious immigrant and subsequent reference to the tribunal. There is no 
plausible reason why it should be impermissible for him or her to set the 
mechanism of Section 6A into motion by voluntarily choosing to get 
detected as a foreigner of the class specified in Section 6A, or to make an 
application for conferment of citizenship. 
 
124. Further, what stands out as palpably irrational in the scheme of Section 6A 
of the Citizenship Act is that there is no end date after which the benefit of 
citizenship under Section 6A(3) cannot be availed. I have dealt in later parts 
of this judgment as to how this militates against the very purpose of the 
enactment of Section 6A(3). 
 
125. Section 6A(3) was enacted as a beneficial provision, both for the 
immigrants who entered into Assam before 25.03.1971 as well as for the 
people of Assam. It confers citizenship in a graded manner upon all such 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

persons who meet the conditions specified therein. On the other hand, by 
implication, it denies the benefit of citizenship to illegal immigrants of the 
post-1971 stream. Additionally, it also prescribes a stricter citizenship 
regime for the class of immigrants who came between 01.01.1966 and 
24.03.1971 including the deletion of names of such immigrants from the 
electoral rolls. The key intent behind inserting Section 6A and conferring 
citizenship only upon a limited segment of persons, that too by a 
retrospective cut-off date, was to ensure that apart from a very limited 
number of immigrants who had already come into Assam much before the 
enactment of Section 6A, all other illegal immigrants shall be expelled and 
no other benefit would be provided. 
 
126. Citizenship provides a bouquet of rights to the person who is conferred 
with it. It was pointed by Shri Bholanath Sen, Member of the Lok Sabha, 
during the discussions on the Citizenship Amendment Bill, 1985, that: - 
“All those who had come between 1966 and 1971 had no such right 
before. No such law was there in this country which could have 
given them this protection. This protection is now being given. Many 
people go to Haj for religious reasons and they need a Passport. 
They will be given Passport. They might like to go even to 
Bangladesh to see their own relations. They will be given Passport. 
Passport will be given to them and that is recognised by this 
legislation clearly. The only thing that is being taken away from 
them is that they will not be able to cast vote for ten years from the 
date of detection as foreigners.” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

127. One of the ideas behind providing for a stricter citizenship regime for the 
immigrants belonging to the 1966-71 category was expressed by Shri Bir 
Bhadra Pratap Singh, Member of the Rajya Sabha, during the discussions 
on the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill was expressed thus: - 
“[...] People from East Pakistan have come here. We have 
welcomed them. We love them. But we will ensure whether they have 
come with genuine intentions to stay in this country and they will be 
good citizens. Let them register themselves. Let them get their claim 
decided. For ten years their voting right will be suspended, but after 
ten years we will confer full citizenship on them. De you think we 
do not have a right to scrutinise the bona fides of these people? We 
have a right to scrutinise to see whether they have come here with 
genuine intentions to settle in this country. But we have never 
intended to throw them out. We have welcomed them [...]” 
 
128. The statutory scheme of Section 6A(3), which doesn’t envisage voluntary 
detection at the option of the immigrant, marks a clear departure, for no 
intelligible reason, from the prevalent scheme noticed under the rest of the 
Citizenship Act. Even across other international jurisdictions, citizenship 
by registration or naturalisation is a process that is initiated at the behest of 
the person seeking to avail the benefit of citizenship by registration or 
naturalization. Articles 6(b) and 7 respectively of the Constitution, which 
deal with citizenship by registration and the permit system introduced to 
meet the exigencies of partition, too, place the onus of registration and 
obtaining permit on the person who wishes to claim such benefit. Thus, 
there is no discernible reason why the mechanism prescribed under Section 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

6A does not require, or at the very least, permit an immigrant to come 
forward and make an application to avail the benefit. 
 
E. 
 TEMPORAL REASONABLENESS 
 
129. Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary defines ‘temporal’ as ‘connected 
with or limited by time’. The term ‘Temporal Reasonableness’, thus, 
describes what in our jurisprudence we say as something which was earlier 
reasonable is no longer so or ceases to be so with the passage of time. 
 
130. The doctrine of temporal reasonableness is encapsulated in the Latin 
maxim “Cessante ratione legis cessat ipsa lex” which means that reason 
is the soul of the law and when the reason of any particular law ceases, so 
does the law itself. Thus, when the reason for which a particular law was 
enacted ceases to exist due to efflux of time, then the law too must cease to 
exist. 
 
131. For better analysis, it is also necessary to understand the concept of 
temporal triggers. A time trigger may be defined as “a point in time that 
initiates or terminates a legal event. A time trigger activates or terminates 
laws, powers, rights, and obligations.”83 Allocative time triggers are points 
in time that mark the beginning or coming into force of treaties, 
 
83 Liaqat A. Khan, Temporality of Law, 40 MCGEORGE L. REV. (2016). 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

constitutions, statutes, obligations, rights, etc. Terminative time triggers on 
the other hand end powers, rights, obligations and claims. 
 
132. In the aforesaid context, it would be apposite to refer to a few decisions of 
this Court wherein the dynamic nature of law vis-à-vis the passage of time 
has been discussed. In Independent Thought v. Union of India reported 
in (2017), it was observed thus by a two-Judge Bench of this 
Court: - 

“88. … Traditions that might have been acceptable at some 
historical point of time are not cast in stone. If times and situations 
change, so must views, traditions and conventions.” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
133. In Modern Dental College and Research Centre and Ors. v. State of 
Madhya Pradesh and Ors. reported in (2016), a five-Judge 
Bench of this Court observed as follows: - 
“69. … law is not an Eden of concepts but rather an everyday life 
of needs, interests and the values that a given society seeks to realise 
in a given time. The law is a tool which is intended to provide 
solutions for the problems of human being in a society. xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
 
92. … law is not static, it has to change with changing times and 
changing social/societal conditions.” 
 
 (Emphasis supplied) 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

134. In Satyawati Sharma v. Union of India, reported in (2008), a 
two-Judge Bench of this Court observed as under: - 
“32. It is trite to say that legislation which may be quite reasonable 
and rational at the time of its enactment may with the lapse of time 
and/or due to change of circumstances become arbitrary, 
unreasonable and violative of the doctrine of equality and even if 
the validity of such legislation may have been upheld at a given 
point of time, the Court may, in subsequent litigation, strike down 
the same if it is found that the rationale of classification has become 
non-existent [...]” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
135. In Malpe Vishwanath Acharya v. State of Maharashtra reported in (1998), a three-Judge Bench of this Court considered the validity of 
determination of standard rent by freezing or pegging down the rent as on 
01.09.1940 or as on the date of first letting, under Sections 5(10)(b), 7, 
9(2)(b) and 12(3) respectively of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging 
House Rates Control Act, 1947. It was held that the said process of 
determination under the said Act, which was reasonable when the law was 
made, became arbitrary and unreasonable with the passage of time in view 
of constant escalation of prices due to inflation and corresponding rise in 
money value. The relevant extracts are as follows: - 
“29. Insofar as social legislation, like the Rent Control Act is 
concerned, the law must strike a balance between rival interests and 
it should try to be just to all. The law ought not to be unjust to one 
and give a disproportionate benefit or protection to another section 
of the society. When there is shortage of accommodation it is 
desirable, nay, necessary that some protection should be given to 
the tenants in order to ensure that they are not exploited. At the 
same time such a law has to be revised periodically so as to ensure 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

that a disproportionately larger benefit than the one which was 
intended is not given to the tenants” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
136. In State of M.P. v. Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd., reported in 1964 SCC 
OnLine SC 121, a five-Judge Bench of this Court was hearing a challenge 
to the Bhopal State Agricultural Income Tax Act, 1953 on the ground that 
it was applicable only within the territory of the former State of Bhopal and 
not in the rest of the territories of Madhya Pradesh. This Court while 
remanding the case to the High Court, observed that a provision introduced 
to achieve a temporary objective, could not be allowed to assume 
permanency. The relevant observations read as under: - 
 
“6. The reorganized State of Madhya Pradesh was formed by 
combining territories of four different regions. Shortly after 
reorganisation, the Governor of the State issued the Madhya 
Pradesh Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) 
Order, 1956, so as to make certain laws applicable uniformly to the 
entire State and later the legislature by the Madhya Pradesh 
Extension of Laws Act, 1958, made other alterations in the laws 
applicable to the State. But Bhopal remained unamended and 
unaltered: nor was its operation extended to other areas or regions 
in the State. Continuance of the laws of the old region after the 
reorganisation by Section 119 of the States Reorganisation Act was 
by itself not discriminatory even though it resulted in differential 
treatment of persons, objects and transactions in the new State, 
because it was intended to serve a dual purpose — facilitating the 
early formation of homogeneous units in the larger interest of the 
Union, and maintaining even while merging its political identity in 
the new unit, the distinctive character of each region, till uniformity 
of laws was secured in those branches in which it was expedient 
after full enquiry to do so. The laws of the regions merged in the 
new units had therefore to be continued on grounds of necessity and 
expediency. Section 119 of the States Reorganisation Act was 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

intended to serve this temporary purpose viz. to enable the new units 
to consider the special circumstances of the diverse units, before 
launching upon a process of adaptation of laws so as to make them 
reasonably uniform, keeping in view the special needs of the 
component regions and administrative efficiency. Differential 
treatment the application of the laws so continued in 
different regions of the same reorganised State, did not, therefore 
immediately attract the clause of the Constitution prohibiting 
discrimination. But by the passage of time, considerations of 
necessity and expediency would be obliterated, and the grounds 
which justified classification of geographical regions for historical 
reasons may cease to be valid. A purely temporary provision which 
because of compelling forces justified differential treatment when 
the Reorganisation Act was enacted cannot obviously be permitted 
to assume permanency, so as to perpetuate that treatment without a 
rational basis to support it after the initial expediency and necessity 
have disappeared.” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
137. In Rattan Arya and Ors. v. State of Tamil Nadu and Ors. reported in (1986), this Court observed thus: 
“…As held by this court in Motor General Traders v. State of 
A.P. [(1984): AIR 1984 SC 121] a provision which was 
perfectly valid at the commencement of the Act could be challenged 
later on the ground of unconstitutionality and struck down on that 
basis. What was once a perfectly valid legislation, may in course of 
time, become discriminatory and liable to challenge on the ground 
of its being violative of Article 14. …” 
 
138. Having discussed the concept and the position of law on temporal 
reasonableness, I shall now look into the submissions of the petitioners on 
the lack of a temporal limit to the application of Section 6A and the 
consequences that follow. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

i. 
Whether there is a temporal limit on the applicability of Section 
6A(3)? 
 
139. Neither Section 6A nor the rules made thereunder prescribe any outer time-
limit for the completion of detection of all such persons who belong to the 
1966-71 stream and are eligible to avail the benefits of Section 6A(3). The 
clock only starts to tick once the detection is made by the foreigners 
tribunal and there is no prescription as to the period of time within which 
the exercise of detection is to be completed from the commencement of 
Section 6A. 
 
140. The absence of any prescribed time-limit for detection of foreigners of the 
1966-71 stream has two-fold adverse consequences – first, it relieves the 
state from the burden of effectively identifying, detecting, and deleting from 
the electoral rolls, in accordance with law, all immigrants of the 1966-71 
stream. Secondly, it incentivises the immigrants belonging to the 1966-71 
stream to continue to remain on the electoral rolls for an indefinite period 
and only get themselves registered under Section 6A once detected by a 
competent tribunal. Hence, the manner in which the provision is worded, 
counter-serves the very purpose of its enactment, which is the speedy and 
effective identification of foreigners of the 1966-71 stream, their deletion 
from the electoral rolls, registration with the registering authority and 
conferring of regular citizenship. As submitted on behalf of the petitioners, 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

the open-ended nature of Section 6A(3) also subserves the legislative intent 
behind the enactment of the IEAA, 1950 and the spirit of the Assam Accord. 
 
141. Section 6A(3) of the Citizenship Act was never meant to maintain the status 
quo regarding the immigrants of the 1966-71 stream. It was enacted with 
the object of achieving en-masse deletion of this category of immigrants 
from the electoral rolls subsequent to which de-jure citizenship was to be 
conferred on them after a cooling-off period of ten years. 
 
142. In the absence of any statutory mandate to do so within a time limit, and 
there being no temporal limit to the applicability of Section 6A(3), it 
follows that any immigrant of the 1966-71 stream, whose name figures in 
the electoral rolls, would not voluntarily want to get detected as a foreigner, 
as upon detection, such immigrant becomes liable to having his or her name 
struck off from the electoral rolls, and is also required to register with the 
registering authority within a specified time period, failing which he or she 
would become liable to deportation. Even otherwise, no person belonging 
to the aforesaid category would, out of their own volition, get detected as 
a foreigner due to the inherent subjectivity that is involved in the process 
of scrutiny and determination of the various conditions as stipulated under 
Section 6A(3), i.e., date of entry into Assam, ordinarily resident, etc. 
However, the same degree of reluctance would not have been present on 
part of the immigrants of the said category if the procedure of conferment 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

of citizenship under Section 6A(3) was instead a one-time exercise which 
was to be mandatorily undertaken in a time-bound manner by anyone who 
wished to avail the benefit of citizenship under the said provision, and any 
failure to abide by such time-bound procedure would have resulted into the 
abatement of their claim to citizenship. Seen thus, the working mechanism 
of Section 6A(3) goes against its avowed objective. ii. 
Whether placing temporal limitations on the period of applicability is 
an objective implicit in the scheme of Section 6A? 
 
143. Upon perusal of the statutory scheme under the Citizenship Act, the 
Foreigners Act, 1946 and other related provisions, it could be seen that the 
mechanism prescribed for giving effect to Section 6A is imbued with the 
idea of temporal limitations and in the absence of temporal limits on the 
period during which Section 6A is made applicable, the provision counter-
serves the object it was enacted with. 
 
144. A foreigner’s tribunal enters upon adjudication on the citizenship status of 
a person only upon a reference received from a competent authority. 
Paragraph 2(1)84 of the Foreigners (Tribunal) Order, 1964 prescribes that 
 
84 2. Constitution of Tribunals.— 
(1) The Central Government or the State Government or the Union territory administration or 
the District Collector or the District Magistrate may, by order, refer the question as to whether 
a person is not a foreigner within the meaning of the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) to a 
Tribunal to be constituted for the purpose, for its opinion. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

the Central Government may refer the question whether a person is a 
foreigner or not within the meaning of the Foreigners Act, 1946 to the 
Foreigners Tribunal. Paragraph 2(1A)85 also empowers the registering 
authority constituted under Rule 19 of the Rules, 2009 to make a reference 
to the foreigners tribunal to ascertain whether a person of Indian origin 
complies with the requirements under section 6A(3) of the Citizenship 
Act. 
 
145. Paragraph 3(14)86 of the Foreigners (Tribunal) Order, 1964 which was 
inserted vide amendment dated 10.12.2013 prescribes that the foreigners 
tribunal must dispose of the case within 60 days of receipt of reference 
from the competent authority. 
 
146. Rule 19(2)87 of the Citizenship Rules, 2009 prescribes that an application 
for registration under Section 6A(3) has to be made within 30 days from 
the date of the receipt of the order of the foreigners tribunal. 
 
85 (1-A) The registering authority appointed under sub-rule (1) of Rule 19 of the Citizenship 
Rules, 2009] may also refer to the Tribunal the question whether a person of Indian Origin, 
complies with any of the requirements under sub-section (3) of Section 6-A of the Citizenship 
Act, 1955 (57 of 1955). 
86 3. Procedure for disposal of questions.— 
… … … 
(14) The Foreigners Tribunal shall dispose of the case within a period of sixty days of the 
receipt of the reference from the competent authority. 
87 19. Registering authority for the purpose of sub-section (3) of section 6A and form for 
registration.— 
… … … 
(2) An application for registration under sub-section (3) of section 6A shall be made in Form 
XVIII, by the person to the registering authority for the district in which such person is 
ordinarily a resident within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of order of the 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

147. Rule 2088 of the Citizenship Rules, 2009 provides that the registering 
authority, in case any question arises as to whether any person fulfils any 
requirement contained in Section 6A(3), has to make a fresh reference to 
the foreigners tribunal within 15 days. 
 
148. Section 6A(4)89 of the Citizenship Act prescribes that upon detection as a 
foreigner, the name of the immigrant is struck off the electoral rolls for a 
period of 10 years, after which the person becomes entitled to have his or 
her name on the rolls again. 
 
149. Section 6A(6)(a)90 of the Citizenship Act prescribes that any person 
referred to under section 6A(2) who doesn’t wish to become a citizen of 
 
Foreigners Tribunal declaring such person as a foreigner; Provided that the registering 
authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the said period to such further 
period as may be justified in each case but not exceeding sixty days. 
88 20. Reference to Tribunals.— Where in case of a person seeking registration under sub-
section (3) of section 6A - 
(a) any question arises as to whether such person fulfils any requirement contained in the said 
sub-section; or 
(b) the opinion of the Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 in 
relation to such person does not contain a finding with respect to any requirement contained 
in the said sub-section other than the question that he is a foreigner, then, the registering 
authority shall, within a period of fifteen days of the receipt of the application under sub-rule 
(2) of rule 19, make a fresh reference to the Tribunal in this regard. 
89 (4) A person registered under sub-section (3) shall have, as from the date on which he has 
been detected to be a foreigner and till the expiry of a period of ten years from that date, the 
same rights and obligations as a citizen of India (including the right to obtain a passport under 
the Passports Act, 1967 (15 of 1967) and the obligations connected therewith), but shall not be 
entitled to have his name included in any electoral roll for any Assembly or Parliamentary 
constituency at any time before the expiry of the said period of ten years. 
90 (6) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 8, — 
(a) If any person referred to in sub-section (2) submits in the prescribed manner and form 
and to the prescribed authority within sixty days from the date of commencement of the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, for year a declaration that he does not wish to be a 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

India has to give a declaration within sixty days of the commencement of 
the Citizenship Amendment Act, 1985. 
 
150. Section 6A(6)(b)91 provides that any person referred to under section 6A(3) 
who doesn’t wish to become a citizen of India has to give a declaration 
within sixty days of coming into force of the Citizenship Amendment Act, 
1985 or from the date of detection as a foreigner, whichever is later. 
 
151. A perusal of all the above provisions indicates that at every stage, except 
the first stage of detection, the mechanism for implementation of Section 
6A is circumscribed by specific temporal limits. The same was taken note 
of by a Full Bench of the Gauhati High Court in State of Assam v. Moslem 
Mandal reported in 2013 SCC OnLine Gau 1: 
“108. Rule 16F of the Citizenship Rules, 1956, as amended in 
2005, provides the time limit for registration of a foreigner within 
the meaning of section 6A(3), which is 30 days from the date of 
detection as a foreigner, which period is extendable by another 60 
days by the registering authority for the reasons to be recorded in 
writing. Rule 16D of the said Rules also empowers the registering 
authority to make a reference to the Tribunal if any question arises 
as to whether such person complies with any requirement 
contained in section 6A(3) of the 1955 Act, which is required to be 
 
citizen of India, such person shall not be deemed to have become a citizen of India under 
that sub-section; 
91 (b) If any person referred to in sub-section (3) submits in the prescribed manner and form 
and to the prescribed authority within sixty days from the date of commencement the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, for year or from the date on which he has been detect-ed 
to be a foreigner, whichever is later, a declaration that he does not wish to be governed by 
the provisions of that sub-sec-tion and sub-sections (4) and (5), it shall not be necessary for 
such person to register himself under sub-section (3). 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

decided by the Tribunal under rule 16E of the said Rules. The 2009 
Rules, which has repealed the 1956 Rules, also contains pari 
materia provisions. From the aforesaid provisions, it, therefore, 
appears that the 1955 Act confers the deeming citizenship on the 
persons of Indian origin who came to Assam from the specified 
territory before 1.1.1966 and who have been ordinarily resident 
in Assam since the date of their entry into Assam. The other class 
of persons, namely, the persons who came to Assam from the 
specified territory on or after 1st day of January, 1966 but before 
25th day of March, 1971, would not become citizens of India 
automatically and they would continue to be foreigners, unless of 
course they are registered in accordance with the provisions 
contained in sub-section (3) of section 6A of the 1955 Act read 
with Rule 1.9 of the 2009 Rules. 
 
109. Prescription of time for filing such application seeking 
registration has a purpose, persons, who are detected to be a 
foreigner of the stream between 1.1.1966 and 25.3.1971, cannot 
enjoy the right under sub-section (4) of section 6A for an indefinite 
period of time, without registering their names as required by law. 
They being recognized as the foreigners by sub-section (3) of 
section 6A, they will be treated as foreigners for all purposes, 
unless they register their names within the time limit prescribed. 
The limited rights and obligations as a citizen of India, however, 
has been conferred on those persons, by virtue of sub-section (4) 
of section 6A, so that they are not deprived of the basic rights as a 
citizen during the time limit prescribed for filing the application 
and till the order is passed by the registering authority registering 
their names. By virtue of the provisions contained in sub-section 
(4) of section 6A, it cannot be said that the persons who are 
detected to be foreigners of the stream between 1.1.1966 and 
25.3.1971 would continue to be the citizens of India and as such 
cannot be deported from India, even if they do not file their 
applications for registration at all, as required by law. The time 
limit prescribed by the aforesaid provisions of law would, 
however, commence from the date of rendering the opinion by the 
Tribunal. xxx 

xxx 

xxx 
 
111. 1956 Rules as well as 2009 Rules, as noticed above, provide 
the initial time limit for filing application for registration, i.e., one 
month, which is extendable by another 60 days by the registering 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

authority. Though there is no time limit prescribed in section 6A 
of the 1955 Act for filing such application, having regard to the 
purpose for which section 6A of the 1955 Act has been enacted, it 
also cannot be said that the fixation of time limit for filing the 
application has no bearing on the purpose sought to be achieved 
by such enactment. However, such time limit can be extended by 
the 
registering authority, 
only 
under 
very 
exceptional 
circumstances preventing the applicant from filing the application 
due to reasons beyond his control, for which the reasons have to 
be recorded by the registering authority. But such extension of 
time cannot also be for an indefinite period of time, having 
regard to the object of the enactment of section 6A of the 1955 
Act. A person who does not register within the time limit fixed or 
within the time limit that may be extended by the registering 
authority, is liable to be deported from India as he is admittedly a 
foreigner and he has not acquired the right of a citizen of India as 
has been acquired by a person of Indian origin who came to Assam 
from the specified territory prior to 1.1.1966, by virtue of the 
deeming provision in sub-section (2) of section 6A of the 1955 Act. 
The decision of the Apex Court in National Human Rights 
Commission (supra) on which Mr. Das, learned senior counsel 
has placed reliance, does not support the contention that a person 
of Indian origin who came to Assam from specified territory 
between 1.1.1966 to 25.6.1971 would continue to be the citizen of 
India despite non-filing of application for registration. In the said 
case, the Apex Court had interfered with the quit notices and 
ultimatum issued by a Student organization, on the ground that 
they do not have the authority to issue the same and it tantamounts 
to threat to the life and liberty of each and every person of Chakma 
tribe. The Apex Court had also directed not to evict or remove the 
Chakmas from their occupation on the ground that he is not a 
citizen of India until the competent authority takes a decision on 
the application filed by them for registration under the provisions 
of the 1955 Act.” 
 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
152. Another absurdity which is manifest in the scheme of Section 6A is that 
once an immigrant belonging to the 1966-71 stream is detected as a 
foreigner, that person has to mandatorily register within a fixed time 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

period, otherwise the person concerned would be liable to deportation. 
However, a similarly situated immigrant, who is yet to be detected by the 
state, can continue to stay in Assam without incurring any liability of 
deportation. 
 
153. Thus, from an analysis of the scheme of Section 6A and the corresponding 
rules along with the decision in the case of Moslem Mandal (supra), it is 
as clear as the noon-day sun that placing temporal limitations on the 
benefits available under Section 6A appears to have been one of the objects 
of the legislation - as otherwise the provision would go against the spirit of 
the Assam Accord. 
 
154. It is pertinent to mention that even the permit system, which was brought 
in after the partition of the country to allow the immigrants from Pakistan 
to migrate to India had a temporal limit to its applicability. The said system 
was brought to an end on 26.12.1952 by the Influx from Pakistan (Control) 
Repealing Act, 1952. Seen in this context, it appears to me to be 
unreasonable why Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, which too was 
brought in to deal with a one-time extraordinary situation, should be 
allowed to continue for all times to come. 
 
155. Continuance of the exercise of detection indefinitely without any temporal 
limitations promotes the immigrants to stay in Assam, and the immigrants 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

residing in the neighbouring states to come into Assam92 in the hope of 
never being detected as a foreigner, or of setting up a defence under Section 
6A of the Citizenship Act upon identification to claim its benefit. iii. 
Absurd consequences Section 6A(3) in the absence of any 
temporal limits to its application. 
 
156. Shri S.W. Dhabe, Member of the Rajya Sabha, during discussion on the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 1985 mentioned93: - 
“What do you mean by “ten years from the date on which he has 
been detected to be a foreigner”? In Sub-Clause (5) on page 3 it is 
stated: 
"A person registered under sub- section (3) shall be deemed to 
be a citizen of India for all purposes as from the date of expiry 
of a period of ten years from the date on which he has been 
detected to be a foreigner." 
 
Suppose you take 15 years or 20 years or 30 years for detection 
purposes, the person shall not be eligible to vote for ten years after 
the detection. Is that so? It means not from just 1971 it can go to 
1990. Therefore, there is a big lacuna. I hope the Minister seriously 
considers this aspect. Unfortunately, the wording of this clause is 
not happily or properly set.” 
 
 (Emphasis supplied) 

92 SANGEETA BAROOAH PISHAROTY, supra note 45, “That the government gave a general 
amnesty to such migrants in Assam, have also led some to presume that it might have 
encouraged that category of people from other border states to move into Assam. Since the 
government didn’t register the category of people who came to the state post the 1950 
citizenship cut-off date before granting the general amnesty of 1971, there is no data, though, 
to pin down exactly how many people benefitted from the exclusive cut-off date in Assam.”. 
93 Session No. 136, Rajya Sabha Deb., Statement of Shri. S.W. Dhabe on The Citizenship 
(Amendment) Bill, 1985 at cols. 371-372 (Dec. 2, 1985). 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

157. Shri P. Babul Reddy, Member of the Rajya Sabha from Andhra Pradesh, 
during the aforesaid discussion on the Bill remarked thus94: - 
“Then, I will point out one more defect. The Bill says, after ten years 
of detection they would be entitled to citizenship, not for ten years 
from detection. This starting point from "detection" is wrong. It 
must start from a particular date. Otherwise, it would lead to a lot 
of anomalies. The Hon. Minister may see the point I am making. 
Justice Baharul Islam, the Hon. Member, here has given the figure 
of 5,66,000 people fall in category two, that is, those who came after 
1966 but before 1971. So, the Tribunal has to enquire about these 
5,66,000 people. They have to be detected, and then they have to be 
registered. From the date of registration their rights would start. 
They would have all the rights of citizenship for what time? For ten 
years. From what date? From the date of detection. Suppose, in one 
man's case detection takes place in 1985 and in another man's case 
the detection takes place in 1988. So, the 1988 man will have to wait 
for another ten years. So, it should not be from the date of detection. 
This is a great anomaly. I have not seen this having been pointed 
out. And I am sure, I am not running on a slippery ground. It means 
that about 6,66,000 people you have to make enquiries. The 
Tribunal will detect one man today, another man five years 
afterwards. Because there is delay in detection, why should that 
man suffer after ten years for another five years? So, this date 
should also be amended. It should be from a particular date. You 
can give one date. Irrespective of when detection takes place, he 
should have citizenship right from that date. In all seriousness I 
submit that this requires particular attention.” 
 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
158. If the statutory construction that there is no time-limit within which the 
exercise of detection under Section 6A(3) is to be completed is accepted as 
correct, then it follows that an immigrant of the 1966-71 stream, upon 
 
94 Session No. 136, Rajya Sabha Deb., Statement of Shri. P. Babul Reddy on The Citizenship 
(Amendment) Bill, 1985 at cols. 327-329 (Dec. 2, 1985). 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

detection, can avail the benefit of Section 6A(3) even today by following 
the procedure prescribed under the rules. Thus, it follows that an immigrant 
who would have entered in the 1966-71 stream and who gets detected as a 
foreigner of the 1966-71 stream today, can register with the registering 
authority and his or her name will then be struck off from the electoral rolls 
for a period of 10 years starting today. 
 
159. Thus, an immigrant whose name figures in the electoral roll, despite being 
a foreigner, continues to be eligible to vote in the elections till that person 
is detected as a foreigner and the name of that person is struck off the 
electoral roll. There being no temporal limit to the applicability of Section 
6A, this situation would continue in the years to come till the detection 
exercise is completed. Further, there would never be any way to assess if 
all the immigrants eligible for availing the benefit of citizenship under 
Section 6A(3) have done so, despite the set of people eligible for such a 
benefit being distinct and determinable. The object of Section 6A(3) of the 
Citizenship Act was never to permit the immigrants of the 1966-71 stream 
to vote for an indefinite period of time without first having been deleted 
from the electoral rolls for a period of ten years or without having been 
conferred de-jure citizenship in the first place. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

160. One another way of looking at the aforesaid is by the use of ‘time triggers.’ 
In the case of an immigrant of the pre-1966 stream, the date of coming into 
effect of Section 6A acts as the terminative time trigger with respect to the 
status of that person as an ‘illegal immigrant’ and at the same time, it also 
acts as the allocative time trigger with respect to that person’s status as a 
citizen of India. That is, on the date of commencement of the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act, 1985, such a person ceases to be an illegal immigrant 
and becomes a citizen in the eyes of the law as per the deeming fiction 
provided in Section 6A sub-section (2). 
 
161. However, in the case of an immigrant belonging to the 1966-71 stream, the 
situation is much more complicated. Even after the commencement of the 
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985, an immigrant belonging to this class 
continues to be an illegal immigrant till the date of his or her detection as 
a foreigner. This date of detection then becomes the allocative trigger, 
conferring upon such person a right to register. Subsequent and subject to 
registration, the immigrant then enjoys all the rights similar to that of a 
citizen except voting rights for a period of ten years from the date of 
detection as a foreigner. On expiry of the period of ten years from the date 
of detection, an allocative time trigger confers the status of de-jure 
citizenship on that person on the day the ten-year period comes to an end. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

162. The consequence of devising a complex and deceptive mechanism under 
Section 6A(3) by the legislature is brought to daylight by virtue of the 
aforesaid analysis. While the object of Section 6A(3), as discussed 
elaborately in the preceding paragraphs, was to make conferment of 
citizenship a stricter affair as compared to Section 6A(2) and to facilitate 
the deletion of immigrants of the 1966-71 stream from the electoral rolls 
through the exercise of detection, however, the shifting of onus of detection 
on the state coupled with the absence of any temporal limit ensures that 
such an immigrant continues to stay on the electoral rolls and enjoy the 
rights of being a de-facto citizen till the time detection takes place, if it ever 
takes place. 
 
163. Another corollary of the aforesaid is that in the absence of a temporal limit 
to the exercise of detection, the condition - ‘has been ordinarily resident in 
Assam since the date of entry’ stipulated under Section 6A of the 
Citizenship Act, tethers the immigrants of the 1966-71 stream and 
incentivises them to continue to stay in Assam and not move out of Assam 
to any other place in or outside India, since that would potentially 
jeopardize their claim to citizenship under Section 6A. To illustrate, if an 
immigrant had entered into Assam from Bangladesh in the year 1970, but 
hasn’t been detected to be a foreigner till date, such a person would be 
incentivised to continue to stay in Assam indefinitely, pending his 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

detection as a foreigner. I say so because an immigrant belonging to the 
1966-71 stream becomes eligible for the conferment of citizenship only if, 
on the date of his detection as a foreigner, he is able to establish that he 
‘has been ordinarily resident in Assam since the date of entry’. To further 
add to the absurdity of the provision, the requirement of ‘ordinarily 
resident’ also doesn’t have a prescribed temporal limit, meaning thereby 
an immigrant of the 1966-71 stream is left with no choice but to continue 
to reside in Assam till he or she happens to get detected as a foreigner. 
 
164. Thus, the submission of the learned Attorney General that an immigrant 
once granted citizenship is free to move and settle in any part of the country 
doesn’t hold true for the immigrants falling under Section 6A(3). I say so 
because the date of conferment of citizenship is dependent on the date of 
‘detection as a foreigner’ and the condition of ‘ordinarily resident in 
Assam’ both of which are mandatory in nature. Thus, an immigrant of the 
1966-71 stream is left with no choice but to continue to reside in Assam till 
the detection exercise takes place. 
 
165. In my considered opinion, the open-ended nature of Section 6A has, with 
the passage time, become more prone to abuse due to the advent of forged 
documents to establish, inter-alia, wrong date of entry into Assam, 
inaccurate lineage, falsified government records created by corrupt 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

officials, dishonest corroboration of the date of entry by other relatives so 
as to aid illegal immigrants who are otherwise not eligible under Section 
6A by virtue of having entered into Assam after 24.03.1971. 
 
166. In a report submitted to the Indian Council for Social Science Research, 
2016 titled “Cross Border Migration in Assam During 1951-2011: 
Process, Magnitude, and Socio-Economic Consequences” by Dr. Nandita 
Saikia & Dr. William Joe95, the problem of fake documents and corrupt 
officials was highlighted, and it was observed that many illegal immigrants 
were using forged documents to secure citizenship. The relevant 
observations are reproduced below: - 
“Corrupt police officers 
The entire problem of bribing and simultaneous political pressure 
cripples the police as well. 
 
Government is negligent in this case. Officials deny the presence of 
Bangladeshis for bribe. Even on complaining, the police come and 
report that the targets have run away and thus do not report their 
presence. This problem will not be solved. (Male, aged 50 years, 
Science teacher) 
 
Assam police Border personnel force is like milking cow...they can 
go, take money and…Our people are equally responsible; as a 
policeman, as mondal, hakim, general people as employer, we think 
about our own benefits. (Male, aged 67 years, retired Principal). 
 
The police therefore are seen to not co-operate with the locals and 
provide both direct and indirect support to the immigrants. 
 
Fake Documentation 
The whole problem of enumerating and estimating illegal 
immigrants in Assam exists because most illegal settlers possess 
 
95 Saikia, supra note 65. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

legal documents. Therefore, it becomes very difficult to tell them 
apart from the legal citizens. And these legal documents are 
acquired by illegal means. 
 
Indigenous people in Assam are living in great fear. The immigrants 
are collecting the legal documents huge way. For example, consider 
my today’s experience: a birth certificate is shown to me which was 
signed on a date of 2009 but was printed in 2012. On the same page, 
the year of print was printed in very small fonts. As an officer, I send 
these kinds of certificates for review but it will be sent back to me 
as “no record is available”. Now I have two options: to file a 
criminal case which will take 7 to months... or to file an FIR. But at 
the end, everything will be managed by money …Also thousands of 
people are buying (Male, aged 34 years, ADC). xxx 
 
xxx 

xxx 
 
This is a racket known most commonly to locals, yet the government 
seems most unaware of. Therefore, it is this complex network of 
corruption that makes legal documents available to illegal settlers 
through illegal means to designate them as legal citizens with the 
right to vote and return benefits to the corrupt politicians.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
167. Thus, Section 6A without any end date of application, promotes further 
immigration into Assam – immigrants come hoping with forged 
documents96 to set up the defence of belonging to pre-1966 or the 1966-71 
stream upon identification as a foreigner and reference to the tribunal. 
 
168. While the object that was sought to be achieved long back with the aid of 
the enactment of Section 6A of the Citizenship Act remained a distant 
dream, its misuse has only continued to increase with the efflux of time. I 
 
96 The Hindu Bureau, Assam plans action against people who forged documents to be in NRC, 
THE HINDU, Dec. 10, 2023. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

say so because with the passage of time, the government records would get 
damaged and perish making it increasingly difficult to cross-check the false 
claims that may be made by the immigrants of the post-1971 stream trying 
to misuse the benefits conferred exclusively to the immigrants of the pre-
1971 stream. 
 
169. It could be argued that the principle of temporal unreasonableness cannot 
be made applicable to a situation where the classification still remains 
relevant to the object sought to be achieved by the provision. However, as 
discussed in the foregoing paragraphs, the underlying object behind the 
creation of two distinct categories of immigrants under Section 6A of the 
Citizenship Act could have been achieved only if the exercise of detection 
of the immigrants of the 1966-71 stream and their deletion from the 
electoral rolls was conducted in an en-masse and time-bound manner. 
However, the same having not been achieved as intended, I find no 
justification to hold that the classification made between the immigrants of 
the pre-1966 and 1966-71 stream still remains relevant to the object of 
Section 6A. To allow Section 6A to continue indefinitely for all times to 
come would tantamount to taking a reductive and one-sided view of the 
historical context in which Section 6A came to be enacted, more 
particularly, that Section 6A sought to achieve a delicate balance between 
two competing interests. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

F. 
MANIFEST ARBITRARINESS VIS-À-VIS TEMPORAL UNREASONABLENESS 
 
170. Having discussed in detail the working mechanism and the object sought 
to be achieved by the enactment of Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, I 
shall now examine if the said section suffers from manifest arbitrariness. 
 
171. It is settled law that even if a statutory provision fulfils the two-pronged 
test of reasonable classification and rational nexus with the object of 
enactment, it can still suffer from the vice of manifest arbitrariness and be 
violative of Article 14 if the provision may lead to differential application 
on similarly situated persons. 
 
172. The test for manifest arbitrariness was laid down in Shayara Bano v. 
Union of India reported in (2017), wherein it was held as follows: 
“101. It will be noticed that a Constitution Bench of this Court 
in Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) (P) Ltd. v. Union of 
India [Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) (P) Ltd. v. Union of 
India, (1985): 1985 SCC (Tax) 121] stated that it was 
settled law that subordinate legislation can be challenged on any of 
the grounds available for challenge against plenary legislation. 
This being the case, there is no rational distinction between the two 
types of legislation when it comes to this ground of challenge under 
Article 14. The test of manifest arbitrariness, therefore, as laid 
down in the aforesaid judgments would apply to invalidate 
legislation as well as subordinate legislation under Article 14. 
Manifest arbitrariness, therefore, must be something done by the 
legislature capriciously, irrationally and/or without adequate 
determining principle. Also, when something is done which is 
excessive and disproportionate, such legislation would be 
manifestly arbitrary. We are, therefore, of the view that 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

arbitrariness in the sense of manifest arbitrariness as pointed out 
by us above would apply to negate legislation as well under Article 
14.” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
173. In Cellular Operators Assn. of India v. Telecom Regulatory Authority of 
India reported in (2016), it was held by this Court that in order 
to pass the scrutiny of Article 14, the provision under challenge must be 
shown to have been drafted as a result of intelligent care and deliberation. 
 
174. From a perusal of the scheme of Section 6A sub-section (3), it is evident 
that the procedure prescribed therein leaves the possibility of differential 
application on similarly situated persons wide open. From any view of the 
matter, the way in which the provision is worded doesn’t effectively serve 
either the purpose of granting citizenship to the immigrants belonging to 
the 1966-71 category, nor does it effectively serve the object of the 
expeditious deletion of the same category of immigrants from the electoral 
rolls. On the contrary, as discussed in the foregoing paragraphs, Section 
6A, in the absence of any temporal limit to its application, with the efflux 
of time is rather counter-serving the object with which it was enacted. 
 
175. The mechanism doesn’t permit an immigrant of the 1966-71 stream to 
voluntarily seek citizenship and such an immigrant has to wait, indefinitely, 
for a reference to be made to the foreigners tribunal. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

176. Similarly, in the absence of any specified date for availing the benefit of 
citizenship under Section 6A sub-section (3), the object of expeditious 
deletion of immigrants from the electoral roll is not met. 
 
177. Manifest arbitrariness also encompasses the aspect of temporal 
unreasonableness that a statute may acquire with the efflux of time. As was 
held by this Court in Joseph Shine v. Union of India reported in (2019), the arbitrariness present in the mechanism devised under Section 
6A has evidently been brought to light with efflux of time, and the 
provision can no longer serve the purpose with which it was enacted. The 
very objective of having a category of immigrants who are to be deleted 
from the electoral rolls for a period of ten years has disappeared with more 
than 40 years having passed since the enactment of the provision. The 
relevant observations read as under: - 
“103. Further, the real heart of this archaic law discloses itself 
when consent or connivance of the married woman's husband is 
obtained — the married or unmarried man who has sexual 
intercourse with such a woman, does not then commit the offence of 
adultery. This can only be on the paternalistic notion of a woman 
being likened to chattel, for if one is to use the chattel or is licensed 
to use the chattel by the “licensor”, namely, the husband, no offence 
is committed. Consequently, the wife who has committed adultery is 
not the subject-matter of the offence, and cannot, for the reason that 
she is regarded only as chattel, even be punished as an abettor. This 
is also for the chauvinistic reason that the third-party male has 
“seduced” her, she being his victim. What is clear, therefore, is that 
this archaic law has long outlived its purpose and does not square 
with today's constitutional morality, in that the very object with 
which it was made has since become manifestly arbitrary, having 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

lost its rationale long ago and having become in today's day and 
age, utterly irrational. On this basis alone, the law deserves to be 
struck down, for with the passage of time, Article 14 springs into 
action and interdicts such law as being manifestly arbitrary. That 
legislation can be struck down on the ground of manifest 
arbitrariness is no longer open to any doubt, as has been held by 
this 
Court 
in Shayara 
Bano v. Union 
of 
India [Shayara 
Bano v. Union of India, (2017): (2017) 4 SCC (Civ) 277] 
…” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
178. In my considered opinion, the aforesaid departure of the scheme of Section 
6A from the Constitutional and statutory framework and the prevalent 
international practice coupled with the absence of any temporal limits on 
the applicability of Section 6A has the effect of rendering it manifestly 
arbitrary and constitutionally invalid. 
 
179. While the test of manifest arbitrariness entails a two-prong test which 
requires that first, there is a reasonable classification based on an 
intelligible differentia; and second that such classification has a rational 
nexus with the object sought to be achieved by such classification. The test 
of temporal unreasonableness, on the other hand, would involve a further 
examination into whether the aforesaid two prongs have continued to 
remain relevant with the passage of time. 
 
180. Thus, the test of temporal unreasonableness would require examining the 
provision in two different time frames – first, when the provision was 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

enacted, and second when such provision comes to be challenged on the 
ground of temporal unreasonableness. Even if a provision passes the two-
prong test in the first time-frame, it may still fail the test in the subsequent 
time-frame if the efflux of time renders either the classification, or the 
object sought to be achieved by such classification, or both as arbitrary and 
thus violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. This could be said to be the 
third prong in the test of manifest arbitrariness under Article 14 as 
envisaged by the doctrine of temporal unreasonableness. 
 
G. 
DAMAGE CAUSED BY THE SCHEME OF SECTION 6A 
 
181. From the discussion above, it can be seen that the mechanism by which the 
implementation of Section 6A is to take place is riddled by two serious 
problems – absence of a temporal limit as to the period of application, and 
shifting of the onus of identification and detection of an immigrant as a 
foreigner on the state. 
 
182. In my view, the absurd and faulty mechanism that has been prescribed 
under Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, constitutes the genesis of the 
controversy before us. The legislature, instead of providing for a one-time 
process to avail the benefits of Section 6A to all those who are eligible has 
instead provided a process where each immigrant of the 1966-71 category 
has to be first identified and then referred to the foreigners tribunal. The 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

tribunal is then required to determine in each individual case whether the 
person referred is an illegal migrant, his date of entry in Assam, whether 
he is entitled to any benefits under Section 6A, etc. 
 
183. The determination by the foreigners tribunal in each individual case 
introduces judicial-element in the process of determination of nationality 
of suspected persons. However, I emphasize that the infirmity of Section 
6A lies not in the judicial determination of the status of each immigrant 
individually, but in the steps preceding such determination, that is, 
identifying suspected immigrants and referring them to the foreigners 
tribunal. The onus of referring suspected immigrants to the tribunal lying 
solely on the state; absence of any provision for self-declaration or 
registration by the immigrant; and absence of any time-limit during which 
the benefit of Section 6A may be availed – collectively have the effect of 
making the provision constitutionally invalid when subjected to the three-
prong test of temporal unreasonableness as elucidated above. 
 
184. The result of the aforesaid infirmity has been that, to this date, the benefit 
of Section 6A can be availed if an immigrant shows that he or she falls 
within Section 6A sub-sections (2) and (3). This has added another layer 
of complexity in the very detection process of illegal migrants, who have 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

mingled amongst those who have legitimately availed the benefit under 
Section 6A. 
 
185. Even a person who is otherwise not eligible under Section 6A can put-up a 
false claim that he or she is covered under Section 6A, and the foreigners 
tribunal would have to examine the legitimacy of the such a claim, thereby 
slowing down the entire process of detection and deportation in Assam. 
 
186. We find substance in the submission of the petitioners that the stipulation 
of the condition ‘ordinarily resident in Assam’ created a vortex that 
attracted other illegal immigrants located in West Bengal or other 
bordering states also to come into Assam in the hope of securing 
citizenship, all because of the faulty mechanism coupled with poor 
implementation of conferring the benefit under Section 6A. 
 
187. It is also pertinent to observe that the regime under the Citizenship Act has 
been made more stringent over the years by a slew of amendments. 
Significantly, the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003 introduced the 
definition of an ‘illegal immigrant’. The Statement of objects and reasons 
accompanying the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2003, reads as under: - 
“[...] 2. The above objects are proposed to be achieved, inter alia, 
by amending provisions of the Citizenship Act so as to — 
(i) make acquisition of Indian citizenship by registration and 
naturalisation more stringent; 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

(ii) prevent illegal migrants from becoming eligible for Indian 
citizenship; 
(iii) simplify the procedure to facilitate the re-acquisition of Indian 
citizenship by persons of full age who are children of Indian 
citizens, and former citizens of independent India; 
(iv) provide for the grant of overseas citizenship of India to persons 
of Indian origin belonging to specified countries, and Indian 
citizens who choose to acquire the citizenship of any of these 
countries at a later date; 
(v) provide for the compulsory registration and issue of a national 
identity card to all citizens of India; 
(vi) enhance the penalty for violation of its provisions, as well as 
the rules framed under it; and 
(vii) to omit all provisions recognizing, or relating to the 
Commonwealth citizenship from the Act.” 
 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
188. A perusal of the above would show that one of the objects of the 2003 
amendment to the Citizenship Act was to exclude illegal immigrants from 
the benefit of citizenship. Thus, while on the one hand the legislature has 
gradually moved towards a regime which bars illegal immigrant from the 
benefit of Indian citizenship, Section 6A, on the other hand, continues to 
be present on the statute book endlessly, and owing to its abuse-prone and 
temporally unlimited mechanism, goes against the present-day statutory 
position and policy with regard to the illegal immigrants. 
 
189. More than 38 years having elapsed since Section 6A came into effect, with 
the benefit of retrospect, we find force in the submission of the petitioners 
that Section 6A, which was meant to dispel and discourage incoming illegal 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

immigrants, turned out to be a beacon for the illegal immigrants from 
Bangladesh to come into Assam, by taking advantage of the poor 
mechanism which is prone to open abuse. There can be no denying that the 
provision has far exceeded the time-limit within which it should have been 
made applicable, and has become vulnerable to misuse owing to the 
inherent arbitrariness, as pointed above. 
 
190. Assam Accord was a one-time political settlement, arrived at in the specific 
context of widespread violence and agitation in Assam. The extraordinary 
conditions existing in the years 1979-85 cannot provide a permanent and 
perennial ground for continuation of a manifestly arbitrary provision, 
which is uncertain and indeterminable owing to its sui-generis mechanism. 
 
191. I shall now refer to the decision of a three-Judge Bench of this Court in 
Sarbananda Sonowal (supra), by which the IMDT Act was struck down. 
One of the primary reasons for which the IMDT Act was struck down was 
that this Court was of the view that instead of achieving the avowed object 
of the legislation, the IMDT Act was defeating the very purpose for which 
it was enacted. Relevant portions of the said decision are reproduced 
hereinbelow: - 
“70. As mentioned earlier, the influx of Bangladeshi nationals who 
have illegally migrated into Assam pose a threat to the integrity and 
security of North-Eastern region. Their presence has changed the 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

demographic character of that region and the local people of Assam 
have been reduced to a status of minority in certain districts. In such 
circumstances, if Parliament had enacted a legislation exclusively 
for the State of Assam which was more stringent than the Foreigners 
Act, which is applicable to rest of India, and also in the State of 
Assam for identification of such persons who migrated from the 
territory of present Bangladesh between 1-1-1966 and 24-3-1971, 
such a legislation would have passed the test of Article 14 as the 
differentiation so made would have had rational nexus with the 
avowed policy and objective of the Act. But the mere making of a 
geographical classification cannot be sustained where the Act 
instead of achieving the object of the legislation defeats the very 
purpose for which the legislation has been made. As discussed 
earlier, the provisions of the Foreigners Act are far more effective 
in identification and deportation of foreigners who have illegally 
crossed the international border and have entered India without any 
authority of law and have no authority to continue to remain in 
India. For satisfying the test of Article 14, the geographical factor 
alone in making a classification is not enough but there must be a 
nexus with the objects sought to be achieved. If geographical 
consideration becomes the sole criterion completely overlooking 
the other aspect of “rational nexus with the policy and object of the 
Act” it would be open to the legislature to apply enactments made 
by it to any sub-division or district within the State and leaving 
others at its sweet will. This is not the underlying spirit or the legal 
principle on which Article 14 is founded. Since the classification 
made whereby the IMDT Act is made applicable only to the State of 
Assam has no rational nexus with the policy and object of the Act, 
it is clearly violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and is liable 
to be struck down on this ground also.” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
192. There have been various judgments of this Court wherein directions were 
issued for reconsideration of the impugned provision on the ground that 
with the passage of time, the provision had become temporally 
unreasonable and rather than fulfilling the object with which it was enacted, 
the same was proving to be counter-productive. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

193. In Narottam Kishore Deb Varman v. Union of India, reported in (1964), a five-Judge Bench of this Court was called upon to decide a batch 
of petitions challenging the validity of Section 87B of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908. The said section required that before a suit could be filed 
against a former ruler of a Princely State, prior sanction of the Union 
Government had to be obtained. This Court, relying upon its previous 
decision, stopped short from holding the provision as unconstitutional. 
However, it called upon the Government to examine if the provision was 
to be allowed to continue for all times. It further noted that Section 87B 
being a result of a political settlement reached between the Government 
and former rulers, its continuance forever was something that the 
Government ought to reconsider. The relevant observations read as under: 
“9. The legislative background to which we have referred cannot be 
divorced from the historical background which is to be found for 
instance, in Article 362. This article provides that in the exercise of 
the power of Parliament or of any legislature of any State to make 
laws or in the exercise of the executive power of the Union or of a 
State, due regard shall be had to the guarantee or assurance given 
under any such covenant or agreement as is referred to in clause 
(1) of Article 291 with respect to the personal rights, privileges and 
dignities of a Ruler of an Indian State. This has reference to the 
covenants and agreements which had been entered into between the 
Central Government and the Indian Princes before all the Indian 
States were politically completely assimilated with the rest of India. 
The privileges conferred on the Rulers of former Indian States has 
its origin in these agreements and covenants. One of the privileges 
is that of extra-territoriality and exemption from civil jurisdiction 
except with the sanction of the Central Government. It was thought 
that the privilege which was claimed by foreign Rulers and Rulers 
of Indian States prior to the independence was attained and the 
States had become part of India, and that is how in 1951, the Civil 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

Procedure Code was amended and the present Sections 86, 87, 87-
A and 87-B came to be enacted in the present form. 
 
10. Considered in the light of this background, it is difficult to see 
how the petitioners can successfully challenge the validity of the 
provisions contained in Section 87-B. In the case of Mohan Lal 
Jain [(1962) ] this Court has held that the ex-Rulers of 
Indian States form a class by themselves and the special treatment 
given to them by the impugned provisions cannot be said to be based 
on unconstitutional discrimination. 
There 
is, of course, 
discrimination between the ex-Rulers and the rest of the citizens of 
India, but that discrimination is justified having regard to the 
historical and legislative background to which we have just 
referred. If that be so, it would follow that the restriction imposed 
on the petitioners' fundamental right guaranteed by Article 19(1)(f) 
cannot be said to be unreasonable. The restriction in question is the 
result of the necessity to treat the agreements entered into between 
the Central Government and the ex-Rulers of Indian States as valid 
and the desirability of giving effect to the assurances given to them 
during the course of negotiations between the Indian States and the 
Central Government prior to the merger of the States with India. 
We have to take into account the events which occurred with 
unprecedented swiftness after 15th August, 1947 and we have to 
bear in mind the fact that the relevant negotiations carried on by 
the Central Government were inspired by the sole object of bringing 
under one Central Government the whole of this country including 
the former Indian States. Considered in the context of these events, 
we do not think it would be possible to hold that the specific 
provision made by Section 87-B granting exemption to the Rulers of 
former Indian States from being sued except with the sanction of the 
Central Government, is not reasonable and is not in the interests of 
the general public. It is true that the restriction works a hardship so 
far as the petitioners are concerned; but balancing the said 
hardship against the other considerations to which we have just 
referred, it would be difficult to sustain the argument that the 
section itself should be treated as unconstitutional. 
 
11. Before we part with this matter, however, we would like to invite 
the Central Government to consider seriously whether it is 
necessary to allow Section 87-B to operate prospectively for all 
time. The agreements made with the Rulers of Indian States may, no 
doubt, have to be accepted and the assurances given to them may 
have to be observed. But considered broadly in the light of the basic 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

principle of the equality before law, it seems somewhat odd that 
Section 87-B should continue to operate for all time. For past 
dealings and transactions, protection may justifiably be given to 
Rulers of former Indian States; but the Central Government may 
examine the question as to whether for transactions subsequent to 
26th of January, 1950, this protection need or should be continued. 
If under the Constitution all citizens are equal, it may be desirable 
to confine the operation of Section 87-B to past transactions and 
not to perpetuate the anomaly of the distinction between the rest of 
the citizens and Rulers of former Indian States. With the passage of 
time, the validity of historical considerations on which Section 87-
B is founded will wear out and the continuance of the said section 
in the Code of Civil Procedure may later be open to serious 
challenge.” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
194. In H.H. Shri Swamiji of Shri Amar Mutt v. Commr., Hindu Religious 
and Charitable Endowments Deptt., reported in (1979), a five-
Judge Bench of this Court was called upon to determine the 
constitutionality of applicability of the Madras Hindu Religious Charitable 
Endowments Act to the South Kanara district. The South Kanara district, 
which was formerly a part of the State of Madras, became a part of the State 
of Mysore as a result of the reorganisation of states on 01.11.1956 and by 
reason of Section 119 of the States Reorganisation Act, the Madras Hindu 
Religious and Charitable Endowments Act continued to apply to South 
Kanara notwithstanding the fact that it was no longer a part of the State of 
Madras. The appellants urged that the application of the Madras Act to only 
one district of the State of Karnataka offended Article 14. The Court held 
that even after passage of 23 years, no serious attempts were made to 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

remove the inequality between the South Kanara district and other districts 
of the State of Karnataka. The relevant observations read as under: 
“31. But that is how the matter stands today. Twenty-three years 
have gone by since the States Reorganisation Act was passed but 
unhappily, no serious effort has been made by the State Legislature 
to introduce any legislation — apart from two abortive attempts in 
1963 and 1977 — to remove the inequality between the temples and 
Mutts situated in the South Kanara District and those situated in 
other areas of Karnataka. Inequality is so clearly writ large on the 
face of the impugned statute in its application to the district of South 
Kanara only, that it is perilously near the periphery of 
unconstitutionality. We have restrained ourselves from declaring 
the law as inapplicable to the district of South Kanara from today 
but we would like to make it clear that if the Karnataka Legislature 
does not act promptly and remove the inequality the 
application of the Madras Act of 1951 to the district of South 
Kanara only, the Act will have to suffer a serious and successful 
challenge in the not distant future. We do hope that the Government 
of Karnataka will act promptly and move an appropriate 
legislation, say, within a year or so. A comprehensive legislation 
which will apply to all temples and Mutts in Karnataka, which are 
equally situated in the context of the levy of fee, may perhaps afford 
a satisfactory solution to the problem. This, however, is a tentative 
view-point because we have not investigated whether the Madras 
Act of 1951, particularly Section 76(1) thereof, is a piece of hostile 
legislation of the kind that would involve the violation of Article 14. 
Facts in regard thereto may have to be explored, if and when 
occasion arises.” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
195. This Court, has on many occasions, struck down provisions for having 
become temporally unreasonable, that is, for having become obsolete and 
discriminatory with the passage of time. 
 
196. In Motor General Traders v. State of A.P., reported in (1984), 
a two-Judge Bench of this Court was examining the validity of Section 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

32(b) of the A.P. Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1960. 
The impugned provision exempted all buildings constructed after 
26.08.1957 from the application of the said Act. This Court held that a 
temporary exemption having nexus with the object of the Act to promote 
new builders had become obsolete with the passage of time, and was acting 
in the form of a permanent bonanza without any rational basis. The Bench 
proceeded to strike down the impugned provision. The relevant 
observations read as under: 
“24. It is argued that since the impugned provision has been in 
existence for over twenty-three years and its validity has once been 
upheld by the High Court, this Court should not pronounce upon its 
validity at this late stage. There are two answers to this proposition. 
First, the very fact that nearly twenty-three years are over from the 
date of the enactment of the impugned provision and the 
discrimination is allowed to be continued unjustifiably for such a long 
time is a ground of attack in these cases. As already observed, the 
landlords of the buildings constructed subsequent to August 26, 1957 
are given undue preference over the landlords of buildings 
constructed prior to that date in that the former are free from the 
shackles of the Act while the latter are subjected to the restrictions 
imposed by it. What should have been just an incentive has become a 
permanent bonanza in favour of those who constructed buildings 
subsequent to August 26, 1957. There being no justification for the 
continuance of the benefit to a class of persons without any rational 
basis whatsoever, the evil effects flowing from the impugned 
exemption have caused more harm to the society than one could 
anticipate. What was justifiable during a short period has turned out 
to be a case of hostile discrimination by lapse of nearly a quarter of 
century. The second answer to the above contention is that mere lapse 
of time does not lend constitutionality to a provision which is 
otherwise bad. “Time does not run in favour of legislation. If it is ultra 
vires, it cannot gain legal strength from long failure on the part of 
lawyers to perceive and set up its invalidity. Albeit, lateness in an 
attack upon the constitutionality of a statute is but a reason for 
exercising special caution in examining the arguments by which the 
attack is supported. [See W.A. Wynes: Legislative, Executive and 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

Judicial Powers in Australia, Fifth Edition, p 33] We are constrained 
to pronounce upon the validity of the impugned provision at this late 
stage because the garb of constitutionality which it may have 
possessed earlier has become worn out and its unconstitutionality is 
now brought to a successful challenge.” 
 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
197. In Satyawati Sharma (supra) a two-Judge Bench of this Court was 
examining the constitutional validity of Section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent 
Control Act, 1958. This Court partly read down the provision on the ground 
that the blanket protection from eviction given to tenants of non-residential 
buildings, with the passage of time, had become unreasonable and was 
liable to be taken away. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“32. It is trite to say that legislation which may be quite reasonable 
and rational at the time of its enactment may with the lapse of time 
and/or due to change of circumstances become arbitrary, 
unreasonable and violative of the doctrine of equality and even if the 
validity of such legislation may have been upheld at a given point of 
time, the Court may, in subsequent litigation, strike down the same if 
it is found that the rationale of classification has become non-existent. 
In State of M.P. v. Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd. [AIR 1964 SC 1179] 
this Court while dealing with a question whether geographical 
classification due to historical reasons could be sustained for all times 
observed: (AIR p. 1182, para 6) 
 
“6.... Differential treatment the application of the 
laws so continued in different regions of the same reorganised 
State, did not, therefore immediately attract the clause of the 
Constitution prohibiting discrimination. But by the passage of 
time, considerations of necessity and expediency would be 
obliterated, and the grounds which justified classification of 
geographical regions for historical reasons may cease to be 
valid. A purely temporary provision which because of compelling 
forces justified differential treatment when the Reorganisation 
Act was enacted cannot obviously be permitted to assume 
permanency, so as to perpetuate that treatment without a rational 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

basis to support it after the initial expediency and necessity have 
disappeared.”” 
 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
H. 
DOCTRINE OF PROSPECTIVE OVERRULING 
 
198. The doctrine of prospective overruling was originally developed by 
American jurists. This doctrine was first applied in an Indian context in 
I.C. Golak Nath v. State of Punjab reported in AIR 1967 SC 1643. It was 
decided by this Court therein that the power of amendment under Article 
368 of the Constitution did not allow the Parliament to abridge the 
fundamental rights contained in the Part III of the Constitution. However, 
while holding thus, this Court made the decision operative with prospective 
effect. 
 
199. The decision was given prospective effect in recognition of the fact that 
from the coming into force of the Constitution upto the date of the decision 
in Golak Nath (supra), the Parliament had in fact exercised the power of 
amendment in a way which, as per the decision in Golak Nath (supra), was 
void. This Court observed that if retrospectivity were to be given to the 
decision, it would introduce chaos and unsettled conditions in the country. 
On the other hand, this Court also recognized that such a possibility of 
chaos might be preferable to the alternative of a totalitarian rule. This 
Court, therefore, sought to evolve a reasonable principle to meet the 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

extraordinary situation. The reasonable principle which was evolved was 
the doctrine of prospective overruling. 
 
200. The decision in Golak Nath (supra) was overruled by subsequent decision 
in Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala reported in (1973). 
However, the observations of this Court regarding the evolution of the 
doctrine of prospective overruling, which hold to this day, are as follows: 
“45. There 
are 
two 
doctrines 
familiar 
to 
American 
Jurisprudence, one is described as Blackstonian theory and the 
other as “prospective over-ruling” which may have some 
relevance to the present enquiry. Blackstone in his 
Commentaries, 69 (15th Edn., 1809) stated the common law rule 
that the duty of the Court was “not to pronounce a new rule but 
to maintain and expound the old one”. It means the Judge does 
not make law but only discovers or finds the true law. The law 
has always been the same. If a subsequent decision changes the 
earlier one, the latter decision does not make law but only 
discovers the correct principle of law. The result of this view is 
that it is necessarily retrospective in operation. But Jurists, 
George F. Canfield, Robert Hill Freeman, John Henry Wigmore 
and Cardozo have expounded the doctrine of “prospective over-
ruling” and suggested it as “a useful judicial tool”. In the words 
of Canfield the said expression means: 
 
“… a court should recognize a duty to announce a new and 
better rule for future transactions whenever the court has 
reached the conviction that on old rule (as established by the 
precedents) is unsound even though feeling compelled 
by stare decisis to apply the old and condemned rule to the 
instance case and to transactions which had already taken 
place”. 
 
Cardozo, before he became a Judge of the Supreme Court of the 
United States of America, when he was the Chief Justice of New 
York State addressing the Bar Association said thus: 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

“The rule (the Blackstonian rule) that we are asked to apply 
is out of tune with the life about us. It has been made 
discordant by the forces that generate a living law. We apply 
it to this case because the repeal might work hardship to 
those who have trusted to its existence. We give notice 
however that any one trusting to it hereafter will do at his 
peril.” 
The Supreme Court of the United States of America in the year 
1932, after Cardozo became an Associate Justice of that Court 
in Great Northern Railway v. Sunburst Oil & Ref. Co. [(1932) 
287 US 358, 366: 77 LEd 360], applied the said doctrine to the 
facts of that case. In that case the Montana Court had adhered to 
its previous construction of the statute in question but had 
announced that that interpretation would not be followed in the 
future. It was contended before the Supreme Court of the United 
States of America that a decision of a court overruling earlier 
decision and not giving its ruling retroactive operation violated 
the due process clause of the 14th Amendment. Rejecting that 
plea, Cardozo said: 
 
“This is not a case where a Court in overruling an earlier 
decision has come to the new ruling of retroactive dealing 
and thereby has made invalid what was followed in the doing. 
Even that may often be done though litigants not infrequently 
have argued to the contrary…. This is a case where a Court 
has refused to make its ruling retroactive, and the novel stand 
is taken that the Constitution of the United States is infringed 
by the refusal. We think that the Federal Constitution has no 
voice upon the subject. A state in defining the elements of 
adherence to precedent may make a choice for itself between 
the principle of forward operation and that of relation 
backward. It may be so that the decision of the highest courts, 
though later overruled, was law nonetheless for intermediate 
transactions…. On the other hand, it may hold to the ancient 
dogma that the law declared by its Courts had a platonic or 
ideal existence before the act of declaration, in which event, 
the discredited declaration will be viewed as if it had never 
been and to reconsider declaration as law from the 
beginning……The choice for any state may be determined by 
the juristic philosophy of the Judges of her Courts, their 
considerations of law, its origin and nature.” 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

The opinion of Cardozo tried to harmonize the doctrine of 
prospective over-ruling with that of stare decisis. xxx 

xxx 

xxx 
 
47. Though English Courts in the past accepted the Blackstonian 
theory and though the House of Lords strictly adhered to the 
doctrine of ‘precedent’ in the earlier years, both the doctrines 
were practically given up by the “Practice Statement (Judicial 
Precedent)” issued by the House of Lords, recorded in (1966) 1 
WLR 1234. Lord Gardiner L.C., speaking for the House of Lords 
made the following observations; 
 
“Their Lordships nevertheless recognise that too rigid 
adherence to precedent may lead to injustice in a particular 
case and also unduly restrict the proper development of the 
law. They propose, therefore, to modify their present practice 
and, while treating former decisions of this House as 
normally binding, to depart from a previous decision when it 
appears right to do so. 
 
In this connection they will bear in mind the danger of 
disturbing retrospectively the basis on which contracts, 
settlements of property and fiscal arrangements have been 
entered into and also the especial need for certainty as to the 
criminal law. 
 
The announcement is not intended to affect the use of 
precedent elsewhere than in this House.” 
 
It will be seen from this passage that the House of Lords hereafter 
in appropriate cases may depart from its previous decision when 
it appears right to do so and in so departing will bear in mind the 
danger of giving effect to the said decision retroactivity. We 
consider that what the House of Lords means by this statement is 
that in differing from the precedents it will do so only without 
interfering with the transactions that had taken place on the basis 
of earlier decisions. This decision, to a large extent, modifies the 
Blackstonian theory and accepts, though not expressly but by 
necessary implication the doctrine of “prospective overruling.” 
 
xxx 

xxx 

xxx 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

49. It is a modern doctrine suitable for a fast moving society. It 
does not do away with the doctrine of stare decisis, but confines 
it to past transactions. It is true that in one sense the court only 
declares the law, either customary or statutory or personal law. 
While in strict theory it may be said that the doctrine involves 
making of law, what the court really does is to declare the law 
but refuses to give retroactivity to it. It is really a pragmatic 
solution reconciling the two conflicting doctrines, namely, that a 
court finds law and that it does make law. It finds law but restricts 
its operation to the future. It enables the court to bring about a 
smooth transition by correcting its errors without disturbing the 
impact of those errors on the past transactions. It is left to the 
discretion of the court to prescribe the limits of the retroactivity 
and thereby it enables it to mould the relief to meet the ends of 
justice. 
 
50. In India there is no statutory prohibition against the court 
refusing to give retroactivity to the law declared by it. Indeed, the 
doctrine of res judicata precludes any scope for retroactivity in 
respect of a subject-matter that has been finally decided between 
the parties. Further, Indian Courts by interpretation reject 
retroactivity to statutory provisions though couched in general 
terms on the ground that they affect vested rights. The present 
case only attempts a further extension of the said rule against 
retroactivity. 
 
51. Our Constitution does not expressly or by necessary 
implication speak against the doctrine of prospective overruling. 
Indeed, Articles 32, 141 and 142 are couched in such wide and 
elastic terms as to enable this Court to formulate legal doctrines 
to meet the ends of justice. The only limitation thereon is reason, 
restraint and injustice. Under Article 32, for the enforcement of 
the fundamental rights the Supreme Court has the power to issue 
suitable directions or orders or writs. Article 141 says that the 
law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all 
courts; and Article 142 enables it in the exercise of its 
jurisdiction to pass such decree or make such order as is 
necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or matter 
pending before it. These articles are designedly made 
comprehensive to enable the Supreme Court to declare law and 
to give such directions or pass such orders as are necessary to 
do complete justice. The expression “declared” is wider than the 
words “found or made”. To declare is to announce opinion. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

Indeed, the latter involves the process, while the former expresses 
result. Interpretation, ascertainment and evolution are parts of 
the process, while that interpreted, ascertained or evolved is 
declared as law. The law declared by the Supreme Court is the 
law of the land. If so, we do not see any acceptable reason why 
it, in declaring the law in supersession of the law declared by it 
earlier, could not restrict the operation of the law as declared to 
future and save the transactions, whether statutory or otherwise 
that were effected on the basis of the earlier law. To deny this 
power to the Supreme Court on the basis of some outmoded 
theory that the Court only finds law but does not make it is to 
make ineffective the powerful instrument of justice placed in the 
hands of the highest judiciary of this country. 
 
52. As this Court for the first time has been called upon to apply 
the doctrine evolved in a different country under different 
circumstances, we would like to move warily in the beginning. 
We would lay down the following propositions: (1) The doctrine 
of prospective overruling can be invoked only in matters arising 
under our Constitution; (2) it can be applied only by the highest 
Court of the country i.e. the Supreme Court as it has the 
constitutional jurisdiction to declare law binding on all the 
courts in India; (3) the scope of the retroactive operation of the 
law declared by the Supreme Court superseding its “earlier 
decisions is left to its discretion to be moulded in accordance with 
the justice of the cause or matter before it.” 
 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
201. Although the doctrine of “prospective overruling” has been drawn from 
American jurisprudence, yet this Court, through its decisions, has imbued 
it with indigenous characteristics. The parameters of the power concerned 
were sought to be laid down in Golak Nath (supra) itself wherein it was 
observed: - 
“52. As this Court for the first time has been called upon to apply 
the doctrine evolved in a different country under different 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

circumstances, we would like to move warily in the beginning. We 
would lay down the following propositions: 
(1) The doctrine of prospective over-ruling can be invoked only in 
matters arising under our Constitution; 
(2) It can be applied only by the highest court of the country, i.e., 
the Supreme Court as it has the constitutional jurisdiction to 
declare law binding on all the courts in India; 
(3) the scope of the retroactive operation of the law declared by the 
Supreme Court superseding its earlier decisions is left to its 
discretion to be moulded in accordance with the justice of the cause 
or matter before it.” 
 
202. This doctrine was also applied by this Court in the case of Synthetics and 
Chemicals Ltd. v. State of UP (supra). In the said case originally, this 
Court in State of UP v. Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. reported in (1980), had upheld the validity of the State legislature to impose tax 
on industrial alcohol. 
 
203. Subsequently, this matter was referred to a Seven-Judge Bench, by the 2nd 
Synthetics Case, and this Court struck down the validity of the provisions 
of the said Act, permitting levy of excise duty in the form of vend fee, 
prospectively. 
 
204. The significance of the prospective overruling was dealt with by a five- 
Judge Bench of this Court in Somaiya Organics (India) Ltd. & Anr. v. 
State of U.P. & Anr. (supra). This Court had elaborated upon the term 
“prospective overruling” as follows: - 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

“24. The word “prospective overruling” implies an earlier judicial 
decision on the same issue which was otherwise final. That is how 
it was understood in Golak Nath [AIR 1967 SC 1643: (1967) ]. However, this Court has used the power even when deciding 
on an issue for the first time. Thus in India Cement Ltd. v. State of 
T.N. [(1990) ] when this Court held that the cess sought 
to be levied under Section 115 of the Madras Panchayats Act, 1958 
as amended by Madras Act 18 of 1964, was unconstitutional, not 
only did it restrain the State of Tamil Nadu from enforcing the same 
any further, it also directed that the State would not be liable for 
any refund of cess already paid or collected. 
 
25. This direction was considered in Orissa Cement Ltd. v. State of 
Orissa [1991 Supp (1) SCC 430] at p. 498 where it was held that: 
(SCC para 69) 
 
“The declaration regarding the invalidity of a provision and 
the determination of the relief that should be granted in 
consequence thereof are two different things and, in the latter 
sphere, the court has, and must be held to have, a certain amount 
of discretion. It is a well-settled proposition that it is open to the 
court to grant, mould or restrict the relief in a manner most 
appropriate to the situation before it in such a way as to advance 
the interests of justice. It will be appreciated that it is not always 
possible in all situations to give a logical and complete effect to 
a finding.” 
 
26. Again in Union of India v. Mohd. Ramzan Khan [(1991): 1991 SCC (L&S) 612: (1991) 16 ATC 505] it was held that 
non-furnishing of a copy of the enquiry report to an employee 
amounted to violation of the principles of natural justice and any 
disciplinary action taken without furnishing such report was liable 
to be set aside. However, it was made clear that the decision would 
have prospective application so that no punishment already 
imposed would be open to challenge on this count. (See 
also Managing Director, ECIL v. B. Karunakar [(1993): 1993 SCC (L&S) 1184: (1993) 25 ATC 704].) 
 
27. In the ultimate analysis, prospective overruling, despite the 
terminology, is only a recognition of the principle that the court 
moulds the reliefs claimed to meet the justice of the case — justice 
not in its logical but in its equitable sense. As far as this country is 
concerned, the power has been expressly conferred by Article 142 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

of the Constitution which allows this Court to “pass such decree or 
make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any 
cause or matter pending before it”. In exercise of this power, this 
Court has often denied the relief claimed despite holding in the 
claimants' favour in order to do “complete justice”. 
 
28. Given this constitutional discretion, it was perhaps unnecessary 
to resort to any principle of prospective overruling, a view which 
was expressed in Narayanibai v. State of Maharashtra [(1969) ] at p. 470 and in Ashok Kumar Gupta v. State of 
U.P. [(1997): 1997 SCC (L&S) 1299] In the latter case, 
while dealing with the “doctrine of prospective overruling”, this 
Court said that it was a method evolved by the courts to adjust 
competing rights of parties so as to save transactions “whether 
statutory or otherwise, that were effected by the earlier law”. 
According to this Court, it was a rule 
 
“…of judicial craftsmanship with pragmatism and judicial 
statesmanship as a useful outline to bring about smooth 
transition of the operation of law without unduly affecting the 
rights of the people who acted upon the law operated prior to 
the date of the judgment overruling the previous law”. 
 
Ultimately, it is a question of this Court's discretion and is, for this 
reason, relatable directly to the words of the Court granting the 
relief. xxx 

xxx 
 
xxx 
 
32. The doctrine of prospective overruling was applied 
in Belsund Sugar Co. Ltd. v. State of Bihar [(1999) ]. 
The question which arose for consideration there was whether 
market fee could be levied under the Bihar Agricultural Produce 
Markets Act, 1960 in respect to transactions of purchase of 
sugarcane, sugar and molasses by sugar mills. In view of the 
provisions of the Bihar Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and 
Purchase) Act, 1981 read with the Sugar (Control) Order, 1966 
issued under the Essential Commodities Act, it was held that the 
provisions of the Sugarcane Act and the Sugarcane Order, on the 
one hand, and the Bihar Market Act on the other could not operate 
harmoniously and, therefore, the Sugarcane Act and the Sugarcane 
Order prevailed over the Market Act. It was then contended that the 
appellants therein should be allowed to get refund of the market fee 
which they had paid under the Market Act subject to their showing 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

that they had not passed on the burden on the principle of unjust 
enrichment. Dealing with the above contentions, it was observed as 
follows: (SCC pp. 667-68, paras 112-13) 
 
“112. Under these circumstances, keeping in view the 
peculiar facts and circumstances of these cases, we deem it fit to 
direct in exercise of our powers under Article 142 of the 
Constitution of India that the present decision will have only a 
prospective 
effect. 
Meaning 
thereby 
that 
after 
the 
pronouncement of this judgment all future transactions of 
purchase of sugarcane by the sugar factories concerned in the 
market areas as well as the sale of manufactured sugar and 
molasses produced therefrom by utilising this purchased 
sugarcane by these factories will not be subjected to the levy of 
market fee under Section 27 of the Market Act by the Market 
Committees concerned. All past transactions up to the date of 
this judgment which have suffered the levy of market fee will not 
be covered by this judgment and the collected market fees on 
these past transactions prior to the date of this judgment will not 
be required to be refunded to any of the sugar mills which might 
have paid these market fees.”” 
 
 (Emphasis supplied) 

205. Taking a clue from the above referred decisions, it could be said that this 
Court has been endowed with the power to mould the relief so as to do 
complete justice in a given situation, and to avoid the possibility of chaos 
and confusion that may be caused in the society at large. In the present 
case, a number of immigrants who came into the State of Assam from 
Bangladesh, have already been conferred with citizenship under Section 
6A of the Citizenship Act. Further, as discussed, the unconstitutionality of 
Section 6A is attributable to the efflux of time. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

206. Section 6A being manifestly arbitrary, temporally unreasonable and, 
demonstrably unconstitutional cannot be allowed to continue for all times 
to come. Hence, in my opinion it would be appropriate to declare Section 
6A as unconstitutional with prospective effect. This would ensure that the 
benefit which has already been derived by the immigrants in Assam is not 
taken away, more particularly when the challenge to Section 6A has been 
made after a considerable delay. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
 
207. The distinction drawn between the State of Assam and other states for the 
grant of citizenship to immigrants was on the basis of special circumstances 
prevailing in Assam at the time of enactment of Section 6A. Section 6A 
was a statutory codification of a political settlement reached between the 
Government and the people of Assam and thus was not violative of the 
equality clause enshrined under Article 14 at the time of its enactment in 
1985. 
 
208. However, Section 6A has acquired unconstitutionality with the efflux of 
time. The efflux of time has brought to light the element of manifest 
arbitrariness in the scheme of Section 6A(3) which fails to provide a 
temporal limit to its applicability. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

209. The prescribed mechanism also shifts the burden of detection of a foreigner 
solely on the State, thus, counter-serving the very purpose for which the 
provision was enacted, that is, the expedient detection of immigrants 
belonging to the 1966-71 stream, their deletion from the electoral rolls, and 
conferment of de-jure citizenship only upon the expiry of ten-years. 
 
210. Justice Surya Kant has said in so many words that although Section 6A 
might not have been constitutionally invalid from its inception, yet the 
possibility of the provision incurring such invalidity anytime in future 
should not be ruled out. In light of the discussion in the foregoing 
paragraphs, I am of the clear view that Section 6A suffers from the vice of 
manifest arbitrariness on account of the “systematic failure of the 
legislative vision”, if I may put it in the very words of my learned brother. 
 
211. Justice Surya Kant has also acknowledged the fact that despite the 
enactment of Section 6A, the influx of illegal immigrants into the State of 
Assam did not abate after 1985. He has relied upon the report published by 
the then Governor of Assam in 1998, to underscore that there are hordes of 
immigrants who have illegally entered Assam and are residing there. 
However, the ultimate view taken by him is that such illegal immigration 
cannot be attributed to Section 6A which is limited in its ambit and does 
not by itself create unabated immigration. As discussed earlier, Section 6A 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

owing to its inherent problems of absence of temporal limit and the sole 
onus of detection upon the State, has indeed resulted in the influx and 
continued presence of illegal immigrants into the State of Assam, to this 
date. 
 
212. One another issue on which I would like to respectfully disagree with 
Justice Surya Kant pertains to the fundamental premise that Section 6A 
aligns with the fundamental purpose of Articles 6 and 7 respectively of the 
Constitution – that is, Section 6A also confers citizenship rights on those 
affected by the partition of India. However, a careful perusal of Section 6A 
vis-à-vis Articles 6 and 7 respectively would reveal that despite a few 
similarities between the two, the crucial difference lies in the fact that in 
Article 6, the onus of registration for a person seeking citizenship lies on 
that person and not on the State. Additionally, all those persons who 
migrated to India from Pakistan after 19.07.1948, had to make an 
application before the commencement of the Constitution. The permit 
system which was introduced as per Article 7 was also brought to an end 
in 1952 as discussed in the foregoing paragraphs. However, as discussed, 
both these conditions i.e., the onus of registration as well as the 
specification of a cut-off date till which such applications could have been 
made are absent from the very scheme of Section 6A. Seen in the context 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

of temporal unreasonableness, this glaring absence renders the scheme of 
Section 6A arbitrary and as a result unconstitutional. 
 
213. Justice Surya Kant has emphasized on the importance of distinguishing 
between the prescribed mechanism under the provisions of Section 6A and 
its actual implementation. After examining the mechanism prescribed 
under Section 6A, he has held that when Section 6A is read with the 
complimentary statutes more particularly, the Foreigners Act, 1946, 
Passport Act, 1967, IEAA, 1950 and the Foreigners (Tribunals Order), 
1964, the same is adequate and sufficient to address the issue of illegal 
immigration into Assam. However, the ultimate conclusion drawn by him 
is that despite of there being sufficient measures, the problem of illegal 
immigration has persisted in Assam till this date because of the 
inadequacies in Section 6A and its faulty implementation. I am of the view, 
that the inadequate implementation of Section 6A(3) of the Act is 
inextricably linked to the fallacious mechanism that has been prescribed 
under it. 
 
214. Justice Surya Kant in paragraph 298 of his judgment, has observed that by 
virtue of Article 19(1)(e), Section 6A does not compel pre-1971 
immigrants to keep residing in the territory of Assam once they have 
obtained citizenship thereunder. While the aforesaid may be true for the 
immigrants belonging to the pre-1966 stream who were conferred 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

citizenship automatically, and thus became citizens of India for all 
purposes from the date of commencement of Section 6A itself, the same 
does not hold true for the immigrants belonging to the 1966-71 category. I 
say so, because, in the absence of any temporal limit, within which all 
immigrants belonging to the 1966-71 category are to be detected, deleted 
and registered as citizens, the immigrants of this category are tethered to 
the territory of Assam, so as to satisfy the criteria of “ordinarily resident in 
Assam” on the date when they eventually happen to get detected. 
 
215. Lastly, Justice Surya Kant, in paragraph 304, has observed that Section 6A 
when read along with the larger statutory regime surrounding citizenship 
and immigration, has mandated timely detection and deportation of illegal 
immigrants. In my view, although the mandate of timely detection and 
deportation of illegal immigrants was the fundamental premise on which 
the Assam Accord was signed, yet, this intention recorded in the Accord, 
was never translated statutorily, due to a faulty mechanism prescribed 
under Section 6A(3), either due to inadvertence or advertence of the 
legislature. 
 
216. Before, I proceed to draw my final conclusion, I must refer to R.W.M. 
Dias’s “Jurisprudence” Fifth Edition Chapter 15. Dias says that one of the 
tasks in the achievement of justice is adapting to change. Just as 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

consonance with accepted ideas is an inducement to obey, so also when 
these change, tensions arise between the law on the one hand, and needs 
and outlook on the other, and there is then an inducement to ignore the law 
or to disobey. Failure to use power to adapt to change is, in its own way, 
an abuse of power. The issue is thus not one of change or no change, but 
of the direction and speed of change. According to Dias, no society is static. 
Changes develop gradually over the years in practically every sphere 
brought about by evolution in environmental, economic and political 
circumstances, national and global, as well as in religious and moral ideas. 
In the words of Dias “…They may occur slowly or rapidly; they may be 
ephemeral as with passing fashions, or permanent. What happens is that 
practices evolve which influence the ways in which laws actually operate, 
e.g. trade practices. When the behaviour of people has moved away from 
the law with a sufficient degree of permanence, tensions arise with varying 
results. The law itself may be stretched to take account of the development, 
or it may be ignored until it becomes a dead letter, or it may be repealed 
and a new law substituted. In these ways evolution gives direction to future 
development.” 
 
217. For all the foregoing reasons, I have reached to the conclusion that Section 
6A of the Citizenship Act deserves to be declared invalid with prospective 
effect and the same is accordingly declared so. 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

218. I summarize my final conclusions as follows: - 
a. Immigrants who migrated before 01.01.1966 and were conferred deemed 
citizenship on the date of commencement of Section 6A(2), subject to 
fulfilment of all the conditions mentioned therein, shall remain unaffected. b. Immigrants who migrated between 01.01.1966 and 24.03.1971 (both 
inclusive) and have been granted citizenship after following the due 
procedure prescribed under Section 6A(3) shall remain unaffected. c. Immigrants who migrated between 01.01.1966 and 24.03.1971 (both 
inclusive) and who have been detected as foreigners and have registered 
themselves with the registering authority as per the prescribed rules, shall 
be deemed to be citizens of India for all purposes from the date of expiry 
of a period of ten years from the date on which they were detected as 
foreigners. d. Immigrants who migrated between 01.01.1966 and 24.03.1971 (both 
inclusive) and who have been detected as foreigners but have not registered 
themselves with the registering authority within the prescribed time limit 
as per the Citizenship Rules, 2009 will no longer be eligible for the benefit 
of citizenship. e. Immigrants who migrated between 01.01.1966 and 24.03.1971 (both 
inclusive) and whose applications are pending for adjudication before the 
Foreigners Tribunal, or who have preferred any appeal against any order 
of such tribunal which is pending before any court will continue to be 

In Re: Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955 

governed by Section 6A(3) as it stood immediately prior to the 
pronouncement of this judgment, till their appeals are disposed of. f. From the date of pronouncement of this judgment, all immigrants in the 
State of Assam shall be dealt with in accordance with the applicable laws 
and no benefit under Section 6A shall be available to any such immigrant. 
To be precise, if someone is apprehended as an illegal immigrant after the 
pronouncement of this judgment, Section 6A of the Citizenship Act will 
have no application. 
 
219. The petitions are disposed of in the aforesaid terms. 
 
220. Pending application(s), if any, also stand disposed of.... J. 
(J.B. Pardiwala) 

New Delhi; 
 
17th October, 2024