IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

VISHWAJEET KERBA MASALKAR 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA 

JUDGMENT 
 
B.R. Gavai, J. 

1. 
The present appeal challenges the final judgment and 
order dated 23rd July 2019, passed by the Division Bench of 
the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Confirmation 
Case No. 2 of 2016 filed by the State of Maharashtra, by 
which it upheld the separate orders of conviction and 
sentence dated 26th August 2016 and 31st August 2016 
passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Pune1 in Sessions 
Case No.64 of 2013, thereby convicting the appellant for the 
offences punishable under Sections 302, 307 and 201 of the 
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as “the trial court”. 

Indian Penal Code, 18602 and sentencing him to death along 
with a fine of Rs. 5,000/- for the offence punishable under 
Section 302 of IPC, rigorous imprisonment for ten years 
along with fine of Rs. 10,000/- for the offence punishable 
under Section 307 of IPC and rigorous imprisonment of three 
years along with a fine of Rs. 5,000/- for the offence 
punishable under Section 201 of IPC. 
2. 
Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present appeal 
are as under: 
2.1 On 4th October 2012, the official at the police control 
room was informed by the appellant about a robbery at his 
house situated at Champaratna Society, Uday Baug, 
Wanwadi, Pune and that his mother-Shobha Masalkar, wife-
Archana Masalkar and two-year old daughter-Kimaya 
Masalkar had been killed. The appellant further informed 
that his neighbourer-Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) had 
also been injured. This information was transmitted to 
Bajirao Dadoba Mohite ACP CID (PW-14), who was on duty at 
Wanawadi Police Station, Pune, who lodged a complaint. 
 
2 Hereinafter referred to as “IPC”. 

2.2 Based on the complaint of the appellant, a First 
Information Report No.196 of 2012 was registered for 
commission of an offence punishable under Sections 302 and 
397 of the IPC against unknown persons. It was stated by 
the appellant in the complaint that one gold chain of 8 Tolas, 
one gold Mangalsutra, cash amount of Rs.7,000/-, 3 small 
rings and 2 almond shaped pendants having total value of 
Rs.3,07,000/- were stolen. The three dead bodies were sent 
to the hospital for post-mortem and the neighbourer 
Madhusudan Kulkarni (PW-12) was also sent to the hospital 
for medical treatment. The panchnama of the place of the 
incident was recorded after Bajirao Dadoba Mohite ACP CID 
(PW-14) had visited the place of occurrence. 
2.3 While recording the spot panchnama, it was observed 
by Bajirao Dadoba Mohite (PW-14) that there were no signs 
of forced entry on both the doors as well as the safety doors 
of the flat of the appellant. A gold Mangalsutra, 3 small gold 
rings, 2 gold almond shaped pendants and cash amount of 
Rs. 7,000/- in one red coloured money purse hidden behind 
a photo frame hanging on the wall of the flat were also found 
by Bajirao Dadoba Mohite (PW-14). Another ash-coloured 

money purse was found in the flat as well. At the place of the 
incident, near the main door of the flat of the appellant, few 
pieces of bangles that were stained with blood and one blood 
stained odhani were also found. 
2.4 During investigation, it was revealed that appellant had 
a love affair with one Gauri Londhe (PW-2). It was stated by 
the appellant’s paramour Gauri Londhe (PW-2) that, when 
she came to know about the appellant’s marriage, she 
refused to marry him but the appellant was ready to leave his 
wife and daughter in order to marry her. It was also seen 
through the CCTV footage of the Saipras Society, which was 
adjoining the flat of the appellant, that at 03:22 PM, 
appellant’s mother (Shobha Masalkar) was seen going 
towards the flat and at 04:28 PM, the appellant was seen 
going out on his motorcycle. Based on these facts, the 
appellant was suspected to have committed the murders by 
the police and so he was arrested on 5th October 2012. 
2.5 Post-Mortem of the three deceased persons was 
conducted. In the post-mortem, it was opined that the cause 
of death of the appellant’s daughter (Kimaya Masalkar) was 
asphyxia due to smothering, the cause of death of the 

appellant’s wife (Archana Masalkar) was traumatic and 
hemorrhagic shock due to head injury and the cause of 
death of the appellant’s mother (Shobha Masalkar) was 
hemorrhagic shock due to head injury. 
2.6 The appellant made a disclosure about keeping his 
blood-stained clothes and Mangalsutra of his wife at a place 
in M.I.D.C., Hadapsar Area, Pune and he further disclosed 
about throwing the hammer, used for committing the crime, 
in a canal after keeping it in a blue bag. Another disclosure 
was made by the appellant about a consent letter for divorce 
by his wife which was found in a drawer inside his house. 
2.7 After completion of the investigation, charge-sheet was 
filed against the appellant for the offences punishable under 
Sections 302, 307 and 201 of the IPC in the Court of Judicial 
Magistrate, First Class, Cantonment Court, Pune. Since the 
case was exclusively triable by the Sessions Court, it was 
committed to the Sessions Court for trial. Charges were 
framed against the appellant by the trial court for the 
commission of the offences punishable under Sections 302, 
307 and 201 of IPC. 

2.8 To bring home the guilt of the accused, the prosecution 
examined 16 witnesses. At the conclusion of the trial, the 
trial court found that the prosecution had proved the guilt of 
the accused beyond reasonable doubt. 
2.9 Vide judgment and order dated 26th August 2016, the 
appellant was convicted for the offences punishable under 
Sections 302, 307 and 201 of IPC and vide order dated 31st 
August 2016 he was sentenced to death along with a fine of 
Rs. 
5,000/-, 
in 
default 
whereof 
to 
suffer 
rigorous 
imprisonment of one year for the offence punishable under 
Section 302 of IPC; rigorous imprisonment for ten years 
along with fine of Rs. 10,000/-, in default whereof rigorous 
imprisonment of one year for the offence punishable under 
Section 307 of IPC and rigorous imprisonment of three years 
along with a fine of Rs. 5,000/-, in default whereof rigorous 
imprisonment of six months for the offences punishable 
under Section 201 of IPC. 
2.10 For confirmation of the execution of the death sentence, 
a reference was made by the trial court to the High Court 
which was numbered as Confirmation Case No. 2 of 2016. 

2.11 Vide impugned judgment and order, the High Court 
upheld the order of the trial court convicting the appellant 
and also confirmed the death sentence imposed on him. 
However, in view of Section 415(1) of Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 19733 the operation and effect of the impugned 
judgment was stayed till the expiry of period allowed for 
preferring an appeal before this Court. 
2.12 Aggrieved thereby, the present appeal. 
3. 
We have heard Ms. Payoshi Roy, learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the appellant and Mr. Siddharth 
Dharmadhikari, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondent-State of Maharashtra. 
4. 
Ms. Payoshi Roy, learned counsel appearing on behalf of 
the appellant submits that the High Court and the trial court 
have grossly erred in holding the present appellant guilty for 
the offence punishable under Section 302 of IPC. She 
submits that the prosecution case mainly rests on the 
evidence of Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12). It is submitted 
that, from the testimony of Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) 
itself, it would be clear that his testimony is not sufficient to 
 
3 Hereinafter referred to as “Cr.P.C.”. base the order of conviction. She submits that, firstly, the 
statement of Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) recorded under 
Section 161 of Cr.P.C. is recorded belatedly i.e. after 6 days. 
She further submits that there is no explanation at all as to 
why his statement was not recorded for 6 days. She submits 
that even the testimony of the IO would show that the IO did 
not find it necessary to go to the hospital for 6 days to record 
the statement of Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12). She 
further submits that, from the evidence of Madhusudhan 
Kulkarni (PW-12), it would also be clear that he has not 
witnessed the incident. She submits that the statement of 
Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) has been recorded by the 
police after he was informed that an FIR has been registered 
against the present appellant for committing the murder of 
his wife, daughter and mother. As such, no credence could 
be given to the testimony of Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12). 
5. 
Ms. 
Roy 
submitted 
that 
if 
the 
testimony 
of 
Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) is discarded, then the only 
circumstances upon which the prosecution relies are 
recovery of hammer and clothes at the instance of the 
present appellant on a memorandum under Section 27 of the 

Evidence Act, 1872. It is however submitted that the said 
recoveries are all farcical and cannot be relied on. She 
therefore submitted that the present appeal deserves to be 
allowed. 
6. 
Ms. Roy submits that, in the event this Court finds that 
the prosecution has proved that the present appellant has 
committed the offence, then the death penalty would not be 
warranted in the facts and circumstances of the case. She 
submits that there are various mitigating circumstances as 
to be found from the various reports placed on record that 
the appellant was not a hardened criminal. She submits that 
there is nothing on record to establish that there is no 
possibility of the present appellant being reformed. She 
therefore submits that the present case would fall under the 
middle path as laid down by this Court in a catena of 
judgments including Swamy Shraddananda (2) alias 
Murali Manohar Mishra v. State of Karnataka4. 
7., Shri Siddharth Dharmadhikari, learned 
counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent-State submits 
that the learned trial court and the High Court have 
 
4 (2008): 2008 INSC 853 

concurrently on the basis of the evidence placed before them 
come to a considered conclusion that the prosecution has 
proved the case beyond reasonable doubt. He submits that 
the ocular testimony of Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) is 
corroborated by the other circumstantial evidence. He 
submits that the hammer used in the crime has been 
recovered on the statement of the present appellant recorded 
under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. He further submits 
that one chhanni is also recovered on the basis of the 
memorandum of the appellant under Section 27 of the 
Evidence Act. The recovery of blood-stained clothes, 
according to the learned counsel, is another circumstance 
which establishes the complicity of the present appellant 
with the crime in question. He further submits that 
Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) is an injured witness and 
therefore a greater credence would be attached to his 
testimony. 
8. 
With the assistance of the learned counsel for the 
parties, we have perused the evidence on record. 
9. 
The prosecution case mainly rests on the ocular 
testimony of Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12). Madhusudhan 

Kulkarni (PW-12) is the neighbour of the appellant and the 
deceased. In his testimony, Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) 
stated that he knew all the three deceased persons as well as 
the appellant. He states that the deceased persons as well as 
the appellant used to reside in his neighbourhood. He stated 
that deceased Shobha Masalkar i.e. the mother of the 
appellant used to do the work of cleaning utensils and she 
was also working in his house. He further stated that 
deceased Shobha had one daughter namely Aboli and that he 
had helped Shobha in the marriage of her daughter Aboli. He 
further stated that there used to be quarrels between the 
appellant on one hand and his mother and wife on the other. 
He stated that the appellant was intending to marry another 
lady and that he was intending to give divorce to his wife 
Archana. He stated that, he as well as deceased Shobha were 
against this as the appellant was already married. 
10. Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) further stated in his 
examination-in-chief that on the date of the incident, he was 
in his house and at around 12:00 Noon, he heard the noises 
of shouts and cries. When he came out, he saw deceased 
Archana along with her daughter Kimaya crying outside their 

house. He further stated that he asked them as to why they 
were crying outside their house. Thereafter, he came into his 
house. At that time, someone hit on his backside with some 
weapon. Due to which, he fell down and saw that the 
appellant was holding a hammer and was going away. 
Thereafter, he became unconscious. He further stated that 
he was admitted in the hospital for 6 days. He stated that he 
could not identify the hammer as to whether it was the same 
hammer used by the appellant for the commission of the 
crime. 
11. The testimony of Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) is full 
of contradictions. Though, he stated in his examination-in-
chief that the appellant was holding hammer in his hand and 
he was going away, the same did not find place in the 
statement recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. by Judicial 
Magistrate, First Class. He stated that he did not remember 
as to whether he was conscious or not when he was admitted 
in the hospital. In the next breath, he admitted that after the 
incident, some people came to his flat and he asked them to 
call the doctor there only. 

12. It will be relevant to refer to the testimony of Dr. Abhijit 
Sudhakr Bele (PW-13) who was attached as Junior Resident 
Doctor in Sassoon Hospital. He stated that on 4th October 
2012, when he was on duty, Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) 
was admitted in the hospital. He stated that he gave the 
history of assault. He stated that on 10th October 2012, the 
statement of Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) was recorded 
in his presence and at that time, he was conscious and 
oriented. 
13. PW-16 is Dr. Tushar Madhavrao Kalekar. He stated 
that, on 4th October 2012, when he was on duty, 
Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) was referred to his 
department from the surgery department for the purpose of 
CT Scan of the brain. He admitted that, initially the patient 
was treated in casualty section and then referred to the 
surgery department. He further admitted that, as per the first 
noting dated 4th October 2012 at 09:55 PM, the case paper 
Exhibit 93-A indicated that the appellant was conscious and 
oriented. He further admitted that the doctor who at the first 
instance examined the patient is an important person who 
can opine about the nature of injuries. 

14. Therefore, a million-dollar question that would arise is if 
Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) was conscious and oriented 
at the time of admission in the hospital, then why was his 
statement not immediately recorded. Another question that 
would arise is if Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) had asked 
the neighbourers, who had come to his flat, to call for the 
doctor, then he naturally would have informed about the 
incident to the neighbourers. However, not a single 
neighbourer is examined to corroborate the version of 
Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12). On the contrary, his 
evidence would show that he had admitted that he came to 
know from the police on 4th October 2012 that in the 
afternoon of 4th October 2012, the appellant, on account of 
his desire to marry Gouri Londhe (PW-2), he had fought with 
his wife Archana and mother Shobha and killed them with a 
hammer and had smothered by a pillow to death his 
daughter Kimaya. He also stated that the appellant came and 
assaulted him with the hammer so as to prevent him from 
telling it to the neighbourers. If that be so, if the 
neighbourers arrived immediately on the scene of occurrence, 
then the question would be, what prevented Madhusudhan 

Kulkarni (PW-12) from informing about the incident to the 
neighbourers. Even if his testimony is taken at its face value, 
it only suggests that he heard the noises of shouts and cries, 
then he immediately came out and saw Shobha and Kimaya 
crying. He only stated that he asked them as to why they 
were crying outside the house. He did not state that the wife 
of the appellant told him that there was a fight between the 
appellant and his wife. From the evidence, it is also not clear 
as to whether the appellant was present in the house or not. 
15. In this respect, it will be relevant to refer to the 
testimony of Bajirao Dadoba Mohite (PW-14), Investigating 
Officer (IO). His testimony would reveal that, on the basis of 
suspicion, the appellant was arrested on 5th October 2012 at 
09:05 PM. It will also be relevant to refer to his cross-
examination which reads thus: 
“It is true to say that on 4th itself I realized that the 
alive injured is the important witness in this case. I 
went on 10th in the hospital to meet that injured. 
Before that I did not go to the hospital. That injured 
was not in a position to speak and therefore, I have 
not visited the hospital before 10th. Prior thereto I 
have not written letter to the doctor It is true to say 
that till 10th. I have not received information from 
the hospital about the state of that injured.” 

16. It can be seen that PW-14 has admitted that on 4th 
October 2012 itself, he realised that Madhusudhan Kulkarni 
(PW-12) was an important witness in this case, but he did 
not go to the hospital before 10th October 2012 and for the 
first time, he went to the hospital on 10th October 2012. He 
further admitted that prior to 10th October 2012, he did not 
write a letter to the doctor as well. 
17. Thus, the delay of 6 days in recording the statement of 
Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) particularly when the 
evidence of Dr. Abhijit Sudhakar Bele (PW-13) shows that 
Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) had given the history of the 
incident and Dr. Tushar Madhavrao Kalekar (PW-16) 
admitted that Exhibit 93-A showed that Madhusudhan 
Kulkarni (PW-12) was conscious and oriented casts a serious 
doubt on the testimony of Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12). 
No doubt that a conviction could be based solely on the basis 
of the evidence of a solitary witness, however, the testimony 
of such a witness is required to be found to be credible and 
trustworthy. It is also necessary to examine the testimony of 
such a witness critically. A reliance in this respect could be 
placed on the three-Judges Bench judgment of this Court in 

the case of Chuhar Singh v. State of Haryana5 which has 
been followed in a catena of cases. 
18. As discussed hereinabove, on a deeper scrutiny of the 
testimony of Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12), we do not find 
that the testimony of Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) is one 
which would inspire confidence in the mind of the Court to 
base the conviction for the offence punishable under Section 
302 of IPC. Firstly, the statement of Madhusudhan Kulkarni 
(PW-12) is recorded after 6 days. Secondly, when the 
evidence shows that he was conscious and oriented on the 
date of the incident, no neighbourer has been examined to 
corroborate the testimony of Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) 
though even according to Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12), 
after the incident, the neighbourers had come and he himself 
had asked them to get the doctor there only. Thirdly, his 
testimony does not show that he has witnessed the incident 
and he himself admitted that he had given the statement 
after he was informed by the police that the present appellant 
had committed the crime. 
 
5 (1976) 

19. If the testimony of Madhusudhan Kulkarni (PW-12) is 
discarded, then the case would become the one of 
circumstantial evidence. 
20. The law with regard to conviction on the basis of 
circumstantial evidence has very well been crystalised in the 
judgment of this Court in the case of Sharad Birdhichand 
Sharda v. State of Maharashtra6, wherein this Court held 
thus: 
“152. Before discussing the cases relied upon by 
the High Court we would like to cite a few decisions 
on the nature, character and essential proof 
required in a criminal case which rests on 
circumstantial 
evidence 
alone. 
The 
most 
fundamental and basic decision of this Court 
is Hanumant v. State of Madhya Pradesh [(1952): AIR 1952 SC 343:: 1953 
Cri LJ 129]. This case has been uniformly followed 
and applied by this Court in a large number of later 
decisions 
up-to-date, 
for 
instance, 
the 
cases 
of Tufail 

Simmi v. State 
of 
Uttar 
Pradesh [(1969): 1970 SCC (Cri) 55] 
and Ramgopal v. State of Maharashtra [(1972): AIR 1972 SC 656]. It may be useful to 
extract 
what 
Mahajan, 
J. has 
laid 
down 
in Hanumant case [(1952): AIR 1952 SC 
343:: 1953 Cri LJ 129]: 
“It is well to remember that in cases 
where the evidence is of a circumstantial 
nature, the circumstances from which 
the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn 
should in the first instance be fully 
established, 
and 
all 
the 
facts 
so 
 
6 (1984): 1984 INSC 121 

established should be consistent only 
with the hypothesis of the guilt of the 
accused. 
Again, 
the 
circumstances 
should be of a conclusive nature and 
tendency and they should be such as to 
exclude every hypothesis but the one 
proposed to be proved. In other words, 
there must be a chain of evidence so far 
complete as not to leave any reasonable 
ground for a conclusion consistent with 
the innocence of the accused and it must 
be such as to show that within all human 
probability the act must have been done 
by the accused.” 
153. A close analysis of this decision would show 
that the following conditions must be fulfilled before 
a case against an accused can be said to be fully 
established: 
(1) the circumstances from which the 
conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should 
be fully established. 
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that 
the circumstances concerned “must or should” and 
not “may be” established. There is not only a 
grammatical but a legal distinction between “may be 
proved” and “must be or should be proved” as was 
held 
by 
this 
Court 
in Shivaji 
Sahabrao 
Bobade v. State of Maharashtra [(1973): 
1973 SCC (Cri) 1033: 1973 Crl LJ 1783] where the 
observations were made: [SCC para 19, p. 807: SCC 
(Cri) p. 1047] 
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that 
the 
accused must be 
and 
not 
merely may be guilty before a court can 
convict and the mental distance between 
‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long and divides 
vague 
conjectures 
from 
sure 
conclusions.” 
(2) the facts so established should be 
consistent only with the hypothesis of the 

guilt of the accused, that is to say, they 
should not be explainable on any other 
hypothesis except that the accused is 
guilty, 
(3) the circumstances should be of a 
conclusive nature and tendency, 
(4) they should exclude every possible 
hypothesis except the one to be proved, 
and 
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so 
complete as not to leave any reasonable 
ground for the conclusion consistent with 
the innocence of the accused and must 
show that in all human probability the 
act must have been done by the accused. 
154. These five golden principles, if we may say so, 
constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a case 
based on circumstantial evidence.” 
 
21. It can thus clearly be seen that it is necessary for the 
prosecution 
that 
the 
circumstances 
from 
which 
the 
conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be fully established. 
The Court held that it is a primary principle that the accused 
‘must be’ and not merely ‘may be’ proved guilty before a court 
can convict the accused. It has been held that there is not 
only a grammatical but a legal distinction between ‘may be 
proved’ and ‘must be or should be proved’. It has been held 
that the facts so established should be consistent only with 
the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they should not be 

explainable on any other hypothesis except the one where 
the accused is guilty. It has further been held that the 
circumstances should be such that they exclude every 
possible hypothesis except the one to be proved. It has been 
held that there must be a chain of evidence so complete as 
not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion 
consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show 
that in all human probabilities, the act must have been done 
by the accused. 
22. It is settled law that the suspicion, however strong it 
may be, cannot take the place of proof beyond reasonable 
doubt. An accused cannot be convicted solely on the ground 
of suspicion, no matter how strong it is. An accused is 
presumed to be innocent unless proved guilty beyond a 
reasonable doubt. 
23. In the light of these guiding principles, we will have to 
examine the present case. 
24. The circumstances which have been relied on by the 
learned trial court are – (i) recovery of hammer; (ii) recovery of 
blood-stained clothes; and (iii) CCTV Footage which shows 
that deceased Shobha had come in the building at 03:22 PM 

and where the appellant was seen going out of his motor-
cycle at 04:28 PM. However, the High Court itself has 
disbelieved the said circumstance in paras 58-59 of its 
judgment. 
25. Insofar as the first circumstance i.e. recovery of the 
hammer alleged to have been used in the crime is concerned, 
according to the prosecution, the said hammer was recovered 
at the instance of the appellant on a statement recorded 
under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. Firstly, it is to be noted 
that the said recovery is from a canal. The recovery 
panchnama shows that the said hammer was having blood-
stains. It is the prosecution case that the hammer was 
packed in a bag which was put in water. It is to be noted that 
the hammer was recovered from a place which is open and 
accessible to one and all. It is improbable that a hammer 
which was soaked in water for 3 days would still retain the 
blood-stains. It is to be noted that the investigating agency 
had to take the service of two swimmers to take the bag out 
from the canal. The evidence of Santosh Bhau Awaghade 
(PW-11) who is a panch witness would show that when the 
police along with the appellant reached the spot, two persons 

were already there and they were searching as per the say of 
the police party. It is thus clear that the place where the 
accused had taken the police party to show where he had 
concealed the incriminating article was already within the 
knowledge of the police. It is also difficult to believe that, in 
flowing water where two swimmers were required to find out 
the incriminating material, the said article would remain at 
the same place after 3 days. We therefore find that it cannot 
be 
said 
that 
the 
prosecution 
has 
proved the 
said 
circumstance beyond reasonable doubt. 
26. Insofar as the circumstance regarding the recovery of 
the appellant’s clothes is concerned, even according to the 
prosecution, it is the appellant who had informed the police 
about the crime and he was present there. As such, the 
presence of blood-stains on his clothes cannot be said to be 
unnatural. Again, the recovery is from a place which is open 
and accessible to one and all. Same is the case with regard to 
the recovery of jewellery. In any case, the recovery 
panchnama does not show that the clothes were sealed. As 
such, the possibility of tampering cannot be ruled out. 
Insofar as the recovery of jewellery (mangalsutra) is 

concerned, the said mangalsutra was not shown either to 
Vijaykumar Kisanrao Sonpetkar (PW-5), father of deceased 
Archana or to the appellant’s sister so as to identify that the 
same belong to deceased Archana. 
27. That leaves us with the circumstance of motive. We find 
that solely on the basis of circumstance of motive, a 
conviction cannot be based. As held by this Court in the case 
of Sharad Birdhichand Sharda (supra), a suspicion, 
however strong it may be, cannot take the place of a proof 
beyond reasonable doubt. As has been held by this Court in 
the case of Sharad Birdhichand Sharda (supra), there is 
not only a grammatical but a legal distinction between “may 
be proved” and “must be or should be proved”. It is a 
primary principle that the accused “must be” and not 
merely “may be” guilty before a court can convict and every 
possible hypothesis except the guilt of the accused has to be 
ruled out. In our considered opinion, in the present case, the 
prosecution has failed to do so. We are therefore of the 
considered view that the impugned judgment and order of 
the High Court as well as the trial court are not sustainable 
in law. 

28. In the result, we pass the following order: 

The appeal is allowed; 

The judgment and order of the High Court dated 23rd 
July 2019 in Confirmation Case No. 2 of 2016 and 
the judgment and order of conviction and sentence 
dated 26th August 2016 and 31st August 2016 passed 
by the trial court in Sessions Case No.64 of 2013 are 
quashed and set aside; and 
(iii) The appellant is directed to be set at liberty if not 
required in any other case. 
29. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of....J 
(PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)