IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

Society for Enlightenment and Voluntary Action & Anr. 
…Petitioners 

Versus 
 
Union of India & Ors. 

 …Respondents 

JUDGMENT 

Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 

Table of Contents 
I. 
Background... 6 
II. 
Procedural history and submissions... 9 
III. 
A vicious cycle: socio-economic determinants and effects of child 
marriage... 14 
IV. 
A national reckoning: child marriage in India... 18 
A. The age of consent... 18 
i. 
Rukhmabai’s case... 20 
ii. 
Phulmoni Dasi’s case... 24 
B. Regulating the age of marriage... 25 
C. The Child Marriage Restraint Act 1929... 27 
V. Contemporary legal framework... 31 
A. The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act 2006... 31 
i. 
Recourse to the wedded: maintenance, residence and custody... 34 
ii. 
Penalties for child marriage... 38 
iii. Preventive measures under the PCMA... 45 
Injunctions against child marriage... 45 
Child Marriage Prohibition Officers... 49 

B. The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act 2012... 53 
C. The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act 2015... 55 
D. The Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act 2005... 59 
E. The Legal Services Authorities Act 1987... 61 
F. 
Policies formulated by the Union Government... 62 
G. States’ efforts to curb child marriage... 65 
i. 
Training schemes... 65 
ii. 
Awareness programs... 66 
iii. Financial incentives... 68 
iv. Other initiatives... 69 
v. 
Impact analysis of State schemes... 70 
VI. 
Traversing frontiers: international human rights norms... 72 
A. Universal framework... 73 
i. 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights... 73 
ii. 
Recognition in political conventions... 74 
iii. Targeted focus: the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women and the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child.... 75 
B. Regional framework... 77 
i. 
African Union... 78 
ii. 
European Union... 80 
iii. SAARC... 83 

C. Rights based framework... 84 
i. 
Right to free choice and autonomy... 86 
a. 
Right to free and informed consent... 87 
b. 
Right against gender-based violence... 89 
ii. 
Right to education... 91 
a. 
Right to primary education... 91 
b. 
Right to be informed... 92 
c. 
Right to sex education... 93 
iii. Right to development of children... 94 
VII. 
India’s obligation... 96 
VIII. 
Constitutional guarantees against child marriage... 98 
A. Right to self-determination: choice, autonomy and sexuality of 
children... 100 
B. Right to health... 105 
C. Right to childhood: education and development... 107 
D. Reiterating the States’ obligations towards combatting child marriage

IX. 
Way forward... 116 
A. Legal Enforcement... 118 
B. Judicial Measures... 122 
C. Community Involvement... 124 
D. Awareness Campaigns... 125 

E. Training/Capacity Building... 128 
F. 
Educational and Social Support... 131 
G. Monitoring and Accountability... 133 
H. Technology-Driven Initiatives for Reporting Child Marriage... 135 
I. 
Funding and Resources... 136 
X. Suggestions... 138 
XI. 
Conclusion... 140 

PART I 

“Sir, I am one of those unfortunate Hindu women, whose hard lot it is to suffer the 
unnameable miseries entailed by the custom of early marriage. This wicked 
practice has destroyed the happiness of my life. It comes between me and that 
thing which I prize above all others—study and mental cultivation. Without the least 
fault of mine I am doomed to seclusion; every aspiration of mine to rise above my 
ignorant sisters is looked upon with suspicion, and is interpreted in the most 
uncharitable manner.” 1 
~ Rukhmabai 
 
I. Background 
1. The Petitioner has approached this court under Article 32 of the Constitution to 
raise an issue which has been debated in our nation for over one and a half 
centuries. The Petitioner is an NGO that has worked extensively against child 
marriage. The Petitioner’s primary grievance is that despite the enactment of 
the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act 20062, the rate of child marriages in India 
is alarming. The Petitioner seeks to address the failure of authorities to prevent 
child marriages. The Petitioner has sought stronger enforcement mechanisms, 
awareness programs, the appointment of Child Marriage Prohibition Officers, 
and comprehensive support systems for child brides – including education, 
healthcare, and compensation, to ensure the protection and welfare of 
vulnerable minors. Accordingly, the Petitioner prays for the issuance of effective 
guidelines. 
 
1 Extracted from a letter written by Rukhmabai to the Times of India on 26 June 1885. 
2 ‘PCMA’ 

PART I 

2. Child marriage is a social evil, and its commission is a criminal offence. Despite 
the near-universal agreement on the ills of child marriage, its commission and 
prevalence have been sobering. Child marriage is the phenomenon of children 
being married before they attain the minimum legal age under the law. Globally, 
children continue – despite legal norms to the contrary – to be married before 
they reach the age of eighteen years. Patriarchy, gender inequality, poverty and 
lack of education and employment lead to child marriage.3 The UN Convention 
on the Rights of the Child regards child marriage as a violation of human rights4. 
While both sexes are inflicted with the violence of child marriages, the 
prevalence of child marriage globally among boys is one-sixth that of girls.5 
3. Elimination of child, early and forced marriages has been committed to by one 
hundred and ninety-three nations, including India under target 5.36 of the 
Sustainable Development Goals7. Section 28 of PCMA defines child marriage 
as a marriage to which either of the contracting parties is a child. Girls below 
the age of eighteen and boys below the age of twenty-one are deemed to be 
children under the PCMA.9 
 
3 UNICEF (2023). Child Marriage. https://www.unicef.org/protection/child-marriage; Anita Raj (2010). When 
the mother is a child: the impact of child marriage on the health and human rights of girls. Archives of Disease 
in Childhood, 95(11), 931. BJM Journals. 
4 United Nations (1989). Convention on the Rights of the Child. 

UNICEF 
(2019). 

Million 
Boys 
and 
Men 
Around 
the 
World 
Married 
as 
Children. https://www.unicef.org/press-releases/115-million-boys-and-men-around-world-married-children-unicef. 
6 United Nations (2015). Transforming our world: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
7 ‘SDG’ 
8 “2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “child” means a person who, if a male, has not completed twenty-one years of age, and if a 
female, has not completed eighteen years of age; 
(b) “child marriage” means a marriage to which either of the contracting parties is a child; 
(c) “contracting party”, in relation to a marriage, means either of the parties whose marriage is or is 
about to be thereby solemnised; …” 
9 Section 2(a), PCMA. 

PART I 

4. The 2019-2021 National Family Health Survey-510 pits child marriage at 23.3% 
of girls11 under the age of eighteen and 17.7% of boys12 under the age of 
twenty-one. The data is based on a survey of women aged 20-24 and men aged 
25-29. This is a reduction from the 2015-2016 NFHS-4 which showed that 
26.8% of girls and 20.3% of boys marry under the legal age of marriage. Child 
marriage has been on a steady decline in India. The prevalence of child 
marriages in India has halved since the enactment of the PCMA in 2006 from 
47% to 27% in 2015-16 and 23.3% in 2019-2021.13 The decline in child 
marriage in India is in line with the global trend. In the past decade, the 
proportion of girls married as children has dropped by 15%.14 Despite these 
enormous strides globally and in India, no region in the world is on track to attain 
the SDG-5 target.15 It is estimated that the progress in reducing child marriage 
would need to be twelve times faster than the rate observed in the past decade 
to achieve the SDG-5 target.16 
5. The term child marriage is an oxymoron. A child implies a person whose 
capacity to make legal decisions is not fully developed. On the other hand, 
marriage is an institution with legal standing. The law seeks to govern the 
legitimacy of sexual activity and marriage is the institution in which it is 
legitimised. Marriage dictates the framework rules of permissible and 
 
10 ‘NFHS-5’ 
11 Data based on the survey of women ages 20-24, NFHS-5. 
12 Data based on the survey of men ages 25-29, NFHS-5. 
13 NFHS-3, NFHS-4, NFHS-5. 
14UNICEF (2018). Child Marriage: Latest trends and future prospects. https://data.unicef.org/resources/child-
marriage-latest-trends-and-future-prospects/. 
15 Ibid. 
16 Pintu Paul (2020). Child Marriage Among Girls in India: Prevalence, Trends and Socio-Economic 
Correlates. Indian Journal of Human Development, 14(2), 304. Sage Journals. 

PART II 

impermissible social behaviours. However, a child is incapable of 
understanding the broad and serious obligations expected from members of a 
marital union. Child marriage often deprives children of intellectual, social and 
psychological development and carries life-threatening risks. It therefore comes 
as a great tragedy that the term child marriage is normalised to a point where 
this blatant paradox is lost on most people. 
II. Procedural history and submissions 
6. This Court issued notice to the Union of India on 13 April 2018. On 13 April 
2023, this Court further directed the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
to file a status report elucidating the following: 
(i) The data collected from various States bearing on the nature and extent 
of child marriages; 
(ii) Steps taken to implement the provisions of the PCMA; and 
(iii) The policies formulated by the Union government to effectuate the 
purpose. 
The Court also directed the Union to consult the States on the appointment of 
Child Marriage Prohibition Officers17 under Section 1618 of the PCMA and 
 
17 ‘CMPO’ 
18 “16. Child Marriage Prohibition Officers 
(1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint for the whole State, or 
such part thereof as may be specified in that notification, an officer or officers to be known as the Child 
Marriage Prohibition Officer having jurisdiction over the area or areas specified in the notification. 
(2) The State Government may also request a respectable member of the locality with a record of social 
service or an officer of the Gram Panchayat or Municipality or an officer of the Government or any public 
sector undertaking or an office bearer of any non-governmental organisation to assist the Child Marriage 
Prohibition Officer and such member, officer or office bearer, as the case may be, shall be bound to act 
accordingly. 

PART II 

submit a comprehensive affidavit on whether the officers appointed as CMPOs 
are given other multifarious duties. 
7. The Ministry of Women and Child Development has submitted that it has 
successfully collected data from all States and Union Territories except 
Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Manipur, Odisha, Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir and 
Lakshadweep. The data placed on record by the Ministry reflects that many 
child marriages are prevented before their solemnization. The remaining cases 
are investigated and prosecuted under the law. We shall analyse the data 
submitted by the Ministry of Women and Child Development in the course of 
this judgment. 
8. On 10 July 2024, this Court heard Ms Mugdha, learned counsel appearing on 
behalf of the Petitioner as well as Ms Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional 
Solicitor General appearing on behalf of the Union of India. While reserving the 
judgment this Court granted liberty to the Petitioner and the Union to make their 
submissions in the form of a note including suggestions on ways for the 
effective enforcement of PCMA. 
 
(3) It shall be the duty of the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer 
(a) to prevent solemnisation of child marriages by taking such action as he may deem fit; 
(b) to collect evidence for the effective prosecution of persons contravening the provisions of this 
Act; 
(c) to advise either individual cases or counsel the residents of the locality generally not to indulge 
in promoting, helping, aiding or allowing the solemnisation of child marriages; 
(d) to create awareness of the evil which results from child marriages; 
(e) to sensitised the community on the issue of child marriages; 
(f) to furnish such periodical returns and statistics as the State Government may direct; and 
(g) to discharge such other functions and duties as may be assigned to him by the State Government. 
(3) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, subject to such conditions and 
limitations, invest the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer with such powers of a police officer as may be 
specified in the notification and the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer shall exercise such powers subject 
to such conditions and limitations, as may be specified in the notification. 
(4) The Child Marriage Prohibition Officer shall have the power to move the Court for an order under 
sections 4, 5 and 13 and along with the child under section 3.” 

PART II 

9. The Petitioner has submitted that: 
(i) Data from NFHS-4 and NFHS-5 reflects that high rate of child marriages 
have been solemnised. The Petitioner submits that this can be gathered 
from the rate of adolescent pregnancies in multiple States; 
(ii) Under Section 16 of PCMA, CMPOs are empowered to prevent child 
marriages. However, findings from HAQ - Centre for Child Rights19 show 
that CMPOs are often tasked with multiple responsibilities, limiting their 
capacity to focus on child marriage prevention. Many States designate 
officials holding other substantial roles, such as Child Development Project 
Officers20 or District Welfare Officers as the CMPO. This leads to CMPOs 
prioritising their duties in the discharge of other roles – defeating the 
purpose of appointing CMPOs - as they would not have the time, monetary 
and human resources to carry out the responsibilities enumerated in the 
Act. For instance, Section 3(1) of the Mizoram Gazette mandates that the 
District Social Welfare Officer or, in their absence, the CDPO acts as the 
CMPO; 
(iii) Responses to various requests under the Right to Information Act 200521 
by all States and UTs reveal significant disparities in the appointment and 
functionality of CMPOs. Of the 36 States and UTs, only 23 responded, and 
only 14 provided substantive data. Most of the responses indicated the 
 
19 HAQ Centre for Child Rights (n.d.). Child Marriage in India: Achievements, Gaps and Challenges, 
Response to Questions for OHCHR Report on Preventing Child, Early and Forced Marriages for Twenty-
sixth Session of the Human Rights Council. 
20 ‘CDPOs’ 
21 ‘RTI’ 

PART II 

transfer of the RTI to other departments without concrete answers. 
Notably, only Haryana and Sikkim reported having exclusively appointed 
CMPOs. In contrast, other States and UTs assign these duties to already 
overburdened officers, such as District Magistrates or CDPOs, 
undermining the effectiveness of CMPOs; 
(iv) There is a discrepancy between data from the National Crime Records 
Bureau22 and information obtained from various State departments in 
response to RTIs. For example, in Rajasthan, the Department of Women 
and Child Development reported 573 and 567 incidents of child marriage 
in 2015-16 and 2016-17, respectively, despite only 576 cases being 
formally recognized by authorities in 2016-17; and 
(v) Analysis of data further reveals not only a low number of child marriage 
cases reported to the police compared to NFHS-4 data but also an 
exceptionally low conviction rate. 
10. Therefore, the Petitioner prays for directives to authorities at multiple levels to 
prevent and address child marriages, particularly during mass events, ensure 
accountability for officials who fail in this duty, and appointment of CMPOs with 
exclusive powers. They also seek collaboration with NGOs, inclusion of child 
marriage awareness in school curriculums, and comprehensive government 
support for affected child brides. 

22 ‘NCRB’ 

PART II 

11. The Union of India has submitted that: 
(i) Child marriages persist due to societal perceptions and economic 
pressures. Girls are often seen as burdens, with early marriage viewed as 
an appropriate option. Additionally, investment in a girl’s education is 
frequently regarded as wasteful, leading some families to end schooling 
early and consider marriage instead. Poverty and structural inequalities, 
including gender, caste, and class, further drive child marriages; 
(ii) The PCMA was introduced to criminalize the facilitation and solemnization 
of child marriage, aiming to deter this harmful practice. Additionally, the 
Beti Bachao Beti Padhao23 program addresses gender-based issues by 
promoting girls' education and empowerment, thereby supporting delayed 
marriage and promoting a culture that values girls’ rights and 
opportunities; 
(iii) Census data from 2001 and 2011 indicates a decrease in child marriage 
rates; 
(iv) Data from NFHS-4 shows a reduction in the percentage of women aged 
15-19 who were mothers or pregnant, from 16% in 2005-06 to 7.9% in 
2015-16. The National Commission for the Protection of Child Rights24 has 
identified 70 high-risk districts across 13 states with the highest child
 
23 ‘BBBP’ 
24 ‘NCPCR’ 

PART III 

marriage rates, and 52 of these districts are covered under the BBBP 
scheme; 
(v) Programs like the Mahila Shakti Kendra aim to reach rural women and 
girls, enhancing awareness and equipping them with knowledge on 
gender equality. The program operates District Level Centres for Women 
across 640 districts to implement initiatives that improve women’s status 
and address gender-based challenges; and 
(vi) States and Union Territories25 have also taken various measures for the 
elimination of child marriages. 
III. A vicious cycle: socio-economic determinants and effects of child marriage 
12. All child marriages are forced marriages. Many parents wish to marry their girl 
child early to guard against any aspersions on the girl’s virtue of virginity and to 
mitigate the economic costs associated with raising a child, payment of dowry 
and conducting a wedding. The economic factors of child marriage are borne 
out by studies that reflect that child marriage in India predominantly occurs in 
less educated, rural and poor families.26 Parents in such families are informed 
by a survivalist and patriarchal mindset that responds to social, cultural and 
religious norms and economic necessity. 
13. Culturally embedded concepts of virginity and chastity are used to control the 
sexuality of women by men and the family. They are not just markers of control 
 
25 ‘UTs’ 
26 Sanjay Kumar (2020). Trends, Differentials and Determinants of Child Marriage in India: Evidence from 
Large-scale Surveys. Economic & Political Weekly, 55(6), 57. 

PART III 

but are also made into identifiers of family and community honour. By placing 
an overemphasis on these constructed virtues, a false sense of protectionism 
is generated to safeguard girls against their ability of self-exploration and to 
form meaningful bonds on their own. Honour, purity, and decisional incapacity 
are presented as the domain of womanhood and its protection is laid in the 
institution of marriage. Parents marry their daughters early to meet the 
prescription of a society rooted in parochial norms of controlling a woman’s 
sexuality. While patriarchy promises respect to its adherents, it only leads to the 
subordination of women who are deprived of any meaningful avenue to develop 
their agency and exercise their autonomy. The malleability of a girl child and 
her inability to form informed opinions are looked up to as desirable qualities. 
These qualities are understood to earn her favour in the eyes of her in-laws in 
serving them as they see fit.27 In less educated, rural and poor setups, members 
of the community lack effective opportunities and life chances. Investing in the 
education and development of a girl is seen as unworthy and unrealistic. The 
lack of alternative means for education, employment and skill development for 
women also incentivises parents to give their daughters away in child marriage. 
14. Parents also believe that their daughters would be saved from pregnancy out 
of wedlock and be guarded against unsolicited advances by men if she were to 
be married early. Many marry their daughters off but delay the consummation 
of marriage till the age of puberty. A gauna ceremony is performed to mark the 
growing up of the daughter and her departure from the parental home to the 
 
27 See RC Roy (1888). Child Marriage in India. The North America Review 147(383) 415-423. University of 
Iowa. 

PART III 

marital home upon getting menses. The delay in sending a child bride to her 
marital home is informed only by the bodily development of the girl and is 
unbothered by any other consideration, such as the mental and educational 
development of the person or indeed her own choice in the matter. The 
compounding of one evil to emerge out of patriarchy with another solution 
rooted in patriarchy has the effect of culturally stunting society and depriving 
children, girls in particular, of any avenue to exit from the cycle of generational 
oppression. 
15. Notably, the very causes of child marriage ensure that members of the marital 
union and their families are stuck in the vicious cycle of social and economic 
oppression. Early marriage in girls, places a burden on them to discharge their 
duty of giving offspring to the family. Sexual activity within the marital union is 
unregulated and even encouraged. A child, forced to prove her fertility, is 
exposed to enormous health risks. Her body is mentally and physically 
unprepared for sexual engagement which is forced upon her. Girls in child 
marriage report early, frequent and unplanned pregnancies which are linked to 
increased risk of maternal and infant morbidity and mortality. 
16. Adolescent mothers are also likely to experience fistula, pregnancy 
complications and death during childbirth.28 Women married as children are 
likely to have their first child before the age of eighteen and are likely to have 
had at least three or more childbirths and a repeat childbirth in less than twenty-
 
28 Anita Raj, Niranjan Saggurti, Donta Balaiah, Jay G Silverman (2009). Prevalence of child marriage and it 
effect on fertility and fertility-control outcomes of young women in India: a cross-sectional, observational 
study. Lancet 373 1993-89. 

PART III 

four months.29 Currently, between the ages of 15 and 19, 7% of women have 
begun childbearing; 5% of women have successfully delivered, while 2% of 
women are pregnant with their first child.30 The rate of teenage pregnancy is 
higher in rural India at 8%.31 States which have reported the highest levels of 
teenage pregnancies are Tripura (22%), West Bengal (16%), Andhra Pradesh 
(13%), Assam (12%), Bihar (11%) and Jharkhand (10%).32 
17. These factors have a detrimental effect on maternal mortality and morbidity. 
Adolescent mothers are likely to develop lifelong health consequences from 
sexual encounters and childbearing. They are also more likely to be sterilized 
at an early age which is indicative of a lack of control over their choices.33 
Families after bearing the desired number of offspring, force women to undergo 
sterilization to control further reproduction in the family.34 The high rate of 
sterilization found in women married as children would also lead to more 
unprotected sex which leads to a risk of contracting sexually transmitted 
diseases. 
18. Lack of healthcare access in rural areas and for poor families may lead to further 
health complications and unsafe medical procedures including unsafe 
abortions.35 Further, women married as children are deprived of educational 
and employment opportunities thereby effacing them from public life. Education 
 
29 Ibid. 
30 NFHS-5, 116. 
31 Ibid. 
32 NFHS-5, 117. 
33 Anita Raj (2010). When the mother is a child: the impact of child marriage on the health and human rights 
of girls. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 95(11), 931. BJM Journals. 
34 Ibid. 
35 Ibid. 

PART IV 

has an inversely proportional effect on child marriage. 87% of married 
adolescent girls did not attend school.36 In India, women having twelve or more 
years of schooling tend to marry much later than other women. The median age 
at first marriage for women between the age of 25-49 increases from 17.1 years 
for women with no schooling to 22.8 years for women with twelve or more years 
of schooling.37 This is in line with studies conducted at a global level which 
reflect that child marriages are 66% lower among girls who complete secondary 
education and 80% lower among those who pursue higher education.38 
IV. A national reckoning: child marriage in India 
A. The age of consent 
19. The trajectory of child marriage in India is stubborn and persistent. It has 
travelled centuries, and its opposition seems to have only incremental 
successes each time. Still widely prevalent,39 the first movement against child 
marriage in modern India began in the latter part of the nineteenth century. 
Social reformers were trying to build public opinion against child marriage. Two 
concerns primarily animated the call against child marriages by early reformers. 
The first was the high number of early widows.40 Because the rate of mortality 
was low, many girls found themselves in widowhood in the early years of their 
lives. The second reason behind seeking child marriage reform was to protect 
 
36 Government of India (2011). Census of India 2011. 
37 NFHS-5, 208. 
38 UNICEF (2019). Evidence Review: Child Marriage interventions and research from 2020 to 2022. 
39 NFHS-5. 
40 Tahir Mahmood (1980). Marriage Age in India and Abroad – A Comparative Aspect. Journal of Indian Law 
Institute 22, 39. 

PART IV 

young wives against forcible sexual intercourse, often by their husbands who 
were significantly older.41 
20. Reformers like Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar had successfully advocated for 
widow remarriage which was hitherto believed to be impermissible under Hindu 
law. These efforts led to the enactment of the Hindu Widows’ Remarriage Act 
1856. However, the demands against child marriages were not immediately 
realised. Child marriage, an aversion to widow remarriage and the low mortality 
rate combined and morphed into a lethal destructive element in the Indian 
society.42 
21. To address the devastation caused, in particular to women and girls, social 
reformers called for raising the minimum age of consent for women in penal 
rape statutes. The idea behind the demand for raising the age of consent was 
to avoid the bodily harm inflicted on girls by their often-elderly husbands. A 
person below the age of consent could not legally consent to any sexual activity 
thereby throwing any sexual conduct within the confines of statutory rape. Such 
laws already existed in the presidency towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay 
as early as 1828.43 The laws in these presidency towns stipulated the age of 
consent for girls to be eight years and the offence of rape against a girl below 
the age of consent was punishable with death.44 In 1847, when the Law 
Commission was drafting the Indian Penal Code it decided, for the first time, to 
 
41 Jaya Sagade. Child Marriage in India: Socio-legal and human Rights Dimensions. Oxford University Press, 
2nd ed. (2012) 37. 
42 Tahir Mahmood (1980). Marriage Age in India and Abroad – A Comparative Aspect. Journal of Indian Law 
Institute 22, 39. 
43 The Joshi Committee Report, 9. 
44 Ibid. 

PART IV 

criminalise the consummation of marriage by a husband with his underage wife. 
The initial version of the Indian Penal Code 186045 stipulated the age of consent 
to be ten years and criminalised marital rape by a husband against his wife 
under the age of consent.46 
22. Raising the age of consent was seen as undue interference by the colonial 
legislature into the personal laws of Indians.47 The movement gained a 
groundswell of support because of efforts by Behramji Malabari, a journalist 
from Bombay, who began publishing his ‘notes’ in his newspaper the ‘Indian 
Spectator’ in 1884.48 He highlighted the consequences of ‘infant marriages’ and 
‘enforced widowhoods’ by recounting anecdotal accounts of victims. His 
polemical style of reporting sought to appeal to the humanity of the readers.49 
Around the same time, two cases came to the fore and exposed the evils which 
come out of child marriage. i. 
Rukhmabai’s case 
23. In 1874, at the age of eleven, Rukhmabai was married off to Dadaji Bhikaji, a 
nineteen-year-old boy who was a cousin of her step-father. Owing to his 
reformist views, Rukhmabai’s stepfather did not send her to live with Dadaji 
Bhikaji immediately upon attaining puberty. Under his guidance, Rukhmabai 
 
45 ‘IPC’ 
46 Ss. 375, 376, IPC 1860 (initial version). 
47 Tahir Mahmood (1980). Marriage Age in India and Abroad – A Comparative Aspect. Journal of Indian Law 
Institute 22, 39. 
48 Infant Marriage and Enforced Widowhood in India, Being a Collection of Opinions For and Against, 
Recorded by Mr. Behramji M. Malabari from Representative Hindu Gentlemen and Official and Other 
Authorities, Bombay (1887); Charles H. Heimsath, Indian Nationalism and Hindu Social Reform, Princeton 
University Press (1964), 151. 
49 Charles H. Heimsath, Indian Nationalism and Hindu Social Reform, Princeton University Press (1964), 
151; Geraldine Forbes, Women and Modernity: The Issue of Child Marriage in India, Women's Studies 
International Quarterly, 1979, Vol. 2, 407-419. 

PART IV 

grew fond of studying and took plenty of advantage of the rich collection of 
books he had accumulated. As Rukhmabai grew into an intelligent and forward-
thinking woman, Dadaji Bhikaji slipped into indolence. This led Rukhmabai to 
refuse to live with Dadaji.50 In 1884, Dadaji instituted a suit for restitution of 
conjugal rights. At the time, a decree for restitution of conjugal rights was 
enforceable and its violation was punishable with imprisonment. Rukhmabai 
opposed the petition on the grounds of social, economic and personal 
incompatibility with Dadaji.51 She also asserted that she had not ‘arrived at 
years of discretion’ at the time of her marriage and therefore she could not be 
bound by it.52 Justice Pinhey of the Bombay High Court dismissed the petition 
and held that Rukhmabai was married before she could consent to such a 
marriage and cannot therefore be compelled to live with her husband eleven 
years later without having cohabited in all this time. He observed that: 
“It is a misnomer to call this a suit for the restitution 
of conjugal rights. When a married couple, after 
cohabitation separate and live apart, either of them 
can bring a suit against the other for the restitution 
of conjugal rights according to the practice in 
England, and according to the later practice of the 
Courts in India. But the present suit is not of that 
character. The parties to the present suit went 
through the religious ceremony of marriage eleven 
years ago when the defendant was a child of eleven 
years of age. They have never cohabited. And now 
that the defendant is a woman of twenty-two, the 
plaintiff asks the Court to compel her to go to his 
house, that he may complete his contract with her by 
consummating the marriage, The defendant, being 
now of full age, objects to going to live with the 
 
50 Sudhir Chandra. Enslaved Daughters: Colonialism, Law and Women's Rights. Oxford University Press, 2nd 
ed (2008), Ch. 1. 
51 Jaya Sagade. Child Marriage in India: Socio-legal and human Rights Dimensions. Oxford University Press, 
2nd ed. (2012) 39. 
52 Sudhir Chandra. Enslaved Daughters: Colonialism, Law and Women's Rights. Oxford University Press, 2nd 
ed (2008), Ch. 1. 

PART IV 

plaintiff, objects to allowing him to consummate the 
marriage, objects to ratifying and completing the 
contract entered into on her behalf by her guardians 
while she was yet of tender age. It seems to me that 
it would be a barbarous, a cruel, a revolting thing 
to do to compel a young lady under those 
circumstances to go to a man whom she 
dislikes, in order that he may cohabit with her 
against her will; and I am of opinion that neither the 
law nor the practice of our Courts either justified my 
malting such an order, or even justifies the plaintiff in 
maintaining the present suit.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
24. The decision of Justice Pinhey was much ahead of its time. At a time when child 
marriage was the norm and the legal standard of consent was inapplicable to 
marital laws, Justice Pinhey’s judgment was a bold declaration of the rights of 
Indian women to make their own life choices. Unfortunately, the success was 
short-lived. The judgement had caused an uproar in the public and Dadaji filed 
an appeal before the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court. The Division 
Bench set aside the judgment of Justice Pinhey and directed Rukhmabai to join 
Dadaji within a month at the pain of penalty to undergo six months’ 
imprisonment. The court reasoned that incompatibility was no defence under 
Hindu law against a petition for restitution of conjugal rights. Firm as she was, 
Rukhmabai refused to join Dadaji and declared that she would subject herself 
to the maximum penalty admissible under the law, rather than to live with her 
husband. The sight of a Hindu woman being imprisoned shocked the public 
conscience. Dadaji entered a compromise and did not press for the execution 
of the decree for restitution of conjugal rights against an amount of Rs 2000/-. 
Rukhmabai went on to study medicine in the UK and became one of India’s 
earliest women doctors. 

PART IV 

25. Rukhmabai’s defiance was uncharacteristic for her time and threatened, not 
only child marriage but also the indomitable idea of a woman’s inferiority. Her 
assertion of womanhood and agency in refusing to go with a wayward husband 
whom she was given to in marriage opened up new ways for women to imagine 
their autonomy. Writing to the editor of the Times of India on 26 June 1885, 
under the pseudo name ‘A Hindu Lady’, Rukhmabai eloquently drew the 
differential plains on which the experiences of boys and girls in a child marriage 
are placed. She wrote: 
“The general apathy towards social improvements 
which characterizes our people has been telling 
upon the whole community, but tells most heavily 
upon the female sex. Hindu social customs do not 
entail on men half the difficulties which they entail 
upon women. Excepting the two principal difficulties 
resulting from infant marriage, they enjoy full mental 
and physical freedom. Religion or social custom 
does not, in any way, interfere with their liberty. 
Marriage does not interpose any insuperable 
obstacle in the course of their studies. They can 
marry not only a second wife, on the death of the 
first, but have the right of marrying any number of 
wives at one and the same time, or any time they 
please. If married early, they are not called upon to 
go to the house and to submit to the tender mercies 
of a mother-in-law; nor is any restraint put upon their 
actions because of their marriage. But the case with 
women is the very reverse of this. If the girl is married 
at the age of eight (as most of them are), her parents 
are at liberty to send her to school till she is ten years 
old; but, if they wish to continue her at school longer, 
they must obtain the express permission of the girl’s 
mother-in-law. But even in these advanced times, 
and 
even 
in 
Bombay—the 
chief 
centre 
of 
civilization—how many mothers-in-law are there 
who send their daughters to school after they are ten 
years old!”53 
 
53 Extracted from a letter written by Rukhmabai to the Times of India on 26 June 1885. 

PART IV 

26. While Rukhmabai’s case ultimately witnessed an out of court settlement and 
her freedom, another case around the same time jolted the conscience of the 
Indian society. ii. 
Phulmoni Dasi’s case 
27. In 1889, Phulmoni Dasi was married off at the age of eleven years to a thirty-
five-year-old man. At age eleven years and three months, she was subjected 
to marital rape by her husband, Hari Maiti. She succumbed to haemorrhage 
from a rupture of the vagina caused by her husband.54 The Court ruled that the 
law of rape was inapplicable because Phulmani had reached her tenth birthday 
and was married to Hari. The coverage of the case as well as the trial cast a 
male medical gaze over the body of the deceased victim. Even after her death, 
she was subjected to scrutiny to determine her true age and growth. Questions 
of her immaturity and puberty were not sought as an ornate way to bring her 
husband to justice but were rather asked to defend him. 
28. The gruesome case of Phulmani galvanised support for Malabari’s campaign 
to raise the age of consent. Phulmani’s case silenced the opposition among 
those who had opposed any legislative intervention as a colonial interference 
in the private sphere and practices.55 The death of Phulmani also cut through 
the lethargy of a colonial bureaucracy which was reluctant to intervene in 
 
54 Jaya Sagade. Child Marriage in India: Socio-legal and human Rights Dimensions. Oxford University Press, 
2nd ed. (2012) 37. 
55 Ratna Kapur & Brenda Cossman (1996). Subversive Sites: Feminist Engagements with Law in India. Sage 
Publications 49-50; Charles H. Heimsath (1964). Indian Nationalism and Hindu Social Reform. Princeton 
University Press 163-165. 

PART IV 

matters of religion.56 The law member of the Viceroy’s Legislative Council, 
Andrew Scoble, prominently used Phulmani’s case to advocate for raising the 
age of consent by enacting his Bill, namely, the Age of Consent Bill. The Bill 
was an amendment to the IPC and raised the age of consent from ten years to 
twelve years. The Age of Consent Act was passed in 1891. The marital rape 
exception had come to the defence of Hari. Raising the age of consent by two 
years meant that any sexual intercourse with a girl under the age of twelve 
would be statutory rape regardless of the marital status of the aggressor with 
the victim. 
B. Regulating the age of marriage 
29. In 1921, the League of Nations held a conference on the trafficking of women 
and recommended raising the age of consent to twenty-one years for girls. In 
1922, Bakshi Sohanlal unsuccessfully tried to raise the age of consent to 14 by 
introducing a Bill. Bills that sought to raise the age of consent were introduced 
and thrown out regularly for five years thereafter. Among these bills was an Age 
of Marriage Bill which was sought to be introduced by Ranglal Jajodia in 1924 
in the Legislative Assembly.57 The Bill prescribed a minimum age before which 
no marriage could take place. This was a shift from the approach taken by other 
reformers and legislators of not interfering with the age of marriage but to 
merely protect girls from forced sex by raising the age of consent in penal laws. 
While this Bill was never introduced, a similar Bill was introduced by Haribilas 
 
56 Ishita Pande (2020). Sex, Law, and the Politics of Age Child Marriage in India, 1891–1937. Cambridge 
University Press 32. 
57 Joshi Committee Report, 15; Also see Tahir Mahmood (1980). Marriage Age in India and Abroad – A 
Comparative Aspect. Journal of Indian Law Institute 22, 41. 

PART IV 

Sarda in 1927 after another failed attempt to raise the age of consent by Hari 
Singh Gour. The ‘Sarda Bill’ was circulated widely to attract opinions. The 
Select Committee altered various provisions, and the Government eventually 
appointed the Age of Consent Committee under the chairmanship of MV Joshi. 
The consideration of the Sarda Bill was postponed till the report of the Joshi 
Committee was received.58 
30. The terms of reference of the Joshi Committee did not include the examination 
of the age of marriage. However, the committee found it impossible to delink 
the question of marriage age with the question of age of consent for 
cohabitation.59 The committee heard over twelve hundred oral witnesses out of 
which one hundred and thirty four witnesses strongly opposed any law 
regulating the age of marriage. The committee submitted its report dated 20 
June 1929. It recommended that the age of consent be raised to fifteen years 
under penal statutes as well as the enactment of a law which penalizes 
marriage below the age of fourteen years.60 The committee was of the opinion 
that it would be easier to regulate the age of marriage by law than to regulate 
the consummation of marriage after it had already taken place. The committee 
reasoned that marriage was an act of public knowledge and many persons had 
a chance to notice the age of the couple. Its visibility would allow for its 
regulation. It was also thought that regulating marriages would avoid the 
 
58 Joshi Committee Report, 8. 
59 Ibid, 8. 
60 Ibid, 196. 

PART IV 

irritation that would follow from the strict regulatory interference of 
consummation within a marital union.61 
31. After much debate, the Sarda Bill was enacted as the Child Marriage Restraint 
Act 1929 and received the assent of the Governor-General on 1 October 1929 
and was to come into force on 1 April 1930 throughout British India. The Act 
applied to all religions. The Act continued to govern the law on the age of 
marriage till Parliament enacted the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act 2006. 
C. The Child Marriage Restraint Act 1929 
32. The law in colonial times had cast a male gaze upon the women and girls of 
India. It did so by making women the object of the legislation but never its 
spectator. Women and their bodies were made a subject of legislation without 
any meaningful attempt to attract the perspectives of women, their experiences 
or their desires. The law did not concern itself with issues of autonomy, agency 
and individualised dignity of a woman. This had been manifested from the days 
of the reform movement on the age of consent laws. As Dr Jaya Sagade argues 
in her book Child Marriage in India: Socio-legal and Human Rights Dimensions, 
the law on consent was nailed purely to the physical capability of women and 
alien from their aspirations or choices. She states that: 
“It is unfortunate that all opinions agreed on a 
definition of consent that was nailed to a purely 
physical capability, entirely dissociated from free 
issues like choice of partner, sexual, emotional, or 
mental compatibility or other social considerations 
such as the girl’s personal development. Consent 
was made into a biological category, a stage when 
 
61 Ibid, 174, para 379. 

PART IV 

the female body was ready to accept sexual 
penetration without 
serious 
harm. 
The 
only 
difference lay in when this stage was reached.”62 
 
33. The Child Marriage Restraint Act 192963 was a first to cover all children – male 
and female – within its gamut. The age of consent laws was enacted through a 
clause in the penal rape statutes which only sought to legislate on girls. The 
CMRA on the other hand was applicable to both boys and girls. 
34. Section 2(a) of the CMRA stipulated that a “child” means a person who, if male, 
is below the age of eighteen, and if female, is below the age of fourteen. Section 
2(d) defined a “minor” to be any person below the age of eighteen. All marriages 
in which either of the parties was a ‘child’ under Section 2(a) was stipulated to 
be a “child marriage” under Section 2(b). The CMRA stipulated that child 
marriage is an offence punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend 
to one month or a fine of one thousand rupees or both. Grooms between the 
ages of eighteen and twenty-one were to be punished only with a fine and no 
imprisonment could be awarded to them. The CMRA originally did not allow for 
the punishment of a ‘child’ for the offence of child marriage. The Act only 
penalised child marriages which had already taken place. However, it did not 
stipulate any provision for the prevention of child marriage. 
35. In 1938, the CMRA was amended to stipulate that a court may issue an 
injunction prohibiting a child marriage from taking place. However, before 
 
62 Jaya Sagade. Child Marriage in India: Socio-legal and human Rights Dimensions. Oxford University Press, 
2nd ed. (2012) 41. 
63 ‘CMRA’ 

PART IV 

issuing such an injunction, the court was required to give prior notice to the 
person sought to be injuncted as well as an opportunity to show cause against 
the issuance of the injunction.64 The CMRA further underwent substantive 
amendments in 1949. 
36. The amendment increased the age for a girl child to fifteen years and increased 
penalties for all categories of offenders. A chart of all the penalties under the 
CMRA and its amendments is produced below: 
Offender 
Penalty under the 
Original CMRA 
1949 Amendment 
Groom between the ages of 
18-21 
Fine of upto Rs 1,000/- 
Simple imprisonment upto 
15 days or/and a fine upto Rs 
1,000/- 
Groom above the age of 21 
Simple imprisonment upto 1 
month or/and fine upto Rs 
1,000/- 
Simple imprisonment upto 3 
months and fine 
One 
who 
knowingly 
performs, conducts or directs 
child marriage 
Simple imprisonment upto 1 
month or/and fine upto Rs 
1,000/- 
Simple imprisonment upto 3 
months and fine 
One who, being in charge of 
a minor – promotes, permits 
or failed to prevent the child 
marriage 
Simple imprisonment upto 1 
month or/and fine upto Rs 
1,000/- 
Simple imprisonment upto 3 
months and fine 
One who knowingly violates 
an injunction against a child 
marriage 
Imprisonment 
of 
either 
description 
upto 
three 
months or/and fine upto Rs 
1,000/- 
Imprisonment 
of 
either 
description 
upto 
three 
months or/and fine upto Rs 
1,000/- 
 
37. None of these offences were cognizable in nature. The offences under the 
CMRA were only made party cognizable through an amendment in 1978. 
Accordingly, the offences under the CMRA were to be treated as cognizable for 
(i) the purpose of investigation, and (ii) for the purpose of matters other than (a) 
 
64 Section 12, CMRA. 

PART IV 

Section 42 of CrPC and (b) the arrest of a person without a warrant or without 
an order of the Magistrate. By the same amendment, Parliament also raised the 
age of marriage to eighteen years for girls and twenty-one years for boys. This 
time too, legislative intervention was largely animated by a concern for 
population control rather than the autonomy or agency of children. The 
Statement of Objects and Reasons expressly stated the intent behind the 
amendment. It states as follows: 
“Prefatory 
Note-Statement 
of 
Objects 
and 
Reasons. The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929, 
was enacted with a view to prevent child marriages, 
namely, a marriage to which either of the contracting 
parties is under a specified age. Originally, the age 
limit for a male was eighteen years and for a female 
fourteen years. The age limit was subsequently 
raised in the case of females from fourteen to fifteen 
by the Amending Act 41 of 1949. Violation of the 
provisions of the Act is made punishable. 
 
2.⁠ ⁠The question of increasing the minimum age 
of marriage for males and females has been 
considered in the present context when there is 
an urgent need to check the growth of population 
in the country. Such increase of the minimum 
age of marriage will result in lowering the total 
fertility rate on account of letter span of married 
life. It will also result in more responsible 
parenthood and in better health of the mother 
and child. A Bill introduced for this purpose in the 
Lok Sabha on 25th August, 1976, lapsed with the 
dissolution of the Lok on 18th January, 1977. The 
matter has examined in all its aspects again. 
 
3.⁠ ⁠The Bill seeks to amend the Child Marriage 
Restraint Act, 1929, to increase the minimum age of 
marriage from fifteen to sixteen for females and from 
eighteen to twenty-one for males and to make 
consequential amendments in the Hindu Marriage 
Act, 1955, and the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 

PART V 

1872. It is also being provided that offences under 
the Child Marriage Restraint Act may be investigated 
upon by a police officer under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure as if it were a cognizable offence. The 
police officer shall, however, not have the power to 
arrest without a warrant or an order of a Magistrate.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
38. The CMRA did not stipulate that child marriages would be void, voidable or 
invalid. It did not affect the validity of child marriages and did not prohibit the 
marriage of a girl to an old man. This remained unchanged till Parliament 
repealed the CMRA and enacted the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act 2006. 
V. Contemporary legal framework 
A. The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act 2006 
39. The National Commission for Women65 in its annual report for the year 1995-
1996 proposed to amend the CMRA. It proposed that (i) the government should 
appoint Child Marriage Prevention Officers; (ii) punishments under CMRA be 
made more stringent; (iii) child marriages be declared void; (iv) a penal 
obligation be imposed on anyone attending a child marriage; and (v) all offences 
under the CMRA must be made cognizable without any qualification.66 The 
NCW further recommended that systematic efforts to spread awareness about 
the evils of child marriage be carried out.67 
40. In 2001-2002, the National Human Rights Commission68 released its annual 
report which inter alia reviewed the CMRA. The NHRC proposed certain 
 
65 ‘NCW’ 
66 Annual Report 1995-1996, National Commission for Women, 3. 
67 Annual Report 1995-1996, National Commission for Women, 3. 
68 ‘NHRC’ 

PART V 

amendments to the CMRA to (i) provide for higher penalties for violation of the 
CMRA; (ii) stipulate action against organisers or associations who organise 
child marriages at a mass scale; (iii) make child marriages voidable at the 
instance of the minor party within two years of the party attaining the age of 
majority; (iv) provide for the maintenance of a minor girl by her husband or 
guardian till she remarries; and (v) stipulate for the return of all dowry and gifts 
exchanged during the child marriage.69 The report also stressed on the need to 
initiate social action by networking with NGOs in the areas where child 
marriages were prevalent in order to sensitize community leaders against such 
marriages.70 
41. On the basis of the two reports, the Government of India consulted the States 
and the Union Territories. Accordingly, the Parliament decided to repeal the 
CMRA and enact the PCMA. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the 
PCMA stated the salient features of the Act as follows: 
“4. The salient features of the Bill are as follows:– 

To make a provision to declare child marriage 
as voidable at the option of the contracting 
party to the marriage, who was a child. 

To provide a provision requiring the husband 
or, if he is a minor at the material time, his 
guardian to pay maintenance to the minor girl 
until her remarriage. 

To make a provision for the custody and 
maintenance 
of 
children 
born 
of 
child 
marriages 

To provide that notwithstanding a child 
marriage has been annulled by a decree of 
 
69 Annual Report 2001-2002, National Human Rights Commission, 50-51, 336-348. 
70 Annual Report 2001-2002, National Human Rights Commission, 51. 

PART V 

nullity under the proposed section 3, every child 
born of such marriage, whether before or after 
the 
commencement 
of 
the 
proposed 
legislation, shall be legitimate for all purposes. 

To empower the district court to add to, modify 
or revoke any order relating to maintenance of 
the female petitioner and her residence and 
custody or maintenance of children, etc. 

To make a provision for declaring the child 
marriage as void in certain circumstances. 

To empower the courts to issue injunctions 
prohibiting solemnisation of marriages in 
contravention of the provisions of the proposed 
legislation. 

To make the offences under the proposed 
legislation to be cognizable for the purposes of 
investigation and for other purposes. 

To provide for appointment of Child Marriage 
Prevention Officers by the State Government. 

To empower the State Governments to make 
rules for effective administration of the 
legislation. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.” 
 
42. The PCMA retained the age of marriage as twenty-one for males and eighteen 
for females.71 The Act provides for governing parties to a child marriage after 
its commission, punitive measures against offenders of the Act as well as 
provisions for the prevention of child marriage. We shall analyse the scheme of 
the PCMA in three parts. In Part i, we shall analyse the provisions that seek to 
protect women married as girls as well as children born in child marriages 
(Sections 3 to 8 of the PCMA). Having analysed the remedies of parties upon 
the commission of a child marriage, we shall analyse the provisions which 
 
71 Section 2(a), PCMA. 

PART V 

penalise the commission of child marriages in Part ii. Lastly, in Part iii we shall 
analyse the provisions which are aimed at preventing child marriages. i. 
Recourse to the wedded: maintenance, residence and custody 
43. The PCMA prescribes that a petition under the Act may be filed before a district 
court having jurisdiction over the place where (i) the defendant resides; or (ii) 
the child resides; or (iii) the marriage was solemnized; or (iv) the parties last 
resided together; or (v) the petitioner is residing at the time of filing the petition. 
Such a court shall have jurisdiction to deal and decree the following reliefs: 
(i) to annul the marriage and issue a decree of nullity under Section 3 of the 
PCMA; 
(ii) to provide for maintenance and residence to the female contracting party 
to a child marriage under Section 4; and 
(iii) for the custody and maintenance of children of a child marriage under 
Section 5. 
44. The PCMA diverges from the CMRA in its approach towards the validity of child 
marriages as well as its enforcement. The PCMA prescribes that a child 
marriage is voidable at the instance of the contracting party who was a child at 
the time of the marriage.72 Section 3 stipulates that a petition for annulling a 
child marriage by a decree of nullity may be filed before the district court. Such 
a person must exercise the right to file the petition within two years of attaining 
 
72 Section 3, PCMA. 

PART V 

the age of majority.73 In case the party is still a minor, the petition may be filed 
by their guardians or next friend along with the CMPO.74 In addition to entitling 
the minor contracting party to a child marriage to a decree of nullity, it also 
requires the district court to direct both parties to the marriage to return all 
money, valuables, ornaments and other articles exchanged as gifts at the time 
of marriage.75 In doing so, the district court must afford an opportunity to the 
parties against whom the order of returning gifts is made.76 
45. The PCMA further empowers the district court to provide for the maintenance 
and residence of the female contracting party to the child marriage. The court 
may pass an interim or final order directing the grant of maintenance to the 
female contracting party by the male contracting party.77 Where the male 
contracting party is a minor, the court may issue a direction to his parents or 
guardians to maintain the female contracting party.78 The court may grant such 
a relief till the female contracting party remarries.79 In computing the amount of 
maintenance, the court shall have regard to the needs of the child, the lifestyle 
enjoyed by the child during marriage and the means of income of the paying 
party.80 Clause (4) of Section 4 empowers the district court to make a suitable 
order for the residence of the female contracting party to a child marriage who 
files an annulment petition. 
 
73 Section 3(3), PCMA. 
74 Section 3(2), PCMA. 
75 Section 3(4), PCMA. 
76 Section 3(4), PCMA. 
77 Section 4(1), PCMA. 
78 Section 4(1), PCMA. 
79 Section 4(1), PCMA. 
80 Section 4(2), PCMA. 

PART V 

46. Section 5 of the PCMA provides for the custody and maintenance of children of 
child marriages. The PCMA is oriented on the universal principal of child law, 
which is that the welfare and beneficial interest of the child has to be paramount. 
The provision governs the custody of the child, the visitation rights of parents 
as well as the maintenance of a child born from a child marriage. The district 
court is empowered to make an order as to the custody of a child born from a 
child marriage81 keeping in mind the welfare and best interest of the child.82 The 
court may also pass an order granting the other party access to the child in a 
manner that serves its best interest.83 The child or its parents or guardians may 
also be awarded maintenance by the court.84 Therefore, the PCMA has sought 
to ensure the upkeep and protection of women and children in families which 
emerge from a child marriage. 
47. One of the critiques against rendering child marriages void is that women and 
children would lose the protective shield of the law, which accrues to them 
under a valid marriage. The PCMA has repelled this criticism by specifically 
providing for the maintenance of women and children in a child marriage 
notwithstanding a decree of nullity being granted under Section 3 of the Act. 
The Act further protects a child born from a child marriage by declaring that 
such a child, begotten or conceived of a child marriage, shall be deemed 
legitimate for all purposes under the law.85 
 
81 Section 5(1), PCMA. 
82 Section 5(2), PCMA. 
83 Section 5(3), PCMA. 
84 Section 5(4), PCMA. 
85 Section 6, PCMA. 

PART V 

48. The maintenance of women and children has been a feature of our family laws. 
It recognises the inherent maldistribution of economic resources and life 
opportunities between men and women. It further recognises the innocence of 
the children who end up in broken families due to no fault of theirs. The status 
of these universally recognised vulnerable persons is further made tragic in a 
child marriage because all child marriages are forced marriages. Children are 
made to enter into matrimony before arriving at the age of intelligent consent 
and are often unaware of the responsibilities, duties and rights which accrue to 
members of the marital union in the eyes of the law as well as society. When 
the party to a child marriage ends up in a situation which is not of their making, 
the vulnerability of the child born from such marriage is heightened. 
49. In Union of India v. VR Tripathi86, a two-Judge Bench of this Court speaking 
through one of us (DY Chandrachud, J) has opined that the legitimacy of a child 
is a matter of the dignity of the child. When the law recognises a child as 
legitimate, it aims to shield the child from the legal fallout of illegitimacy as well 
as the social stigma attached to illegitimate children. It is impermissible to treat 
children of void marriages, who are statutorily legitimate, as illegitimate. Section 
6 of the PCMA therefore serves to afford dignity to children born to parents who 
had entered into a child marriage. A decree of nullity of marriage passed under 
Section 3 shall not affect the legitimacy of the child born from such a marriage. 
50. Section 7 of the PCMA allows the district court to add to, modify or revoke any 
order which it passes on the maintenance, residency of the woman or the 
 
86 (2019). 

PART V 

custody and maintenance of the child born from a child marriage based on 
change in circumstances. Such a change in the order of the court may be made 
at any time, either during the pendency of the petition or after it has been 
disposed of. 
51. These provisions seek to safeguard the interest of the vulnerable stakeholders 
involved in a child marriage, namely, a child bride and any child born from a 
child marriage. Parliament, having safeguarded these rights has further 
stipulated punishments for violation of the PCMA and solemnization of child 
marriages. ii. 
Penalties for child marriage 
52. The PCMA prescribes punishment for three classes of persons, namely, (i) an 
adult groom in a child marriage,87 (ii) persons involved in the solemnization of 
child marriage88 and (iii) persons who promote or permit the solemnization of 
child marriage.89 The maximum punishment prescribed for all three classes is 
rigorous imprisonment of two years and a fine of rupees one lakh. Unlike many 
social legislations, the PCMA does not prescribe a mandatory minimum 
punishment for committing an offence under the Act. The effect of this is that a 
judge would be at liberty to nominally punish the accused who are convicted 
under the Act. The non-prescription of a minimum mandatory sentence has led 
to ineffective enforcement of the PCMA. 
 
87 Section 9, PCMA. 
88 Section 10, PCMA. 
89 Section 11, PCMA. 

PART V 

53. Section 15 of the PCMA stipulates that all offences under the Act are cognizable 
and non-bailable. This is a deviation from CMRA which initially did not make the 
offence of child marriage cognizable. The effect of this was to make the 
prevention of child marriage entirely contingent on the private initiative of 
citizens to file a complaint before the magistrate and be examined under oath. 
The CMRA also initially required a security bond to be executed by the 
complainant to sustain their bona fides. This requirement made the 
enforcement of the Act illusory. The requirement of executing a mandatory 
security bond was eliminated by the Child Marriage Restraint (Second 
Amendment) Act 1938. The offences under the CMRA were further made 
partially cognizable through an amendment in 1978. Section 15 of PCMA is 
therefore a welcome step which aims to better enforce the Act. 
54. Section 9 of the PCMA prescribes that a man above the age of eighteen, who 
enters into a marriage with a minor girl is liable to be punished with rigorous 
imprisonment which may extend to two years or with a fine which may extend 
to one lakh rupees or both. The court is accordingly empowered to penalise an 
accused under Section 9 with imprisonment or a fine or both. The court is at 
liberty to exercise its options of imposing punishment based on the gravity of 
the offence, the circumstance of the marriage and the socio-economic power of 
the male over his child bride. In many instances, the marriage between a child 
bride and aged groom occurs at the instance of the groom incentivising the 
family of the girl to marry her off. The provision deals with such situations but 
also recognises the relative lack of involvement of a man who may be a young 
adult and enters into matrimony with a minor. The option of imprisonment and 

PART V 

fine is a deviation from the other two penal provisions in the PCMA which 
mandate both, a fine and imprisonment, to be imposed on guilty convicts. The 
rationale of this option is to allow the judge a degree of latitude in assessing the 
culpability of the groom under Section 9 and impose a proportionate criminal 
sentence. 
55. Despite the age of majority for a man to enter into a marriage being prescribed 
as twenty-one under Section 2(a) of the Act, his criminal liability for entering into 
a child marriage with a minor woman begins at eighteen. Therefore, two 
positions of law emerge from Section 9. First, a woman, regardless of her age 
is not liable for entering into a child marriage. Second, a man above the age of 
eighteen but under the age of twenty one is liable for marrying a girl who is 
under the age of eighteen. The legislative intent behind making a groom liable 
for entering child marriage is to recognise the relative control of the agency that 
a groom may have in relation to his marriage as opposed to a girl. 
56. In Hardev Singh v. Harpreet Kaur90 the appellant was under the age of twenty-
one and had married a woman who was twenty-three years old. The High Court 
of Punjab and Haryana directed an FIR to be registered under Section 9 of the 
PCMA against the wife for entering into a marriage with a man who was a minor 
under the PCMA. A two-Judge bench of this Court set aside the judgment of 
the High Court and held that the PCMA does not prescribe any punishment for 
an adult woman who marries a male child. This Court held that the Act 
recognises women as a vulnerable class and seeks to punish adult men who 
 
90 (2020). 

PART V 

marry child brides. The Court further rejected the literal interpretation of Section 
9 which would make a man between the ages of eighteen and twenty one who 
marries an adult woman liable for child marriage. Therefore, no child as defined 
in Section 2(a) of the PCMA is liable under Section 9 for marrying an adult 
person. 
57. Section 10 of PCMA stipulates that a person who performs, conducts, directs 
or abets any child marriage shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment which 
may extend to two years and shall be liable to a fine which may extend to one 
lakh rupees. The provision, unlike Section 9, does not allow the court to choose 
the option of imposing a fine or sentencing a term of imprisonment or both. A 
court adjudicating under Section 10 is mandated to impose a sentence of 
imprisonment as well as impose a fine. 
58. The provision is expansive and would govern any accomplice to the 
commission of child marriage. This would include the priest who performs the 
marriage, any family member, relative or person at whose direction the 
marriage takes place or anyone who abets it. The provision stipulates a defence 
available to any accused under Section 10 which is that a person must 
demonstrate that he had reasonable belief that the marriage was not a child 
marriage. The inbuilt defence stipulated in the provision is to safeguard any 
person who may unwittingly become a part of the commission of the offence of 
child marriage. 

PART V 

59. Section 11 of the PCMA is a catchall provision against the promotion or 
permitting of child marriage by those in charge of a minor party to the marriage. 
The provision reads as follows: 
“11. Punishment for promoting or permitting 
solemnisation of child marriages.— 
(1) Where a child contracts a child marriage, any 
person having charge of the child, whether as parent 
or guardian or any other person or in any other 
capacity, lawful or unlawful, including any member of 
an organisation or association of persons who does 
any act to promote the marriage or permits it to be 
solemnised, or negligently fails to prevent it from 
being 
solemnised, 
including 
attending 
or 
participating in a child marriage, shall be punishable 
with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two 
years and shall also be liable to fine which may 
extend up to one lakh rupees: Provided that no 
woman shall be punishable with imprisonment. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, it shall be 
presumed, unless and until the contrary is proved, 
that where a minor child has contracted a marriage, 
the person having charge of such minor child has 
negligently failed to prevent the marriage from being 
solemnised.” 
 
60. Section 11 stipulates that any person having charge of the child – who promotes 
or permits a child marriage or fails to prevent it – is liable to rigorous 
imprisonment which may extend to two years and a fine which may extend to 
one lakh rupees. Similar to the provision under Section 10 of the PCMA, Section 
11 also prescribes a mandate to the sentencing court to impose a sentence of 
imprisonment as well as a fine. The provision uses the word ‘and’ between the 
two punishments and the judge does not have the liberty to pick a certain 
punishment to the exclusion of the other. The person liable under Section 11 
may be the parents of the child or a guardian or any other person or 

PART V 

organisation. Further, the means by which a person may have the charge of the 
child is immaterial as the provision stipulates that the charge may be ‘lawful or 
unlawful’. The section seeks to penalise any person or organisation involved in 
a child marriage. Its expansive scope allows for the prosecution of any person 
who may have unlawfully taken the custody of a child and thereafter promoted, 
permitted or failed to prevent the child marriage. Section 11 also deals with 
organisations, such as orphanages or schools or hostels, which may have the 
charge of a child and under whose watch the child is married off. 
61. The intention of the provision is to place an obligation on any person who has 
the charge of a child to ensure that the offence of child marriage is not 
committed. The provision not only penalises the active participation of the 
person having charge of a child but also penalises the omission on the part of 
such a person to prevent child marriage. The provision recognises that children 
lack the ability to form intelligent consent and may not necessarily know the full 
ambit of the activity which they are about to commit. Further, children may lack 
the ability and grit to defend themselves and refuse to participate in the 
marriage against the pleasure of their custodians or parents. 
62. Clause (2) of Section 11 raises a presumption. It stipulates that any person, 
who is in charge of a child who was married off, is presumed to have negligently 
failed to prevent the child marriage. The presumption is a rebuttable one and 
may be defended if the person proves that he could not have prevented the 
marriage or failed at preventing it, having tried to do so to the best of their ability. 
This principle is only applicable to an offence under Section 11. 

PART V 

63. Having stipulated penal provisions for the commission of child marriage in 
Sections 9, 10 and 11, the PCMA further stipulates that any child marriage 
which occurs as a result of another criminal act is void ab initio.91 Section 12 
stipulates three instances in which the marriage of a child is null and void. These 
instances are where a minor child – 
(i) is taken or enticed out of the keeping of the lawful guardian;92 or 
(ii) compelled by force or by any deceitful means induced to go from any 
place;93 or 
(iii) is sold for the purpose of marriage; and made to go through a form of 
marriage or if the minor is married after which the minor is sold or trafficked 
or used for immoral purposes.94 
64. Section 12 provides that the marriage in these instances is non est in law and 
has no legal standing from its inception. The declaration of the provision is 
mandatory and removes the option from the hands of the party to consent to 
the marriage after its commission. Therefore, all marriages done by taking or 
enticing a child, compelling by force or deceit or selling are void. Section 12(c) 
further stipulates that where a child marriage occurs and after the marriage, the 
minor is sold or trafficked or used for immoral purposes is void. Therefore, even 
when the commission of marriage was not through force or deceit the marriage 
 
91 Section 12, PCMA. 
92 Section 12(a), PCMA. 
93 Section 12(b), PCMA. 
94 Section 12(c), PCMA. 

PART V 

would be void from the inception based on the acts performed after the marriage 
takes place. iii. 
Preventive measures under the PCMA 
65. The PCMA seeks to eliminate child marriages by deterrence and prevention. 
The Act designed the preventive measures in two ways, i.e., (i) by an injunction 
against the commission of child marriage, and (ii) by the appointment of 
CMPOs. We shall analyse the scheme of the PCMA in regard to both of these 
aspects below. 
Injunctions against child marriage 
66. Sections 13 and 14 of the PCMA deal with injunctions against child marriage. 
Section 13 reads as follows: 
“13. 
Power of 
court 
to 
issue 
injunction 
prohibiting child marriages.— 
(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in this Act, if, on an application of the Child 
Marriage Prohibition Officer or on receipt of 
information through a complaint or otherwise from 
any person, a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or 
a Metropolitan Magistrate is satisfied that a child 
marriage in contravention of this Act has been 
arranged or is about to be solemnised, such 
Magistrate shall issue an injunction against any 
person including a member of an organisation or an 
association of persons prohibiting such marriage. 
(2) A complaint under sub-section (1) may be made 
by any person having personal knowledge or reason 
to believe, and a non-governmental organisation 
having reasonable information, relating to the 
likelihood of taking place of solemnisation of a child 
marriage or child marriages. 

PART V 

(3) The Court of the Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class or the Metropolitan Magistrate may also take 
suo motu cognizance on the basis of any reliable 
report or information. 
(4) For the purposes of preventing solemnisation of 
mass child marriages on certain days such as 
Akshaya Trutiya, the District Magistrate shall be 
deemed to be the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer 
with all powers as are conferred on a Child Marriage 
Prohibition Officer by or under this Act. 
(5) The District Magistrate shall also have additional 
powers to stop or prevent solemnisation of child 
marriages and for this purpose, he may take all 
appropriate measures and use the minimum force 
required. 
(6) No injunction under sub-section (1) shall be 
issued against any person or member of any 
organisation or association of persons unless the 
Court has previously given notice to such person, 
members of the organisation or association of 
persons, as the case may be, and has offered him or 
them an opportunity to show cause against the issue 
of the injunction: 
Provided that in the case of any urgency, the Court 
shall have the power to issue an interim injunction 
without giving any notice under this section. 
(7) An injunction issued under sub-section (1) may 
be confirmed or vacated after giving notice and 
hearing the party against whom the injunction was 
issued. 
(8) The Court may either on its own motion or on the 
application of any person aggrieved, rescind or alter 
an injunction issued under sub-section (1). 
(9) Where an application is received under sub-
section (1), the Court shall afford the applicant an 
early opportunity of appearing before it either in 
person or by an advocate and if the Court, after 
hearing the applicant rejects the application wholly 
or in part, it shall record in writing its reasons for so 
doing. 
(10) Whoever knowing that an injunction has been 
issued under sub-section (1) against him disobeys 
such 
injunction 
shall 
be 
punishable 
with 

PART V 

imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to two years or with fine which may 
extend to one lakh rupees or with both: 
Provided that no woman shall be punishable with 
imprisonment.” 
67. A Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case 
may be, is empowered to issue an injunction order if they are satisfied that a 
child marriage has been arranged or is about to be solemnised.95 The judge 
may issue such an order based on information that may be received as a 
complaint or otherwise. The person who complains to the judge must have 
personal knowledge or reason to believe that a child marriage is likely to 
occur.96 In case the complainant is a non-governmental organisation, they must 
have reasonable information, relating to the likelihood of the taking place of or 
solemnisation of a child marriage or child marriages. The injunction order may 
be issued against any person or association of persons.97 However, the court 
must issue notice to such person, members of the organisation or association 
of persons, as the case may be, and offer them an opportunity to show cause 
against the issuance of an injunction.98 The court may eschew from this 
requirement only if it is expedient or urgent for the court to act, in which case 
an interim injunction may be issued. 
68. A Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case 
may be, is also empowered to take suo moto cognizance of the commission of 
a child marriage based on a reliable report or information.99 The PCMA also 
 
95 Section 13(1), PCMA. 
96 Section 13(2), PCMA. 
97 Section 13(1), PCMA. 
98 Section 13(6), PCMA. 
99 Section 13(3), PCMA. 

PART V 

gives the judge associated powers in addition to the power to issue an 
injunction. These include the power to (i) confirm or vacate the injunction;100 (ii) 
rescind or alter an injunction;101 and (iii) reject the application for injunction 
wholly or in part by a speaking order.102 The punishment for disobeying an 
injunction issued under Section 13 of the PCMA is imprisonment which may 
extend to two years or a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or both.103 
However, no woman can be sentenced to imprisonment for violating an 
injunction order under Section 13. Any marriage solemnized in violation of an 
injunction order passed under the PCMA is void ab initio as per Section 14 of 
the PCMA. 
69. In addition to the power of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a 
Metropolitan Magistrate to issue injunctions, Section 13 also stipulates the role 
of the District Magistrate in the prevention of child marriages. Clause (4) of 
Section 13 stipulates that a District Magistrate is deemed to be a CPMO on 
certain days to prevent the solemnization of child marriages. The District 
Magistrate may exercise all the powers which accrue to the CMPO under the 
PCMA.104 The intent of empowering the District Magistrate is in recognition of 
the fact that child marriages may take place in higher numbers on certain days. 
Since many communities in India believe that marriages may be beneficial if 
conducted on auspicious days, the authorities may preventively earmark these 
days for the application of Clauses (4) and (5) of Section 13 of the PCMA. 
 
100 Section 13(7), PCMA. 
101 Section 13(8), PCMA. 
102 Section 13(9), PCMA. 
103 Section 13(10), PCMA. 
104 Section 13(4), PCMA. 

PART V 

Clause (5) of the PCMA stipulates that the District Magistrate shall have 
additional powers to stop or prevent the solemnisation of child marriages, for 
which he may take appropriate measures and use the minimum force required. 
Child Marriage Prohibition Officers 
70. In addition to injunctions, the PCMA also prescribes the appointment of CMPOs 
for the prevention of child marriage. One of the primary critiques of the CMRA 
was that the law was dependent on the private initiative of public-spirited 
citizens to avoid child marriages. The offences under the CMRA were only 
partially cognizable and its enforcement was met with severe social penalty and 
the wrath of the two families whose wards were made to tie the knot. The PCMA 
sought to better enforce its provisions by stipulating the appointment of a 
CMPO. Section 2(d) of PCMA defines a CMPO as an officer appointed by the 
State Government under Section 16(1) of PCMA. Section 16 empowers the 
State Government to issue a notification in the official gazette appointing a 
CMPO for the specified jurisdiction. Under Clause (2) of Section 16 of PCMA, 
the State may also request a respectable member of the locality with a record 
in social service or an officer of the Gram Panchayat or Municipality or an officer 
of the Government or any public sector undertaking or a non-governmental 
organisation to render assistance to the CMPO. The CMPO is mandated to 
carry out the duties stipulated in Clause (3) of Section 16 of PCMA. These 
duties are as follows: 
(i) to prevent solemnisation of child marriages by taking such action as he 
may deem fit; 

PART V 

(ii) to collect evidence for the effective prosecution of persons contravening 
the provisions of the Act; 
(iii) to advise either individual cases or counsel the residents of the locality 
generally not to indulge in promoting, helping, aiding or allowing the 
solemnisation of child marriages; 
(iv) to create awareness of the evil which results from child marriages; 
(v) to sensitise the community on the issue of child marriages; 
(vi) to furnish such periodical returns and statistics as the State Government 
may direct; and 

to discharge such other functions and duties as may be assigned to 
him by the State Government. 
71. The CMPO may move the court for an order of (i) maintenance and residence 
of the child bride under Section 4; (ii) custody of a child born from a child 
marriage under Section 5; and (iii) injunction against the solemnization of 
marriage or against the violation of an injunction under Section 13.105 
Additionally, the CMPO may move the court along with a child who has been 
married off for a decree of nullity under Section 3 of PCMA.106 
72. The legislative intent behind the appointment of the CMPOs is to designate an 
officer to take tailored action against child marriage in each district. The 
 
105 Section 16(5), PCMA. 
106 Section 16(5), PCMA. 

PART V 

prevention of child marriage ensures that communities can progress whereas 
the prosecutorial functions of the CMPO ensure effective deterrence. 
73. The Petitioner has submitted that the practice widely prevalent is to appoint an 
officer with multifarious duties as the CMPO. The task of the CMPO is doled out 
as an additional task to officers who are already burdened with their primary 
duties. This leads to ineffectiveness and allows many child marriages to slip 
through the cracks. 
74. The data provided by the Union in its additional affidavit sheds light on the 
prevalence of officers holding additional charges as CMPOs at the district level. 
In states like Haryana and Chhattisgarh, officials such as Sub-Divisional 
Magistrates107 and District Social Welfare Officers are appointed as CMPOs but 
may also hold other responsibilities. 
75. As argued by the Petitioner, the appointment of CMPOs who are inundated with 
other multifarious duties impedes the effectiveness of child marriage prevention 
measures. Officers with multiple duties might struggle to dedicate sufficient time 
and resources to their role as CMPOs, potentially hindering the effectiveness 
of child marriage prevention efforts. The appointment of CMPOs is not a mere 
statutory formality as part of an ornate virtue signalling. These officers are in 
charge of prosecution of child marriages, counselling of stakeholders and 
spreading awareness and sensitization in the community. An effective CMPO 
must make efforts to find their roots in the community, engage with communities 
and organisations in the area and carry out the painstaking, and sometimes 
 
107 ‘SDM’ 

PART V 

thankless, task of reporting specific factors affecting child marriages in the 
district. We observe that the need for dedicated personnel with a focused 
mandate to tackle child marriage is crucial to ensure that resources are utilized 
effectively and that the objectives of the PCMA are met. 
76. Additionally, the level at which CMPOs are designated—whether at the district, 
Block, or Gram Panchayat level—is also a critical concern. For instance, states 
like Karnataka have appointed 58,522 officers across thirty one districts, and 
Maharashtra has appointed 25,562 officers across thirty six districts, extending 
appointments down to the Gram Panchayat level. Andhra Pradesh has 
appointed 16,590 officers from the village or ward level up to the district level, 
including District Magistrates at the district level. However, Uttar Pradesh has 
designated only one CMPO per district, with 75 CMPOs for seventy-five 
districts. Although high numbers of appointments may suggest extensive 
coverage, this alone does not ensure effectiveness unless there are exclusive 
officers dedicated solely to CMPO duties, free from additional responsibilities. 
For example, at the Gram Panchayat level, Panchayat Secretaries, Village 
Revenue Officers, and Patwaris are often given CMPO duties in addition to their 
primary roles, which dilutes their ability to focus solely on child marriage 
prevention. 
77. CMPOs often lack adequate training and are ill-equipped to engage sensitively 
with children. A study analysing child marriage cases filed nationwide between 
2008 and 2017 revealed that CMPOs initiated only seven percent of these 

PART V 

cases, highlighting a significant gap in proactive enforcement.108 In some 
instances, CMPOs redirect complaints to other designated officers under 
different laws, such as protection officers under the Domestic Violence Act 
2005109 or the JJ Act110, who then refer the complaints back to the CMPOs. 
This back-and-forth highlights a need for improved clarity and streamlined 
coordination in handling child marriage cases effectively. 
78. We accordingly hold that, given the significant obligations expected to be 
discharged by a dedicated CMPO, no officer with other responsibilities shall be 
appointed as the CMPO. States or UTs shall appoint exclusive CMPOs in each 
district in addition to any CMPOs already serving in a dual capacity, and they 
shall equip these officers with adequate resources for the effective discharge of 
their functions. If a State or UT concludes that instances of child marriage have 
decreased to the extent that appointing exclusive CMPOs is no longer 
necessary, it may file an application before this Court, seeking leave to appoint 
a CMPO who also holds other duties at the District level. 
B. The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act 2012 
79. The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act 2012111 was enacted by 
Parliament to safeguard the right of all children to safety, security and protection 
from sexual abuse and exploitation. It is a self-contained comprehensive 
legislation for the protection of children from sexual assault, sexual harassment 
 
108 Social and Policy Research Foundation. ‘Child and Early Marriage in India, Issue Brief’ (2021) referred in 
India Child Protection, Towards Justice: Ending Child Marriages (2024), 21. 
109 The Domestic Violence Act, 2005. 
110 The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015. 
111 ‘POCSO Act’ 

PART V 

and pornography.112 The POCSO Act operates in a manner which promotes the 
best interest and well-being of a child and ensures their healthy physical, 
emotional, intellectual and social development.113 
80. The POCSO Act applies to all children regardless of their gender. Section 2(d) 
defines a child as being under the age of eighteen. The Act elevates the age of 
consent to eighteen years for all persons. The 2013 amendment to the IPC 
increased the age of consent under the rape provision from sixteen to eighteen. 
However, the marital rape exception to the rape provision in Section 375 IPC 
continued to protect men for having sex with their minor wives. In Independent 
Thought (supra) this court removed the inconsistency and struck down the 
exception to the penal provision on rape under Section 375 IPC in so far as it 
related to minors. Further, Subclause (vi) of clause (d) of Section 63 of 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023114 prescribes the age of consent to be eighteen 
years. Section 63 BNS is pari materia to Section 375 IPC. 
81. The principles of the POCSO Act are directly threatened by the commission of 
child marriage. The intent of the POCSO Act is to protect children from sexual 
advances. Child marriage on the other hand is an institution which puts minor 
girls directly in harm’s way. Under the POCSO Act, a man is liable to 
punishment for having sex with his minor wife. Nevertheless, the existence of 
child marriage and its continued recognition in the law as a valid (and voidable) 
marriage threatens the dignity of children. The institution of child marriage, more 
 
112 Statement of Objects and Reasons, POCSO. 
113 Ibid. 
114 ‘BNS’ 

PART V 

directly than any other institution, stipulates for the sexual abuse of child brides 
by design. 
C. The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act 2015 
82. The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act115 was first enacted 
in 2000 to provide for the protection of children. The legislation underwent 
amendments in 2006 and 2011. Thereafter, based on the recorded 
inadequacies of the legislation, Parliament enacted a new JJ Act in 2015. The 
JJ Act was enacted in furtherance of Article 15 and Articles 39(e) and (f),116 
45117 and 47118 of the Constitution to ensure the proper care, protection, 
development, treatment and social re-integration of children in difficult 
circumstances. The JJ Act applied a child-friendly approach and is premised on 
the principle of the best interest of the child. 
83. The JJ Act inter alia deals with children in need of care and protection.119 
Section 2(14) defines CNCP. Sub-clause (xii) of Section 2(14) of the JJ Act 
 
115 ‘JJ Act’ 
116 “39. Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State.— The State shall, in particular, direct its 
policy towards securing— 
… 
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and the tender age of children are not 
abused and that citizens are not forced by economic necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their 
age or strength; 
(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions 
of freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and against 
moral and material abandonment.” 
117 “45. Provision for early childhood care and education to children below the age of six years.— The 
State shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the 
age of six years.” 
118 “47. Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public 
health.— The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people 
and the improvement of public health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavour 
to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of 
drugs which are injurious to health.” 
119 ‘CNCP’ 

PART V 

prescribes that children at imminent risk of marriage are CNCP. The provision 
reads as follows: 
“2. Definitions.–In this Act, unless the context 
otherwise requires,– 
… 
(14) “child in need of care and protection” means a 
child– 
… 
(xii) who is at imminent risk of marriage 
before attaining the age of marriage and 
whose parents, family members, guardians 
and any other persons are likely to be 
responsible 
for 
solemnisation 
of 
such 
marriage;” 
84. The Act provides a comprehensive framework to deal with CNCP. Section 27120 
of the JJ Act establishes the Child Welfare Committee121 to inter alia handle 
and resolve complaints in relation to children who are in need of care. The 
CWC's role is to ensure the children's basic needs are met and that they are 
protected, treated, developed, and rehabilitated. 
85. Therefore, children who are married off are required to be produced before the 
CWC so that they may be rehabilitated and taken care of. The JJ Act further 
 
120 “27. Child Welfare Committee.– (1) The State Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette 
constitute for every district, one or more Child Welfare Committees for exercising the powers and to 
discharge the duties conferred on such Committees in relation to children in need of care and protection 
under this Act and ensure that induction training and sensitisation of all members of the committee is 
provided within two months from the date of notification. 
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairperson, and four other members as the State 
Government may think fit to appoint, of whom at least one shall be a woman and another, an expert on the 
matters concerning children. 
(3) The District Child Protection Unit shall provide a Secretary and other staff that may be required 
for secretarial support to the Committee for its effective functioning. 
… 
(8) The Committee shall submit a report to the District Magistrate in such form as may be 
prescribed and the District Magistrate shall conduct a quarterly review of the functioning of the Committee. 
(9) The Committee shall function as a Bench and shall have the powers conferred by the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) on a Metropolitan Magistrate or, as the case may be, a Judicial 
Magistrate of First Class. 
(10) The District Magistrate shall be the grievance redressal authority to entertain any grievance 
 the functioning of the Committee and the affected child or anyone connected with the child, as 
the case may be, may file a complaint before the District Magistrate who shall take cognizance of the action 
of the Committee and, after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, pass appropriate order.” 
121 ‘CWC’ 

PART V 

provides for the constitution of the State Child Protection Society and District 
Child Protection Unit. Section 106 of the JJ Act stipulates that the State shall 
constitute a State Child Protection Society and a Child Protection Unit in each 
district. The mandate of the Society and Unit may be prescribed by the State. 
The constitution of these societies and units is to take up matters related to 
children for the implementation of the Act including inter alia notification of 
competent authorities in relation to the children and their rehabilitation and co-
ordination with various official and non-official agencies concerned. The society 
and units therefore have the responsibility to identify needs and engage with 
stakeholders, official and non-official, for the implementation of the JJ Act. As 
a beneficial social legislation aimed at children, the society and units constituted 
under the JJ Act are required to proactively identify remedies and strategies for 
the rehabilitation and protection of victims of child marriages. 
86. Section 107 of the JJ Act further provides for the Child Welfare Police Officers122 
and Special Juvenile Police Units123. It stipulates that at each police station, at 
least one police officer shall be appointed as the CWPO. The officer so 
designated shall not be below the rank of Assistant Sub-inspector. The 
appointment of CWPOs is required to be done bearing in mind the aptitude, 
appropriate training and orientation of the inspector. The officer so appointed is 
in charge of exclusively dealing with children, either as victims or perpetrators, 
and coordinate with the police and voluntary and non-governmental 
organisations. 
 
122 ‘CWPO’ 
123 ‘SJPU’ 

PART V 

87. In each district, the State governments are mandated to constitute a SJPU for 
effective coordination of all police-related functions related to children. The 
SJPU shall be headed by an officer of the rank of Deputy Superintendent of 
Police or superior. The SJPU shall comprise all the CWPOs appointed in each 
police station throughout the district as well as two social workers who have 
worked on issues relating to child rights. At least one of such social workers 
who is made part of the unit shall be a woman. 
88. The JJ Act recognises the inapplicability of standards which accrue to adults. It 
is intended to safeguard children and deal with those among them who are in 
conflict with the law. In the context of child marriage, the principles enunciated 
in the JJ Act as well as the framework established under it are vitally important. 
Children who are at risk of marriage at the hands of their family or relatives are 
expressly recognised as CNCP under the Act. The JJ Act further prescribes for 
their protection, rehabilitation and development. While victims of child marriage 
are protected under the JJ Act, it further strengthens the effort to eliminate child 
marriages by creating a trained and skilled force of police officers to deal with 
children. The SJPUs are marked by their unique ability to inject humanity in law 
enforcement. The task of law enforcement officers, the police in particular, has 
traditionally been associated by the State’s ability to compel compliance to its 
norms. The formation of SJPUs reflects a refreshing outlook toward police work, 
one which is imperative in liberal democracies’ treatment of vulnerable groups. 
Law with a touch of humanity and law enforcement with a boost of sensitivity 
and empathy are the cornerstone of the law on children. The JJ Act therefore 

PART V 

forms an important instrument in the contemporary legal framework concerning 
child marriages in India. 
D. The Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act 2005 
89. The UN General Assembly adopted the Declaration on Survival, Protection and 
Development of Children in 1990. In 1989 the UN adopted the Convention on 
the Rights of the Child124 which India ratified on 11 December 1992. To 
implement India’s obligations under these international instruments, Parliament 
enacted the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act 2005.125 
90. The CPCRA seeks to assure child rights in two ways. Firstly, it establishes 
National and State Commissions for the protection of Child Rights.126 These 
bodies study, review, and oversee the implementation of child rights law in 
India. Secondly, the CPCRA establishes Children’s Courts for providing speedy 
trial of offences against children or for violation of child rights.127 Clause (b) of 
Section 2 of CPCRA defines child rights to include the rights stipulated in CRC. 
91. The NCPCR under Section 13 and the State Commissions for the Protection of 
Child Rights under Section 24 of CPCRA are inter alia entrusted with performing 
the function of: 
 
124 ‘CRC’ 
125 ‘CPCRA’ 
126 Sections 3 and 17, CPCRA. 
127 Section 25, CPCRA. 

PART V 

(i) examining and reviewing the safeguards provided by any law for the 
protection of child rights and recommending measures for their effective 
implementation; 
(ii) inquiring into violation of child rights and recommend initiation of 
proceedings in such cases; and 
(iii) inquiring into complaints and taking suo motu notice of matters relating to,- 
(a) deprivation and violation of child rights; (b) non-implementation of laws 
providing for protection and development of children; (c) non-compliance 
of policy decisions, guidelines or instructions aimed at mitigating hardships 
to and ensuring welfare of the children and to provide relief to such 
children, or take up the issues such matters with appropriate 
authorities. 
92. The NCPCR and SCPCR serve the roles of review, monitoring and oversight of 
the legal framework on child rights in India. While the CPCRA enables the two 
commissions to effectively discharge their functions with appropriate resources, 
the effective implementation of the law is contingent on pro-active initiatives of 
the NCPCR and SCPCRs and the timely appointment of members to the two 
commissions. The effective implementation of the PCMA also falls within the 
subject matter of the NCPCR and SCPCRs. Over time, the commissions have 
collected data and reviewed the progress of the implementation of the PCMA. 
The operative directions and guidelines that we shall issue in this judgment shall 
also stipulate the further and specific role that we envision for the NCPCR and 
SCPCRs to perform in the prevention and elimination of child marriages. 

PART V 

93. The MWCD and the NCPCR have been actively engaged in raising awareness 
about the negative consequences of child marriage and strengthening the 
enforcement of the PCMA. In recent years, the NCPCR has conducted multiple 
review meetings and collaborated with a broad spectrum of stakeholders, 
including District Magistrates, CMPOs, CDPOs, CWCs, and Anganwadi 
Workers. 128 These initiatives have aimed to create a coordinated approach to 
tackling child marriage at the grassroots level. 
94. The NCPCR has also concentrated on identifying children at risk by compiling 
school-wise data on those who have dropped out or exhibit irregular 
attendance. In 2023-2024, the NCPCR identified 645,673 children across India 
who were either out of school or at risk of early marriage. The Commission 
directed district authorities to pinpoint vulnerable children from this list, prevent 
their marriages, and ensure proper rehabilitation for those affected. While these 
awareness campaigns and data-driven interventions have been vital, it is 
evident that awareness alone is not enough to prevent child marriages 
effectively. Enforcement of laws, community engagement, and support systems 
for vulnerable children are equally crucial. 
 
E. The Legal Services Authorities Act 1987 
95. The Legal Services Authorities Act 1987 was enacted to constitute legal 
services authorities at the National, State and District levels to provide free and 
competent legal services to the weaker sections of the society. The constitution 
 
128 ‘AWWs’ 

PART V 

of the authorities is aimed at ensuring that opportunities for securing justice are 
not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities. 
96. Section 12(c) of the Act stipulates that any child who has to file or defend a case 
is entitled to legal services.129 The Legal Services Authorities are therefore 
under an obligation under the Act to assist minors who file cases under the 
PCMA to exercise their statutory rights. The National Legal Services 
Authority,130 State Legal Services Authority,131 District Legal Services 
Authorities,132 Taluk Legal Services Committees, High Court Legal Services 
Committees, and Supreme Court Legal Services Committee have formulated 
various schemes to be followed while they deal with legal services to 
children.133 We shall make further directions in this regard to legal services 
authorities in the operative portion of this judgment. 
F. Policies formulated by the Union Government 
97. In addition to the legislative apparatus outlined above, the Union has submitted 
that the MWCD proposed a National Strategy on Child Marriage on 14 February 
2013. This strategy emphasized linking with Integrated Child Protection 
Scheme134 structures and statutory bodies to ensure early detection and swift 
referral of cases needing care and protection. One of its strategic directions was 
 
129 Section 12(c), The Legal Services Authorities Act 1987, 
130 ‘NALSA’ 
131 ‘SLSA’ 
132 ‘DLSA’ 
133 See for example National Legal Services Authority (Child Friendly Legal Services to Children and their 
Protection) Scheme, 2024. 
134 ‘ICPS’ 

PART V 

to ensure that children already in child marriages should not face discrimination 
in accessing health, nutrition, education, and employment services. 
98. The Union Government has also implemented several schemes aimed at 
empowering young girls and women, such as Sukanya Samridhi Yojana, 
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban & Rural), Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan 
Yojana, and Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana (PMMVY). These 
initiatives aim to promote social well-being and to create a supportive 
environment for young girls. Complementing these efforts are programs like 
Samagra Shiksha, the National Overseas Scholarship Scheme, Babu Jagjivan 
Ram Chhatrawas Yojana, and the Swachh Vidyalaya Mission, which focus on 
making schools girl-friendly, particularly for vulnerable sections of society. The 
Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment of Adolescent Girls – SABLA, 
launched on November 19, 2010135, in 200 districts, focuses on empowering 
adolescent girls (aged 11-18) by improving nutrition, health, and vocational 
skills. SABLA provides nutrition at Rs 5 per day for 300 days, iron and folic acid 
supplementation, health check-ups, nutrition and health education, family 
welfare guidance, and vocational training for girls aged sixteen and above under 
the National Skill Development Programme. It also raises awareness about the 
importance of marrying at the appropriate age. 
99. To enhance the employability of female workers, the Ministry offers training 
through a network of Women’s Industrial Training Institutes, National Vocational 
Training Institutes, and Regional Vocational Training Institutes. Additionally, the 
 
135 See Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment of Adolescent Girls: Sabla, https://www.india.gov.in/rajiv-
gandhi-scheme-empowerment-adolescent-girls-sabla. 

PART V 

Skill India Mission aims to ensure economic independence for women through 
skill development. 
100. The Ministry implements the Beti Bachao Beti Padhao scheme136, which 
specifically aims to address issues of gender inequality by promoting the 
education and welfare of girls. It targets high-risk districts with low child sex 
ratios and focuses on changing societal attitudes toward girls through 
awareness campaigns, community engagement, and promoting girl-friendly 
educational infrastructure. Additionally, the Union has established CHILDLINE, 
a 24/7 emergency outreach service for children in crisis, which coordinates with 
police and child protection services to address various issues, including child 
marriage prevention. 
101. Despite these efforts, there remains a gap in implementing specific, 
targeted measures focused solely on the prevention of child marriage. Existing 
schemes, while impactful, do not provide sufficient tools to tackle child marriage 
comprehensively. For instance, while training and educational programs are 
vital, there appears to be a lack of robust mechanisms to monitor the long-term 
outcomes of these initiatives, particularly in rural and underserved areas where 
child marriage rates are often high. Additionally, while financial support is 
essential in empowering women, it may not always effectively reach the most 
vulnerable communities. Therefore, we direct that a special scheme be 
introduced, specifically focusing on skill development, vocational training, and 
economic stability for women and girls who choose to leave child marriages. 
 
136 See https://www.myscheme.gov.in/schemes/bbbp. 

PART V 

This scheme should include provisions for legal aid, psychological support, and 
financial assistance to help them transition to a life of self-reliance. 
G. States’ efforts to curb child marriage 
102. Each State and UT in India has introduced training programs, awareness 
initiatives, and financial incentives as part of a comprehensive approach to 
enforcing the PCMA137. These efforts encompass preventive training, 
education, financial support, and community-based outreach to discourage 
child marriage and promote girls' education and empowerment. Relevant up-to-
date data on the States’ efforts to curb child marriage over the last three years 
has been placed before this Court. As and by way of illustration, we shall briefly 
provide an overview of the efforts made in regard to (i) training schemes, (ii) 
awareness programs, (iii) financial incentives and (iv) other incentives. We shall 
then analyse the impact of these schemes broadly. i. 
Training schemes 
103. Across India, States and UTs have conducted extensive training programs 
over the past three years to equip officials and communities with the knowledge 
needed to combat child marriage. States and UTs are conducting training 
programs to equip officials and communities with the knowledge needed to 
combat child marriage. 
 
137 Additional Affidavit, Ministry of Women and Child Development (2023). The data highlights the steps 
undertaken by the States in the Past Three Years – 2020 -2023. 

PART V 

104. States like Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Gujarat, and Chhattisgarh 
have conducted training and awareness programs for field workers through 
DCPUs, providing critical information on the PCMA. Some states have 
partnered with DWCD&SS and UNICEF, with support from partner 
organizations, to conduct these training sessions. For instance, Karnataka has 
established Child Marriage Prohibition Cells138 under its Spoorthi Yojana139 to 
train staff in identifying and preventing child marriages. Additionally, Rs. 12.51 
crores have been allocated for training Protection Officers and staff in Special 
Cells for women and children140. In Haryana, Protection-cum-Prohibition 
officers receive intensive training and sensitization from experts with support 
from NIPCCCD and HIPA. These initiatives indicate a structured approach, 
focusing not only on immediate prevention but also on long-term societal 
change by raising awareness and educating local populations about the harms 
of child marriage. ii. 
Awareness programs 
105. Awareness initiatives play a vital role in changing societal perceptions about 
child marriage and promoting girls' education. In terms of the number of 
awareness sessions over the last year, most sessions have been reported by 
 
138 These cells deal with the administrative Sanction of Spoorthi Yojana, Action Plan, Prohibition of Child 
Marriage Act Systematic Procedure, Coordination and Review Committee, Cell Establishment Details, Child 
Marriage Prohibition Officers Roles and responsibilities and additional CMPOs Orders, Revised Committee 
Order at Gram panchayat; See details of Government orders and guidelines for major schemes and programs 
of 
the 
Department 

https://dwcd.karnataka.gov.in/info-
4/Details+of+Government+orders+and+guidelines+for+major+schemes+and+programs+of+the+Departme
nt/en. 
139 The Scheme was first introduced on a pilot basis, has been successful, and will now be extended to a few 
more districts. It aims to improve nutritional levels and empower 12- to-18-year adolescent girls in 5 districts 
covering 50000 adolescent girls from 11 Special Development Plan Taluks. 
140 The State cabinet approved the release of Rs 12.51 crore for ‘Spoorthi scheme’ in 2023. 

PART V 

Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Odisha and Tamil Nadu.141 Andhra Pradesh 
conducted 37,446 sessions, reaching 857,012 participants; Uttar Pradesh 
conducted 35,377 sessions, reaching 1,248,394 participants; and Odisha 
conducted 33,276 sessions covering 30,755 blocks and villages.142 
Additionally, Tamil Nadu has actively engaged communities with widespread 
awareness programs tailored to local needs.143 
106. States have deployed varied and unique measures in spreading awareness 
such as leveraging local media to economically empower girls,144 distributing 
legal informational pamphlets in rural areas,145 partnering with NGOs,146 
facilitating community meetings147, targeted awareness programs focusing on 
high school students and school dropouts148, and running educational YouTube 
channels.149 
107. This grassroots, multisectoral collaboration is essential, as it leverages 
community-based networks to reach children most at risk, ensuring early 
intervention and protection against child marriage. It strengthens coordination 
 
141 NCCPR, Comprehensive Report of Virtual Review Meetings on Child Marriage with Districts All Over 
India For 2023-2024 (2024). 
142 Ibid. 
143 Ibid. 
144 Delhi Ladli Scheme, 2008 has been operational since 01.01.2009 for controlling female foeticide, 
improving the sex ratio, and empowering girls educationally and financially. 
145 Haryana has engaged 1,855 stakeholders through targeted campaigns, distributing over 50,000 
informational pamphlets in rural areas to explain the legal ramifications and adverse impacts of child 
marriage; Similarly, Tamil Nadu has created thirteen different types of posters, with 3,77,585 posters 
distributed across the state, and an allocation of Rs. 50 lakhs specifically for campaigns in ten economically 
disadvantaged districts. 
146 Odisha has partnered with NGOs to conduct 1,500 workshops in schools. 
147 Assam facilitated community meetings in 200 villages, highlighting the harmful effects of early marriage 
on health, education, and economic opportunities. 
148 Telangana has organized targeted awareness programs aimed at identifying vulnerable children, 
particularly with the support of Village Child Protection Committee members. These initiatives focus on high 
school students and school dropouts, working in coordination with ICPS, ICDS, ChildLine, Sakhi staff, 
Anganwadi teachers, ASHA workers, and local Sarpanchs. 
149 Tamil Nadu launched an educational YouTube channel and provided 3-6 months of vocational training to 
support victims of child marriage, equipping them with skills for a better future. 

PART V 

between state authorities, NGOs, and local stakeholders to enhance the impact 
of these awareness initiatives. iii. 
Financial incentives 
108. Financial incentives play a significant role in these initiatives. In Telangana, 
the Shaadi Mubarak and Kalyana Lakshmi schemes offer cash transfers to 
eligible families; for instance, families receive a one-time grant of approximately 
Rs. 1 lakh upon the girl reaching adulthood150. Chhattisgarh offers a similar 
scheme, the Noni Suraksha Yojana, while Bihar’s Kanya Utthaan Yojana 
provides financial support of Rs. 25,000 per girl to encourage education and 
delay marriages and Mantri Vivah Yogana aids families by covering marriage 
expenses for eligible girls. Madhya Pradesh’s Ladli Lakshmi Yojana links 
financial support to educational milestones, offering up to Rs. 6,000 for 
completing certain grades.151 In Andhra Pradesh, the Jagananna Amma Vodi 
program aims to improve the Gross Enrollment Rate (GER) and promote higher 
education for girls. Rajasthan’s Mukhyamantri Kanyadan Yojana provides 
financial assistance to BPL families from SC, ST, and minority communities for 
the marriages of girls upon reaching 18 years. 
109. These financial incentives serve as a powerful tool in reducing child 
marriage and enhancing girls' education by alleviating the financial expenses of 
 
150 The Government of Telangana launched the 'Kalyana Lakshmi/Shaadi Mubarak scheme provided to 
unmarried girls who are above 18 years of age from SC, ST, BC and Minority families (with a combined 
income of both parents not exceeding Rs. 2,00,000 per annum) at the time of their marriage. 
151 This aims to discourage child marriage, eradicate female infanticide, rectify the falling birth rate of girls, 
improve the health and educational status, curtail inequality and uphold the status of the girl child in the 
society. ln this scheme, there is a provision for a final payment of Rs. 1.00 lakh on completion of 21 years of 
age of the girl child, on appearing in class 12th examination birth and on early marriage 
Instructions were issued for Akshay Tritiya. 

PART V 

families. These States demonstrate promising results in increasing girls' 
enrolment in schools through targeted financial assistance programs. However, 
these schemes must be supported by robust monitoring and evaluation 
mechanisms to ensure that the funds are used effectively and that the intended 
outcomes are achieved. iv. 
Other initiatives 
110. In addition to training, awareness, and financial support, states have 
implemented various structural measures to reinforce the PCMA. For example, 
some States conduct regular meetings with school authorities to identify and 
reintegrate school dropouts, using education as a key tool to prevent child 
marriages. States like Assam collaborate with NGOs and CBOs to rehabilitate 
victims, provide compensation, and facilitate home visits through DCPU staff. 
Several states have also drafted action plans: Uttar Pradesh has District Action 
Plans for ending child marriage and adolescent empowerment, incorporating 
and adapting activities from the State Action Plan. Rajasthan introduced its 
State Action Plan in 2017152, anchoring multiple interventions and activities to 
address the root causes of child marriage. These plans include partnerships 
and monitorable indicators, ensuring that progress is tracked and evaluated for 
effectiveness and relevance. 
 
152 Rajasthan Government (2017), ‘State Strategy and Action Plan for Prevention of Child Marriage: Towards 
creating a child marriage free Rajasthan; The document articulates the principles, strategy, vision, objectives, 
actions, coordination mechanisms and resources that will ensure effective 
implementation of the actions/interventions to end child marriage in Rajasthan. 

PART V 

111. Additionally, some States like Karnataka have created online portals to 
monitor child marriage cases, enhancing transparency and accountability.153 
These structural initiatives, supported by partnerships with community 
organizations and digital monitoring tools, are crucial to a holistic approach that 
prevents child marriages and strengthens protection for vulnerable children. v. 
Impact analysis of State schemes 
112. The data reveals that a comprehensive, multifaceted approach involving 
training schemes, awareness programs, and financial incentives is essential for 
effectively combating child marriage. However, not all States have adopted this 
three-pronged strategy. States such as Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, and Bihar 
showcase strong alignment with this multifaceted approach. For instance, the 
financial incentive schemes in Telangana and Bihar effectively incentivize 
families to delay marriage. States like Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Chhattisgarh 
focus on training and awareness. The absence of direct financial support could 
limit their schemes’ impact on economically vulnerable communities. While 
these efforts contribute to raising awareness and promoting societal change, 
families facing financial hardships may still lean toward early marriage without 
economic support for educational or vocational opportunities. The absence of 
direct financial assistance may limit the reach and impact of otherwise well-
designed training and awareness programs, as families in economically 
challenged communities may not feel the immediate benefits of delaying 
marriage without addressing financial constraints. 
 
153 Karnataka’s online portal ‘Surakshini’ keeps track of the child’s status, and every department official 
involved has to log in regularly. 

PART V 

113. The data on child marriages across various States and UTs shows a range 
of outcomes in both prevention and prosecution efforts over the last three years. 
Several states, such as Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, and West Bengal, report 
a high number of cases, though many of these cases were prevented before 
the marriages could be solemnized. Karnataka documented 8,348 child 
marriage cases, preventing 7,306 of these, while Andhra Pradesh reported 
3,413 cases, with 3,136 successfully prevented. This reflects a proactive 
approach to preventing child marriages in some states, where authorities 
intercept and prevent a significant portion of cases before, they are formalized. 
114. Some States illustrate discrepancies between the number of child marriage 
cases reported, the number prevented, and the number of FIRs filed. 
Maharashtra reported 2043 cases prevented but registered 178 FIRs, 
suggesting limited legal follow-through. Similarly, Telangana reported 4440 
cases of child marriage, of which only 149 FIRs were filed. Andhra Pradesh, 
despite having 3,416 cases registered, filed 10 FIRs. These gaps highlight 
potential obstacles in prosecution and a possible need for streamlined 
cooperation between child marriage prevention authorities and law 
enforcement agencies. Tamil Nadu presents a more comprehensive approach, 
where both prevention and FIR filing are high; with 8,966 reported cases, the 
state successfully prevented 6,436 marriages and filed 2,392 FIRs. 
115. Interestingly, several States and UTs, such as Dadra and Nagar Haveli, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, and Nagaland, reported no cases of child marriage over 
the last three years. While this might indicate minimal occurrences of child 
marriage in these areas, it could also suggest underreporting or a lack of 

PART VI 

awareness of the issue among authorities and communities. Furthermore, 
States and UTs like Chhattisgarh, Chandigarh and Puducherry, which reported 
very low figures or none at all, raise questions about the consistency and 
accuracy of data reporting processes. 
116. A more comprehensive look across all regions also includes variations in the 
effectiveness of interventions. In addition, the number of cases leading to FIRs 
is relatively low across most states compared to the number of marriages 
reported, highlighting potential gaps in legal action and prosecution efforts. 
Even in states with high intervention rates, the limited legal action suggests that 
additional support may be needed to ensure accountability and deterrence. 
VI. Traversing frontiers: international human rights norms 
117. The development of child rights law is highly influenced by the evolving legal 
standards in international law. The comity of nations has arrived at a broad 
consensus rooted in the goal to realise universal human rights of children. 
Domestically and abroad, various jurisdictions have developed their legal 
standards under the influence of global advancements in international bodies. 
It is therefore instructive to look at the progress made and prevailing standards 
on child rights in the context of early and forced marriage in international law. 
We shall therefore trace the universal framework on child rights, various 
regional advancements and the rights-based framework against child marriage 
presently. 

PART VI 

A. Universal framework 
118. Early international conventions did not explicitly prohibit child marriage. With 
the evolution of international law, the community of nations inched closer to an 
agreeable standard against child marriage. We shall trace this evolution in 
international human rights norms presently. First, we shall briefly overview the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,154 then we shall explore the 
Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and 
Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery of 1956155 and the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1966.156 Lastly we shall look at the two 
seminal conventions on the issue of child marriage, namely, the Convention on 
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 1979157 and the 
CRC 1989. i. 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
119. The UDHR adopted as General Assembly Resolution 217 A (III) in 1948,158 
set forth fundamental principles regarding the right to marry. Article 16(1) of the 
UDHR stipulates that men and women of full age, without any limitation due to 
race, nationality, or religion, have the right to marry and to found a family.159 
They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage, and at its 
dissolution. Article 16(2) further stipulates that marriage shall be entered into 
 
154 ‘UDHR’ 
155 The Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices 
Similar to Slavery of 1956; India ratified it on 23 June 1960. 
156 ‘ICCPR’ 
157 ‘CEDAW’. 
158 The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, G.A. Res. 217, U.N. Doc. A/810 (1948). 
159 Ibid, article 16(1); See also Maja Eriksson, ‘Article 16’ in The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: A 
Commentary, ed. Aide Eide et al. (Oxford: Scandinavian University Press, 1992), 243. 

PART VI 

only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses.160 Although it does 
not specify a minimum age for marriage, the UDHR establishes that marriage 
should be based on free and full consent, laying an early framework for 
safeguarding autonomy and protecting individuals from coerced or forced 
marriages.161 
120. In the years following the UDHR, International Human Rights Law162 began 
to recognize and address the specific vulnerabilities and abuses associated 
with child marriage. This shift was a response to growing evidence that child 
marriage disproportionately harms girls, undermining their education, health, 
and prospects for economic independence. Recognizing that such marriages 
are often non-consensual and perpetuate cycles of poverty and inequality, the 
international community began drafting conventions aimed at setting protective 
standards for marriageable age and conditions. ii. 
Recognition in political conventions 
121. The Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, 
and Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery of 1956163 expanded on these 
protections by directly addressing practices similar to slavery, including child 
marriage. Article 2 of the Convention mandates that State Parties prescribe, 
where appropriate, suitable minimum ages of marriage and encourage the use 
of facilities whereby the consent of both parties to a marriage may be freely 
expressed in the presence of a competent civil or religious authority164. This 
 
160 Ibid, article 16(2). 
161 Ibid. 
162 ‘IHRL’ 
163 The Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices 
Similar to Slavery, 1956. 
164 Ibid, Article 2. 

PART VI 

provision reflects a recognition that child marriage can be exploitative and akin 
to slavery. In aligning marriage requirements with those designed to end 
slavery-like practices, the Convention highlights the UN's stance against child 
marriage as a form of coercion and exploitation. 
122. These standards were developed as a matter of political rights guarantee in 
the ICCPR165. Article 23(2) establishes the right of men and women of 
marriageable age to marry and to found a family.166 Article 23(3) prescribes that 
no marriage shall be entered into without the free and full consent of the 
intending spouses.167 Finally, Article 23(4) requires that State Parties take 
measures to ensure equality in marriage, signalling the UN’s increasing 
recognition of individual autonomy, choice, and consent in marriage.168 This 
framework not only advocates for minimum marriageable age requirements but 
also emphasizes free and full consent. The framers of these documents aimed 
to prevent child marriage by specifically using the terms “men and women,” 
rather than “males and females,” to imply an age of maturity and decision-
making capacity necessary for marriage.169 
iii. 
Targeted focus: the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women and the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child. 
123. The progress of the international community led to the ground-breaking 
inclusion of child marriage as an expressly recognised illegality in the 
 
165 UN General Assembly (1966). International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, United Nations, Treaty 
Series, vol. 999, p. 171. 
166 ICCPR, Article 23 (2). 
167 ICCPR. Article 23(3). 
168 ICCPR. Article 23(4). 
169 See Maja Eriksson, ‘Article 16’ in The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: A Commentary, ed. Aide 
Eide et al. (Oxford: Scandinavian University Press, 1992), 243. 

PART VI 

CEDAW170. Article 16(2) explicitly invalidates child betrothals and marriages, 
calling for legislation to establish a minimum age for marriage and mandate 
official registration.171 This is crucial to CEDAW’s objective of safeguarding 
women's rights and autonomy, highlighting that child marriage undermines the 
agency, equality, and dignity of girls and women. By emphasizing that child 
marriages should have no legal effect, CEDAW directly addresses the systemic 
inequalities perpetuated through such practices. 
124. The guarantee to women in CEDAW was further tailored as a matter of child 
rights in 1989 with the adoption of the CRC172. It was essential to establish a 
global framework dedicated to children because, despite previous human rights 
treaties, there remained gaps in protections for children who, due to their age 
and vulnerability, require special safeguards. The CRC acknowledges the 
unique needs of children for development,173 care, and protection from abuse, 
exploitation, and neglect.174 The international community recognized that 
children are often marginalized, and their rights overlooked, which made it 
critical to implement specific provisions tailored to them. 
125. Article 1 of the CRC defines a child as a person below the age of eighteen 
unless, under the law applicable to the child, a majority is attained earlier.175 In 
the context of child marriage, this provision sets a clear threshold for defining 
 
170 UN General Assembly (1989). Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against 
Women, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, p. 13. 
171 CEDAW, Article 16 (2). 
172 UN General Assembly (1989). Convention on the Rights of the Child, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 
1577, p. 3. 
173 CRC, Article 6(2); State Parties shall ensure to the maximum extent possible the survival and development 
of the child. 
174 CRC, Article 19 (1); Requires States to take all appropriate measures to protect the child from all forms of 
abuse, neglect, or maltreatment while in the care of parents. 
175 CRC, Article 1. 

PART VI 

who is considered a child, ensuring that international standards focus on the 
protection of minors from early and forced marriages. Article 19(1) of the CRC 
requires State Parties to take all necessary legislative, administrative, social, 
and educational measures to protect children from all forms of physical or 
mental violence, injury, abuse, neglect, or exploitation, including sexual abuse, 
whether committed by parents, guardians, or others responsible for the child’s 
care. 176 This article recognizes that children, due to their vulnerability, require 
comprehensive protection across various domains of life, especially from forms 
of violence that may occur within the family or caregiving environment. This is 
particularly relevant in cases of child marriage, where minors may face abuse 
or exploitation under the guise of familial or cultural practices. Article 19(2) 
further emphasizes the need for protective measures, including the creation of 
social programs, support services for children and caregivers, and judicial 
mechanisms to address and prevent maltreatment.177 This highlights the 
importance of establishing a robust framework for the identification, reporting, 
and follow-up of child abuse cases, offering practical measures for intervention 
and prevention. 
B. Regional framework 
 
126. In addition to international conventions, three important regional 
conventions have addressed the issue of child marriage. Regional conventions 
reflect the targetter focus of a region to pivot their shared values and goals into 
 
176 CRC, Article 19(1). 
177 CRC. Article 19(2) 

PART VI 

obligatory and tangible outcomes. We shall elucidate the framework developed 
in the African Union, the European Union and the SAARC. i. 
African Union 
127. The African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child,178 adopted in 
1990,179 builds upon international frameworks by requiring State Parties to 
enact legislation setting eighteen as the minimum age for marriage. Article 21 
of the Charter specifically addresses “Protection against Harmful Social and 
Cultural Practices,” stating that all necessary measures should be taken to 
eliminate customs detrimental to children’s health, dignity, and development.180 
Under Article 21(2), child marriage and betrothal are prohibited, with a mandate 
that states enact laws setting a minimum marriageable age of eighteen and 
ensuring compulsory marriage registration.181 
128. In Association pour le Progrès et la Défense des Droits des Femmes 
Maliennes (APDF) and the Institute for Human Rights and Development in 
Africa (IHRDA) v. Republic of Mali,182 the African Court on Human and 
Peoples’ Rights addressed significant issues regarding child marriage. The 
applicants argued that Mali’s Family Code of 2011, which set the minimum 
marriage age for girls at sixteen (with exceptions allowing marriage as young 
as fifteen), violated key international agreements such as the African Charter 
 
178 ‘ARWRC’ 
179 The African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child (1990). OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/24.9/49, entered 
into force Nov. 29, 1999; See also IPAS, African Alliance for Women’s Reproductive Health Rights – A 
Handbook for Advocacy in the African Human Rights System (Chapel Hill: IPAS, 2006), 29. 
180 ARWRC, Article 21(1). 
181 ARWRC, Article 21(2). 
182 Association pour le progrès et la défense des droits des femmes Maliennes (APDF) and the Institute for 
Human Rights and Development in Africa (IHRDA) v. Republic of Mali, App. No. 046/2016, Judgment, African 
Court on Human and Peoples' Rights [Afr. Ct. H.P.R.] (May 11, 2018). 

PART VI 

on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa183 and the 
ACRWC both of which require a minimum marriage age of eighteen to protect 
the rights of children. Furthermore, the applicants raised concerns that religious 
authorities in Mali often performed marriages without ensuring full and free 
consent from both parties, leading to forced marriages that particularly affected 
young girls.184 
129. The court found that Mali’s Family Code was incompatible with its 
obligations under multiple international instruments, including the Maputo 
Protocol, the ACRWC and CEDAW.185 Specifically, the Family Code’s 
provisions on minimum marriage age and the lack of mandatory consent were 
seen as violations of these treaties, which seek to eliminate harmful practices 
and ensure gender equality and child protection.186 Consequently, the court 
ordered Mali to amend its Family Code to align it with these international 
standards by setting a minimum marriage age of eighteen, ensuring free 
consent to marriage, and providing equal inheritance rights for all children, 
including those born outside of marriage. 
130. This ruling is significant because it highlights the enforceability of 
international human rights treaties at the regional level, compelling Mali to 
amend its laws to meet international obligations. By holding Mali accountable, 
the court reinforced the legally binding nature of the Maputo Protocol, ACRWC, 
and CEDAW, promoting the standardization of human rights protections across 
Africa. This decision also sets a precedent for other African nations, 
 
183 ‘Maputo Protocol’ 
184 Ibid, para 59, 60, 62. 
185 Ibid, para 124. 
186 Ibid, para 125. 

PART VI 

emphasizing the duty to harmonize domestic laws with international child 
protection standards. ii. 
European Union 
131. In the European Union, the European Convention on Human Rights187 is 
a key legal instrument that impacts issues of marriage and child protection. 
188Specifically, Article 12 of the ECHR grants men and women of marriageable 
age the right to marry189, while Article 8 protects the right to respect for private 
and family life.190 These articles do not directly set a minimum age for marriage 
but do highlight the importance of individual autonomy and respect for personal 
and family life, which are relevant to child marriage discussions. Article 3, 
which prohibits inhuman or degrading treatment, has also been interpreted to 
protect vulnerable individuals, including children, from practices that may be 
harmful or coercive, such as child marriage.191 
132. Early marriage in the European Region is described as an abrupt and 
premature transition from childhood to adult life for the affected minors, who are 
predominantly girls192. At the EU level, the resolution of the European 
Parliament of 4 October 2017 on “Ending Child Marriage” references the 
considerable negative effects of child marriage on the rights of children, in 
particular those of girls affected by the practice. 
 
187 “ECHR” 
188 The European Convention on Human Rights, 1950; See https://www.echr.coe.int/european-convention-
on-human-rights 
189 ECHR, Article 12. 
190 ECHR, Article 8. 
191 Ibid, Article 3. 
192 Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, Forced Marriage in Europe (2018), Resolution 2233, 
para. 2; Recognised that Early marriage thereby typically leads to restricted opportunities for education and 
economic development of women, who are mostly affected. 

PART VI 

133. A landmark case in the German Federal Constitutional Court193 involved a 
Syrian couple who married in 2015 under Syrian law, with the wife being 14 at 
the time. Fleeing the Syrian conflict, they arrived in Germany, where the 
authorities took the young wife into care due to her minor status. Citing the Act 
to Prevent Child Marriages 2017, the German courts automatically invalidated 
the marriage under Article 13(3) no. 1 of the Introductory Act to the Civil Code 
(EGBGB), which prohibits the recognition of marriages if one spouse was under 
16 at the time. The husband contested this, arguing that their marriage was 
valid under Syrian law and should be recognized in Germany. 
134. The Federal Constitutional Court of Germany ruled that, although the state 
has a legitimate interest in protecting minors from child marriage, the automatic 
invalidation of marriages involving minors under 16 was unconstitutional.194 The 
Court found that the law lacked provisions for dealing with the legal 
consequences of invalidation, and it failed to offer the possibility of validating 
the marriage once both parties reached adulthood. This automatic invalidation 
was seen as conflicting with Article 6(1) of the German Basic Law, which 
protects the right to marry and form a family195. It is a right that is based on the 
free will, equality and autonomy of the partners and involves special mutual 
obligations, with the official ceremony of marriage serving to substantiate the 
marriage through a formal act. 196 
135. The Court recognised that the invalidation of such marriages not only 
safeguards minors from the inherent risks associated with marital cohabitation 
 
193 See BVerfG, Order of the First Senate of 1 February 2023 - 1 BvL 7/18 (Germany). 
194 Ibid, Para 44-45. 
195 Ibid, Para 107. 
196 Ibid, Para 114 -116. 

PART VI 

but also enhances the legal options available to guardians. They can determine 
the living arrangements of married minors without considering their marital 
status, ensuring that decisions prioritize the child's best interests under IHRL197. 
Protecting minors from early marriage aligns with the state's duty to uphold life 
and physical integrity under Article 2(2) of the German Basic Law and 
addresses the need to eliminate disadvantages faced by women. 
As a result, the court ordered the legislature to amend the law by 30 June 2024, 
to address these gaps, thus providing legal clarity on the status of such 
marriages and offering a pathway for validation after reaching adulthood.198 
This case illustrates the complexities involved in addressing child marriage 
within Europe, particularly in the context of refugees and migration. While the 
German law aimed to protect minors, the Federal Constitutional Court 
emphasized the need for balance. 
136. In India, the PCMA protects child brides and any child born from a child 
marriage by prescribing for their maintenance, residence and custody. Further, 
any child born from such a marriage is deemed legitimate. These provisions 
apply even when the marriage has been nullified at the instance of the minor 
contracting party. India therefore does not have the same legal gap that the 
Federal Constitutional Court observed in German law. Protections of 
maintenance, residence and custody under family law are a recognition of the 
responsibilities that society places on families after marriage. The philosophy is 
that a law must not merely penalise criminal action – in this case child marriage 
– but must also compensate and address the harm meted out to the victim. 
 
197 Ibid. 
198 Ibid, Para 190-192. 

PART VI 

iii. 
SAARC 
137. Child marriage is a significant concern in South Asia, where approximately 
one in four young women are first married or in union before reaching the age 
of eighteen.199 The prevalence of child marriage varies greatly across the 
region, with over 50% of girls married before eighteen in Bangladesh, compared 
to only 2% in the Maldives.200 Furthermore, even within individual countries, 
disparities exist; for example, Afghanistan shows a tenfold difference in child 
marriage rates across its provinces.201 Although child marriage is less common 
among boys, it still occurs, with nearly 1 in 10 young men in Nepal reporting 
childhood marriages.202 Despite these challenges, South Asia is recognized for 
its progress in reducing child marriage rates, showcasing a potential pathway 
for other regions facing similar issues. 
138. The SAARC Charter,203 established in 1985, lays the foundation for regional 
cooperation among the eight South Asian countries—Afghanistan, Bangladesh, 
Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. It emphasizes the 
need for collaboration in various sectors, including social development, which 
encompasses the protection of children's rights. The Convention on Regional 
Arrangements for the Promotion of Child Welfare in South Asia, adopted in 
 
199 UNICEF (2023). A Profile of Child Marriage in South Asia; UN (2022). United Nations Department of 
Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, World Population Prospects. 
200 Ibid. 
201 Ibid. 
202 Ibid. 
203 The Charter of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation; The objectives of the association 
are to: a) promote the welfare and quality of life of the peoples of South Asia; b) accelerate economic growth, 
social progress, and cultural development, ensuring individuals can live with dignity and realize their full 
potential; c) enhance collective self-reliance among South Asian countries; d) foster mutual trust, 
understanding, and appreciation of shared challenges; e) encourage collaboration and mutual assistance in 
economic, social, cultural, technical, and scientific areas; (f) strengthen cooperation with other developing 
countries; g) collaborate in international forums on common interests; h) engage with international and 
regional organizations with similar goals 

PART VI 

2002204, specifically addresses the alarming prevalence of child marriage in the 
region. This Convention recognizes child marriage as a violation of children's 
rights and advocates for legislation to set a minimum marriage age, promote 
awareness, and protect children from harmful practices. 
139. The Convention reinforces the commitment of SAARC member states to 
create a protective environment for children by calling for effective measures to 
combat child marriage. This includes the establishment of monitoring systems, 
the promotion of education, and the mobilization of community resources to 
challenge cultural norms that perpetuate child marriage. 
C. Rights based framework 
140. Child marriage is forced marriage and international law recognises it as 
such. Early marriage, or child marriage involves children under eighteen years. 
The majority of child marriages involve minor girls. The joint General 
Recommendation and Comment on harmful practices from the CRC and the 
CEDAW Committee states205: 
“A child marriage is considered to be a form of 
forced marriage, given that one and/or both 
parties have not expressed full, free, and 
informed consent. As a matter of respecting the 
child’s evolving capacities and autonomy in making 
decisions that affect her or his life, a marriage of a 
mature, capable child below 18 years of age may be 
allowed in exceptional circumstances, provided that 
the child is at least 16 years of age and that such 
decisions are made by a judge based on legitimate 
exceptional grounds defined by law and on the 
evidence of maturity, without deference to culture 
and tradition.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

204 The Convention on Regional Arrangements for the Promotion of Child Welfare in South Asia, 2002. 
205 Joint general recommendation No. 31 of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against 
Women /General comment No. 18 of the Committee on the Rights of the Child on harmful practices”, UN 
Doc CEDAW/C/GC/31-CRC/C/GC18 (2014), para 20. 

PART VI 

141. The joint General Recommendation and Comment proposed a detailed 
regime of laws to address forced and early marriage, including raising 
awareness, addressing root causes, ensuring proper registration of births and 
marriages, protection orders, and ensuring access to remedies and reparations, 
including the use of criminal law.206 
142. This issue has been dealt with in international case laws as well. In 
Prosecutor v. Dominic Ongwen,207 the International Criminal Court's Appeals 
Chamber focused on a former commander of the Lord's Resistance Army who 
was charged with war crimes and crimes against humanity. The court had to 
adjudicate whether the legal characterization of 'forced marriage' could be 
classified as an 'other inhumane act' under Article 7(1) of the Rome Statute.208 
The Trial Chamber noted that forced marriage is similar in nature and gravity to 
the acts listed in Article 7(1).209 
143. The violation of relational autonomy has been characterized in various ways 
under international law. Within the framework of international human rights law, 
forced marriage fundamentally denies individuals the right to freely and 
consensually enter into a conjugal union. This denial not only infringes upon 
personal liberty but also undermines the essential dignity and agency of 
individuals, particularly women, who are disproportionately affected by such 
practices. The Court noted: 
“The first type of harm caused by forced marriage, 
the violation of relational autonomy, has been 
 
206 Ibid. 
207 No. ICC-02/04-01/15 A A2 (Ongwen Trial Judgment). 
208 The Rome Statute, Article 7(1); “Other inhumane Act” is defined as (k) Other inhumane acts of a similar 
character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health” 
209 Ongwen Trial Judgment, para. 2751. 

PART VI 

described in various ways under international law. 
Under international human rights law, the crux of 
forced marriage is the denial of the right to freely and 
consensually enter into marriage. In other words, 
the focus is on consent to marriage. For 
example, the International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights ("ICCPR”) states that “No 
marriage shall be entered into without the free 
and full consent of the intending spouses”. 
Similarly, the Convention on the Elimination of 
All Forms of Discrimination Against Women 
(“CEDAW”). The same right freely to choose a 
spouse and to enter into marriage only with their 
free and full consent”. International human rights 
law bodies have recognized that forced marriage, as 
defined under international human rights law, can 
take place both in peacetime and in armed conflict. 
International criminal law similarly recognizes the 
deprivation of relational autonomy through the 
imposition of a “conjugal union” on a victim. This 
union need not be marriage as recognized under 
domestic law, as it also includes relationships in 
which the victim is forcibly attached to a particular 
person outside of the context of domestic marriage 
law. These forced conjugal unions can take place 
during armed conflict or ‘peacetime’ mass atrocity, 
and under oppressive regimes, and can occur 
regardless of the victim’s existing marriage status.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
i. 
Right to free choice and autonomy 
144. The issue of forced marriage is intricately linked to child marriage, as both 
practices deny individuals, particularly minors, the fundamental right to make 
autonomous decisions regarding their lives. The imposition of forced marriage 
reflects the broader systemic issue of coerced relationships that deny the 
victims agency and autonomy. This lack of agency is heightened in the context 
of child marriage, where children are subjected to societal and familial 
pressures that undermine their ability to give informed consent. This mirrors the 
definition of forced marriage as articulated in international law, where relational 

PART VI 

autonomy is violated, and the individual's right to freely choose a partner is 
disregarded. International law has evolved a rights-based framework to address 
myriad issues. Child marriage is an evil against which the international 
community has reflected its commitment through the recognition of rights. 
These rights are traced below. 
145. This encompasses the right to free and informed consent and the right 
against gender-based violence.210 These interconnected rights form the 
foundation for ensuring that marriage is a consensual partnership rather than a 
coercive arrangement, particularly when addressing the issue of child marriage. a. Right to free and informed consent 
146. Various international instruments211 emphasize the necessity for parties 
entering into marriage to provide free and full consent. CEDAW's General 
Recommendations on Marriage and family relations further elucidate that when 
men and women marry, they assume important responsibilities. Consequently, 
marriage should not be permitted before they attain full maturity and capacity 
to act.212 For women to exercise full, free, and informed consent as outlined in 
Article 16(1)(b) of CEDAW,213 they must possess the cognitive capacity to 
comprehend the meaning and responsibilities associated with marriage. This 
entails having access to comprehensive information about their potential 
 
210 ‘GBV’ 
211 See Article 16(2) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 1948, Article 10(1) of the 
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) 1966, Article 23(3) of the ICCPR, 
Article 1 of the UN Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and Registration of 
Marriages 1962, Article 16(1)(b) of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against 
Women (CEDAW) 1975, Article 17(3) of the American Convention on Human Rights 1969, and Article 33 of 
the Arab Charter on Human Rights 2004. 
212 UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women, CEDAW General Recommendation 
No. 21: Equality in Marriage and Family Relations 1994, para 16. 
213 CEDAW, article 16(1)b states ‘The same right freely to choose a spouse and to enter into marriage only 
with their free and full consent’. 

PART VI 

spouse, understanding the institution of marriage, and recognizing their rights 
to choose if, when, and whom to marry. 
147. This principle has been elucidated in different judgments, reinforcing the 
right to free and informed consent within the context of marriage. In National 
Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality v. Minister of Justice214 the 
Constitutional Court of South Africa emphasized that autonomy encompasses 
more than mere freedom from state interference; it acknowledges the need for 
individuals to choose their partners freely. The court in that case held that: 
“117. Autonomy must mean far more than the right 
to occupy an envelope of space in which a socially 
detached individual can act freely from interference 
by the state. What is crucial is the nature of the 
activity, not its site. While recognising the unique 
worth of each person, the Constitution does not 
presuppose that a holder of rights is as an isolated, 
lonely and abstract figure possessing a disembodied 
and socially disconnected self. It acknowledges that 
people live in their bodies, their communities, their 
cultures, their places and their times. It is not for the 
state to choose or to arrange the choice of partner, 
but for the partners to choose themselves” 
 
148. Similarly in Artavia Murillo ET AL v. Costa Rica,215 the Inter-American 
Court of Human Rights addressed the question of whether the State’s 
prohibition on the practice of in vitro fertilisation (IVF) constituted an arbitrary 
interference with the right to private life. The court affirmed that the right to 
private life extends beyond privacy to include personal autonomy and the 
freedom to establish relationships. The Court held that: 
“The scope of the protection of the right to private life 
has been interpreted in broad terms by the 
international human rights courts, when indicating 
that this goes beyond the right to privacy. The 
 
214 1999 (1) SA 6, CC (South Africa). 
215 Inter-Am. Ct. H.R. (Ser. C) No. 257 (American Court of Human Rights). 

PART VI 

protection of private life encompasses a series 
of factors associated with the dignity of the 
individual, including, for example, the ability to 
develop his or her own personality and 
aspirations, to determine his or her own identity 
and to define his or her own personal 
relationships. 
The 
concept 
of 
private 
life 
encompasses aspects of physical and social 
identity, including the right to personal autonomy, 
personal development and the right to establish and 
develop relationships with other human beings and 
with the outside world. The effective exercise of the 
right to private life is decisive for the possibility of 
exercising personal autonomy on the future course 
of relevant events for a person’s quality of life. 
Private life includes the way in which individual views 
himself and how he decides to project this view 
towards others, and is an essential condition for the 
free development of the personality.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
149. These judgments emphasize the critical role of free and informed consent in 
marriage, particularly regarding child marriage. b. Right against gender-based violence 
150. Further, the right against GBV is recognised. Article 34 of the CRC provides 
a right to protection from sexual exploitation and abuse, defining child marriage 
as a form of sexual exploitation. 216 Article 19 prohibits all forms of physical or 
mental violence, abuse, or exploitation, with many young brides suffering these 
consequences.217 Child marriage frequently leads to violence against child 
wives, and although CEDAW does not specifically label child marriage as 
violence against women, it identifies forced marriage as a form of family 
violence in General Recommendations 19 on violence against women.218 The 
 
216 CRC, Article 34. 
217 CRC, Article 19. 
218 See CEDAW General Recommendation No. 19: Violence against Women, Adopted at the Eleventh 
Session of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (1992), Document A/47/38 
[Para 11]. 

PART VI 

Committee interprets Articles 2(f), 5, and 10(c) together, recognizing that 
traditional attitudes regarding women's subordination perpetuate practices 
involving violence or coercion, such as forced marriage.219 
151. The UN Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women, adopted 
by the General Assembly, defines violence as any act of GBV that results in, or 
is likely to result in, physical, sexual, or psychological harm or suffering to 
women.220 The Declaration calls on States to exercise due diligence to prevent, 
investigate and punish acts of violence against women. Article 4 requires 
member states to condemn violence against women and not invoke custom, 
tradition, or religion to evade their obligations to eliminate such violence. 221 
152. The Istanbul Convention is the first international treaty to contain a definition 
of gender as a socially constructed category that defines “women” and “men” 
according to socially assigned roles, behaviours, activities, and attributes.222 It 
firmly establishes the link between achieving gender equality and the 
eradication of violence against women. Based on this premise, it recognizes the 
structural nature of violence against women and that it is a manifestation of the 
historically unequal power relations between women and men. The Convention 
specifically asks State parties to ensure that culture, custom, religion, tradition 
or so-called ‘honour’ shall not be considered as justification for any acts of 
violence. Evidently, the human and fundamental right against GBV has found 
firm roots in the international sphere. This affords protection against child 
 
219 Ibid, [Para 24]. 
220 UN General Assembly, Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women, A/RES/48/104, UN 
General Assembly (20 December 1991). 
221 DEVAW, Article 4. 
222 Council of Europe (2014). The Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence 
against Women and Domestic Violence. 

PART VI 

marriage, as it is a form of GBV that disproportionately affects girls and women. 
It subjects them to early and forced marriages perpetuating power imbalances 
and often leading to physical, emotional, and sexual abuse. ii. 
Right to education 
153. The right to education is violated by the commission of child marriage under 
international law. These rights are manifested in the rights of children to – 
primary education, information, and sex education. a. Right to primary education 
154. The CRC mandates that States ensure primary education is free and 
compulsory. Article 28 states that the child has the right to education,223 while 
Article 29 emphasizes that education should develop the child's personality, 
talents, and abilities, as well as promote respect for human rights and 
fundamental freedoms.224 
155. The CRC’s Guidelines for Periodic Reports require States to outline specific 
measures taken to ensure compulsory primary education, including minimum 
age for enrolment and compulsory education.225 The Committee further extends 
this obligation to include secondary education, reinforcing the need for 
comprehensive educational policies. The Concluding Comments of the 
CEDAW Committee has expressed ongoing concern regarding the impact of 
 
223 CRC, Article 28. 
224 CRC, Article 29. 
225 Concluding observations of the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child (2002-2023) – extracts 
concerning inclusive education and disability, gender and ethnic background and related issues. 

PART VI 

early and forced marriages on school dropout rates among girls and urged 
States to adopt all available measures to eliminate child marriage.226 
156. Research from UNESCO highlights that, in many countries, marriage and 
schooling are seen as mutually exclusive.227 In South Asia, particularly in 
Bangladesh, India, and Nepal, child brides are four times more likely to be out 
of school than their unmarried peers.228 While the relationship between 
education and child marriage is clear, the mechanisms driving this connection 
are complex, suggesting that interventions must be multifaceted to address 
both issues simultaneously. b. Right to be informed 
157. International obligations also emphasize the importance of awareness and 
education regarding the adverse effects of child marriage. Article 12 of the CRC 
asserts that children should be provided with information that aids their 
understanding of issues affecting them, including the potential consequences 
of early marriage.229 The right to be informed empowers young individuals to 
make autonomous choices about their lives, fostering an environment 
conducive to resisting harmful practices such as child marriage. Education 
plays a critical role in this regard; when girls are aware of their rights and the 
detrimental effects of early marriage on their health, education, and economic 
prospects, they are better equipped to advocate for themselves and their peers. 
 
226 See Concluding observations of the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women 
(2002-2010) – extracts concerning inclusive education; Also see CEDAW Committee Concluding 
Observations, India (Jan 1990). UN Doc. A/55/38, Para 78. 
227 UNESCO (2021). Reimagining our futures together: a new social contract for education, International 
Commission on the Futures of Education; See also UNFPA (2012). Marrying Too Young: End Child Marriage, 
76 p. 
228 Ibid. 
229 CRC, Article 12. 

PART VI 

c. Right to sex education 
158. Major United Nations conferences of the 1990s, such as the International 
Conference on Population and Development230 held in Cairo in 1994, 
emphasized the importance of human rights, gender equality, sexual and 
reproductive health, and HIV/AIDS awareness.231 The ICPD's Programme of 
Action affirmed that sexual health is a vital component of overall health, stating 
that all individuals should have access to information and services related to 
sexual and reproductive health.232 In subsequent years, documents like the 
Yogyakarta Principles233 and the Bali Global Youth Forum have built upon these 
foundations, addressing the rights of marginalized groups, including 
adolescents, to access comprehensive sexuality education. In 2012, the UN 
Commission on Population and Development reaffirmed these principles - 
calling states to provide evidence-based comprehensive education on human 
sexuality, sexual and reproductive health, human rights, and gender equality, 
enabling youth to engage with their sexuality positively and responsibly.234 
159. In a landmark ruling, the European Court of Human Rights235 upheld young 
people's right to sexuality education in schools. This case involved a refusal by 
a primary school to grant a request from a parent seeking to exempt her 
daughter, then seven years old, from sex education lessons. The EtCHR opined 
 
230 “ICPD” 
231 UN Population Fund (1995). Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, 
Cairo, 5-13 September 1994, A/CONF.171/13/Rev.1; UN coordinated an International Conference on 
Population and Development (ICPD) in Cairo, Egypt. Its resulting Programme of Action is the steering 
document for the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 
232 Ibid. 
233 International Commission of Jurists (2007). Yogyakarta Principles: Principles on the Application of 
International Human Rights Law in Relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity. International 
Commission of Jurists. 
234 See UNESCO (2018). International technical guidance on sexuality education: an evidence-informed 
approach. 
235 A.R. and L.R. v. Switzerland, application no. 22338/15 (EtCHR). 

PART VI 

that this refusal violated the right to freedom of thought, conscience, and 
religion. It also violates Article 2 (the right to life) and Article 8 (the right to 
respect for private and family life). The Court recognized that one of the aims 
of sex education is to prevent sexual violence and exploitation, threats that 
compromise children's physical and mental health.236 It also stressed that state 
education should prepare children for social realities, justifying the inclusion of 
sexual education for even very young children in primary education. iii. 
Right to development of children 
160. A lack of education denies girls their right to personal development as 
guaranteed in the CRC which is crucial for them to prepare for adulthood and 
effectively contribute to the future well-being of their families and society. The 
CRC highlights the significance of personal development, emphasizing that 
every child has the inherent right to develop their personality, talents, and 
mental and physical abilities to their fullest potential.237 The right to personal 
development is intricately linked to various aspects of a child's well-being, 
particularly health. The CRC interrelates with five other articles,238 which 
collectively address eight specific dimensions of child development that require 
protection: physical development, mental development, moral development, 
social development, cultural development, spiritual development, development 
of the personality, and development of talent. 
161. Under Article 29(1)(a) of the CRC, States Parties agree that the education 
of the child shall be directed toward the development of the child's personality, 
 
236 Ibid. 
237 See OHCHR (2013). Realising the Right to Development: Essays in Commemoration of 25 Years of 
the United Nations Declaration on the Right to Development. 
238 CRC, Articles 18(1), 23(3), 27(1), 29(1)(a), and 32(1). 

PART VI 

talents and mental and physical abilities to their fullest potential.239 Article 
29(1)(d) further emphasizes that education should be oriented toward the 
preparation of the child for a responsible life in a free society, in the spirit of 
understanding, peace, tolerance, equality of sexes, and friendship among all 
peoples.240 Similarly, Article 13(1) of the International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights241 stipulates that education shall enable all persons 
to participate effectively in a free society.242 Article 13(2) reinforces this by 
asserting that education should be directed to the full development of the 
human personality and the sense of its dignity."243 
162. As Professor Nico Schrijver argues, the right to development functions as a 
cluster right, encompassing a range of interconnected rights.244 These include 
the right to a decent standard of living, which encompasses the right to food, 
water, clothing, and housing; the right to work; the right to education; the right 
to life; and the right to freedom of expression and organization. Together, these 
rights form a comprehensive 'human right to development,' which is essential 
for empowering children, particularly girls, to realize their full potential and 
actively participate in their communities. As we shall explore below, these rights 
ought to influence our understanding of the law in dealing with child rights in 
India.

239 CRC, Article 29(1)(a) 
240 CRC, Article 29(1)(d). 
241 UN General Assembly (1966). International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, United 
Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 993, p. 3. 
242 ICESCR, Article 13(1). 
243 ICESCR, Article 13(2). 
244 Nico Schrijver, Development without Destruction: The UN and Global Resource Management 
(Bloomington, Indiana University Press, 2010), p. 221. 

PART VII 

VII. India’s obligation 
163. Article 51 of the Indian Constitution emphasizes the importance of 
international law and treaty obligations, urging the Indian state to make 
concerted efforts to adhere to and respect international legal standards245. This 
provision establishes a foundation for integrating international human rights law 
into domestic legal frameworks, particularly concerning the protection of 
vulnerable populations such as children. 
164. This Court has consistently affirmed India’s obligation with regard 
international conventions and norms when interpreting domestic laws.246 In 
Vishaka v. State of Rajasthan,247 this Court formulated basic principles and 
guidelines based on international instruments aimed at preventing sexual 
harassment at the workplace.248 In Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum v. Union 
of India249 this Court recognized aspects related to sustainable development 
as part of customary international law. 
165. In Apparel Export Promotion Council v. AK Chopra250 this Court had the 
occasion to opine on the judiciary's obligation to give due regard to international 
conventions, particularly when there is no inconsistency between these 
 
245 The Constitution of India, Article 51; The article deals with Promotion of international peace and security 
- The State shall endeavour to--(a) promote international peace and security; (b) maintain just and honourable 
relations between nations;(c) foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of 
organised peoples with one another; and (d) encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration. 
246 See Prem Shankar Shukla v. Delhi Admn. (1980); Mackinnon Mackenzie and Co. Ltd. v. 
Audrey D' Costa (1987); Sheela Barse v. Secy., Children's Aid Society [(1987), 51] 
SCC at p. 54; Vishaka v. State of Rajasthan (1997); People's Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of 
India (1997) and D.K. Basu v. State of W.B. (1997), 438. 
247 (1997) AIR 3011. 
248 These guidelines were informed by several international instruments, including the Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, and the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 111 on discrimination in employment. 
249(1996) INSC 952; The Court incorporated principles like the “precautionary principle” and the “polluter pays 
principle” into domestic law. 
250 (1999). 

PART VII 

conventions and domestic laws, or when domestic law is silent on a particular 
issue. 
“This Court has in numerous cases emphasized that 
while discussing constitutional requirements, court 
and counsel must never forget the core principle 
embodied in the international conventions and 
instruments and as far as possible, give effect to the 
principles 
contained 
in 
those 
international 
instruments. The courts are under an obligation to 
give due regard to international conventions and 
norms for construing domestic laws, more so, when 
there is no inconsistency between them and there is 
a void in domestic law.” 
 
166. In M/s Entertainment Network (India) Ltd. v. M/s Super Cassette 
Industries Ltd.251 this Court expressed its willingness to adopt principle of 
international conventions to which India is not a signatory where they were 
compatible with Indian law. This approach was further exemplified in Ravindra 
Kumar Dhariwal v. Union of India252 where this Court maintained that even 
when India is not a signatory to certain international treaties, the principles 
enshrined within them could still inform the interpretation of domestic legislation. 
167. The overarching theme emerging from these judgments is that India has a 
dual obligation: to respect its commitments under international treaties and to 
interpret domestic laws in a manner consistent with international human rights 
standards. This is particularly relevant concerning child marriage, as India has 
ratified several international instruments that set the minimum age for marriage 
 
251 This position has been reiterated by various other decisions of this Court. See, for instance, National Legal 
Services Authority v. Union of India, (2014). 
252 Ravinder Kumar Dhariwal v Union of India 2021 INSC 916. 

PART VIII 

at eighteen, including CEDAW253 and the CRC254. Moreover, even if India is not 
a party to certain regional conventions that address child marriage directly, the 
principles of non-discrimination, the best interests of the child, and the right to 
free and informed consent should guide national legislation and policy in this 
area. These fundamental principles are embedded in various international 
human rights instruments and form the backbone of child protection efforts 
globally. 
168. As Prof. Rangita De Silva-De Alwis argues in her report, Child Marriage and 
the Law – Legislative Reform Initiative Paper Series255 child marriage must be 
treated as a human rights issue to highlight its seriousness and prompt state 
parties to amend their laws and policies accordingly.256 She also emphasises 
that framing child marriage within international treaties compels States to be 
accountable for their inaction on this issue. If a treaty establishes a monitoring 
body or a mechanism to address complaints, any non-compliant state party may 
face public rulings against it.257 We believe that such public scrutiny can 
pressure the state to implement effective measures that protect children from 
the harmful effects of early marriage. 
VIII. Constitutional guarantees against child marriage 
169. The right to free choice and autonomy, education and development of the 
child with all their offshoots are firmly recognised in this Court’s jurisprudence 
 
253 India ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women on July 9, 
1993. 
254 India ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1992. 
255 Rangita De Silva De-Alwis, Child Marriage and the Law – Legislative Reform Initiative Paper Series (New 
York: Division of Policy and Planning, UNICEF, 2007), para 28. 
256 Ibid, 6. 
257 Ibid; See also Douglas, ‘The Significance of International Law’, 89-90. 

PART VIII 

and the myriad legislations in India which we have traced above. The evolution 
and progress of child rights in the international arena have simultaneously been 
evolved and recognised in India. 
170. The material deprivation of health, education, employment and life 
opportunities wreaked by child marriage is an affront to cherished constitutional 
principles of equality, liberty and free expression. Children who are thrown into 
forced marriages are deprived of their right to development of the child. Three 
quarters of a century after the commencement of the Constitution, child 
marriage remains a present and continuous threat to our society, social 
progress and individual liberty. The Constitution does not countenance such an 
affront. We shall trace the gamut of rights accruing against child marriage from 
the Constitution. 
171. The right to life and liberty enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution258 is 
violated by the commission of child marriage. All children married as minors are 
denied their right to choice and autonomy, right to education, right to sexuality 
and the right to development of the child. Girls who are married as children are 
denied their right to health. First, we shall analyze the right to choice, autonomy 
and sexuality, then we shall explore the right to health. We shall thereafter trace 
the right to childhood which includes the right to education and development. 
 
258 Article 21, The Constitution of India. 

PART VIII 

A. Right to self-determination: choice, autonomy and sexuality of children 
172. Life’s meaning for any person is animated by their dignity, the ability to make 
free choices, the autonomy to have them translated into reality and to plan the 
peaks and troughs of life in good health. The journey a person travels from birth 
to death is made meaningful and enjoyable by the realization of these rights 
which are guaranteed under Article 21. 
173. Child marriage deprives children of their agency, autonomy and right to fully 
develop and enjoy their childhood. The right to free choice and autonomy in 
marriage encompasses three fundamental rights: the right to free and informed 
consent, the right against gender based violence, and the right to sexual 
autonomy. These interconnected rights form the foundation for ensuring that 
marriage is a consensual partnership rather than a coercive arrangement, 
particularly when addressing the issue of child marriage. 
174. Girls who are married off early are not only denied their childhood but are 
also forced into social isolation on account of being cut off from their natal 
family, friends and other support systems. They are left to the mercies of their 
marital home and in-laws and denied their innocence which is native to a 
meaningful childhood experience. Boys who are married early are forced to take 
up more responsibilities and are pressured to play the role of a provider to the 
family, earlier in life. Patriarchy requires members of a marital union to play 
specific roles. It forces men to play the public role in a marriage and fend for the 
family by being responsible for its economic and occupational development. 
Both sexes are adversely affected by forced and early marriage. 

PART VIII 

175. In India, marriage has traditionally been a religious ceremony organised by 
the families of the bride and groom. The union is looked at as an integration of 
the two families and the object of facilitating an organically compatible 
relationship between the bride and the groom is inconsequential. The mandate 
to recreate a patriarchal family structure is tied to social norms and 
expectations. One of the primary manifestations of this is the control over 
sexuality. While social norms rooted in a patriarchal mindset seek to control the 
sexuality of all persons, its nexus with child marriage is undeniable. 
176. Patriarchy offends the most basic rights of people by creating a hierarchy-
based order of subjugation and static power distribution in society. When an 
institution of patriarchy operates, it never denies rights in a unidimensional way. 
The frontal assault of patriarchal institutions is in, all at once, denying any 
deviance and valuing some over others. In the instance of child marriage, the 
right to sexuality of a person is systematically dismantled. The assault starts 
with the sexualisation of the child at a tender age. As we have stated above, 
marriage is an institution with legal standing in which sexual conduct is 
legitimised and promoted by the State and society. Marrying in childhood has 
the effect of objectifying the child. The practice of child marriage imposes 
mature burdens on children who are not physically or mentally prepared to 
comprehend the significance of marriage. When women are forced into 
marriages to protect their ‘chastity’ and ‘virginity’ she is denied her right to 
sexuality, bodily autonomy and the freedom to make choices for herself as she 
sees fit. 

PART VIII 

177. The minor is then boxed with the expectation of compulsory heterosexuality. 
The ability of a person to experience sexual desire organically and to navigate 
their choice in intimacy is effaced at the altar of tradition and social norm. At an 
age which must be instructed by the ability to make mistakes and learn from life 
experiences, children are stunted and forcibly fit into boxes. The multi-
dimensional assault of child marriage is therefore not only oppressive to 
heterosexual girls and boys but also to all gender and sexual minorities. 
Choices in matters of sexuality are integral to human desire. Our Constitution 
recognises the right a person has over all aspects of their sexuality.259 The 
control of the sexuality of a girl child from orthodox moral virtues restricts her 
ability to experience life in its fullest dimension. Sexuality is not only the 
orientation a person may have in matters of romance and intimacy but also the 
ability to navigate the desires of a person regardless of their choice of partner 
or the option not to have a partner. Men and women alike are victimised by 
compulsory heterosexuality. In child marriage, their limited agency within 
heteropatriarchy is also taken away in infancy. 
178. Upon marriage, a girl is expected to bear children and prove her fertility. 
Decisions of reproduction are withdrawn from the girl and placed in the hands 
of the family. The right to choice and autonomy of a woman who is married as 
a child is violated by the system of child marriage. When minor girls are forced 
to make conjugal relations, they experience post-traumatic stress and 
depression emanating from sexual abuse by an elder partner.260 Child marriage 
 
259 Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India, (2018); Joseph Shine v. Union of India, (2019). 
260 NCPCR (2017). A Statistical Analysis of Child Marriage in India, Based on Census, 2011. Young Lives 
and National Commission for Protection of Child Rights. 

PART VIII 

leads to irreversible physical and psychological damage in girls. Her choice is 
eviscerated in matters of selection of partner, time of marriage, reproductive 
freedom and sexuality. Article 21 protects these rights.261 
179. In X v. Principal Secretary,262 a three-Judge Bench of this Court speaking 
through one of us (DY Chandrachud, CJ) held that the right to choice and 
autonomy includes the right to reproductive freedom. Elucidating on the 
contours of this right, the Court held as follows: 
“101. The ambit of reproductive rights is not 
restricted to the right of women to have or not have 
children. It also includes the constellation of 
freedoms and entitlements that enable a woman to 
decide freely on all matters relating to her sexual and 
reproductive health. Reproductive rights include the 
right to access education and information about 
contraception and sexual health, the right to decide 
whether and what type of contraceptives to use, the 
right to choose whether and when to have children, 
the right to access safe and legal abortions, and the 
right to reproductive healthcare. Women must also 
have the autonomy to make decisions concerning 
these rights, free from coercion or violence.” 
 
180. This Court has also articulated the right to self-determination in National 
Legal Services Authority v. Union of India.263 Choice and autonomy are the 
vocabulary in which self-determination is exercised. This court held that the right 
to self-determination which is protected under Article 21 of the Constitution 
includes the right of a person to determine their gender. The meaningful realisation 
of this right assumes that the underlying conditions in the society are feasible for 
its free exercise. This Court in NALSA (supra) has held that the right to self-
 
261 Shafin Jahan v. Ashokan KM, (2018); X v. Principal Secretary, (2023). 
262 (2023). 
263 (2014). 

PART VIII 

determination is an integral part of personal autonomy and self-expression and 
falls within the realm of personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the 
Constitution of India. 
181. A nine-Judge Bench of this Court in KS Puttaswamy (Privacy-9J) v. Union 
of India,264 held that the fundamental right to privacy connotes the right to 
spatial control, decisional autonomy, and information control. This Court held 
that privacy is an essential aspect of dignity and protects the ability to make 
choices for oneself. This Court has conclusively held that personal aspects of 
life, including family, marriage, procreation and sexual orientation are intrinsic 
to the dignity of an individual and enjoys protection under Article 21. From this 
emerges the ability of a person to retain autonomy of their body and mind. 
182. The Court held that liberty enables the individual to have a choice of 
preferences on various facets of life including what and how one will eat, the way 
one will dress, the faith one will espouse and a myriad other matters on which 
autonomy and self-determination require a choice to be made within the privacy of 
the mind. In Anuj Garg v. Hotel Association of India,265 a three-Judge Bench 
of this court held that the right to self-determination is an integral offshoot of 
gender justice discourse. Justice SB Sinha speaking for the Court held that the 
law and its enforcement strategies must reflect the right of women to freedom. 
183. Despite the enactment of the PCMA, the abysmal number of prosecutions 
and the continued existence of the practice violates the essence of this Court’s 
holding. These rights and values are equally iterated in international law to 
which India owes an obligation. 
 
264 (2017) at 298. 
265 (2008). 

PART VIII 

B. Right to health 
184. The right to reproductive freedom which we have traced above is part of the 
constellation of rights in which the right to the health of a person also finds its 
place. Article 21 of the Constitution guarantees the right to life and personal 
liberty. Neither of these elements could be completely fulfilled without the ability 
of individuals to lead a healthy life. Our Constitution recognises the right to 
health as an inalienable aspect of the right to life and personal liberty under 
Article 21.266 Women who are married young are forced to bear children earlier 
in life. They are likely to have their first childbirth before the age of eighteen and 
are likely to conceive more than once within twenty-four months. The health 
penalty imposed on women in child marriages is writ large in the complications 
arising from adolescent pregnancies. Teenage pregnancy leads to health 
complications such as fistula, pregnancy complications and death during 
childbirth. Early childbirth also leads to the deterioration of maternal mortality 
and morbidity. 
185. The maternal morbidity is associated with adolescent fertility – typical to 
child marriage. It is marked by common negative health outcomes such as 
anaemia, high blood pressure, toxaemia, delayed or obstructed labour, 
complications in pregnancy and weight loss during lactation.267 The adverse 
health effects of early marriage and pregnancy have dented the nutritional 
status of adolescent girls in India. These ill health outcomes haunt the woman 
 
266 Pt. Parmanand Katara v. Union of India, (1989); Paschim Banga Khet Majoor Samiti v. State 
of West Bengal, (1996). 
267 Jaya Sagade. Child Marriage in India: Socio-legal and human Rights Dimensions. Oxford University Press, 
2nd ed. (2012) 17. 

PART VIII 

throughout her life cause severe impediments in navigating the daily trifles and 
occasions of life. 
186. Studies have shown that women married as children are more likely to be 
sterilized earlier in life. The sterilization is associated with families getting the 
desired number of children earlier in the marital life of the couple. Sterilization 
of women in child marriage is indicative of loss of control of a woman over her 
own reproductive choices. This also leads to more unprotected sex which may 
expose women to risks of contracting sexually transmitted diseases like HIV. 
187. In Independent Thought v. Union of India,268 this Court struck down the 
marital exception to rape in Section 375 IPC as it relates to underage wives. 
The Court had the opportunity to delve into the effects of child marriage and its 
interposition with the right to health. Justice Deepak Gupta in his opinion has 
traced the right to health in the context of child marriage as follows: 
“179. There can be no dispute that every citizen 
of this country has the right to get good 
healthcare. Every citizen can expect that the 
State shall make best endeavours for ensuring 
that the health of the citizen is not adversely 
affected. By now it is well settled by a catena of 
judgments of this Court that the “right to life” 
envisaged in Article 21 of the Constitution of India 
is not merely a right to live an animal existence. 
This Court has repeatedly held that right to 
life means a right to live with human dignity. 
Life should be meaningful and worth living. 
Life has many shades. Good health is the 
raison d'être of a good life. Without good 
health there cannot be a good life. In the case 
of a minor girl child good health would mean 
her right to develop as a healthy woman. This 
not only requires good physical health but 
also good mental health. The girl child must 
be encouraged to bloom into a healthy 
 
268 (2017). 

PART VIII 

woman. The girl child must not be deprived of 
her right of choice....” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
188. Child marriage inflicts tangible and lifelong physical and mental injuries to 
its members. The right to health is made illusory by all accounts within such an 
institution. The effect of child marriage denies women their health which is vital 
to lead a dignified life. 
C. Right to childhood: education and development 
189. Childhood represents the best of what human life has to offer. A good 
childhood is marked by limitless imagination and the ability to dream big. The 
audacity to envision futures filled with success, happiness, divergence and 
enjoyment occurs naturally to all – but is manifested most authentically in 
childhood. The right to childhood is the right to be able to develop the 
experiences of childhood into tangible life skills and intellectual pursuits. It is 
marked by the expectation of the child that they are not on their own but are 
entitled to the supportive network of their parents, siblings, family, friends and 
the entire society. As the saying goes – it takes a village to raise a child. The 
foremost method by which society commits to developing a child is by imparting 
education. Institutions of learning are centres for society to channel knowledge 
and experience and make them available to children. Education allows its 
recipients to benefit from the best of human advances and claim a degree of 
ownership in its fruits. 

PART VIII 

190. Education allows a person to develop and articulate their thoughts and learn 
the language of global engagement. It is a call for greater emancipation of the 
mind. Education breathes life into intellect, dimension into perspective and 
openness in minds. It opens doors to employment opportunities and enables 
people to stand on their own feet in professional and personal pursuits of life. 
The detrimental effect of not being educated affects girls most starkly since they 
are already vulnerable to agents of oppression on account of their gender. 
Marriage for most women in patriarchal societies is an announcement of 
educational conclusion. 
191. It is uncommon for women to continue education after marriage without the 
express approval and wish of the in-laws and husband. The imposition of a 
marital family on the education of women may be an experience common to all 
women. But when the woman is married as a child, her education is arrested in 
place during a pivotal period of brain development. The minority of a woman’s 
age at the time of her marriage has a heightened impact on her education. The 
right to primary education is a fundamental right expressly enshrined under 
Article 21-A. 
192. However, the right to education under Article 21 holds broader significance. 
The right to information about routine ways to make life meaningful and be 
educated on the adverse effects of child marriage falls under Article 21. 
Children are entitled to be aware of their rights and the ill effects that marriage 
unleashes on them. The entitlement of the child flows from the right to 
education. Education cannot be restricted to pedantic and bookish classroom 
learning. The State certainly has an obligation to provide free and compulsory 

PART VIII 

education to all between the ages of six and fourteen. The mandatory minimum 
prescribed by Article 21-A, however, cannot restrict the right of children to be 
informed of significant and life altering dangers. 
193. In a litany of judgments, this Court has firmly grounded the right to education 
into our constitutional jurisprudence.269 While dealing with a PIL against 
physically and mentally challenged children being kept in jails, this Court in 
Sheela Barse II v. Union of India270 has recognised that it is the duty of the 
State to ensure the full development of a child’s personality. The articulation of 
the right to development of a child puts a positive obligation on the State to 
create conditions feasible and resources necessary for the full development of 
children. In addition to the rights tracible to Part III of the Constitution, the 
development of child is also a part of the Directive Principles of State Policy.271 
Article 39 stipulates certain principles of policy to be followed by the State. 
Clause (f) of Article 39 reads as follows: 
“(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities 
to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of 
freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth 
are protected against exploitation and against moral 
and material abandonment.” 
 
194. The duty of the State corresponds to the right to development of a child 
which is tracible to Articles 14, 19(1)(a), 21 and 15. The right comprehends the 
ability of a child to exercise free speech, express authenticity and live a life of 
liberty and dignity. It falls on the State to ensure that children are informed of 
 
269 Unni Krishnan JP v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1993); Society For Unaided Private Schools 
Of Rajasthan v. Union Of India (2012); Avinash Mehrotra v. Union Of India, 2009 INSC 498; Bachpan 
Bachao Andolan v. Union of India, (2011); Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Vedic Vishwavidyalaya v. State 
of M.P., (2013); Sampurna Behura v. Union of India, (2018). 
270 (1983) AIR 378. 
271 ‘DPSP’ 

PART VIII 

ways in which their life is likely to interact with society and the cautions to bear 
in the journey they chart out in life so that they may enjoy and exercise their 
rights under Articles 14, 15, 19(1)(a) and 21. 
195. Child marriage is one such threat. Sexual conduct within this relation, or for 
that matter outside marriage, is another aspect of education and information. 
Sex education becomes imperative for children to process experiences which 
they are to inevitably encounter. In Just Rights for Children Alliance v. S 
Harish,272 one of us (J B Pardiwala, J) has lucidly reflected on the importance 
of sex education. The Court has opined that: 
“238. In India, the misconceptions about sex education 
are 
widespread 
and 
contribute 
to 
its 
limited 
implementation and effectiveness. Many people, 
including parents and educators, hold conservative 
views that discussing sex is inappropriate, immoral, or 
embarrassing. 
This 
societal 
stigma 
creates 
a 
reluctance to talk openly about sexual health, leading 
to a significant knowledge gap among adolescents. 
 
239. One prevalent misconception is that sex 
education encourages promiscuity and irresponsible 
behaviour among youth. Critics often argue that 
providing information about sexual health and 
contraception will lead to increased sexual activity 
among teenagers. However, research has shown that 
comprehensive sex education actually delays the onset 
of sexual activity and promotes safer practices among 
those who are sexually active. [Padminin Iyer & Peter 
Aggleton, Seventy years of sex education - A Critical 
Review, 74(1) HEALTH EDUC. J. 3 (2015).] 
 
240. Another common belief is that sex education is a 
Western concept that does not align with traditional 
Indian values. This view has led to resistance from 
various state governments, resulting in bans on sex 
education in schools in some states. This type of 
opposition 
hinders 
the 
implementation 
of 
comprehensive and effective sexual health programs, 
leaving 
many 
adolescents 
without 
accurate 
 
272. 

PART VIII 

information. This is what causes teenagers and young 
adults to turn to the internet, where they have access 
to unmonitored and unfiltered information, which is 
often misleading and can plant the seed for unhealthy 
sexual behaviours. 
241. Additionally, there is a misconception that sex 
education 
only 
covers 
biological 
aspects 
of 
reproduction. Effective sex education encompasses a 
wide range of topics, including consent, healthy 
relationships, gender equality, and respect for diversity. 
Addressing these topics is crucial for reducing sexual 
violence and promoting gender equity.” 
 
196. In the context of child marriage, we have demonstrated the heightened risk 
of health complications to arise out of adolescent sex and childbearing. While 
girls married as children have to bear the consequences of this, they are not 
the only party to the sexual relation which causes negative health outcomes. 
Boys married at young age equally feel pressures associated with sexual 
performance. Often, the only resource available to them is their peer group. The 
performance of sexual activity is an avenue for men to exhibit their masculinity. 
Because of their tender mind and patriarchal notions of masculinity and sexual 
dominance, they are likely to fall into egregious misinformation by their peers 
and commit violence on their child brides. The issue of approaching boys in 
child marriage with care, compassion and affection is unfortunately lost in some 
mainstream discourse on child marriage. While girls are undoubtedly affected 
by child marriage disproportionately, we ought to also account for the tender 
minds of men who are forced into marriages as children. 
197. The right to childhood belongs to all sexes. Education- primary, sexual and 
life enhancing – is integral to the right to childhood. Realisation of this right is 
crucial in dealing with the evils of child marriage. Abuses of patriarchy are learnt 

PART VIII 

behaviours. What is learnt can be unlearned or better yet, disabused early on. 
Education in all aspects allows for the debunking of harmful life choices and 
conducts which children may adopt in the absence of better guidance. 
D. Reiterating the States’ obligations towards combatting child marriage 
198. Under IHRL, the State has a concrete, enforceable obligation to prevent and 
eliminate child marriage by ensuring that laws, policies, and social services 
align with international standards such as those in the CRC and the CEDAW. 
The state must establish and enforce a legal framework that explicitly prohibits 
child marriage, accompanied by robust mechanisms for implementation and 
redress. 
199. States also have an obligation to monitor and enforce compliance with these 
laws and to work closely with civil society organizations to implement effective 
interventions. The State's role is not limited to merely punishing offenders but 
extends to creating an enabling environment where children can exercise their 
rights freely. This includes the responsibility to not only to legislate against child 
marriage but also to address the underlying socio-economic factors—poverty, 
lack of education, and gender discrimination—that perpetuate this practice. 
200. The Directive Principles of State Policy in Part IV of the Constitution lay 
down the fundamental principles in the governance of the country and press 
upon the State to apply them while making laws. Article 38(2) of the 
Constitution273 requires the state to promote the welfare of people and eliminate 
inequalities in opportunities: It states that: 
 
273 Article 38(2), the Constitution of India 1950. 

PART VIII 

“38. State to secure a social order for the promotion 
of welfare of the people – 
… 
(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimize the 
inequalities in income, and endeavour to eliminate 
inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities, not 
only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of 
people residing in different areas or engaged in 
different vocations.” 
201. This Article mandates the State to actively reduce inequalities and promote 
welfare, which is essential in addressing child marriage—a practice that 
disproportionately 
affects 
children 
from 
economically 
and 
socially 
disadvantaged backgrounds. By targeting inequalities in income, status, and 
opportunities, Article 38(2) supports creating conditions where vulnerable 
children have better access to education, healthcare, and social support. This, 
in turn, reduces the pressures that often lead to early marriage, such as 
economic dependency and limited future prospects, and enables children to 
pursue a life free from the constraints imposed by early marital commitments. 
202. This Court has, in several landmark judgments, reinforced the State’s 
positive obligation to protect children’s rights. In Sheela Barse II (supra) this 
court dealt with abandoned or destitute children lodged in various jails across 
the country for ‘safe custody.’ The Court noted that the National Policy for the 
Welfare of Children contained the following preamble: 
“The nation’s children are a supremely important asset. 
Their nurture and solicitude are our responsibility. 
Children’s programmes should find a prominent 
part in our national plans for the development of 
human resources, so that our children grow up to 
become robust citizens, physically fit, mentally 
alert and morally healthy, endowed with the skill 
and 
motivations 
needed 
by 
society. 
Equal 
opportunities for development of all children during the 

PART VIII 

period of growth should be our aim, for this would serve 
our large purpose of reducing inequality and ensuring 
social justice.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
203. This Court observed that if a child is a “national asset” as per the National 
Policy, the State bears the duty to nurture and ensure their full development, 
underscoring the expectation that children not be subjected to custodial 
detention. Here, the principles of care and protection are directly relevant to 
child marriage, as the practice obstructs the full and healthy development of 
minors by imposing on them responsibilities and roles they are neither 
physically nor emotionally prepared to undertake. Such an arrangement 
undermines their potential and violates their rights to education, health, and 
personal development, reinforcing cycles of poverty and inequality. 
204. In this context, the principle of parens patriae—where the State assumes a 
protective role akin to that of a guardian—is particularly relevant. The State’s 
intervention in preventing child marriage aligns with its duty to act in the best 
interest of children, ensuring their safety, development, and freedom from 
practices that harm their physical, emotional, and educational prospects. This 
principle has been repeatedly upheld by the judiciary as essential in upholding 
child rights and creating a supportive environment that upholds their well-being 
and growth into empowered, healthy citizens. 
205. Similarly, in Society for Unaided Private Schools v. Union of India274 the 
Court addressed the constitutionality of Section 12 of the Right of Children to 
Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009. This provision, which mandates a 
 
274 (2012). 

PART VIII 

25% reservation in schools for children from disadvantaged backgrounds, was 
challenged on the grounds that it violated Articles 19(1)(g) and 30 of those who 
had established schools in the private sector. The Court upheld the 
constitutionality of this provision, finding the following: 
“222. The provisions referred to above and other 
provisions of international conventions indicate that the 
rights have been guaranteed to the children and those 
rights carry corresponding State obligations to respect, 
protect and fulfil the realisation of children's rights. The 
obligation to protect implies the horizontal right 
which casts an obligation on the State to see that it 
is not violated by non-State actors. For non-State 
actors to respect children's rights casts a negative 
duty of non-violation to protect children's rights 
and a positive duty on them to prevent the violation 
of children's rights by others, and also to fulfill 
children's 
rights 
and 
take 
measures 
for 
progressive improvement. In other words, in the 
spheres of non-State activity there shall be no violation 
of children's rights.” 
… 
224. The primary responsibility for children's rights, 
therefore, lies with the State and the State has to 
respect, protect and fulfil children's rights and has also 
got a duty to regulate the private institutions that care 
for children, to protect children from violence or abuse, 
to protect children from economic exploitation, 
hazardous work and to ensure human treatment of 
children. Non-State actors exercising the State 
functions like establishing and running private 
educational institutions are also expected to respect 
and protect the rights of the child, but they are, not 
expected to surrender their rights constitutionally 
guaranteed.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
206. These judgments affirm that the State must regulate private as well as non-
State actors in ensuring children’s welfare and that the State holds primary 
responsibility for protecting children’s rights. Applied to child marriage, these 
principles reiterate that the State must enact and enforce laws that prohibit child 

PART IX 

marriage while ensuring that social, educational, and economic protections are 
in place to prevent the practice. 
IX. Way forward 
207. In light of the foregoing analyses, we seek to formulate specific guidelines 
for achieving the elimination of child marriage while bearing in mind the delicate 
socio-economic interplay. The Union submits that the PCMA focuses on two 
key pillars: (a) raising awareness and (b) prosecution. Despite progress in 
awareness campaigns, there is still a pressing need to enhance accountability 
mechanisms, ensure mandatory reporting, and rehabilitate minors affected by 
child marriages. Further attention is required to make the legal framework more 
effective by addressing loopholes and ensuring swift action against offenders, 
particularly in areas with high child marriage prevalence. 
208. Addressing child marriage requires an intersectional approach that 
acknowledges the overlapping vulnerabilities experienced by children, 
especially girls from marginalized communities. Intersectionality involves 
considering factors like gender, caste, socioeconomic status, and geography, 
which often increase the risks of early marriage. Preventive strategies should 
therefore be tailored to the unique needs of various communities and focus on 
addressing the root causes of child marriage, such as poverty, gender 
inequality, lack of education, and entrenched cultural practices. 
209. The PCMA as a social legislation will only succeed through the collective 
efforts of all stakeholders to address the issue within a broader social 
framework which emphasises the need for multi-sectoral coordination. This 

PART IX 

necessitates the enhancement of reporting mechanisms, expansion of public 
awareness campaigns, and investment in the training and capacity-building of 
law enforcement officers and related actors. It is also crucial to regularly monitor 
the implementation of the Act, conduct evaluations to identify gaps, and 
establish feedback mechanisms to continually refine and improve responses to 
child marriage. As we issue these directions, we emphasize the need for more 
comprehensive approaches and community-driven strategies to ensure the 
complete eradication of child marriages. 
210. We frame the following guidelines for the effective and useful 
implementation of the PCMA. The orientation of these guidelines is to prioritise 
prevention before protection and protection before penalisation. We are 
cognizant of the impact that criminalisation has on families and communities. 
To ensure effective use of penal provisions in the PCMA, it is imperative that 
there is widespread awareness and education about child marriage and the 
legal consequences of its commission. We therefore direct that the following 
guidelines be interpreted to expand effective implementation of the preventive 
measures under PCMA analysed in Part V(A)(iii) of this judgment. 
211. We must not be understood to discourage prosecution of those who commit 
illegal acts. However, the aim of the law enforcement machinery must not be 
solely focused on increasing prosecutions without making the best efforts to 
prevent and prohibit child marriage. The focus on penalisation reflects a harms-
based approach which waits for a harm to occur before taking any steps. This 
approach has proven to be ineffective at bringing about social change. We 
therefore direct as follows: 

PART IX 

A. Legal Enforcement 
1. Appointment and accountability of CMPO 
1.1. State Governments and Union Territories (UTs) must appoint officers solely 
responsible for discharging the functions of CMPO at the district level. These 
officers should not be burdened with additional duties that could impede their 
focus on preventing child marriage; 
1.2. If a CMPO believes that they lack the necessary resources to safely and 
comprehensively fulfil their functions, they must submit a request to the 
relevant State Ministry of Women and Child Development. The Ministry shall 
conduct an assessment and address the resource needs within three months 
of the date on which the request was made; 
1.3. To enable personal accountability and ensure immediate preventive measures 
are taken against any planned solemnization of child marriages - each State 
and UT is directed to upload quarterly reports from CMPOs on their official 
websites. These reports should detail the steps taken to prevent child 
marriages and the outcomes of investigations; 
1.4. The Ministry of Women and Child Development and Ministry of Home in each 
State/UT shall conduct quarterly performance reviews of CMPOs and law 
enforcement agencies to assess: 
1.4.1. 
The effectiveness of child marriage prevention initiatives; 
1.4.2. 
Response times and outcomes of reported case; 

PART IX 

1.4.3. 
The level of cooperation and communication between CMPOs and 
local law enforcement agencies; 
1.4.4. 
The engagement with communities and stakeholders in prevention 
efforts; 
1.4.5. 
The status of CMPOs regarding deployment to additional duties, 
including the reasons for such assignments, to ensure that their primary 
focus on child marriage prevention is not compromised; and 
1.4.6. 
Recommendations for improvements based on the assessments, 
including identifying areas requiring additional support or resources. 
1.5. The Ministry of Women and Child Development is directed to execute 
mandatory training refreshers for CMPOs every six months. These refreshers 
will ensure that all personnel are updated on: 
1.5.1. 
Legal changes relevant to child marriage prevention; 
1.5.2. 
Best practices and effective strategies for combating child marriage; 
1.5.3. 
Community engagement techniques to foster collaboration with local 
stakeholders; 
1.5.4. 
Advocacy skills to effectively promote child rights and raise 
awareness about the negative impacts of child marriage; 
1.5.5. 
Cultural sensitivity training to address the social factors contributing 
to child marriage, ensuring a nuanced understanding of local contexts and 
practices; and 

PART IX 

1.5.6. 
Evaluation and reporting mechanisms to assess the effectiveness of 
their initiatives and adjust strategies accordingly. 
2. District-Level Responsibility for Prevention of Child Marriages 
2.1. In addition to the mandate of the CMPO under Section 16(3)(a) – the Collectors 
and Superintendents of Police in each district across India shall also be 
responsible for actively preventing child marriages within their districts. They 
shall have the authority and responsibility to prosecute all individuals who 
facilitate or solemnize child marriages, including those who knowingly assist, 
promote, or bless such marriages, even if reported in public events or media; 
2.2. The CMPO, the Collectors and Superintendents of Police in each district shall 
inform the State Government about any impediments they encounter in the 
discharge of their functions, including but not limited to, social boycotts; and 
2.3. Specific emphasis must be placed on preventing mass marriages, often 
conducted in public, where the participation of government or law enforcement 
officials could inadvertently lend legitimacy to child marriage ceremonies. Any 
failure by district authorities to act in accordance with this mandate will warrant 
immediate administrative action and disciplinary proceedings against the 
responsible officials. 
3. Establishment of a Specialized Police Unit 
3.1. Recognizing the sensitivity and unique aspects of child marriage cases, a 
specialized police unit is deemed essential. The State Ministries of Home 
Affairs shall consider the viability of integrating the Special Juvenile Police Unit 

PART IX 

into the child marriage prevention framework. The SJPU, already trained in 
handling juvenile and sensitive cases, shall be deployed to manage cases of 
child marriage; 
3.2. The Ministry should evaluate the effectiveness of this integration and provide 
necessary resources and support to the SJPU for optimal performance in 
addressing child marriage issues; 
3.3. The SJPU, supported by trained personnel and resources, will ensure that child 
marriage cases are handled with appropriate sensitivity and urgency. The unit 
shall work in coordination with CMPOs and district authorities to ensure swift 
preventive action and enforce legal accountability; and 
3.4. The Ministry of Women and Child Development is directed to consider the 
viability and prescribe a format for the SJPUs to biannually report the following: 
3.4.1. 
The outcomes of legal actions taken against perpetrators of child 
marriage, including any convictions or pending cases; 
3.4.2. 
The number of awareness programs conducted and the community 
engagement efforts made to prevent child marriages; 
3.4.3. 
The status of collaboration with local law enforcement and child 
protection agencies in addressing child marriage; and 
3.4.4. 
Any challenges faced in the reporting period and recommendations 
for improving child marriage prevention efforts. 

PART IX 

4. Establishment of a Special Child Marriage Prohibition Unit 
4.1. The State Governments and UTs shall constitute a State Special Child 
Marriage Prohibition Unit and where there are more than one CMPOs in any 
district, a District level Special Child Marriage Prohibition Unit; 
4.2. The Unit shall comprise of all the CMPOs of the State or the District, as the 
case may be, and shall include five social workers having experience of 
working against child marriage or on child rights. At least two of such social 
workers shall be women. All the CMPOs of the Unit shall be provided special 
training on dealing with child marriages; 
4.3. The Units shall tailor courses and resources with the help of professionals 
dealing with the mental health concerns of the CMPOs. The Unit shall also 
provide forums for CMPOs to raise any difficulties or grievances they encounter 
in discharge of their functions, including but not limited to, any difficulty relating 
to social ostracization for preventing child marriages; and 
4.4. The Unit shall act as a forum of sharing best practices, inviting trained 
professionals to dispense knowledge and collectivise and redress grievances. 
B. Judicial Measures 
1. Empowering Magistrates to Take Suo Moto Action and Issue Preventive 
Injunctions 
1.1. All Magistrates vested with authority under Section 13 of the Prohibition of 
Child Marriage Act, 2006, are directed to take proactive measures, including 

PART IX 

issuing suo motu injunctions to prevent the solemnization of child 
marriages; and 
1.2. Magistrates are encouraged to particularly focus on "auspicious days" 
known for mass weddings, when the occurrence of child marriages is 
notably high. Upon receiving credible information or even upon suspicion, 
Magistrates should use their judicial powers to halt such marriages and 
ensure child protection. 
2. Exploration of Special Fast-Track Courts for Child Marriage Cases 
2.1. The Union Government, in coordination with State Governments, is directed 
to assess the feasibility of establishing special fast-track courts exclusively 
to handle cases under the PCMA. These courts will expedite case 
proceedings, thereby preventing prolonged delays that often lead to 
additional harm for the affected children; and 
2.2. A status report on the establishment, resource allocation, and potential 
effectiveness of these fast-track courts shall be submitted to this Court 
within a year from now onwards. 
3. Mandatory Action Against Neglectful Public Servants 
3.1. It is directed that strict disciplinary and legal action be taken against any 
public servant found to be in deliberate neglect of duty concerning child 
marriage cases within their jurisdiction. As stipulated under Section 199(C) 
of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita (BNS), 2023, public officials who 
fail to act in child marriage cases, particularly those with knowledge of 

PART IX 

imminent marriages, shall be subject to stringent punishment. This direction 
is aimed at reinforcing accountability among public officials and ensuring 
that child marriage cases receive immediate and appropriate action at all 
administrative and enforcement levels. 
C. Community Involvement 
1. Annual Action Plans and Community-Centric Capacity Building 
1.1. Each State and UTs is directed to develop an Annual Action Plan to prevent 
child marriages, incorporating Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) that 
reflect local cultural and social contexts. This plan should include 
measurable goals tailored to address community-specific beliefs and 
practices related to child marriage; and 
1.2. States and UTs shall incorporate regular orientation programs, seminars, 
and workshops in their annual schedules aimed at building the capacity of 
all stakeholders. These initiatives should target CMPOs, Gram Panchayat 
or Municipality office holders, government officials, school principals and 
teachers, representatives of non-governmental organizations, local 
representatives, and Para Legal Volunteers (PLVs), fostering a 
collaborative approach to child marriage prevention. 
2. Adoption of the Child Marriage Free Village Initiative 
2.1. Inspired by the "Open Defecation Free Village" model under the Swachh 
Bharat Mission, a “Child Marriage Free Village” initiative should be 

PART IX 

launched, encouraging Panchayats and community leaders to play an 
active role in preventing and reporting child marriages; and 
2.2. This initiative will mobilize local communities to collectively discourage child 
marriages, with the involvement of Panchayats in monitoring and promoting 
"Child Marriage Free" certifications for villages and Gram Panchayats. This 
designation should be publicly celebrated to reinforce a culture where the 
rights and well-being of children are paramount. 
D. Awareness Campaigns 
1. Awareness Campaigns Led by CMPOs in Schools, Religious Institutions, 
and Panchayats 
1.1. CMPOs are directed to conduct regular, structured awareness campaigns 
across schools, religious institutions, and Panchayats. These campaigns 
must include impactful hoardings and slogans in local languages that 
highlight the legal penalties for child marriage, health risks associated with 
early and forced marriages, and their socio-economic consequences; and 
1.2. Schools and local institutions must conduct monthly informational sessions, 
leveraging creative methods like plays, storytelling, and interactive sessions 
to engage young people on the topic of child marriage prevention, 
emphasizing gender equality, reproductive rights, and personal agency. 

PART IX 

2. Comprehensive Sexuality and Rights Education 
2.1. All States and Union Territories are directed to integrate comprehensive 
sexuality education275 into school curricula in line with the framework 
prescribed by the World Health Organisation276 and leading thoughts in the 
field of CSE. This education must include clear information on the legal 
aspects of child marriage, gender equality, reproductive health rights, and 
the impacts of child marriage on physical and mental well-being; and 
2.2. Educational content should be tailored for age-appropriateness and be 
culturally sensitive, with particular emphasis on empowering students with 
knowledge of their legal rights, the importance of delaying marriage, and 
understanding of sexual and reproductive health. 
3. Educational Materials and Community Awareness Tools 
3.1. Schools in regions where child marriage prevails must include information 
on child marriage prevention within the curriculum, with a dedicated section 
in textbooks that outlines legal protections, health risks, and preventive 
measures. Visible posters or charts summarizing this information should be 
displayed prominently in schools, Gram Panchayats, and public institutions; 
and 
 
275 ‘CSE’ 
276 CSE is the imparting of accurate, age-appropriate information about sexuality and their sexual and 
reproductive health – which is critical for their health and survival; See World Health Organization, (2023), 
“What is Comprehensive Sexuality Education?”. 

PART IX 

3.2. Schools must adhere to a reporting protocol whereby principals or teachers 
are required to report potential cases, such as sudden drop out of a girl 
child, to the appropriate authorities immediately. 
4. Targeted Community Awareness Campaigns 
4.1. Regular community-based campaigns are mandated, specifically targeting 
parents, respected members of the community (including but not limited to 
teachers, principals and local body leaders) and local influencers. CMPOs 
are instructed to work with these groups to challenge entrenched social 
norms, using community discussions, multimedia presentations, and 
testimonials from child marriage survivors to shift perceptions; and 
4.2. Community-focused initiatives should also include public forums where the 
adverse effects of child marriage are openly discussed, alongside the 
benefits of educating young women. 
5. Empowerment Programs for Girls and Young Women 
5.1. All States and Union Territories are directed to implement mentorship and 
leadership programs that encourage young girls to become active 
participants in their communities. These programs should include 
workshops on leadership skills, public speaking, and advocacy training, 
enabling girls to become local ambassadors for change; and 
5.2. Schools and local organizations should establish peer groups led by trained 
mentors, where girls can safely discuss personal issues of home, family and 
public ongoings which may potentially force a girl into child marriage. 

PART IX 

6. Helpline Awareness and Reporting Mechanisms 
6.1. Comprehensive awareness of helpline numbers such as Childline (1098) 
and Women Helpline (181) should be included in all educational materials 
and community campaigns. Schools, Panchayats, and local institutions are 
required to display these numbers prominently and ensure that children and 
adolescents are aware of how to seek help. 
E. Training/Capacity Building 
1. Training for Community Health Workers and Educators 
1.1. All State and UTs will impart specialized training to Anganwadi Workers 
(AWW), Auxiliary Nurse-Midwives (ANM), and Accredited Social Health 
Activists (ASHA) to enhance their role in the prevention of child marriage 
through active community engagement. This training should cover: 
1.1.1. Identification of at-risk children and families, effective communication 
strategies to engage communities, and understanding the legal 
framework surrounding child marriage; 
1.1.2. Workshops on the socio-economic impacts of child marriage on girls 
and families, enabling them to effectively communicate these 
consequences to community members; and 
1.1.3. Effective ways and strategies to deal with crisis-management and 
render immediate and long-term support to victims who may be in a 
crisis associated to child marriage. This may include persons such as a 

PART IX 

girl vulnerable to child marriage herself; a peer, sibling or other person 
who fears that another person may be at risk of child marriage; or girls 
who have witnessed early or forced marriages around them. 
2. Training for Law Enforcement and Judicial Officers 
2.1. Police officers, particularly those in the Special Juvenile Police Units 
(SJPU), must undergo training focused on the legal aspects of the PCMA, 
child rights, and sensitivity towards cases involving minors. This training 
should include: 
2.1.1. Protocols for handling child marriage cases, ensuring the protection 
of victims, and understanding the psychological impact of child 
marriage on children and those affected around them; and 
2.1.2. Regular refresher courses on human rights and the ethical treatment 
of victims in accordance with the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection 
of Children) Act. 
3. Capacity Building for Teachers and School Administrators 
3.1. Teachers and school administrators will be trained to recognize signs of 
potential child marriage and engage with students regarding their rights and 
the importance of education. 
4. Empowerment of Local Leaders and Community Influencers 
4.1. Training programs will be designed for local leaders, including members of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions and community influencers, focusing on their 

PART IX 

critical role in preventing child marriage. This training should cover 
strategies to challenge and change harmful social norms and practices that 
perpetuate child marriage within their communities. 
5. Engagement with Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) 
5.1. Collaborations with NGOs that focus on women's rights and child protection 
will be established to train volunteers and staff on child marriage prevention. 
State authorities including the CMPO and SJPU must proactively identify 
and collaborate with NGOs on the practical and procedural difficulties in 
preventing, prohibiting and prosecuting child marriages. 
6. Training for Health Care Providers 
6.1. Healthcare providers, including doctors and counsellors, will be trained to 
address the specific health risks associated with child marriage. This 
training will include: 
6.1.1. Counselling techniques for young women and girls, focusing on 
reproductive health rights and the health consequences of early 
marriage; and 
6.1.2. Awareness of available resources for girls at risk and the referral 
processes for victims seeking help. 

PART IX 

F. Educational and Social Support 
1. Educational Incentives and Scholarships 
1.1. The Ministry of Women and Child Development is directed to consider the 
viability of implementing comprehensive educational incentive programs 
specifically targeted at girls at risk of child marriage. This includes: 
1.1.1. Providing scholarships to girls for secondary and higher education to 
encourage families to prioritize education over early marriage; 
1.1.2. Offering stipends or financial support for families with daughters who 
remain in school beyond the age of fifteen, as a tangible incentive for 
delaying marriage; and 
1.1.3. Creating mentorship programs that connect at-risk girls with role 
models who have successfully pursued education and career 
opportunities. 
2. Social Welfare Programs 
2.1. The Ministry of Women and Child Development will also consider 
developing and implementing social welfare programs to assist families at 
risk of engaging in child marriage, including: 
2.1.1. Conditional cash transfer programs that provide financial support to 
families in exchange for commitments to keep their daughters in school 
and delay marriage until legal adulthood; 

PART IX 

2.1.2. Access to vocational training and skill development programs for 
families, enabling them to improve their economic status and lessen 
reliance on marrying off daughters for financial relief; and 
2.1.3. Support services for families facing economic hardships, such as food 
assistance, healthcare services, and access to microfinance 
opportunities to promote sustainable livelihoods. 
3. Convergence and Continuity of Services 
3.1. The Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs shall designate an appropriate 
authority who shall ensure the convergence of services across various 
government departments and agencies to create a cohesive support 
system for vulnerable and at-risk communities. This includes: 
3.1.1. Regular inter-departmental meetings to coordinate efforts and 
resources among education, health, social welfare, and law 
enforcement sectors to address the multifaceted nature of child 
marriage; and 
3.1.2. Establishing community-based resource centres that provide 
information and support related to education, legal rights, and social 
services to families at risk of child marriage. 

PART IX 

G. Monitoring and Accountability 
1. Development of Standard Operating Procedures 
1.1. The National Legal Services Authority277 is directed to formulate a Standard 
Operating Procedure278 that provides comprehensive guidelines for legal-
support services, and long-term rehabilitation plans related to the 
prevention, protection, and rehabilitation of victims of child marriage for 
lawyers and law-enforcement officers. NALSA is further directed to dispatch 
this SOP to all States and District Legal Services Authority where it may be 
used in assisting aggrieved victims; 
1.2. The Ministry of Women and Child Development, in consultation with State 
Child Protection Societies279 and local government bodies, shall draft SOPs 
focused on maintaining detailed registers. These registers will document: 
1.2.1. The number of awareness programs and capacity-building initiatives 
conducted; 
1.2.2. The number of child marriages prevented and reported; and 
1.2.3. Follow-up actions taken in each case. 
1.3. The SOPs must clearly define the duties and responsibilities of CPMOs, 
and other stakeholders involved in community protection efforts, such as 
police authorities, Sarpanchs, village Pradhans, school teachers, AWWs, 
 
277 “NALSA” 
278 “SOP” 
279 “SCPS” 

PART IX 

and ASHA. Special emphasis shall be placed on these responsibilities 
during critical periods and other wedding seasons and 
1.4. The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights is directed to 
expedite the process of drafting an SOP to establish accountability for the 
non-reporting of child marriages, provide rehabilitation for minor survivors, 
and initiate prosecution procedures. 
2. Role of Panchayats and Local Leaders 
2.1. All Panchayats, Sarpanchs, and local leaders must: 
2.1.1. Complete a training program on child marriage prevention and 
reporting within three months; 
2.1.2. Report any suspected child marriages within 48 hours of awareness 
to relevant authorities; and 
2.1.3. Actively participate in community awareness programs to educate 
families on the legal consequences of child marriage and promote 
alternative practices to early marriage. 
3. Individual Care Plans for At-Risk Girls 
3.1. State authorities must develop and implement Individual Care Plans (ICP) 
for at-risk girl children, ensuring compliance with Section 10 of the JJ Act, 
which mandates individualized care and rehabilitation for children in need 
of care and protection. It shall include: 

PART IX 

3.1.1. Immediate access to educational resources tailored to the child's 
needs; 
3.1.2. Regular psychological support sessions, including counselling and 
therapy, as necessary; 
3.1.3. Establishment of peer support groups to help at-risk girls connect with 
one another and share experiences; 
3.1.4. Monitoring by Child Welfare Officers/District Child Protection Unit 
(DCPU) should occur every month for the first year post-intervention to 
ensure successful reintegration into education and community life; and 
3.1.5. Follow-up assessments should be conducted every three months to 
evaluate the effectiveness of the ICP, adjusting support services as 
needed to address any emerging challenges faced by the child. 
H. Technology-Driven Initiatives for Reporting Child Marriage 
1. Creation of a Centralized Reporting Portal 
1.1. The Ministry of Home Affairs, in collaboration with the Ministry of Women 
and Child Development and the NALSA, shall establish a designated portal 
for online reporting of child marriages. This portal will include features for 
anonymous reporting, allowing victims and concerned citizens to easily 
lodge complaints and access support services; and 
1.2. The portal will serve as a centralized platform for collecting and analyzing 
data on child marriage incidents, enabling targeted interventions. It will 

PART IX 

enhance accessibility, transparency, and accountability by ensuring that all 
reports are addressed promptly by enforcement agencies and CMPOs. 
2. Leveraging Technology for Support Services 
2.1. Each State and UT shall make all endeavours to disseminate information 
against child marriage across all print, digital and social media – with a 
focus on regions where child marriages are likely to occur in high numbers. 
They shall also consider the viability of data analytics to identify high-risk 
areas and patterns of child marriage, enabling swift interventions. 
3. Technology-Driven Monitoring of Attendance 
3.1. The Ministry for Women and Child Development, in coordination with the 
relevant State Ministries, shall consider the viability of a technology-driven 
monitoring system to track daily attendance for school-going girls up to the 
12th grade, ensuring compliance with the privacy standards outlined in the 
Supreme Court judgment in KS Puttaswamy (9J) (supra). 
I. Funding and Resources 
1. Dedicated Annual Budget Allocation 
1.1. The relevant ministries of the Union Government are directed to 
recommend the allocation of a dedicated yearly budget for each State 
specifically aimed at preventing child marriage and supporting affected 
individuals. This budget should encompass: 
1.1.1. Community awareness programs; 

PART IX 

1.1.2. Educational initiatives targeting at-risk populations; 
1.1.3. Training programs for frontline workers, including CMPOs and local 
law enforcement; 
1.1.4. Rehabilitation services for victims, including counselling and 
vocational training; and 
1.1.5. Provisions for regular monitoring, home visits, and follow-up support 
for victims to ensure their reintegration into society. 
2. Juvenile Justice Fund Institutionalization 
2.1. The State Governments are directed to institutionalize the Juvenile Justice 
Fund established under Section 105 of the JJ Act. This fund will provide 
financial assistance in the form of scholarships and stipends specifically for 
girls at imminent risk of child marriage or whose marriages have been 
annulled, promoting their educational and social empowerment. 
3. Compensation for Girls Opting Out of Marriage 
3.1. The Ministry of Women and Child Development is requested to consider the 
viability of providing compensation to girls who opt out of marriage upon 
reaching the age of majority under the NALSA Victim Compensation 
Scheme or respective State Victim Compensation Schemes. This 
compensation should be equivalent to that provided to rape victims, 
ensuring adequate support for those who have escaped child marriage.

PART X 

4. Identification and Support for At-Risk Children 
4.1. Superintendents of Police and Collectors are directed to identify instances 
of child marriage and monitor children at risk of dropping out of school due 
to socio-economic challenges or threats of early marriage. This initiative 
should ensure: 
4.1.1. Comprehensive access to education and health services for at-risk 
children; and 
4.1.2. Provision of stipends and fellowships to support their continued 
education and mitigate the factors contributing to child marriage. 
X. Suggestions 
212. In the course of this judgment, we have traced the full breadth of the law 
against child marriage. The PCMA is the central legislation governing the issue on 
the subject. In light of the Constitutional guarantees accruing to children, we 
observe certain gaps in the PCMA. Absent a Constitutional challenge or a case 
being argued, we resist from making declarations and restrict ourselves to making 
suggestions for the scrutiny of the Union. The legal question on these issues, 
however, is kept open if it were to come before a Constitutional court in an 
appropriate proceeding. 

PART X 

213. The issue of the interface of personal laws with the prohibition of child 
marriage under the PCMA has been a subject of some confusion. The Union in its 
note of submission filed after the judgment was reserved in the case has stated 
that this Court may direct that the PCMA prevails over personal law. The note 
states as follows: 
“9. As a way forward, Ministry of Women & Child 
Development has following inputs to provide for kind 
consideration of the Hon’ble Court – 
i. 
There are conflicting pronouncements by 
various High Courts about the precedence of the 
Prohibition of Child Marriage Act (PCMA), 2006 over 
the personal laws. Hence, Hon’ble Court may 
consider issuing directions pronouncing that the 
PCMA will prevail over the personal laws governing 
marriage. 
…” 
214. Details of the conflicting opinions were not furnished in the submissions by 
either party to these proceedings. The PCMA states nothing on the validity of the 
marriage as we have noted above. The Prohibition of Child Marriage (Amending) 
Bill 2021 was introduced in Parliament on 21 December 2021. The Bill was referred 
for examination to the Department Related Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports. The Bill sought to amend the PCMA to 
expressly state the overriding effect of the statute over various personal laws. The 
issue, therefore, is pending consideration before Parliament. 
215. Lastly, we note that while the PCMA seeks to prohibit child marriages, it 
does not stipulate on betrothals. Marriages fixed in the minority of a child also have 
the effect of violating their rights to free choice, autonomy, agency and childhood. 
It takes away from them their choice of partner and life paths before they mature 

PART XI 

and form the ability to assert their agency. International law such as CEDAW 
stipulates against betrothals of minors. Parliament may consider outlawing child 
betrothals which may be used to evade penalty under the PCMA. While a betrothed 
child may be protected as a child in need of care and protection under the JJ Act, 
the practice also requires targeted remedies for its elimination. 
XI. Conclusion 
216. A copy of this Judgment will be transmitted to the Secretaries of all 
concerned Ministries, the Government of India which includes the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, 
Ministry of Education, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Ministry of Rural 
Development, statutory authorities, institutions, and organizations under the 
control of the respective ministries. 
217. The Ministry of Women and Child Development is directed to circulate this 
judgment to the Chief Secretaries/Administrators of all the States and Union 
Territories, as well as NALSA, and NCPCR for strict compliance with the directions. 
This shall be done within a period of four weeks from the date of delivery of this 
judgment. 

PART XI 

218. The writ petition is disposed of. 
219. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of. 

…….……………………………………CJI 
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud].….…………………………………………J 
[J B Pardiwala]..….…………………………………………J 
[Manoj Misra] 

New Delhi; 
October 18, 2024