IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Appeal No (s). of 2024 
(@ ) 

Bijay Agarwal 
 ….Appellant(s) 
Versus 
M/s Medilines 
….Respondent(s) 
With 
 
Criminal Appeal No(s). of 2024 
(@ ) 
 
JUDGMENT 
C. T. Ravikumar, J. 

Leave granted. 
 
On the consent of the parties, the matter was 
finally heard. 
1. 
The captioned appeals by a special leave are 
directed against the impugned common order dated 
09.01.2024 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at 
Bengaluru in Criminal Petition Nos. 13095 of 2023 and 
13153 of 2023 respectively. 
2. 
Heard the learned senior counsel appearing for 

the appellant and the learned counsel appearing for the 
respondent. 
3. 
In view of the factual background obtained in 
these cases, a question of seminal importance arises for 
consideration viz., “whether the signatory of a cheque 
authorized by the Company is a drawer and whether 
such a signatory could be directed to deposit any sum 
out of the fine or compensation awarded by the trial 
Court under Section 148 of the Negotiable Instruments 
Act, 1881 (for short ‘NI Act’)”, as a condition for 
suspending the sentence in an appeal filed against his 
conviction under Section 138 of the NI Act? 
4. 
The contention of the appellant is that he is only an 
authorized signatory of the company M/s. Gee Pee 
Infotech Private Limited, which was held liable to 
adequately compensate the complainant company by 
the trial Court. The status of the appellant authorised 
signatory of the aforesaid company is undisputed 
rather, it is indisputable as it is the very case of the 
respondent complainant. Before the trial Court the said 
company was the first accused and the appellant herein 
was the second accused. In unambiguous terms, the 
respondent-complainant described the appellant Sri. 
Bijay Agarwal as the authorized signatory/ Director of 

M/s. Gee Pee Infotech Pvt. Ltd. 
5. 
Bearing in mind the said indisputable and 
undisputed fact, we will briefly refer to the other 
relevant facts of the case. 
 
The complaint being C.C. No. 13938 of 2013 was 
filed by the respondent company against M/s. Gee Pee 
Infotech Private Ltd. and appellant, under Section 138 of 
the NI Act. The crux of the complaint was as under: - 
The Accused No.1 is a Company incorporated 
under provisions of Companies Act 1956. The 
second 
accused 
is 
an 
authorised 
signatory/Director of the first accused company 
and he is incharge and responsible for the day 
today administrative affairs and functioning of 
the accused No.1 Company. The accused by 
representing that they are the Pan Indian circle 
licence holder for distribution of Electronic Pin 
Recharge BSNL, induced the complainant to pay 
advance amount of Rs.1,00,00,000/- and to 
become the Master Distributor for BS recharge 
pin for Karnataka State and accordingly entered 
in 
agreement 
with 
the 
complainant 
on 
01/10/2011. By virtue of said Agreement, the 
accused appointed the complainant Master 
Distributor 
for 
BSNL 
E-recharge 
pin 
for 

Karnataka and collected the advance payment 
while undertaking liquidate/transfer BSNL E-
recharge pin load to the complainant as to 
enable 
them 
to 
distribute 
through 
their 
constituents of the State of Karnataka. After 
entering into the Agreement accused supplied 
certain BSNL E-recharge pin to the complainant. 
However, to their utter shock, surprise and 
dismay, it came to the knowledge of the 
complainant through their constituents that 99% 
of the BSNL E-recharge pin supplied by the 
accused are fake and the talk time under the 
said BSNL E-recharge load supplied to them 
could not be uploaded to the Mobile Numbers 
of the customers. 
 
6. 
It was the further case that on being told that 
appropriate action would be initiated they executed a 
Memorandum of Understanding on 10.04.2012 and 
assured return of the amount advanced and issued five 
post-dated cheques. The cheque presented was 
dishonoured and thereupon the complainant caused 
legal notice. Pursuant to the same, the accused issued 
two fresh post-dated cheques each for a sum of Rs.25 
lakhs in lieu of the old cheques. Later, cheque bearing 

No.955437 dated 24.04.2013 for a sum of Rs.25 lakhs was 
presented, but dishonoured and returned with the 
endorsement “payment stopped by the drawer”. The 
complaint was, thereupon, filed after complying with the 
requisite procedures and was taken on file as C.C. 
No.13938/2013 
7. 
After appreciating the evidence, the trial Court 
arrived at the following finding as against issue No.2: 
32. Point No.2:- Complainant Company paid a 
sum of Rs. 1,00,00,000/- to the accused 
Company for purchasing BSNL E recharge pins 
but was supplied fake E-recharge pins which 
the 
complainant 
Company 
demanded 
repayment, the accused not be uploaded to the 
Mobile numbers of the customers. W a sum of 
Rs.50,00,000/- and for the balance Company 
repaid amount it issued the cheque in question 
which came to be dishonoured on presentation. 
Complainant Company has been deprive of its 
money for all these years, i.e. for a period of 
more than years. Hence, accused Company 
shall adequately compensate the complainant 
for the same. 
 
8. 
As relates the latter appeal, the complaint that was 

taken on file as C.C. No.13937/2013 was filed pursuant 
to the dishonour of cheque No.955421 dated 24.12.2012 
for a sum of Rs. 25 lakhs under similar circumstances. 
On appreciating the evidence the trial Court, as per a 
separate order passed on 30.09.2023 itself arrived at 
similar conclusion as in C.C. No.13938/2013. 
9. 
Based on the aforesaid conclusions, in both the 
cases the trial Court found the appellant guilty and 
accordingly convicted and sentenced, as per judgment 
and order dated 30.09.2023 as under: - 
 
“Accused is found guilty of the offence 
punishable 
U/Sec. of 
Negotiable 
Instruments Act 1881. 
 
 Acting U/sec. 255(2) of Cr.PC accused is 
hereby convicted for the offence punishable 
U/Sec. 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act 1881 
and he is sentenced to pay to pay fine of Rs. 
40,00,000/-. 
 
 In default, accused shall undergo simple 
imprisonment for a period of six months.” 
 
10. 
Feeling aggrieved by the conviction and sentence 
passed in C.C. No.13937/2013, the appellant preferred 
Criminal 
Appeal 
No.1536/2023 
and 
against 
the 
conviction and sentence passed in C.C. No.13938/2013 

filed, before the 
Principal City Civil and Sessions Judge Court at 
Bangalore. In the appeals, the appellant herein filed 
separate applications and sought for suspension of 
sentence passed in both the cases, under Section 389 of 
the Cr.PC. Separately, but on the very same lines 
orders were passed in both the appeals on 10.11.2023. 
The sentence was suspended with condition to deposit 
20% of the fine/compensation amount in each of the 
appeals. It is against the said direction to deposit 20% 
of the compensation amount that the appellant 
approached the High Court by filing Criminal Petition 
Nos.13095/2013 and 13153/2013 seeking that part of the 
order dated 10.11.2023 requiring deposit of fine be 
quashed, which culminated in the impugned common 
order dated 09.01.2024. 
11. 
Now, the self-same appellant raised the contention 
in both the appeals that in the light of the decision of 
this Court in Shri Gurudatta Sugars Marketing Pvt. Ltd. 
Vs. Prithviraj Sayajirao Deshmukh & Ors.1, he could 
not have been directed to pay any amount payable 
under Section 148 (1) of the NI Act, for this Court laid 
down the law that merely because an officer of a 
 
1 (2024) SCC OnLine SC 1800 

company being the authorised signatory of the cheque 
by itself would not make him its drawer. It is submitted 
that though the said decision was dealing with Section 
143A of the NI Act in view of its analogicalness to 
Section 148, NI Act, the dictum laid down in the said 
decision is to be followed as relates Section 148 as well 
and hence, an authorized signatory of an accused 
company not being the drawer of the cheque could not 
be directed to deposit any particular percentage of the 
fine or compensation awarded by the trial Court under 
Section 148, NI Act. The learned counsel for the 
respondent resisted the contention and canvassed for 
the dismissal of the appeals. According to the learned 
counsel, the exposition of law in the decision in Shri 
Gurudatta Sugars Marketing Pvt. Ltd. case (supra) is 
inapplicable in the cases on hand. 
12. 
To appreciate rival contentions, it is only 
appropriate to refer to Sections 143- A and 148 of the NI 
Act: - 
“S.143 – A. Power to direct interim 
compensation 
– 

Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the Court 
trying an offence under Section 138 may 
order the drawer of the cheque to pay 
interim compensation to the complainant- 

(a) in a summary trial or a summons 
case, where he pleads not guilty to 
the 
accusation 
made 
in 
the 
complaint; and 
(b)in any other case, upon framing of 
charge. 
(2) The interim compensation under sub-
section (1) shall not exceed twenty per 
cent of the amount of the cheque. 

The interim compensation shall be 
paid within sixty days from the date of the 
order under sub-section (1), or within such 
further period not exceeding thirty days as 
may be directed by the Court on sufficient 
cause being shown by the drawer of the 
cheque. 
(4) If the drawer of the cheque is acquitted, 
the Court shall direct the complainant to 
repay to the drawer the amount of interim 
compensation, with interest at the bank 
rate as published by the Reserve Bank of 
India, prevalent at the beginning of the 
relevant financial year, within sixty days 
from the date of the order, or within such 
further period not exceeding thirty days as 
may be directed by the Court on sufficient 
cause being shown by the complainant.“ 
 
“S.148. Power of Appellate Court to order 
payment 
pending 
appeal 
against 
conviction. 
 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 

the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974), in an appeal by the drawer against 
conviction 
under 
Section 
138, 
the 
Appellate Court may order the appellant to 
deposit such sum which shall be a 
minimum of twenty per cent of the fine or 
compensation awarded by the trial Court: 
Provided that the amount payable 
under this sub-section shall be in addition 
to any interim compensation paid by the 
appellant under Section 143-A.” 
 (Underline supplied) 
 
13. 
A scanning of Sections 143A and 148 would reveal 
that the former deals with the power of the Court trying 
an offence under Section 138 of the NI Act to direct the 
drawer of the cheque to pay interim compensation to 
the complainant whereas the latter Section deals with 
the power of the Appellate Court in an appeal by the 
drawer against the conviction under Section 138 to the 
appellant to deposit such sum which shall be a 
minimum of 20% of the fine or compensation awarded 
by the trial Court. The proviso to Section 148(1) would 
further reveal that the amount payable thereunder shall 
be in addition to any interim compensation paid by the 
appellant under Section 143A, NI Act. Thus, a scanning 
of both the Sections would reveal that the said sections 

empower to issue such directions only to the ‘drawer’ of 
the cheque. We have already noted that in ‘Shri 
Gurudatta Sugars Marketing Pvt. Ltd.’ Case (supra) after 
referring to the earlier decisions of this Court including 
in ‘K.K. Ahuja v. V.K. Vohra and Another2’, and in ‘N. 
Harihara Krishnan v. Godfather Travels and Tours P. 
Ltd.3’, this Court held that the primary liability for an 
offence under Section 138 lies with the company and 
the company’s management is vicariously liable only 
under specific conditions provided in Section 141 and 
for the purpose of Section 143A of the NI Act and a 
signatory merely authorised to sign on behalf of the 
company would not become the ‘drawer’ of the cheque 
and, therefore, could not be directed to pay interim 
compensation under Section 143A. In the contextual 
situation, it is relevant to refer to paragraphs 28 to 30, 
34 and 35 of ‘Shri Gurudatta Sugars Marketing Pvt. Ltd.’s 
case to the extent it is relevant for the purpose of this 
case, as under: - 
“28. The High Court's interpretation of section 7 
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 
accurately identified the "drawer" as the 
individual 
who 
issues 
the 
cheque. 
This 
 
2 (2009) 
3 (2018) 

interpretation is fundamental to understanding 
the obligations and liabilities under Section 138 
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, which 
makes it clear that the drawer must ensure 
sufficient funds in their account at the time the 
cheque is presented. The appellants' argument 
that directors or other individuals should also 
be liable under Section 143A misinterprets the 
statutory language and intent. The primary 
liability, as correctly observed by the High 
Court, rests on the drawer, emphasizing the 
drawer's responsibility for maintaining sufficient 
funds. 
29. The general rule against vicarious liability in 
criminal law underscores that individuals are 
not typically held criminally liable for acts 
committed by others unless specific statutory 
provisions extend such liability. Section 141 of 
the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 is one 
such provision, extending liability to the 
company's officers for the dishonour of a 
cheque. The appellants' attempt to extend this 
principle to section 143A, to hold directors or 
other individuals personally liable for interim 
compensation, is unfounded. The High Court 
rightly emphasized that liability under section 

141 arises from the conduct or omission of the 
individual involved, not merely their position 
within the company. 
30. The distinction between legal entities and 
individuals acting as authorized signatories is 
crucial. Authorized signatories act on behalf of 
the company but do not assume the company's 
legal identity. This principle, fundamental to 
corporate law, ensures that while authorized 
signatories can bind the company through their 
actions, they do not merge their legal status 
with that of the company. This distinction 
supports the High Court's interpretation that the 
drawer under section 143A refers specifically to 
the issuer of the cheque, not the authorized 
signatories. 
34. 
The respondents correctly argued that an 
authorised signatory is not a drawer of the 
cheque, as established in N. Harihara Krishnan. 
This judgment clarified that a signatory is 
merely authorised to sign on behalf of the 
company and does not become the drawer. 
The respondents’ interpretation aligns with the 
principle 
that 
penal 
statutes 
should 
be 
interpreted strictly, particularly in determining 
vicarious liability. The judgment in K.K. Ahuja 

further supports this approach, emphasising 
that penal provisions must be read strictly to 
determine liability. 
35. In conclusion, the High Court’s decision to 
interpret “drawer” strictly as the issuer of the 
cheque, excluding authorised signatories, is 
well-founded.” 
 
14. 
As noted earlier, Section 148 would make it clear 
that it empowers the Appellate Court in an appeal by 
the drawer against conviction under Section 138, NI Act, 
to direct to deposit a sum which shall be a minimum of 
20% of the fine or compensation awarded by the trial 
Court and the same shall be in addition to any interim 
compensation paid by the appellant under Section 
143A. When this be the position revealed from Sections 
143A and 148 there cannot be any doubt with respect to 
the position that the term ‘drawer’ referred to in Section 
148 and 143A means ‘drawer of the cheque concerned’. 
Ergo, the question is whether the law laid down in the 
decision in Shri Gurudatta Sugars Marketing Pvt. 
Ltd.’s case (surpa) is applicable proprio vigore in cases 
involving the question of liability to pay additional 
compensation, as contemplated under Section 148(1), 
NI Act. The proviso to Section 148(1) itself makes it 

specifically clear that the amount payable under Section 
148(1), NI Act, if the Appellate Court so directs, shall be 
in addition to any interim compensation paid by the 
appellant concerned under Section 143A, NI Act. It is 
nobody’s case that the appellant was made to pay 
interim compensation under Section 143A, in relation to 
the original proceedings. Be that as it may, the other 
question is whether an authorised signatory of the 
cheque can be said to be the drawer of the cheque 
concerned? We may hasten to add here that we were 
not addressed on the question whether the appellant 
herein could be saddled with the liability to pay such 
additional compensation in terms of Section 148(1) by 
virtue of the provision under Section 141, NI Act which 
extends liability to the officers of the company for the 
dishonour of a cheque and as such, we do not propose 
to consider that aspect as it need be considered only 
when pointedly posed for consideration based on 
proven facts. 
15. 
There can be no doubt with respect to the position 
that Section 143A and 148 empowers the Court trying 
an offence under Section 138 and the Appellate Court 
considering an appeal by a drawer against his 
conviction under Section 138 respectively to fasten 

liability to pay interim compensation and additional 
compensation under Section 148(1), as the case may be, 
and therefore, the question whether any particular 
officer of the company concerned can be made to pay 
interim 
compensation 
or 
deposit 
additional 
compensation under the aforesaid relevant provision(s) 
would depend upon the question whether he is only a 
signatory of the cheque or whether he is the drawer of 
the cheque. It is that question with reference to Section 
143A, NI Act, that was answered as above in the 
decision in Shri Gurudatta Sugars Marketing Pvt. 
Ltd.’s case (surpa). In view of the analogicalness of 
Section 143A to Section 148, that both the provisions are 
under the same Act though applicable at different stage 
of proceedings under Section 138 of NI Act and that the 
proviso to Section 148(1) makes it abundantly clear that 
deposit under Section 148(1) of the NI Act shall be an 
additional compensation paid by the appellant under 
Section 143A thereof, it can only be said that the 
decision in Shri Gurudatta Sugars Marketing Pvt. 
Ltd.’s case (supra) is applicable to the extent it holds an 
officer of a company who is an authorised signatory of 
the cheque issued by a company is not the drawer of 
the same subject to what is held in the said decision 

with reference to Section 141, NI Act, as relates Section 
148 thereof. 
16. 
To wit, as in the case of the position qua Section 
143A, NI Act, merely because an officer of a company 
concerned is the authorised signatory of the cheque 
concerned by itself will not make such an officer 
‘drawer of the cheque’ under Section 148, NI Act, so as 
to empower the Appellate Court, in an appeal against 
conviction for an offence under Section 138, NI Act, to 
direct to deposit compensation of any sum under 
Section 148(1), of the NI Act. 
17. 
In the decision in ‘Jamboo Bhandari v. Madhya 
Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation 
Limited and Ors.4’ this Court held that an Appellate 
Court in an appeal against conviction under Section 
138, NI Act, could not place a condition to deposit an 
amount invoking the power under Section 148(1), NI 
Act, mechanically without considering whether the case 
falls within exceptional circumstances. In view of the 
said exposition of law, the Appellate Court ought to 
have considered the aforesaid aspects as it would 
certainly be an exceptional circumstance to exempt the 
appellant who is not the ‘drawer’ of the cheque 
 
4 (2023) 

concerned to deposit the amount payable under Section 
148(1) by an appellant who is the ‘drawer’ of the 
cheque. In the case on hand, the High Court has failed 
to consider these crucial aspects in the light of the 
dictum laid down by this Court in the decisions referred 
supra while considering the application for suspension 
of sentence for the conviction under Section 138 of the 
NI Act in the pending appeal. 
18. 
The upshot of the discussion is that these appeals 
should succeed and consequently, it is allowed. The 
impugned common order dated 09.01.2024 passed by 
the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru in Criminal 
Petition Nos.13095/2023 and 13153/2023 is set aside. 
Accordingly, the orders dated 10.11.2023 passed by the 
Principal City Civil & Sessions Judge at Bangalore 
respectively in and 
1536/2023 stands quashed and set aside to the extent it 
put the condition to deposit of 20% of the fine amount 
payable under orders in CC Nos.13937/2023 and 
13938/2013, passed by the Court of XXXVI Additional 
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Bangalore City and 
restore the orders dated 10.11.2023 suspending the 
sentence of the appellant in both the cases, with the 
condition(s) imposed qua execution of bond and on 

such execution it will remain in force till the disposal of 
the above mentioned appeals pending before the First 
Appellate Court concerned. 
19. 
The First Appellate Court shall endeavour to 
dispose of the appeals expeditiously. 
20. 
The appeals stand allowed as above. 
21. 
Pending 
application(s), 
if 
any, 
shall 
stand 
disposed of....,J. 
(C.T. Ravikumar)...,J. 
 (Sanjay Karol) 
New Delhi; 
October 21, 2024.