IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO./2024 
 SLP (C) No. 4940 of 2022 
 
CENTRAL WAREHOUSING CORPORATION & ANR....APPELLANT(S) 
 
 VERSUS 
 
M/S SIDHARTHA TILES & SANITARY PVT. LTD...RESPONDENT(S) 
 
JUDGMENT 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The questions of law formulated in this appeal is, whether the 
Public Premises Act, 1971 overrides the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996. If the said question is answered in negative, the only 
question that survives is, whether the High Court committed any error 
in appointing the arbitrator while exercising the jurisdiction under 
Section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (‘hereinafter 
referred as the Act’). Having examined the matter in detail, it is clear 
that the said question does not arise in the facts and circumstances of 
the case. We are guided by the existence of the Arbitration Clause and 
the decision of this Court in SBI General Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Krish 

Spinning1 which discussed the scope of referral court’s interference 
when a valid arbitration clause exists. 
3. 
A brief conspectus of the facts is as follows. The appellant is a 
statutory body under the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962, and is 
under the administrative control of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Government of India. As it was providing warehousing facilities, the 
respondent, a company engaged in the business of trading ceramic tiles 
and sanitary ware, had approached the appellant for storage of its 
goods. The appellant agreed and provided a storage space of 1295 sq. mtrs. and possession of this space was handed over to the respondent 
on 12.09.2012, even before an agreement could be entered between the 
parties. 
4. 
Lease agreement on 26.09.2012 governing the contractual 
relationship provided under Clause 1 that the space will remain with 
the respondent for a period of 3 years from 12.09.2012. Thus, the 
contract was due to expire by efflux of time by 11.09.2015. This lease 
was made subject to a ‘renewal by mutual consent’ as per Clause 2. 
The rate of storage was fixed at Rs. 131 per square meter per month. 
What is relevant for us is Clause 16 of the agreement, incorporating the 
arbitration clause. 

5. 
Even before the expiry of the lease, the storage charges were said 
to have been revised on a pan India basis w.e.f. 01.11.2012. The 
revision of the storage charges was communicated to the respondent 
and by a letter dated 04.10.2012, a demand for enhanced payment 
w.e.f. 01.11.2012 was raised. The appellant renewed the said demand 
on 10.05.2013 and 31.12.2014 and intimated that if the amount is not 
paid, it will be inferred that the respondent is not interested in retaining 
the facility. While the matter was pending, the storage charges were 
further revised w.e.f. 01.04.2015 by a letter dated 05.03.2015 when the 
respondent was informed that the tariff will be at the rate of Rs.177/- 
per sq. mtr. per month. 
6. 
In turn, the respondent is said to have intimated the appellant 
that it is interested in continuing the facility but sought renewal of the 
agreement dated 26.09.2012 by also committing that any arrears due 
as per the original agreement would be cleared. 
7. 
On 16.09.2015, the appellant is supposed to have rejected the 
request for renewal of the agreement and has in turn raised a demand 
of Rs. 16,10,004/. In view of the fact that the respondent had not 
vacated the premises despite the lease’s expiry on 11.09.2015, the 
appellant invoked the provisions of the Public Premises (Eviction of 
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 (hereinafter the Public Premises 
Act). 

8. 
It is an admitted fact that even before the order of the Estate 
Officer under the Public Premises Act could be passed, the respondent 
is said to have vacated the premises on 13.11.2015. The Estate Officer 
any way passed his order on 31.12.2015 holding that the respondent 
was in unauthorised possession only from 11.09.2015 (i.e. when the 
lease expired) to 13.11.2015 (when premises were vacated) and also 
directed payment of certain dues as indicated in the demand notice. 
9. 
It is in the above referred background that the respondent invoked 
arbitration by filing an application under Section 11(6) of the Act for 
the appointment of an arbitrator in view of a subsisting arbitration 
clause in the agreement. The said clause is as under: 
“16. All disputes and differences or in any 
way touching upon or concerning this agreement 
whatsoever shall be referred to the sole Arbitration of any 
person appointed by the Managing Director, Central 
Warehousing Corporation New Delhi. The Award of such 
Arbitrator shall be final and binding on the Parties to this 
agreement. It is a term of this agreement that in the event 
of such arbitrator to whom the matter is originally 
referred / being transferred or vacating his office or being 
unable to act for any reason the Central Warehousing 
Corporation at that time shall appoint any other person to 
act as Arbitrator in accordance with the terms of this 
agreement. Such person shall be entitled to proceed with 
the reference from the stage at which it was left by his 
predecessors. The Arbitrator shall give a speaking 
award. 
The venue of Arbitration shall be at such place as may be 
fixed by the Arbitrator at his sole discretion. 
The cost of arbitration shall be borne by the parties as per 
the decision of the Arbitrator. 
The Arbitrator shall give separate award respect of each 
dispute or difference referred him, 

 In to Subject as aforesaid, the Arbitration & Conciliation 
Act, 1996 shall apply to the Arbitration proceedings 
under this clause.” 
 
10. The application under Section 11 specifically speaks about the 
dispute that has arisen under the agreement dated 26.09.2012. 
Broadly, they relate to the right of renewal of the contract and also the 
legality and propriety of the revision of rates during the subsistence of 
the agreement. 
11. The High Court considered the matter in detail and came to the 
conclusion that the claims made in the notice followed by the 
application under Section 11 are clearly covered by the arbitration 
clause. The relevant portions of the High Court Judgment is as under: 
“12. On going through the same, it is seen that as per the 
said clause all disputes and differences or 
in any way touching upon or concerning the agreement 
have to be referred to the sole arbitration of any person 
appointed by the Managing Director of the Corporation. 
Award of such arbitrator shall be final and binding on the 
parties to the agreement. The arbitrator shall also decide 
the venue of arbitration and the cost of arbitration shall 
be borne by the parties as per the decision of the 
arbitrator. The arbitrator is required to give separate 
award in respect of each dispute or difference referred to 
him. Thus, the crucial words in Clause 16 are "all 
disputes and differences or in any way 
touching upon or concerning the agreement. According to 
the petitioner, the agreement for dedicated warehousing 
entered into between the parties on 26.09.2012 clearly 
mentioned the rate of storage charge i.e. Rs. 131-00 per 
square meter per month. But the Corporation unilaterally 
enhanced the storage charge rate with effect from 
01.11.2012 at the gross area rate of Rs.157-00 per 
Square meter per month and net area rate of Rs.216-00 
per square meter per month. 

13. The second area of dispute is with regard to 
extension of the agreement for dedicated warehousing. 
As per Clause No 1 the period of dedicated warehousing 
was for three years with effect from 12.09.2012, but both 
the parties had the option of renewing the agreement for 
a further period as mutually agreed upon on expiry of the 
term of the agreement. It is on these two issues that notice 
of arbitration was given to the Managing Director of the 
Corporation by the petitioner on 23.09.2015. As per the 
postal tracking (page32 of the paper book), the same was 
delivered on 26.09.2015. In any case respondent has not 
disputed receipt of the notice. According to the 
respondent, it is not an arbitral dispute being beyond the 
agreement.” 
 
12. Questioning the judgment and order passed by the High Court, 
referring the dispute to arbitration, the appellant filed the present 
appeal. Though the question relating to whether the Public Premises 
Act will override the Arbitration Act has been raised and argued before 
the High Court. This court issued notice in the special leave petition on 
the basis of the question so formulated. We could have dismissed the 
special leave petition on this very ground but as notice was issued on 
this point and the appeal has been pending for some time, we 
considered it appropriate to hear the appellant on this question and 
decide the case. We will first answer the issue relating to the 
applicability of the Public Premises Act. 
13. Re: Whether the Public Premises Act, 1971 overrides the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 1996: This submission has to fail. The reasons 
are simple and straight forward. The dispute that is raised in the 

Section 11 application relate to promises and reciprocal promises 
 the agreement dated 26.09.2012. The right of renewal as 
well as the legality and propriety of the enhanced demand arose during 
the subsistence of the agreement. It will be on the interpretation, 
construction and the obligations the agreement that the 
respondent’s claim rests. On the other hand, The Public Premises Act 
authorises the ejectment of a tenant in unauthorised occupation of 
public premises and for consequential directions. The original lease as 
it were, validly subsisted till 11.09.2015 and the dispute between the 
parties related to the period commencing from 12.09.2012 to 
11.09.2015, when the lease expired. The Public Premises Act would not 
even cast a shadow on this period. In so far as the dispute relating to 
this right of renewal is concerned, it depends on the terms of the 
agreement. The Public Premises Act neither bars nor overlaps with the 
scope and ambit of proceedings that were initiated under the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act. 
14. Whether the High Court committed any error in appointing the 
arbitrator while exercising the jurisdiction under Section 11: We have 
already extracted the relevant portion of the order passed by the High 
Court. The revision of storage charges occurred during the subsistence 
of the contract. Its legality and propriety will depend on the terms of 
the agreement dated 26.09.2012. Similarly, the right of renewal will 

also be based on and a construct of the said agreement. These two 
disputes will undoubtedly arise out of the agreement between the 
parties and the resolution of such disputes is clearly covered by the 
arbitration clause (Cl. 16 of the agreement). After the recent decision of 
this court in SBI General Insurance Co. (supra) the remit of the referral 
court to consider an application under Section 11(6) is clear and 
unambiguous. We need to just examine the existence of an arbitration 
agreement. The context is clearly delineated in paras 110-111 and 114 
of the judgment which are extracted below for ready reference. 
“110. The scope of examination under Section 11(6-A) is 
confined to the existence of an arbitration agreement on 
the basis of Section 7. The examination of validity of the 
arbitration agreement is also limited to the requirement of 
formal validity such as the requirement that the 
agreement should be in writing. 
111. The use of the term ‘examination’ under Section 
11(6-A) as distinguished from the use of the term ‘rule’ 
under Section 16 implies that the scope of enquiry under 
section 11(6-A) is limited to a prima facie scrutiny of the 
existence of the arbitration agreement, and does not 
include a contested or laborious enquiry, which is left for 
the arbitral tribunal to ‘rule’ under Section 16. The prima 
facie view on existence of the arbitration agreement 
taken by the referral court does not bind either the 
arbitral tribunal or the court enforcing the arbitral award. 
[…] 
114. In view of the observations made by this Court in In 
Re: Interplay (supra), it is clear that the scope of enquiry 
at the stage of appointment of arbitrator is limited to the 
scrutiny of prima facie existence of the arbitration 
agreement, and nothing else.[…]” 
(emphasis supplied) 
15. For the reasons stated above, we have no hesitation in rejecting 
the petition and we further hold that the appellant must bear the costs 
for this unnecessary litigation which we quantify at Rs. 50,000/-. 

16. As the arbitration proceedings were stayed due to the pendency of 
this appeal by the order dated 01.04.2022, while dismissing this appeal 
we direct that the arbitral tribunal shall resume the proceedings and 
endeavour to deliver the award as expeditiously as possible. 
17. The appeal is dismissed in terms of the above order. 
………………………………...J. 
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 
………………………………...J. 
[SANDEEP MEHTA] 
NEW DELHI; 
October 21, 2024.