IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 7420-7421 of 2010 

Haryana Urban Development Authority 
…Appellant(s) 
Versus 
Abhishek Gupta etc. 
…Respondent(s) 
 
JUDGEMENT 
 
SURYA KANT, J. 
 
1. 
These appeals have been preferred by the Haryana Urban 
Development 
Authority 
(HUDA, 
now 
HSVP) 
(hereinafter, 
‘Appellant’) against the judgement dated 15.07.2008 of the High 
Court of Punjab and Haryana (hereinafter, ‘High Court’), whereby 
the land acquisition proceedings initiated by the State of Haryana 
were annulled by quashing the notifications issued under Sections 
4 and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter, ‘1894 Act’). 

A. 
FACTS 
2. 
A notification was issued on 16.03.1999 under Section 4(1) 
of the 1894 Act for acquiring 952.18 acres land, of which 748.56 
acres fall in Village Saketri and 203.62 acres in Village Bhainsa 
Tiba, both in Tehsil and District Panchkula, Haryana. The land 
was being acquired for development and utilization for residential, 
commercial, institutional and recreational purposes. 
3. 
Located between the Union Territory of Chandigarh and the 
Shivalik Range, the lands are bordered on one side by the Sukhna 
Lake, and a designated Forest Area on the other. It is also adjacent 
to several other residential sectors that the Appellant has fully 
developed as part of the Mansa Devi Complex in the Panchkula 
Urban Area. 
4. 
The Respondents submitted their objections under Section 
5A of the 1894 Act on 16.04.1999, contending that their portion of 
the land under acquisition ought to be exempted as they contained 
fruit trees and the state policy mandates the exemption of such 
lands from acquisition. Additionally, they claimed that a cattle-
shed, greenhouse, and an attendant room were also erected on the 
land, for which authorization had been granted by the 

Commissioner, Ambala, on 23.12.1992 under the Punjab New 
Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952 (hereinafter, ‘Punjab 
Periphery Act’). Similarly, a farmhouse was also claimed to have 
been constructed with the approval of the Additional District 
Judge, Ambala, (hereinafter, ‘ADJ’) vide judgement dated 
05.04.1994. 
5. 
The Collector accepted these objections, noting that since the 
Commissioner and the ADJ had authorized the construction on 
the land, it could be exempted from acquisition. However, the State 
Government went ahead with the acquisition, asserting that the 
structures were unauthorized. A declaration under Section 6 of the 
1894 Act was issued on 16.03.2000 to acquire both the land and 
the constructions thereon. 
6. 
Aggrieved, the Respondents approached the High Court, 
pleading that their objections under Section 5A of the 1894 Act 
had not been appropriately considered. 
7. 
Subsequently, 
vide 
the 
impugned 
judgement 
dated 
15.07.2008, the High Court allowed the Respondents’ writ petition 
and quashed the notifications issued under Sections 4 and 6 of the 
1894 Act. This finding stood on two primary legs: (i) the 

Respondents’ 
objections 
were 
wrongfully 
rejected 
as 
the 
constructions were duly authorized; and (ii) it was discriminatory 
to acquire the Respondents’ land when similarly situated land 
belonging to Maharaja Harinder Singh ‘Khalaf’ Maharaja Varinder 
Singh had been exempted from acquisition. 
8. 
Discontented with the quashing of the notifications issued 
under Sections 4 and 6 of the 1894 Act, the Appellant—beneficiary 
of the acquisition, is before us in these appeals. This Court, vide 
order dated 01.09.2008, directed the parties to maintain status 
quo which is operating till date. 
B. 
CONTENTIONS 
9. 
Mr. Lokesh Sinhal, Learned Senior Additional Advocate 
General of Haryana, appearing on behalf of the Appellant—
beneficiary of the acquisition contended that the High Court erred 
in quashing the aforementioned notifications. In support of this 
assertion, he made the following submissions: 

The constructions undertaken by the Respondents were 
unauthorized. Although permission was granted by the 
Commissioner, 
Ambala, 
it 
was 
conditioned 
on 
the 
Respondents submitting the building plan. However, there is 

no evidence substantiating that such a plan was ever 
submitted. Hence it cannot be presumed that the 
construction was duly authorized, and consequently, the 
Competent Authority was justified in repudiating the 
Appellant’s objections under Section 5A of the 1894 Act. 

The Collector did not recommend the release of the 
Respondents’ land. He merely stated that the State 
Government may consider such release. The issue of 
exemption from acquisition was consequently left open for 
consideration by the Competent Authority. 

Even if it is assumed that the Collector recommended the 
release of the land, it would not bind the State Government. 
After due inspection, the High-Powered Committee had 
determined that the construction was unauthorized and not 
in conformity with the Developmental Plan. The State 
Government, therefore, committed no error on disagreeing 
with the Collector and proceeding with the acquisition, as 
buttressed by this Court’s decision in Anand Buttons Ltd. v. State of Haryana.1 
 
1 (2005). 

The land belonging to Maharaja Harinder Singh ‘Khalaf’ 
Maharaja Varinder Singh had also been subsequently 
acquired through the notification dated 17.05.2007. It could 
not be acquired earlier on account of pending public interest 
litigations. It is thus incorrect to assert that the State 
Government discriminated against the Respondents by 
releasing 
similarly 
placed 
lands. 
In 
any 
case, 
the 
Respondents had also not demonstrated that this land was 
similarly placed as their own land. Furthermore, the 
acquisition proceedings do not violate the provisions of the 
Punjab Periphery Act. 
10., Mr. Rajive Bhalla, Dr. Bharat Bhushan Parsoon, 
and Mr. Sanjeev Sharma, Learned Senior Counsels representing 
the Respondents, have supported the impugned judgement by 
arguing that: 

The burden of proving that the constructions were not 
supported by the building plan lies on the Appellant. Since 
the same has not been proved, there cannot be any adverse 
presumption against the legality of the construction. In any 
case, as confirmed by the order dated 05.04.1994 of the ADJ, 

the Appellant was not obligated to seek any permission and 
hence, non-submission of the building plan is not material. 

There is a flagrant violation of Section 5A as the Respondents’ 
objections have not been considered in accordance with law. 
Since Section 5A of the 1894 Act provides a valuable 
safeguard to an expropriated land owner, it warrants 
mandatory compliance and cannot be treated as an empty 
formality. 

Furthermore, doubt can be cast on the thoroughness of the 
inspection conducted by the High-Powered Committee 
constituted by the State Government, given that a vast tract 
of land is claimed to have been inspected in a very short 
duration. Additionally, the composition of the committee 
formed for the inspection indicates a complete abdication of 
power by the State government. 

Even if the land of Maharaja Harinder Singh ‘Khalaf’ 
Maharaja Varinder Singh was re-acquired, it was done at a 
rate prevalent in 2007, which was higher in comparison to 
1999. Denying the higher rate to the Respondents amounts 
to arbitrary and discriminatory conduct. 

In any case, there is a significant subsequent development, 
as during the pendency of the proceedings, the State of 
Haryana has agreed on releasing the subject land, provided 
that the Respondents provide a part of the land for basic 
amenities free of cost and use the remaining for charitable 
purposes. Since the Respondents have consented to put their 
land to such conditional use, this Court should give effect to 
such a conscionable agreement between the parties and may, 
therefore, dismiss the instant appeals in light thereof. 

Since this Court has dismissed the previous appeals filed by 
the State of Haryana against the same impugned order, the 
present set of appeals are not maintainable and attract the 
auspices of the doctrine of merger. 
C. 
ISSUES 
11. Having 
given 
our 
thoughtful 
consideration 
to 
the 
submissions at length, we find that the following four issues are to 
be analysed: 
i. 
Whether the mandatory procedure contemplated under 
Section 5A of the 1894 Act has been complied with? ii. 
Whether the land acquisition proceedings deserve to be 
vitiated on the ground that similarly placed landowners have 
been treated differently? iii. 
Whether the instant appeals are liable to be dismissed as 
infructuous in view of the subsequent developments like 
`settlement’ between the parties? iv. 
Whether doctrine of merger is attracted in view of the fact 
that State appeals against the same impugned judgment 
have already been dismissed? 
D. 
ANALYSIS 
D.1 Evaluation of objections under Section 5A of the 1894 
Act 
12. The focal contention of the Respondent-landowners is that 
the acquisition proceedings stand vitiated and ought to be quashed 
as they were carried out in violation of Section 5A of the 1894 Act, 
which mandates due consideration of their objections. 
13. It would be pertinent to understand the object that Section 
5A of the 1894 Act seeks to fulfil. A plain reading of the provision 
indicates that it codifies the fundamental safeguard of audi altrem 
partem. Landowners have the opportunity to demonstrate that the 

acquisition is against public purpose or marred by mala fides. In 
the event the landowner presents a cogent case, the appropriate 
government may exempt such land from acquisition. By enabling 
landowners to put forward their perspective and elucidate their 
remonstrances, Section 5A envisions a modus of deliberation and 
consultation, which must therefore be construed to be mandatory, 
akin to a right.2 
14. Objections under Section 5A of the 1894 Act most often 
proceed in four distinct stages: 
i. 
The filing stage: Landowners can file objections within thirty 
days of the notification issued under Section 4 of the 1894 
Act;3 
ii. 
The hearing stage: The Collector must provide an oral hearing 
to the objecting landowners, either in person or through a 
pleader/authorized representative;4 
iii. 
The recommendation stage: The Collector—after hearing 
objections and upon further inquiry—makes a report to the 
 
2 Women's Education Trust v. State of Haryana, (2013), para 1. 
3 Section 5A (1), 1894 Act. 
4 NOIDA v. Darshan Lal Bora, 2024 INS 508. appropriate government containing their recommendations; 
and 
iv. 
The decision stage: The appropriate government considers 
the Collector’s report and takes a final decision on the 
objections. 
15. Reverting to the case in hand, although the Respondents 
have averred that their right under Section 5A has been infringed, 
however, they have failed to substantiate such claim. Onus was on 
the Respondents to identify any fault in the procedure adopted by 
the State, which we find tracks closely with the aforementioned 
four-stage process. When the Section 4 notification was issued on 
16.03.1999, objections were invited from the landowners. These 
objections were duly heard, and a report was prepared by the 
Collector. Subsequently, the State Government constituted a High-
Powered Committee, and based on its findings and opinion, the 
Government ultimately took a final decision to acquire the 
Respondents’ land. Section 5A mandates a procedure, not a 
particular outcome. The landowners in this case were thus 
certainly guaranteed a hearing and consideration, not relief. 
16. Regarding the fourth stage, the Respondents have specifically 
argued that since the Collector had recommended the release of 

their land and the State Government deviated from such 
recommendation without any valid and sufficient reasons, its 
decision is bad in law. In effect, their claim seems to be that the 
Collector’s recommendation ought to be final and binding on the 
Government. However, such an interpretation is at odds with the 
bare text of Section 5A, which states that the Collector shall “either 
make a report in respect of the land which has been notified under 
Section 4, sub-section (1), or make different reports in respect of 
different parcels of such land, to the appropriate Government, 
containing his recommendations on the objections, together 
with the record of the proceedings held by him, for the 
decision of that Government. The decision of the appropriate 
Government on the objections shall be final.” [Emphasis 
supplied] 
17. The choice of different terminologies for the role of the 
Collector and the role of the Government makes it evident that the 
Legislature intended different roles for each of them. The Collector 
has no power to “decide” the case and can only give 
“recommendations” to the Government. It is the Government 
which is the ultimate arbiter for determining whether the land is 
to be released or not. No other authority can dictate the outcome 

of Section 5A proceedings—neither the Collector nor the 
landowner.5 While the Collector’s report can form the “basis” of 
such decision, the Government is free to independently evaluate 
and take a final decision, of course, based on relevant and lawful 
considerations. 
18. It is therefore patently clear that the State Government 
possessed the ability to disagree with the Collector’s report and 
decide a different course. This is not to say that the Government’s 
decision cannot be challenged or is beyond judicial review. Indeed, 
had the Respondents demonstrated that the decision was arbitrary 
or passed without due application of mind, then they could have 
been victorious in their challenge. However, the Respondents have 
not placed any evidence on record to lay such foundation. On the 
contrary, the State Government/Appellant have demonstrated that 
their decision was not whimsical but was predicated on the 
findings of a High-Powered Committee, which comprised qualified 
individuals, like officers of the Indian Administrative Services, 
officials working with the Appellant, experts from the Town 
Planning Department and the Department of Agriculture, etc. 
Having duly inspected the subject land, this Committee deduced 
 
5 Shri Mandir Sita Ramji v. Lt. Governor of Delhi, (1975), para 5. that the building structures on the land were unauthorized and 
not in conformity with the Development Plan. Relying on this 
analysis, 
the 
Government 
deviated 
from 
the 
Collector’s 
recommendation and proceeded with the acquisition. We are of the 
considered view that such departure was made in public interest, 
with due application of mind and was fully justified. 
19. The Respondents have also assailed that the State 
Government’s decision was at odds with the earlier orders of the 
Commissioner 
and 
the 
ADJ, 
who 
had 
authorized 
such 
constructions. We find this submission disingenuous. These 
orders of the Commissioner and ADJ permitted constructions that 
were to be erected specifically for agricultural purposes, not 
residential. The order dated 23.12.1992, specifically notes that 
only structures like cattle sheds and green houses would be 
permitted, as they are subservient to agricultural activities, 
whereas a modern farm house would be unauthorized under the 
Punjab Periphery Act. Similarly, the order dated 05.04.1994 noted 
that no such authorization would be necessary, provided the land 
was to be utilized for agricultural purposes. However, the 
submissions proffered by the Respondents undermine their own 
case. While attempting to attack the public purpose element of the 

acquisition proceedings, they admitted that the usage of the land 
was not limited to ‘agricultural purposes’ and that it was intended 
to be ‘residential’ in nature as well. This disharmony is visible in 
the Respondents’ Section 5A objections: 
“6. That the above said land of the objector is 
situated adjacent to sector 4 Mansa Devi 
Complex and the objector has purchased this 
costly land with a view to set up a farm house 
thereon, since the purpose of Acquisition is 
also residential, it would be against the 
principal of natural justice to uproot the 
objector first and then to develop the same 
land 
for 
residential 
purpose 
meaning 
thereby the State would be providing 
residential accommodation to one of after 
taking away the residential land from the 
objector, which would serve no public purpose 
as stated in the notice. Hence, the notice under 
section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act is liable to 
be withdrawn qua the above said land of the 
objector.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
20. Given how the Respondents have themselves admitted to the 
intention of developing their lands and structures for non-
agricultural activities, we do not wish to second guess the fact-
finding exercise conducted by the High-Powered Committee. We 
must also note that the orders of the Commissioner and ADJ were 
caveated approvals for prospective construction of the agricultural 
structures. We do not see how these would preclude the State 
Government from conducting an actual on-ground inspection and 

coming to a different conclusion as to their actual use. It is indeed 
possible that following the said orders, the land may have had 
unauthorized structures, which were being used beyond mere 
agricultural purposes. This possibility is only further enhanced by 
the Respondents’ own stated intention of putting the lands to 
residential use. 
21. Regardless, we may also hasten to add here that there are 
serious doubts on the jurisdictional competence of the Civil Court, 
in holding that agriculture related structures could be raised 
without prior permission. Such a hasty declaration by the ADJ was 
ex facie uncalled for and beyond its jurisdictional authority, given 
that it was expressly barred under the Punjab Periphery Act. 
22. However, the Respondents’ strategy of arguing that their 
constructions 
were 
authorized 
(being 
agricultural), 
while 
simultaneously seeking exemption from acquisition on the ground 
that their lands were subserving the same intention as the 
acquisition (being residential), is not only contradictory but also 
ill-advised. Furthermore, in first placing themselves at par with the 
object of acquisition, and then vitiating that very purpose by 
claiming that it contravenes the Punjab Periphery Act, the 
Respondents have effectively shot themselves in the foot. 

23. The Respondents have also failed to discharge their burden 
of proof. They have not produced any reliable material to prove that 
the constructions on their land were authorized, and if anything, 
have further created doubts, as to whether these structures are 
indeed permitted under the auspices of the Punjab Periphery Act. 
24. On the contrary, there is ample material on record to show 
that the High-Powered Committee comprised of senior officials, 
made their assessment after having properly inspected the site. 
This Committee emphatically recommended that the whole of the 
land, including the unauthorized structures, be acquired for the 
proposed regulated development. Such a decision, in our 
considered view, is in conformity with the legislative object behind 
the Haryana Development and Regulation of Urban Areas Act, 
1975, whereunder no construction on an agricultural land is 
permissible save and except when the change of land use is 
granted by the appropriate authority, in accordance with the 
procedure prescribed therein. 
25. In any case, even if the constructions were to be authorized, 
it would not materially affect our outcome. As has been held by 
this Court on several occasions, exempting lands bearing 
constructions from acquisition is a matter of State Policy, and not 

of law.6 In case the Government finds that exempting such lands 
would adversely affect the larger Development Plan or any other 
purpose behind the acquisition, then it can still continue with the 
acquisition.7 Private interest of a few, should give way to the public 
interest of the many. Prior authorization of the constructions is 
also not the definitive saving grace that the Respondents imagine 
it to be. In fact, this Court has repeatedly allowed acquisitions even 
in cases where the construction was specifically authorized by the 
government beforehand, as was the case in State of Haryana v. 
Vinod Oil & General Mills:8 
“8. Acquisition of the respondents' lands was 
held to be vitiated on the ground that the 
State having granted permission to the 
respondents for change of land use and 
develop the area as an industry cannot turn 
around after twenty-six years to acquire the 
land saying that the same is required to be 
developed for residential purposes and the 
action of the respondent State was held to 
be arbitrary. Of course, the Director of Town and 
Country Planning, Haryana earlier granted 
permission to the respondents herein for change 
of land use for construction of Oil and General 
Mills in their lands in 23 kanals 6 marlas in 
Khasra Nos. 148/1, 148/2 and 149/10. The 
fact that the factory and building was put 
up in the land with the approval of the 
authority cannot be a bar for acquisition of 
the land. Public interest overrides individual 
 
6 NOIDA v. Darshan Lal Bohra, 2024 SCC Online SC 1690. 
7 Anand Buttons Ltd. v. State of Haryana, (2005). 
8 (2014), para 8. interests. In our view, the High Court was not 
justified in saying that the acquisition is 
bad since permission was earlier granted for 
change of land use and developing the area 
as an industry and that the Government is 
estopped 
from 
initiating 
acquisition 
proceeding” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
26. The existence of constructions on the Respondents’ land, 
whether authorized or not, legal or not, cannot be by themselves 
an absolute embargo on the Government’s power of eminent 
domain. The challenge brought by the Respondents on the anvil of 
Section 5A of the 1894 Act, therefore, falls flat. 
D.2. Discrimination and Article 14 of our Constitution 
27. In addition to seeking refuge under Section 5A of the 1894 
Act, the Respondents contend that the acquisition of their land 
was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. They claim that the 
land of Maharaja Harinder Singh ‘Khalaf’ Maharaja Varinder Singh 
had been exempted from the acquisition. This contention was also 
accepted by the High Court, which held the subject-acquisition to 
be discriminatory in nature, for leaving out lands of similarly 
placed owners from the process of acquisition. 
28. We find this patently erroneous, for three reasons. First, the 
High Court overlooked the fact that the total land proposed to be 

acquired through the Section 4 notification was 952.18 acres, out 
of which land admeasuring 950.14 acres eventually stood 
acquired. The acquisition of 99.78% of the initially notified land 
demonstrated the intention of the State to acquire the land 
uniformly, and not pick and choose individual parcels of land. 
29. A mere plea regarding differential treatment is insufficient; 
the claimant must instead demonstrate that similarly placed 
classes had been treated dissimilarly, unjustifiably.9 The burden 
lies on the Respondents to not only prove disparate treatment of 
equals, but that it amounts to hostile discrimination as well. 
30. Second, we disagree with the remedy, even if discrimination 
was to have been established. The solution to some lands being 
unjustifiably left out is to direct their acquisition, not encourage 
the exclusion of more lands. The latter approach only furthers the 
discrimination and creates more aggrieved landowners. Moreover, 
it is settled law that Article 14 cannot be ordinarily employed as a 
ground to claim negative equality, i.e., it cannot be used for 
claiming illicit benefits simply because someone else has been 
allowed such an undue favour, especially when doing so would 
 
9 State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd., 1964 SCC Online SC 121, para 
11. jeopardize the entire acquisition by undermining its contiguity.10 
Therefore, instead of multiplying the illegality, the High Court 
ought to have exercised its writ jurisdiction to annul such illicit 
benefit received by the similarly placed person.11 
31. Third, and most crucially, the illegality, if any, has since been 
remedied. It could not be disputed before us that the land of 
Maharaja Harinder Singh ‘Khalaf’ Maharaja Varinder Singh had 
been 
subsequently 
acquired 
through 
notifications 
dated 
16.05.2007 and 27.03.2008. The very basis of discrimination, 
thus, stood denuded of its factual foundation as of the date the 
High Court passed the impugned judgement on 15.07.2008. The 
High Court ought to have taken note of this material subsequent 
event which took place during the pendency of the proceedings 
before it, considering its serious impact on the outcome of the 
entire acquisition process. 
D.3. Events before this Court 
32. We may now advert to certain unpalatable events which 
occurred during the pendency of these appeals before this Court. 
On 10.05.2023, when the matter was posted for hearing, a joint 
 
10 Gurcharan Singh & Ors. v. New Delhi Municipal Committee & Ors., (1996) 
11 Vivek Coop. House Building Society Ltd. v. State of Haryana, 2016 SCC OnLine P&H 15802; 
Chandigarh Administration v. Jagjit Singh, (1991). request was made to list these matters for final hearing on 
26.07.2023. On the date fixed, learned Senior Additional Advocate 
General of Haryana bona fidely conveyed the State’s consent to 
drop the acquisition process qua the Respondents’ land only, if 
they were to agree, to provide a part of the subject land for the 
building of roads and other public amenities free of cost, along with 
an undertaking that the remaining land shall be utilized only for 
charitable purposes, i.e., non-commercial activities. Learned 
Senior Counsel for the Respondents was consequently directed to 
seek formal instructions in this regard. Respondents meanwhile 
filed a formal undertaking stating that they would use the land 
only for non-profit and charitable purposes. 
33. On 13.09.2023, we directed the State Government / 
Appellant to file an affidavit responding to the following queries: 

Why the State Government is agreeable to release the land of 
the Respondents from acquisition? 

Whether such release of land will affect the acquisition of 
adjoining lands or not? 

Whether the subject-land falls within or near the Sukhna 
Lake catchment area? 

Whether the land in dispute falls in any non-construction 
zone? 

If not, what type of construction is permissible in and around 
the area of subject-land? 
34. In response thereto, the State of Haryana filed an affidavit 
stating, inter alia, as follows: 

The land can be released because the acquisition proceedings 
for the same were quashed by the High Court and are under 
abeyance in view of the status quo order passed by this Court 
and because the Respondents undertake to utilize the land 
for charitable purposes; 

The present case has unique circumstances; 

The site does not fall within the Sukhna Catchment Area, 
however, the exact area that falls under Eco Sensitive Zone 
would be known once the notification for such zone is 
finalized; and 

Construction is permissible in the land. 
35. The Respondents also, without any delay, filed their affidavits 
in consonance and agreement with the State Government’s 

affidavit. Since the parties have reached a ‘settlement’ during the 
pendency of these appeals, we are introspecting as to whether or 
not to allow the Government to make such exemption for the 
Respondents’ land. 
36. We are not oblivious to ground realities. This Court is aware 
that the subject land is prime real estate. The proposed acquisition 
and development is located between the Shivalik Range and the 
Union Territory of Chandigarh. One side touches the Sukhna lake, 
while the other side abuts a notified forest. The land is contiguous 
with well-developed residential areas like the Mansa Devi Complex. 
Its idyllic natural surroundings and strategic proximity to urban 
areas and limited supply of similarly placed alternative areas, 
makes the land priceless. 
37. Furthermore, we are also aware of the fact that the 
acquisition, in its entirety, was under challenge before the High 
Court, with a batch of writ petitions pending at the stage of final 
hearing, at the time when the State Government agreed to release 
the subject land. The High Court has meanwhile dismissed those 
petitions, upholding the acquisition, and presently, Special Leave 
Petitions (hereinafter ‘SLPs’) are pending before this Court. 

38. Be that as it may, given the land’s premium nature, and its 
criticality to the subject acquisition, it is rather intriguing why the 
State Government has opted to enter into a compromise, knowing 
full well that doing so would weaken its case in defending the major 
chunk of the acquisition. We, therefore, in order to satisfy 
ourselves that the State Government has considered thoroughly all 
the pros and cons and acted in a bona fide manner to serve the 
public interest, before making the offer of release, deemed it 
imperative to delve deeper. 
39. A perusal of the original record casts a cloud of doubt on the 
legal necessity of the entire exercise and has disappointed us 
regarding the manner in which the State Government’s decision to 
release the land has been taken. The record reveals that this issue 
was first discussed in the letter dated 08.09.2023, in which the 
Appellant (HUDA) noted on record that the land in question cannot 
be spared. Nevertheless, the Appellant deferred the final decision 
to the State government. This note was authored by an official in 
the rank of an Assistant. Following this, the file moved with 
remarkable 
celerity 
and 
received 
approval 
from 
various 
departments and officials, including as high as the office of the 
Additional Chief Secretary, Urban Development on the very same 

date. Unfortunately, none of the officers thought it appropriate to 
write even a single word while agreeing with the proposal to release 
the land. This rapid progression raises questions on whether all 
relevant factors were considered before recommending such 
approval. The only so called self-speaking note is of the Director 
General, Urban Estate of the even date, i.e., 08.09.2023, which 
noted that the file may be “submitted to govt. for approval so that 
Honorable Apex Court may be informed about view of state…”. The 
proposal was reportedly approved by the State Government within 
a period of 3 days only, i.e., on 11.09.2023. Res ipsa loquitor. 
40. Even the responses to the questions posed by this Court in 
its order dated 13.09.2023, moved with extraordinary swiftness, 
securing approval at an astonishingly expedited pace upwards, 
without the addition of even a single word at any level. The 
responses the record shows, were drafted by an Assistant. 
41. We hasten to add here that we have no intention to suggest 
that 
bureaucratic 
swiftness 
necessarily 
undermines 
the 
thoroughness of the process. Indeed, our administrative setup can 
do with more such alacrity. Rather, the confluence of 
circumstances— the land being prime real estate and yet suddenly 
and inexplicably being excluded from acquisition, crucial policy 

decisions with wide ranging public interest of enormous financial 
ramifications being discussed and finalized by very junior officials, 
files receiving approval at exceptional speed, etc.—collectively do 
not inspire confidence as to the objectivity of the entire process. 
42. Despite meticulously analyzing all relevant documents 
appended with the file, including the cryptic brief notes of the 
Assistant, we are unable to get any qualitative assistance from the 
government record. As noted above, there is little discussion 
about: (i) the effect of release of the Respondents’ land on the 
remaining acquisition, in light of the challenge pending before the 
High Court or this Court; (ii) the cascading effect that this 
compromise would have on the other landowners along with the 
arguments it would invite on the question of hostility of Article 14, 
and if so; (iii) the basis of such classification and whether it would 
be reasonable; (iv) whether the release of the land would affect the 
contiguity of the land under acquisition and if so, would it impair 
the planned development of the area under acquisition; and (v) 
whether the State was competent to release the land in purported 
exercise of its powers under Section 48 of the 1894 Act when the 
matter was sub judice before this Court. 

43. None of these issues have been discussed, considered, or 
analyzed. The decision regarding release of the Respondents’ land 
is, therefore, manifestly arbitrary. While the State Government 
undoubtedly possesses the power to release the land for lawful 
considerations, it cannot do so whimsically, irrationally, without 
any application of mind, or selectively. Condoning such action 
would encourage further monocratic release of other lands in 
complete disregard of the consequences and impact on public 
interest. This would likely result in the creation of small islands of 
unacquired lands within large swathes of acquired land. These 
private enclaves would undoubtedly upset the effectiveness of the 
rest of the acquisition—making it patently unfair for all other 
landowners, laying to waste perhaps the very purpose for which 
their lands were acquired in the first place. Turning futile the 
acquisition would also render mindless dissipation of the State 
Exchequer, already expended earlier in the process—reducing 
returns for all. Although the State Government possesses 
acknowledgeable power in the lifecycle of the acquisition process, 
it also bears great responsibility of ensuring its judicious exercise. 
We cannot, therefore, treat the compromise or release lightly. 

44. Keeping in view the entirety of the exercise and the sum 
totality of all factors, both apparent and others more insidious, we 
are unable to accept the parties’ compromise, in terms whereof the 
disposal of instant appeals is suggested. 
45. Having held so, we are not enthused by the Respondents’ 
conduct either. These unusual events create more than just 
suspicion that the Respondents have been able to influence the 
representations of the many, as well as twist and undermine 
institutions and process meant for the protection of public interest. 
In their hurry to curry favour with the Respondents, the senior 
bureaucrats have unfortunately failed to visualise the serious 
ramifications their actions could have had on the entire acquisition 
of more than 950 acres land and the law in general. 
46. We are thus, of the considered view that this is a case where 
the bureaucracy abdicated its duty and failed to objectively assist 
the Decision-Making Authority, in arriving at a just and fair 
conclusion in conformity with larger public interest. Had the senior 
officers flagged all the relevant issues on file, we have no reason to 
doubt that the Competent Authority would have never approved 
the proposal to release the subject land. 

D.4 Doctrine of merger 
47. We must also note that the previous Civil Appeals preferred 
by the State Government, challenging the same impugned order 
were dismissed on account of non-prosecution. Hence, there arises 
an important question with regard to the maintainability of the 
present appeals. This issue may be conclusively determined by 
examining the applicability of the doctrine of merger to the peculiar 
set of circumstances of the instant case. 
48. In this respect, in the landmark case of Kunhayammed v. 
State of Kerala12, it was held that: 
“44. To sum up, our conclusions are: 
(i) Where an appeal or revision is provided 
against an order passed by a court, tribunal or 
any other authority before superior forum and 
such superior forum modifies, reverses or affirms 
the decision put in issue before it, the decision by 
the subordinate forum merges in the decision by 
the superior forum and it is the latter which 
subsists, remains operative and is capable of 
enforcement in the eye of law 
[…] 
(vi) Once leave to appeal has been granted 
and appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court 
has been invoked the order passed in appeal 
would attract the doctrine of merger; the 
order may be of reversal, modification or 
merely affirmation.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
12 (2000) 

49. The same principle was reiterated in the case of Khoday 
Distilleries Limited v. Sri Mahadeshwara Sahakara Sakkare 
Karkhane Limited, Kollegal13, where this Court held that merger 
would result if the SLPs were dismissed after granting leave, 
irrespective of whether reasons were given or not: 
“20. The Court thereafter analysed number of 
cases where orders of different nature were 
passed and dealt with these judgments by 
classifying them in the following categories: 
(i) Dismissal at the stage of special leave 
petition—without reasons—no res judicata, no 
merger. 
(ii) Dismissal of the special leave petition by 
speaking or reasoned order—no merger, but rule 
of discipline and Article 141 attracted. 

Leave 
granted—dismissal 
without 
reasons—merger results.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
50. In the instant case, leave to appeal was granted vide the order 
dated 27.08.2010, and the Civil Appeals preferred by the State of 
Haryana were then dismissed on 16.11.2016. Therefore, since the 
previous SLPs the same impugned judgement were 
dismissed after granting leave, arguably, the doctrine of merger 
would be attracted. 
 
13 (2019) 

51. However, we may hasten to add that in Kunhayammed 
(supra), this Court held that the doctrine of merger is neither a 
doctrine of constitutional law nor of statutory recognition. Since it 
is a common law principle directed towards judicial propriety, the 
same should not be applied in a straitjacket manner, and the 
nature of facts and circumstances of that particular case should 
be considered. 
52. Still further, a three-judge bench of this Court—to which one 
of us (Surya Kant, J.) was a member—in GNCTD v. BSK 
Realtors,14 analyzed the aforementioned exception to the doctrine 
of merger and held that the exercise of powers under Article 142 of 
the Constitution, which enables the Court to do complete justice, 
would fall under the four corners of such exception. 
53. Applying the afore-cited principle to the facts and 
circumstances of the instant case, we have found that the 
impugned judgement of the High Court is patently unjust and 
could adversely affect the subject acquisition, leading to significant 
harm to the public at large. In light of this, we find it a fit case to 
invoke our powers under Article 142 of the Constitution and carve 
 
14 GNCTD v. BSK Realtors,. out an exception to the doctrine of merger so as to do complete 
justice to the parties. 
E. 
CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS 
54. We, thus, deem it appropriate to allow these appeals and 
dispose of the matter in the following terms and directions: 
i. 
The Appeals are allowed; the impugned judgment dated 
15.07.2008 of the High Court, which is under challenge in 
this batch of appeals, is hereby set aside; 
ii. 
If there is any other judgement or order of the High Court 
which is passed following the main judgement dated 
15.07.2008, thereby quashing or adversely impacting the 
subject acquisition, such judgements or orders are also 
deemed to be set aside; 
iii. 
In case no ‘award’ for the land owned by the Respondents was 
passed earlier, the same shall be passed expeditiously, and 
in any case within a period of 3 (three) months in accordance 
with the provisions of the 1894 Act; 
iv. 
If an award in respect of the Respondent’s land has already 
been passed under the 1894 Act, in that event, there will be 
no necessity to pass a fresh award. However, liberty is 

granted to the Respondents to avail their remedy under 
Section 18 of the 1894 Act, if so advised. Such reference, if 
moved by the Respondents within a period of 2 (two) months 
from the date of uploading of this order on the website, the 
Reference Court will not dismiss it on the ground of limitation 
and shall proceed to decide the same on merits and in 
accordance with law; 
v. 
In case the land of the Respondents is found to have same 
potentiality and utility as that of Maharaja Harinder Singh 
‘Khalaf’ Maharaja Varinder Singh (i.e., land which was 
acquired vide the notifications dated 16.05.2007 and 
27.03.2008), the Respondents will also be entitled to seek 
compensation at the same rate as has been granted for the 
said similarly located land; and 
vi. 
The State of Haryana and the HSVP are directed to take 
possession of the subject-land in accordance with law and 
commence development works without any delay. The land 
shall be utilized for the public purposes for which it has been 
acquired. 
55. We are sanguine that the State Government is conscious of 
the principles evolved by this Court in a catena of decisions in 

regard to the violation of public trust doctrine15 and will thus 
ensure that the acquired land is utilised in public interest in 
accordance with provisions of the Haryana Development and 
Regulation of Urban Areas Act, 1975. Consequently, the HSVP will 
take on the responsibility to develop the entire acquired land 
strictly in accordance with the public purpose of its acquisition. 
56. In this regard, compliance report shall be filed before this 
Court after six months i.e. before 30.04.2025. 
57. Ordered accordingly. 
 
………..………………… J. 
(SURYA KANT) 

……………………………J. 
(K.V. VISWANATHAN) 
 
NEW DELHI 
DATED: 21.10.2024 

15 Uddar Gagan Properties v. Sant Singh and others, (2016); Greater Noida 
Industrial Development Authority v. Devender Kumar and others, (2011).