IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6166 of 2023)
Mafabhai Motibhai Sagar
                    
    … Appellant

VERSUS

State of Gujarat & Ors.
       … Respondents
  
JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.
Leave granted.
2.
The issue involved in this appeal is as regards the legality of
the conditions imposed while remitting the life sentence of the
appellant   in   the exercise   of   powers   under   sub­section   (1)   of
Section 432 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short,
‘the   CrPC’).     There   is   an   identical   provision   in   the   Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (for short, ‘the BNSS’) in the
form of sub­section (1) of Section 473.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
3.
The   appellant   was   convicted   for   the   offence   punishable
under Section 302 read with Sections 147 and 148 of the Indian

Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘the IPC’) and was sentenced on 18th
February 2008 to undergo life imprisonment. The conviction of the
appellant has attained finality. 
4.
The present appeal arises out of an order passed by the High
Court of Gujarat on an application made by the appellant for grant
of parole under Rule 19 of the Prisons (Bombay Furlough and
Parole) Rules, 1959.  As the prayer was rejected by the impugned
order, this appeal was filed before this Court.  While arguing the
appeal before this Court, on 26th  June 2023, a submission was
made on behalf of the appellant that the application for remission
made by the appellant under sub­section (2) of Section 432 of the
CrPC   was   not   being   considered   by   the   State   Government.
Therefore, a notice was issued on 26th June 2023 on that limited
aspect, and a direction was issued to expeditiously decide the
pending application for grant of remission.
5.
On   15th  September   2023,   the   Home   Department   of   the
Government of Gujarat passed an order granting remission to the
appellant. His remaining sentence was remitted.   While granting
remission by the order dated 15th September 2023, four conditions
were imposed, which read thus:  
“Conditions:

After the release from jail the
prisoner shall behave decently for 2
(Two) years.  For this purpose he has to
submit two Sureties of the respectable
persons of the Society stating that the

prisoner shall not breach the peace and
harmony of the society and also shall
not   threaten   the   complainant   and
witnesses.

If the prisoner after the release
from   the   jail   carries   out   any
cognizable   offence   or   inflict   any
serious   injury   to   any   citizen   or
property   then   he   will   be   arrested
again and he will have to serve the
remaining period of sentence in jail.

After being released from jail the
prisoner shall mark his presence in the
nearest police station for a period of 1
(one) year.

The   prisoner   shall   be   released
only   after   paying   the   unpaid   fine
amount if any.”
                                   (emphasis added)
As the appellant was aggrieved by the first two conditions, we
permitted   him   to   amend   the   appeal   and   challenge   conditions
nos.1 and 2 instead of driving him to file a fresh writ petition
before the High Court.
SUBMISSIONS
6.
Mr Rauf Rahim, the learned senior counsel appearing for the
appellant,   has   made   submissions   on   the power   of   the   State
Government to impose conditions while granting remission.   He
submits that the impugned conditions defeat the very object of
the grant of remission.   He submitted that the word “decently”

used in condition no.1 is vague. The concept of decency differs
from person to person.   Therefore, putting such a condition of
maintaining decent behaviour is completely violative of Article 14
of   the   Constitution   of   India   being   manifestly   arbitrary.     It   is
submitted that putting such a condition confers arbitrary power
on the State Government to cancel the remission order.   Hence,
the condition violates Article 21 of the Constitution of India.  
7.
Regarding   condition   no.2,   the   learned   senior   counsel
submitted   that   even   if   a   false   allegation   is   made   against   the
appellant   of   commission   of   any   cognizable   offence,   he   will   be
deprived   of   remission   granted   under   the   order   dated   15th
September   2023.     The   learned   senior   counsel   relied   upon   a
decision of this Court in the case of Shaikh Abdul Azees v. State
of Karnataka1.  While dealing with sub­section (3) of Section 401
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (for short, ‘the CrPC of
1898’) which is  pari materia  with Section 432 of the CrPC, this
Court  held  that  on  breach  of  any  of  the   conditions   on   which
remission is granted, there is no automatic revival of the sentence.
He submitted that both conditions are completely illegal.
8.
Ms Swati Ghildiyal, the learned counsel appearing for the 1st
respondent­State of Gujarat, submitted that under sub­section (1)
of Section 432 of the CrPC, the appropriate Government has the
power to remit the whole or any part of the punishment subject to
certain conditions.   The provision requires the convict to accept
1 (1977) 

the   said   conditions,   without   which   he   cannot   be   granted   the
benefit of remission.  The learned counsel submitted that it is very
well   settled   that   a   convict   is   not   entitled   to   remission   of
the sentence as a matter of right.  She submitted that the limited
right of the convict is only to be considered for remission as held
by this Court in the case of Union of India v. V. Sriharan alias
Murugan   &   Ors2.     The   learned   counsel   also   relied   upon   a
decision of this Court in the case of Epuru Sudhakar & Anr. v.
Govt. of A.P. & Ors.3, which lays down that the power to remit
sentence is a discretionary power which has to be exercised on
public  interest considerations.   The learned  counsel submitted
that the appellant has accepted the conditions imposed on him
and has furnished surety in terms of condition no.1.  Hence, no
interference is called for.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
9.
Section 432 of the CrPC reads thus:
“432.   Power   to   suspend   or   remit
sentences.—(1)  When any person has
been sentenced to punishment for an
offence, the appropriate Government
may, at any time, without conditions
or   upon   any   conditions   which   the
person   sentenced   accepts,   suspend
the   execution   of   his   sentence   or
remit the whole or any part of the
2 (2016) 
3 (2006) 

punishment   to   which   he   has   been
sentenced.
(2) Whenever an application is made to
the   appropriate   Government   for   the
suspension or remission of a sentence,
the   appropriate   Government   may
require the presiding Judge of the Court
before or by which the conviction was
had or confirmed, to state his opinion
as to whether the application should be
granted   or   refused,   together   with   his
reasons   for   such   opinion   and   also   to
forward   with   the   statement   of   such
opinion a certified copy of the record of
the  trial   or  of  such  record  thereof  as
exists.
(3)  If   any   condition   on   which   a
sentence   has   been   suspended   or
remitted   is,   in   the   opinion   of   the
appropriate
 
Government,
 
not
fulfilled, the appropriate Government
may   cancel   the   suspension   or
remission, and thereupon the person
in   whose   favour   the   sentence   has
been suspended or remitted may, if
at   large,   be   arrested   by   any   police
officer,
 
without
 
warrant
 
and
remanded to undergo the unexpired
portion of the sentence.
(4) The condition on which a sentence is
suspended   or   remitted   under   this
section may be one to be fulfilled by the
person in whose favour the sentence is
suspended   or   remitted,   or   one
independent of his will.

(5)   The   appropriate   Government   may,
by general rules or special orders, give
directions   as   to   the   suspension   of
sentences and the conditions on which
petitions should be presented and dealt
with:
Provided   that   in   the   case   of   any
sentence (other than a sentence of fine)
passed on a male person above the age
of eighteen years, no such petition by
the person sentenced or by any other
person   on   his   behalf   shall   be
entertained,
 
unless
 
the
 
person
sentenced is in jail, and—
(a) where such petition is made
by   the   person   sentenced,   it   is
presented through the officer in
charge of the jail; or
(b) where such petition is made
by any other person, it contains
a   declaration   that   the   person
sentenced is in jail.
(6)   The   provisions   of   the   above   sub­
sections shall also apply to any order
passed by a Criminal Court under any
section of this Code or of any other law
which restricts the liberty of any person
or imposes any liability upon him or his
property.
(7) In this section and in Section 433,
the
 
expression
 
“appropriate
Government” means,— 
(a) in cases where the sentence is
for   an   offence   against,   or   the

order referred to in sub­section
(6)   is   passed   under,   any   law
relating to a matter to which the
executive   power   of   the   Union
extends,
 
the
 
Central
Government; 
(b)   in   other   cases,   the
Government of the State within
which the offender is sentenced
or the said order is passed.”
                                 (emphasis added)
Under sub­section (1) of Section 432 of the CrPC, the appropriate
Government has the power to remit the whole or any part of the
punishment of a convict.   The remission can be granted either
unconditionally   or   subject   to   certain   conditions.     As   expressly
provided under sub­section (1) of Section 432, actual remission
takes effect only after the convict accepts the conditions.   Thus,
there is no doubt that there exists a power in the appropriate
Government   to   grant   remission   subject   to   compliance   with
conditions.
10.
Insofar as the exercise of power under sub­section (1) of
Section 432 of the CrPC is concerned, the Constitution Bench in
the case of  V. Sriharan2  has approved the view taken by this
Court in the case of Mohinder Singh v. State of Punjab4.  The
view taken is that the decision to grant remission has to be well­
informed, reasonable and fair to all concerned.
4 (2013) 

11.
It is no doubt true that the power to remit a sentence under
Section   432(1)   of   the   CrPC   is   discretionary.   One   of   the
considerations for the  exercise of the  discretion  can be public
interest. The gravity and nature of the offences committed by the
convict are also factors to be considered. The antecedents of the
convict are also relevant. Almost all the States have a written
policy on the grant of remission under Section 432(1) of the CrPC.
For example, the 1st respondent, the State of Gujarat, has a policy
that forms part of the Government Resolution dated 23rd January
2014,   which   was   amended   from   time   to   time.     The   said
Government   Resolution   incorporates   guidelines/policy   for
consideration   of   cases   for   grant   of   remission   and   premature
release of prisoners. The existence of a rational policy is necessary
to prevent the arbitrary exercise of power to grant a remission
under Section 432(1) of the CrPC.
12.
A   convict   cannot   seek   remission   as   a   matter   of   right.
However, he has a right to say that his case for the grant of
remission ought to be considered in accordance with the law.  The
power under sub­section (1) of Section 432 of the CrPC has to be
exercised in a fair and reasonable manner.  Therefore, conditions
imposed   while   exercising   the   power   under   sub­section   (1)   of
Section 432 must be reasonable.  The conditions must stand the
test of scrutiny of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.   If the
conditions imposed are arbitrary, the conditions will stand vitiated

due to violation of Article 14. Such arbitrary conditions may also
violate the convict's rights under Article 21 of the Constitution.
13.
Now,   we   come   to   condition   no.1.     The   first   part   of   this
condition requires the convict to behave decently for a period of
two years after release from jail.   The convict must submit two
respectable sureties to ensure that he does not commit the breach
of peace and harmony of the society and does not threaten the
complainant and the witnesses.   The words ‘decent’ or ‘decently’
are not defined in the CrPC or any other cognate legislation.  The
concept of decency of each human being is likely to be different.
The idea of decency keeps on changing with time. As the term
‘decency’   is   not   defined   in   the   CrPC   or any   other   cognate
legislation,   every   person   or   authority   may   interpret   the   same
differently. Therefore, such a condition while granting remission
becomes too subjective.   Putting such a vague condition while
exercising the power under sub­section (1) of Section 432 of the
CrPC will give a tool in the hands of the executive to cancel the
remission at its whims and fancies. Therefore, such a condition is
arbitrary and will be hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Such a condition cannot be imposed as it will defeat the very
object of remitting the sentence in the exercise of powers under
sub­section (1) of Section 432 of the CrPC.  Therefore, condition
no.1 cannot be sustained.   If a condition imposed is unclear or
ambiguous,   it   can   have   different   meanings.   Consequently,   it
becomes   very   difficult   to   enforce   such   conditions.   Thus,   the

condition imposed while granting remission must be such that it
is capable of being complied with and enforced.
14.
 Now, we come to condition no.2, which provides that if the
appellant,   after   his   release   from   jail,   commits   any   cognizable
offence or inflicts any serious injury to any citizen or property, he
will be arrested again and will have to serve the remaining period
of   the sentence   in   jail.     Thus,   this   condition   authorises   the
appropriate   Government   to   arrest   the   convict   and   revoke   the
benefit   of   remission.   This   clause   provides   for   automatic
cancellation of the order remitting the sentence.  In this respect, it
is necessary to consider the decision of this Court in the case of
Shaikh Abdul Azees1.  It was a case where remission was earned
by the appellant therein after undergoing a life sentence for fifteen
and a half years.  The High Court held that Section 303 of the IPC
was applicable, and this was a case of conditional remission under
Section 401 of the CrPC of 1898.  Section 401 of the CrPC of 1898
has been quoted in paragraph 13 of the said decision, which reads
thus:
“13. We are, however, clearly of opinion
that for the purpose of Section 303 IPC
it does not make any difference whether
the remission under Section 401 CrPC
is   with   or   without   conditions.   This   is
clear from a perusal of sub­section (3) of
Section   401   CrPC   which   reads   as
follows:
“401(3) If any condition on which
a sentence has been suspended

or remitted, is, in the opinion of
the appropriate Government, not
fulfilled,
 
the
 
appropriate
Government   may   cancel   the
suspension   or   remission   and
thereupon the person in whose
favour   the   sentence   has   been
suspended or remitted, may, if at
large, be arrested by any police
officer   without   warrant   and
remanded   to   undergo   the
unexpired   portion   of   the
sentence.”
An identical provision is found in sub­section (3) of Section 432 of
the CrPC and sub­section (3) of Section 473 of BNSS.  Ultimately,
in  paragraph  14 of  the  said  decision,  while  dealing   with  sub­
section (3) of Section 401 of the CrPC of 1898, this Court held
thus:
“14. It   is   manifest   from   the   above
provision   that   on   breach   of   any
condition   of   the   remission   there   is
not   an   automatic   revival   of   the
sentence. It will certainly be open to
the Government in a particular case
to  cancel  the  remission  but it  may
not. The Government is not under a
legal   obligation   to   cancel   the
remission.   It   is   only   when   the
Government chooses to pass an order
of   cancellation   of   the   remission   of
sentence that the convict is arrested
and   is   required   to   serve   the
unexpired   portion   of   the   sentence.
During the interregnum the accused

who is released cannot be said to be
under a sentence of imprisonment for
life.  While   he   is   in   enjoyment   of   the
freedom on account of remission, that
period   is   not   even   reckoned   under
Section   401   CrPC   for   the   purpose   of
calculation of the sentence to be served
in the eventuality.”
                                (emphasis added)
15.
The   effect   of   remitting   the   sentence   is   the restoration   of
the liberty of a convict.   If the order granting remission is to be
cancelled or revoked, it will naturally affect the convict's liberty.
The reason is that when an action is taken under sub­section (3)
of Section 432 of the CrPC or sub­section (3) of Section 473 of the
BNSS,   it   results   in   the   convict   being   taken   to   prison   for
undergoing the remaining part of the sentence. Thus, the benefit
of   remission   stands   withdrawn.     Therefore,   this   drastic   power
cannot be exercised without following the principles of natural
justice.  A show cause notice must be served on the convict before
taking   action   to   withdraw/cancel   remission.   The   show   cause
notice   must   contain   the   grounds   on   which   action   under   sub­
section (3) of Section 432 of the CrPC or sub­section (3) of Section
473   of   the   BNSS   is   proposed   to   be   taken.     The   concerned
authority must give the convict an opportunity to file a reply and
of being heard.   After that, the authority must pass an order
stating brief reasons.   The principles of natural justice must be
read into sub­section (3) of Section 432 and sub­section (3) of
Section 473 of the BNSS. The convict whose remission has been

cancelled can always adopt a remedy under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
16.
In view of the legal position stated above, condition no.2
cannot be interpreted to mean that every allegation of a breach
thereof would automatically result in the cancellation of the order
of   remission.     Registration   of   a   cognizable   offence   against   the
convict, per se, is not a ground to cancel the remission order.  The
allegations of breach of condition cannot be taken at their face
value, and whether a case for cancellation of remission is made
out will have to be decided in the facts of each case.  Every case of
breach cannot invite cancellation of the order of remission. The
appropriate Government will have to consider the nature of the
breach alleged against the convict. A minor or a trifling breach
cannot be a ground to cancel remission. There must be some
material   to   substantiate   the   allegations   of   breach.   Depending
upon the seriousness and gravity thereof, action can be taken
under sub­section (3) of Section 432 of the CrPC or sub­section (3)
of Section 473 of the BNSS of cancellation of the order remitting
sentence.
17.
Our conclusions can be summarised as under:

Under sub­section (1) of Section 432 of the CrPC or sub­
section (1) of Section 473 of the BNSS, the appropriate
Government has the power to remit the whole or any part
of the punishment of a convict.   The remission can be

granted   either   unconditionally   or   subject   to   certain
conditions; 
(ii) The decision to grant or not to grant remission has to be
well­informed, reasonable and fair to all concerned;
(iii) A  convict  cannot  seek  remission  as   a   matter   of   right.
However, he has a right to claim that his case for the
grant of remission ought to be considered in accordance
with   the   law   and/or   applicable   policy   adopted   by   the
appropriate Government;
(iv) Conditions   imposed   while   exercising   the   power   under
sub­section (1) of Section 432 or sub­section (1) of Section
473 of the BNSS must be reasonable. If the conditions
imposed are arbitrary, the conditions will stand vitiated
due to violation of Article 14. Such arbitrary conditions
may violate the convict's rights under Article 21 of the
Constitution;

The effect of remitting the sentence, in part or full, results
in the restoration of liberty of a convict.   If the order
granting remission is to be cancelled or revoked, it will
naturally affect the liberty of the convict.  The reason is
that when action is taken under sub­section (3) of Section
432 of the CrPC or sub­section (3) of Section 473 of the
BNSS, it results in the convict being taken to prison for
undergoing   the   remaining   part   of   the   sentence.

Therefore, this drastic power cannot be exercised without
following the principles of natural justice.  A show cause
notice must be served on the convict before taking action
to   withdraw/cancel   remission.   The   show   cause   notice
must contain the grounds on which action under sub­
section (3) of Section 432 of the CrPC or sub­section (3) of
Section   473   of   BNNS   is   sought   to   be   taken.   The
concerned authority must give the convict an opportunity
to file a reply and of being heard.  After that, the authority
must  pass  an   order   stating  the reasons   in  brief.     The
convict can always challenge the order of cancellation of
remission by adopting a remedy under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.; and
(vi) Registration of a cognizable offence against the convict,
per se, is not a ground to cancel the remission order.  The
allegations of breach of condition cannot be taken at their
face   value,   and   whether   a   case   for   cancellation   of
remission is made out will have to be decided in the facts
of   each   case.     Every   case   of   breach   cannot   invite
cancellation of the order of remission. The appropriate
Government will have to consider the nature of the breach
alleged against the convict. A minor or a trifling breach
cannot be a ground to cancel remission. There must be
some material to substantiate the allegations of breach.
Depending   upon   the   seriousness   and   gravity   thereof,
action can be taken under sub­section (3) of Section 432

of the CrPC or sub­section (3) of Section 473 of the BNSS
of cancellation of the order remitting sentence.
18.
Therefore, we pass the following order:
a. The   first   part   of   condition   no.1   regarding   behaving
decently, being manifestly arbitrary, is struck down.
Therefore, the undertaking given by the appellant and
the surety bonds submitted by him stand cancelled
only to that extent; 
b. Condition   no.2   stands   clarified   in   terms   of   this
judgment;
c. The order of remission shall not be revoked on the
ground of breaches of conditions without compliance
with the principles of natural justice as provided in
paragraph 17(v) above; and
d. The Appeal is partly allowed on the above terms....…………………………….J.
       (Abhay S Oka)...…………………………….J.
                                                          (Augustine George Masih)
New Delhi;
October 21, 2024.