IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 

HDFC BANK LTD. 
 
 Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.8906 of 

VERSUS 

THE STATE OF BIHAR & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
This appeal challenges the judgment and order dated 8th 
June, 2022 passed by the learned Single Bench of the High Court 
of Judicature at Patna in wherein the learned Single Judge dismissed the 
Writ Petition preferred by the present appellant, HDFC Bank1, to 
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘appellant-bank’. quash the First Information Report2 being Case No. 549 of 2021 
registered at Gandhi Maidan Police Station, Patna on 22nd 
November, 2021, against certain officials of the appellant-bank 
working at its Exhibition Road Branch, Patna for the offences 
punishable under Sections 34, 37, 120B, 201, 206, 217, 406, 
409, 420 and 462 of the Indian Penal Code, 18603. 
3. 
The facts which give rise to the present appeal are as 
under:- 
3.1 In October, 2021, Smt. Priyanka Sharma, Deputy Director 
of Income Tax (Investigation), Unit-2(2), Respondent No. 5 
in the present proceedings, conducted a search and seizure 
operation in the case of several income-tax assessees 
including Shri Sunil Khemka (HUF), Smt. Sunita Khemka 
and Smt. Shivani Khemka at the third floor of Khataruka 
Niwas, South Gandhi Maidan, Patna. The said search and 
seizure operation was conducted on the basis of warrants 
of authorization issued under Section 132(1) of the Income 
Tax Act, 19614. During the course of the search, it was 
 
2 ‘FIR’ for short. 
3 ‘IPC’ for short. 
4 ‘IT Act’ for short. found that Smt. Sunita Khemka held a bank locker bearing 
No. 462 in the appellant-bank at its Exhibition Road 
Branch, Patna. 
3.2 On the basis of the said operation, on 5th October, 2021, an 
order under Section 132(3) of the IT Act was served upon 
the Branch Manager of the appellant-bank at its Exhibition 
Road Branch, Patna by the concerned Authorized Officer, 
thereby directing the said branch of the appellant-bank to 
stop the operation of any bank lockers, bank accounts and 
fixed deposits standing in the names of Shri Sunil Khemka 
(HUF), Smt. Sunita Khemka and Smt. Shivani Khemka, 
among several other individuals and entities, with 
immediate effect. It was further clarified that contravention 
of the order would render the Branch Manager liable under 
Section 275A of the IT Act and the same would result in 
penal action. 
3.3 In compliance of the aforesaid order, the appellant-bank 
stopped the operation of the bank accounts, bank lockers 
and fixed deposits of the individuals/entities mentioned in 
the order. Further, on 7th October,2021, the appellant-bank 

blocked the bank accounts of the income-tax assesses 
named in the order and also sealed the bank locker bearing 
No. 462 belonging to Smt. Sunita Khemka. 
3.4 Subsequently, on 1st November, 2021, Respondent No. 5 
issued an order to the Branch Manager of the appellant-
bank at its aforementioned branch thereby directing the 
appellant-bank to revoke the restraint put on the bank 
accounts of Smt. Sunita Khemka and three other persons, 
in view of the restraining order dated 5th October, 2021 
passed under Section 132(3) of the IT Act. Accordingly, the 
said persons, including Smt. Sunita Khemka, were to be 
allowed to operate their bank accounts. The said order was 
received by the concerned Branch Manager of the 
appellant-bank of 8th November, 2021 at 4:00 p.m. 
However, on 2nd November, 2021 at 11:24 a.m., an email 
was sent to the Branch Manager which contained the same 
order. 
3.5 Thereafter, on 9th November, 2021, the concerned branch 
of the appellant-bank allowed Smt. Sunita Khemka to 
operate her bank locker bearing No. 462 and proper entries 

recording the operation of the said locker were made in the 
bank’s records. 
3.6 Subsequently, on 20th November, 2021, Respondent No. 5 
conducted a search and seizure operation at the 
aforementioned bank locker in the concerned branch of the 
appellant-bank wherein it was found that Smt. Sunita 
Khemka had operated her bank locker with the assistance 
of the concerned officers of the appellant-bank. This was 
validated by the entry made in the bank’s records and the 
CCTV footage of the bank. Resultantly, the concerned 
officials of the aforementioned branch of the appellant-bank 
were found to have breached the restraining order dated 5th 
October, 2021. 
3.7 Accordingly, on 20th November, 2021, Respondent No. 5 
issued summons under Section 131(1A) of the IT Act to 
Abha Sinha-Branch Manager, Abhishek Kumar-Branch 
Operation Manager and Deepak Kumar-Teller Authoriser 
being the concerned officials of the appellant-bank at its 
aforementioned branch. 

3.8 The aforementioned officials attended the office of 
Respondent No. 5 and their statements were recorded 
wherein Abha Sinha and Abhishek Kumar stated that there 
had been an inadvertent error on the part of the bank 
officials and they had misinterpreted the order dated 1st 
November, 2021. Since the said order pertained to the bank 
accounts of the concerned individuals including Smt. 
Sunita Khemka, the bank officials had misread the order to 
understand /assume that the revocation of the restraint 
extended to the bank lockers as well. Having misunderstood 
the order, the bank officials under a bona fide assumption 
that bank locker had been released as well, allowed Smt. 
Sunita Khemka to operate the same. 
3.9 The statement of Smt. Sunita Khemka had also been 
recorded wherein she stated that her accountant Surendra 
Prasad, after speaking with Deepak Kumar, had informed 
her that the restraint on the aforementioned bank locker 
had been revoked and she could operate the said locker. 
This was specifically denied by Deepak Kumar in his 
statement. 

3.10 Dissatisfied with the said explanations, Respondent No. 5 
submitted a written complaint to the SHO, Gandhi Maidan 
Police Station seeking to register an FIR against Smt. Sunita 
Khemka and the concerned bank officials on the ground 
that the order dated 5th October, 2021 had been violated 
owing to the unlawful operation of the aforementioned 
locker. 
3.11 On the basis of the said complaint, on 22nd November, 
2021, an FIR being Case No. 549 of 2021 came to be 
registered against Smt. Sunita Khemka and the staff of the 
appellant-bank at its aforementioned branch for the 
offences punishable under Sections 34, 37, 120B, 201, 207, 
217, 406, 409, 420 and 462 of the IPC at the Gandhi 
Maidan Police Station, Patna. 
3.12 Aggrieved by the registration of the FIR, the appellant-bank 
preferred a Criminal Writ Jurisdiction Case thereby 
invoking the inherent power of the High Court under 
Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19735 for 
 
5 Hereinafter referred to as ‘Cr.P.C.’ 

the quashing of the FIR. The High Court vide the impugned 
order dismissed the writ petition finding it to be devoid of 
merit. 
3.13 Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal. 
4. 
We have heard Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant and Mr. Manish 
Kumar, 
learned 
Advocate-on-Record 
appearing 
for 
the 
respondent Nos. 1 to 4 and Mr. Venkataraman Chandrashekhara 
Bharathi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent 
No.5. 
5. 
Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned Senior Counsel submits 
that taking the FIR at its face value, it does not disclose any mens 
rea of the officials of the appellant-bank and it also fails to 
disclose the commission of any offence. He further submits that 
the complaint also does not disclose any specific allegation with 
regard to collusion between the unnamed staff of the appellant-
bank with Ms. Sunita Khemka. The only allegation against the 
unnamed staff members of the appellant-bank is that while the 
Prohibitory Order dated 5th October 2021 was in force in relation 
to the bank locker No.462, Ms. Sunita Khema, customer of the 

appellant-bank, was permitted to operate the said bank locker. 
6. 
The learned Senior Counsel submits that taking the 
allegations at their face value, they do not disclose commission 
of the alleged offences of Sections 420, 409, 406, 462, 206, 217, 
201, 34, 120B and 37 of the IPC. It is submitted that it is settled 
law that the High Court while considering a petition under 
Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. for quashing the FIR must examine as 
to whether prima facie the ingredients of the offence have been 
made out in the FIR or not. In this regard, a reference is placed 
on the judgment of this Court in the case of Arnab Manoranjan 
Goswami v. State of Maharashtra and others6 and in the case 
of Delhi Race Club (1940) Ltd. and others v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh and another7. 
7. 
Shri Kaul, relying on the judgments of this Court in the case 
of State of Haryana and others v. Bhajan Lal and others8, 
submits that the continuation of the prosecution of the 
appellant-bank and/or its staff under IPC would amount to 
undue hardship and miscarriage of justice. 
 
6 (2021) 

8 1992 Supp. (1) SCC 335 

8. 
Shri Manish Kumar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of 
the respondents Nos. 1 to 4, on the contrary, submits that the 
High Court while exercising powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. cannot conduct a mini trial. It is submitted that this Court in the 
case 
of 
R. 
Venkatkrishnan 
v. 
Central 
Bureau 
of 
Investigation9 has held that though a bank or a financial 
institution may not suffer ultimate loss but if the money has been 
allowed to be used by another person illegally for illegal purposes, 
the ingredients of Section 405 IPC would be attracted. 
9. 
It is submitted that access of the bank locker given to Ms. 
Sunita Khemka in violation of Section 132(2) of the IT Act would 
attract the offence under Section 409 read with Section 405 of 
the IPC. 
10. It is submitted that the High Court has rightly, relying on 
various 
judgments 
of 
this 
Court 
including 
Neeharika 
Infrastructure Private Limited v. State of Maharashtra and 
others10, held that the High Court cannot thwart any 
investigation into a cognizable offence, which is the statutory 
 
9 (2009) 
10 (2021) 

right and duty of the Police under the relevant provisions of the 
Cr.P.C. 
11. He further submits that it is equally settled that the Court 
cannot embark upon an enquiry as to the reliability or 
genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in the 
FIR/complaint. 
12. With the assistance of the learned counsel for the parties, 
we have scrutinized the record. It will be relevant to refer to the 
Prohibitory Order issued by the Authorized Officer on 5th October 
2021, which reads thus: 
“Sub: Order under 132(3) of the Income- Tax 
Act, 1961 in respect of bank Accounts, Lockers, 
Fixed Deposits etc.- regarding, 
 
Sir, 
 
In connection with search operation conducted 
under sub-section (1) of section 132 of the 
Income-Tax 
Act, 
1961, 
in 
the 
office/residential/business premises of the 
under noted 
person, you are directed to STOP OPERATION, 
immediately, of Bank Lockers, Bank Accounts 
and Fixed Deposits, if any, standing in the 
below mentioned names(s) either singly or 
jointly, in terms of provisions of sub section (3) 
of section 132 of the Income-Tax Act, 1961. 

Sl. 
No. 
Name & Address of the 
person 
 
Detail of 
Bank 
Lockers/ 
Accounts/ 
Deposits 
1. 
Sunil Kumar Khemka 
 
2. 
Sunil Kumar Khemka 

3. 
Sunita Khemka 
 
4. 
Saloni Khemka 
 
5. 
Shivani Khemka 
 
6. 
Sharda Devi Khemka 
 
7. 
Sharda Tradelinks Pvt. 
Ltd. 
 
8. 
Gravity Sales Agency 
Pvt. Ltd. 
 
9. 
Sparsh Tie Up Pvt. Ltd. 
 
10. 
S.S. Biolife Pvt. Ltd. 
 
11. 
NCL Synthetic Pvt. Ltd. 
 
12. 
Green 
Engicon 
Pvt. 
Ltd. 
 
13. 
Gulmohar 
Vyapaar 
Pvt. Ltd. 
 
14. 
Lord Dealcom Pvt. Ltd. 
 
15. 
Paramount 
Financial 
Management 
 
16. 
Maa Jagdamba Seva 
Samiti Trust 

2. 
The contravention of this order shall 
render you liable, under section 275A of the 
Income-Tax Act, 1961, to punishment of 
rigorous imprisonment which may extend to 
two years and also render you liable to fine. 
3. 
You are requested to intimate the balance 

standing in these accounts IMMEDIATELY to 
the bearer of this letter and send a statement of 
the said accounts since the opening of the 
accounts along with copy of account opening 
form to this office within 7 (seven) days of 
receipt of this order.” 
 
13. It will also be relevant to refer to the Revocation Order dated 
1st November 2021, issued by the Deputy Director of Income-Tax 
(Inv.) Unit-2(2), Guwahati, which reads thus: 
“Sub: Revocation of order under section 132(3) 
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 in respect of Bank 
Accounts, Lockers, Fixed Deposits, etc.-reg. 
 
Ref:- This office’s letter No.DIN/AC/DDIT/U 
2(2)/GHY/2021-22, dated 05.10.2021. 
 
In this connection this is to state that, restrain 
order u/s 132(3) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, 
were put on the following bank accounts of the 
persons as stated below. The restrain order put 
on the following bank accounts only may be 
revoked by your kind self and they may be 
allowed to operate these accounts. 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Account Holder 
 
Account No. 
1. 
Sunil 
Kumar 
Khemka (HUF) 

2. 
Sunil 
Kumar 
Khemka 

3. 
Sunita Khemka 

4. 
Shivani Khemka 

14. It could thus be seen that though vide order dated 5th 
October 2021, a restraint order was imposed in respect of Bank 
Lockers, Bank Accounts and Fixed Deposits, the Revocation 
Order dated 1st November 2021 only refers to the Bank Accounts. 
15. In the statements of the Officers of the appellant-bank, it is 
stated that the bank locker was inadvertently permitted to be 
operated, by misinterpreting the Revocation Order dated 1st 
November 2021. 
16. In the present case, we are only considering the FIR 
registered for the offences punishable under the different 
provisions of the IPC. 
17. The FIR is registered on the basis of the complaint lodged 
by the Deputy Director of Income-Tax (Inv.) Unit-2(2), Guwahati, 
respondent No.5 herein. The only statement/allegation in the 
complaint with regard to the bank and its officers is thus: 
“However, it has come to the light, that the 
restraint order imposed under section 
132(3) dated 05.10.21 has been breached 
and violated. During the course of 
execution of search & seizure operation on 
the Bank Locker no 462 under warrant of 
authorization dated 20.11.21, it is found 
that Smt Sunita Khemka has operated the 

bank Locker no-462 on 09.11.21. The 
bank locker register maintained at the 
HDFC bank states that the Smt Sunita 
Khemka has operated the Bank Locker at 
11.53 am. The CCTV footage was has 
validated the fact that Smt Sunita Khemka 
aided by the HDFC Bank Exhibition 
Branch, Patna has breached the order 
under section 132(3) of the Income Tax 
Act, 1961 and has unlawfully operated her 
Bank locker no 462 in the HDFC Bank.” 
 
18. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of 
this Court in the case of Arnab Manoranjan Goswami (supra): 
“62. Now in this backdrop, it becomes 
necessary to advert briefly to the contents 
of the FIR in the present case. The FIR 
recites that the spouse of the informant 
had a company carrying on the business 
of 
architecture, 
interior 
design 
and 
engineering consultancy. According to the 
informant, her husband was over the 
previous two years “having pressure as he 
did not receive the money of work carried 
out by him”. The FIR recites that the 
deceased had called at the office of the 
appellant and spoken to his accountant for 
the payment of money. Apart from the 
above statements, it has been stated that 
the deceased left behind a suicide note 
stating that his “money is stuck and 
following owners of respective companies 
are not paying our legitimate dues”. Prima 
facie, on the application of the test which 
has been laid down by this Court in a 
consistent line of authority which has been 
noted above, it cannot be said that the 

appellant was guilty of having abetted the 
suicide within the meaning of Section 306 
IPC. These observations, we must note, are 
prima facie at this stage since the High 
Court is still to take up the petition for 
quashing. Clearly however, the High Court 
in failing to notice the contents of the FIR 
and to make a prima facie evaluation 
abdicated 
its 
role, 
functions 
and 
jurisdiction when seized of a petition 
under Section 482 CrPC. The High Court 
recited 
the 
legal 
position 
that 
the 
jurisdiction to quash under Section 482 
has to be exercised sparingly. These 
words, however, are not meaningless 
incantations, but have to be assessed with 
reference to the contents of the particular 
FIR before the High Court. If the High 
Court were to carry out a prima facie 
evaluation, it would have been impossible 
for it not to notice the disconnect between 
the FIR and the provisions of Section 306 
IPC. The failure of the High Court to do so 
has led it to adopting a position where it 
left the appellant to pursue his remedies 
for regular bail under Section 439. The 
High Court was clearly in error in failing to 
perform a duty which is entrusted to it 
while evaluating a petition under Section 
482 albeit at the interim stage. 
 
63. The petition before the High Court was 
instituted under Article 226 of the 
Constitution and Section 482 CrPC. While 
dealing with the petition under Section 
482 for quashing the FIR, the High Court 
has not considered whether prima facie 
the ingredients of the offence have been 
made out in the FIR. If the High Court were 

to have carried out this exercise, it would 
(as we have held in this judgment) have 
been apparent that the ingredients of the 
offence 
have 
not 
prima 
facie 
been 
established. As a consequence of its failure 
to perform its function under Section 482, 
the High Court has disabled itself from 
exercising its jurisdiction under Article 
226 to consider the appellant's application 
for bail. In considering such an application 
under Article 226, the High Court must be 
circumspect in exercising its powers on 
the basis of the facts of each case. 
However, the High Court should not 
foreclose itself from the exercise of the 
power when a citizen has been arbitrarily 
deprived of their personal liberty in an 
excess of State power.” 

19. In the present case, the FIR does not show that the 
appellant-bank had induced anyone since inception. 
20. For bringing out the offence under the ambit of Section 420 
IPC, the FIR must disclose the following ingredients: 

That the appellant-bank had induced anyone since 
inception; 

That the said inducement was fraudulent or 
dishonest; and 

That mens rea existed at the time of such inducement. 

21. The appellant-bank is a juristic person and as such, a 
question of mens rea does not arise. However, even reading the 
FIR and the complaint at their face value, there is nothing to 
show that the appellant-bank or its staff members had 
dishonestly induced someone deceived to deliver any property to 
any person, and that the mens rea existed at the time of such 
inducement. As such, the ingredients to attract the offence 
under Section 420 IPC would not be available. 
22. Insofar as the provisions of Section 409 IPC is concerned, 
the following ingredients will have to be made out: 
(a) That there has been any entrustment with the 
property, or with any dominion over property on a 
person in the capacity of a public servant or banker, 
etc.; 
(b) That the said person commits criminal breach of trust 
in respect of that property. 
23. For bringing out the case under criminal breach of trust, it 
will have to be pointed out that a person, with whom entrustment 
of a property is made, has dishonestly misappropriated it, or 
converted it to his own use, or dishonestly used it, or disposed of 

that property. 
24. In the present case, there is not even an allegation of 
entrustment of the property which the appellant-bank has 
misappropriated or converted for its own use to the detriment of 
the respondent No.5. As such, the provisions of Section 406 and 
409 IPC would also not be applicable. 
25. As already discussed hereinabove, since there was no 
entrustment of any property with the appellant-bank, the 
ingredients of Section 462 IPC are also not applicable. 
26. Likewise, since the offences under Section 206, 217 and 
201 of the IPC requires mens rea, the ingredients of the said 
Sections also would not be available against the appellant-bank. 
27. The FIR/complaint also does not show that the appellant-
bank and its officers acted with any common intention or 
intentionally cooperated in the commission of any alleged 
offences. As such, the provisions of section 34, 37 and 120B of 
the IPC would also not be applicable. 
28. It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of 
this Court in the case of Bhajan Lal and others (supra): 

“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation 
of the various relevant provisions of the 
Code under Chapter XIV and of the 
principles of law enunciated by this Court 
in a series of decisions relating to the 
exercise of the extraordinary power under 
Article 226 or the inherent powers under 
Section 482 of the Code which we have 
extracted and reproduced above, we give 
the following categories of cases by way of 
illustration wherein such power could be 
exercised either to prevent abuse of the 
process of any court or otherwise to secure 
the ends of justice, though it may not be 
possible to lay down any precise, clearly 
defined and sufficiently channelised and 
inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and 
to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds 
of cases wherein such power should be 
exercised. 
 
(1) Where the allegations made in the first 
information report or the complaint, even 
if they are taken at their face value and 
accepted in their entirety do not prima 
facie constitute any offence or make out a 
case against the accused. 
 
(2) Where the allegations in the first 
information report and other materials, if 
any, accompanying the FIR do not disclose 
a 
cognizable 
offence, 
justifying 
an 
investigation by police officers under 
Section 156(1) of the Code except under an 
order of a Magistrate within the purview of 
Section 155(2) of the Code. 
 
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations 
made in the FIR or complaint and the 

evidence collected in support of the same 
do not disclose the commission of any 
offence and make out a case against the 
accused. 
 
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not 
constitute 
a 
cognizable 
offence 
but 
constitute only a non-cognizable offence, 
no investigation is permitted by a police 
officer without an order of a Magistrate as 
contemplated under Section 155(2) of the 
Code. 
 
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR 
or complaint are so absurd and inherently 
improbable on the basis of which no 
prudent person can ever reach a just 
conclusion that there is sufficient ground 
for proceeding against the accused. 
 
(6) Where there is an express legal bar 
engrafted in any of the provisions of the 
Code or the concerned Act (under which a 
criminal proceeding is instituted) to the 
institution 
and 
continuance 
of 
the 
proceedings and/or where there is a 
specific provision in the Code or the 
concerned 
Act, 
providing 
efficacious 
redress for the grievance of the aggrieved 
party. 
 
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is 
manifestly attended with mala fide and/or 
where the proceeding is maliciously 
instituted with an ulterior motive for 
wreaking vengeance on the accused and 
with a view to spite him due to private and 
personal grudge. 

103. We also give a note of caution to the 
effect that the power of quashing a 
criminal proceeding should be exercised 
very sparingly and with circumspection 
and that too in the rarest of rare cases; 
that the court will not be justified in 
embarking upon an enquiry as to the 
reliability or genuineness or otherwise of 
the allegations made in the FIR or the 
complaint and that the extraordinary or 
inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary 
jurisdiction on the court to act according 
to its whim or caprice.” 
 
29. We find that the present case would squarely fall within 
categories (2) and (3) of the law laid down by this Court in the 
case of Bhajan Lal and others (supra). 
30. We are of the considered view that the continuation of the 
criminal proceedings against the appellant-bank would cause 
undue hardship to the appellant-bank. 
31. In the result, we pass the following order. 

The appeal is allowed. 

The impugned judgment and order dated 8th June 2022 
passed by the learned Single Bench of the High Court of 
Judicature at Patna in Criminal Writ Jurisdiction Case 
No. 1375 of 2021 is quashed and set aside. 

(iii) The First Information Report being Case No. 549 of 2021 
registered at Gandhi Maidan Police Station, Patna on 
22nd November, 2021, against certain officials of the 
appellant-bank working at its Exhibition Road Branch, 
Patna for the offences punishable under Sections 34, 37, 
120B, 201, 206, 217, 406, 409, 420 and 462 of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860 is also quashed and set aside 
qua the appellant-bank...J 
(B.R. GAVAI)...J 
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)