IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

GLAS Trust Company LLC 

 …Appellant 

Versus 

BYJU Raveendran & Ors. 

 …Respondents 

And With 

JUDGMENT 

Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 

Table of Contents 
A. Background... 5 
i. 
Parties before this Court... 5 
ii. 
Proceedings before the US Courts... 6 
iii. 
Insolvency proceedings against the first respondent... 8 
iv. Settlement between the parties and proceedings before the NCLAT.. 9 
v. 
Impugned Judgement... 14 
vi. Proceedings before this Court and the Delaware Court... 16 
B. 
Issues... 18 
C. 
Submissions... 18 
D. Legal Background... 23 
i. 
Legal context and fundamental principles... 23 
a. 
General principles underlying the IBC... 23 
b. 
Nature of the proceedings after admission of the application... 27 
ii. 
Legal framework for withdrawal and settlement of claims... 31 
a. 
Evolution of the legal framework... 31 
b. 
Insights from the evolution of the legal framework... 44 
iii. 
Scope of ‘Inherent Powers’ under Rule 11... 49 

E. Application to the instant case... 51 
i. 
Locus of the appellant before this Court... 52 
ii. 
Approach of the NCLAT in the Impugned Judgement... 54 
iii. 
Decisions of this Court cited in the Impugned Judgement... 57 
F. 
Conclusion... 60 

1. This appeal arises from a judgment of the National Company Law Appellate 
Tribunal, Chennai1 dated 2 August 2024.2 The National Company Law Tribunal, 
Bengaluru,3 admitted the application instituted by the second respondent under 
Section 9 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code4 and initiated the corporate 
insolvency resolution process5 against the third respondent. In the exercise of 
its powers under Rule 11 of the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal 
Rules, 20166, the NCLAT approved a settlement in relation to the dues payable 
to the third respondent by the second respondent and set aside the order of the 
NCLT. 
 
2. The appellant, who claims to be a Financial Creditor, had moved an application 
before the NCLAT objecting to the approval of the settlement and questioned 
the source of the funds for the settlement. The objections of the appellant were 
rejected by the NCLAT in the Impugned Judgement. The present appeal raises 
substantial questions about the legal framework governing the withdrawal of a 
CIRP; the settlement of claims after the admission of an application instituted 
by a debtor; and the scope of the inherent powers vested in the NCLAT under 
Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules. 

1 “NCLAT” 
2 “Impugned Judgement” 
3 “NCLT” 
4 “IBC” 
5 “CIRP” 
6 “NCLAT Rules” 

PART A 

A. Background 

i. 
Parties before this Court 
 
3. The third respondent, Think and Learn Pvt Ltd, a company engaged in the 
business of providing online educational services, is the Corporate Debtor.7 The 
first respondent, Byju Raveendran and his brother, Riju Raveendran are former 
directors of the Corporate Debtor. 
 
4. The second respondent, the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) is an 
Operational Creditor who executed a ‘Team Sponsor Agreement’ dated 25 July 
2019 with the Corporate Debtor, which relates to the sponsorship of the Indian 
National Cricket Team. 
 
5. The Corporate Debtor has a 100% owned subsidiary, Byju’s Alpha Inc. – a 
company incorporated in the United States of America. Byju’s Alpha Inc. availed 
a loan facility aggregating to approximately USD 1,200,000,000 under a credit 
and guarantee agreement dated 24 November 2021.8 The Appellant, GLAS 
Trust Company LLC, is the ‘Administrative Agent’ of all the lenders under this 
agreement and the ‘Collateral Agent’ for the secured parties. Under the terms 
of the Credit Agreement, the Corporate Debtor acted as a guarantor and issued 
a guarantee deed dated 24 November 2021 in favour of the appellant. 

7 “Corporate Debtor” 
8 “Credit Agreement” 

PART A 

ii. 
Proceedings before the Delaware Court 
 
6. On account of an alleged default under the Credit Agreement, the appellant 
enforced the security in respect of the loan and took a series of steps that 
resulted in the removal of all pre-existing directors of Byju’s Alpha Inc., including 
Riju Raveendran and the appointment of a new sole director. The appellant 
contends that despite these measures, defaults persisted in payment of the 
principal outstanding amount and the interest accrued under the Credit 
Agreement. 
 
7. Accordingly, the appellant, acting as the Administrative Agent of the lenders, 
issued a notice of demand dated 6 December 2023 to the Corporate Debtor, 
invoking the guarantee deed and demanding that the Corporate Debtor pay the 
requisite amount. However, it is the case of the appellant, that the Corporate 
Debtor too defaulted in its capacity as the guarantor under the Credit 
Agreement. 
 
8. It is contended that a series of wire transfers were carried out in April and July 
2022 by Byju’s Alpha Inc., allegedly at the behest of the Corporate Debtor, 
fraudulently transferring approximately USD 533 million to a hedge fund based 
in the United States. A motion for preliminary injunctive relief to protect this 
amount was moved before the United States Bankruptcy Court, District of 
Delaware9. 

9 “Delaware Court” 

PART A 

9. On 18 March 2024, the Delaware Court issued a preliminary injunction inter alia 
restraining Riju Raveendran, another wholly owned subsidiary of the Corporate 
Debtor, the concerned hedge fund, and other similarly placed persons from 
taking any steps to spend, transfer, exchange, convert, dissipate, liquidate, or 
otherwise move or modify any rights related to the USD 533 million transferred 
from Byju’s Alpha Inc to the hedge fund. The operative directions of the order 
passed by the Delaware Court read as follows: 
“Defendants 
Riju 
Ravindran, 
Inspilearn 
LLC 
("Inspilearn"), Camshaft Capital Fund LP, Camshaft 
Capital 
Advisors, 
LLC, 
Camshaft 
Capital 
Management, LLC; and any of such parties' officers, 
agents, servants, employees, and attorneys, and 
any other persons who are in active concert or 
participation with the foregoing, including, Byju 
Raveendran and Divya Gokulnath (collectively, the 
"Enjoined Parties") are immediately enjoined, 
upon entry of this Order, from taking any steps 
to spend, transfer, exchange, convert, dissipate, 
liquidate, or otherwise move or modify any rights 
related to: (i) the funds that in the approximate 
amount of $533,000, I00.00 transferred from the 
Debtor to Camshaft Capital Fund, LP in April and 
July 2022, (ii) the funds (or other assets) 
transferred to and/or redeemed by a non-U.S. trust on behalf of lnspilearn on or about February 
1, 2024, and (iii) the funds (or other assets) that 
were purportedly subsequently transferred to a 
"non-US based 100% subsidiary of BYJU'S," 
along with any associated accrued interest or 
proceeds, in each case ((i), (ii), and (iii) 
collectively, the "Alpha Funds").” 
(emphasis supplied) 

10. On 28 May 2024, the Delaware Court passed an order finding that Riju 
Raveendran was in contempt of the above preliminary injunction order dated 
18 March 2024. The Delaware Court directed that “full discovery shall 
immediately commence concerning Mr Ravindran's financial situation, 

PART A 

including, but not limited to, the location and amounts of his assets wherever 
and however held, including (i) how much money he has, including funds in his 
personal bank account(s), and (ii) what other assets he holds” and posted the 
case to a later date to determine the financial penalties to be imposed on Riju 
Raveendran. Eventually, on 31 July 2024, the Delaware Court imposed 
financial penalties of USD 10,000 per day on Riju Raveendran, which is payable 
until the contempt is ”purged by him”. iii. 
Insolvency proceedings against the first respondent 
 
11. On 23 September 2023, the second respondent moved a petition under Section 
9 of the IBC, in respect of an operational debt of approximately Rs 158 crore 
payable by the Corporate Debtor under the Team Sponsor Agreement.10 The 
NCLT admitted the petition on 16 July 2024 and initiated CIRP. 11 A moratorium 
under Section 14 of IBC was imposed and an Interim Resolution Professional,12 
was appointed. 
 
12. Separately, the appellant also filed a petition under Section 7 of the IBC against 
the Corporate Debtor on 22 January 2024.13 On 16 July 2024, the NCLT 
disposed of the Section 7 petition, in view of the order passed on the same day 
admitting the Section 9 petition filed by the second respondent.14 The appellant 
was granted liberty to file their claims before the IRP appointed pursuant to the 
 
10 Company Petition (IB) No. 149/BB/2023 (“Section 9 Petition”) 
11 “Section 9 Order” 
12 “IRP” 
13 Company Petition (IB) No. 55/BB/2024 (“Section 7 Petition”) 
14 “Section 7 Order” 

PART A 

Section 9 Order. Significantly, the NCLT also granted liberty to the appellant to 
seek a revival of its Section 7 petition, “depending on the subsequent 
developments at the appellate level, if any.” The NCLT directed as follows: 
“3. In view of the order passed today i.e., 16.07.2024 
by this Adjudicating Authority in another Company 
petition bearing C.P (IB) No.149/BB/2023 which is filed 
by The Board and Control for Cricket in India under 
Section 9of the I & B Code 2016 r/w Rule 6 of the 
Insolvency & Bankruptcy (Application to Adjudicating 
Authority) Rules 2016, against the same Corporate 
Debtor herein i.e., Think & Learn Private Limited and 
since the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process 
(CIRP) has been initiated in respect of the Corporate 
Debtor therein by appointing the IRP, the instant C.P 
is disposed of by granting liberty to the Petitioner 
herein to put-forth their claim before the IRP 
appointed 
in 
C.P 

No. 
149/BB/2023 
in 
accordance with the provisions of the IBC 2016 and 
the Regulation made thereunder. 
 
4. However, at the request of the Learned Senior 
Counsel for the Petitioner, we hereby grant liberty to 
the Petitioner to seek restoration/revival of the said 
petition bearing C.P (IB) No.55/BB/2024 depending 
on the subsequent developments in the matter at 
the Appellate level; if any.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

13. The IRP made a public pronouncement on 17 July 2024 and the appellant filed 
its claim in the prescribed format on 25 July 2024. iv. 
Settlement between the parties and proceedings before the NCLAT 
 
14. Both the appellant and the first respondent moved the NCLAT in appeal against 
the respective orders of the NCLT. The first respondent challenged the 
admission of the Section 9 petition by the NCLT.15 On the other hand, the 
 
15 CA (AT) (CH) (Ins) No. 262 of 2024. 

PART A 

appellant challenged the order disposing of the Section 7 petition.16 The 
appellant also moved an application before the NCLAT for impleadment in the 
appeal filed by the first respondent, seeking to be heard before any relief was 
granted.17 
 
15. The appeal instituted by the first respondent was placed before the NCLAT for 
the first time on 30 July 2024 and adjourned on a request made by the senior 
counsel for the second respondent. On the next date of the hearing, i.e. 31 July 
2024, it was recorded, based on the submissions by the counsel for the first 
and second respondents, that a sum of INR 50 crore had been transferred to 
the second respondent as part of a settlement. The counsel for the first 
respondent further submitted, before the NCLAT, that another sum of Rs 25 
crore would be paid by 2 August 2024, and the balance amount of Rs 83 crore 
would be paid thereafter, on or before 9 September 2024.18 
 
16. The payment was purportedly made pursuant to a settlement offer extended by 
Riju Raveendran, in his personal capacity, to the second respondent by an 
email dated July 30, 2024. He proposed to clear the operational debt of Rs 158 
crore in three tranches on 30 July 2024,19 2 August 2024 and 9 August 2024, 
respectively. The second respondent agreed to take steps for withdrawal of the 
 
16 CA (AT) (CH) (Ins) No. 274 of 2024. 
17 I.A. No. 727 of 2024. 
18 Impugned Judgement, paras 9-11. 
19 The settlement offer inadvertently stated “30 June 2024”, which was clarified to be a typographical error 
for 30 July 2024. 

PART A 

petition upon receipt of full payment of the operational debt. Relevant excerpts 
of the email are as follows: 
“1.⁠ ⁠We undertake to pay INR. 50 crores upfront 
today i.e. 30 June 2024, by way of RTGS from the 
account of its promoter, Mr. Riju Ravindran. We shall 
forward the UTR details of the same shortly. 
2.⁠ ⁠We further undertake to pay INR. 25 crores on 02 
August 2024 through RTGS. 
3.⁠ ⁠The total dues are approximately INR. 158 crores. 
4.⁠ ⁠The balance amount of INR. 83 crores to complete 
the figures of INR. 158 crores shall be paid on or 
before 09 August 2024. 
5.⁠ ⁠We shall also hand over post-dated cheques to 
the tune of INR. 83 crores drawn in favour of “Board 
of Control for Cricket in India” payable on 09 August 
2024. 
6.⁠ ⁠In view of the aforesaid proposed settlement, the 
parties shall jointly request the Hon’ble NCLAT on 
31 July 2024 to suspend the order of admission of 
Think & Learn Pvt. Ltd passed by the NCLT until 09 
August 2024. 
7.⁠ ⁠Further, once the payment of complete INR. 158 
crores to BCCI is made, BCCI shall make statement 
to withdraw the Company Petition and take 
necessary steps towards the same.” 
 
17. It is common ground that on 31 July 2024, when the parties sought to place the 
settlement on record, although CIRP had been initiated and an IRP had been 
appointed, the CoC had not been constituted. Before the NCLAT, the second 
respondent stated that in view of the money being generated in India and 
coming through a banking channel, it shall be accepted and was in favour of 
the withdrawal of CIRP. The appellant, however, raised several objections, 
including inter alia that the alleged payment made by Riju Raveendran would 
constitute a preferential payment to an operational creditor. Further, the 
appellant contended that the source of the funds is not clear, and the amount 
being offered by Riju Raveendran to settle the debt of the second respondent 

PART A 

would constitute an act of round-tripping. The appellant apprehended that the 
funds of Byjus’s Alpha Inc. were being offered to settle dues in India, in 
contravention of the preliminary injunction issued by the Delaware Court on 18 
March 2024. 
 
18. On 1 August 2024, an affidavit was filed along with an undertaking by Riju 
Raveendran. The affidavit of Riju Raveendran could purportedly not be filed in 
time as he was not in India and thus, the undertaking was filed through an 
authorized representative. In the undertaking, Riju Raveendran affirmed that (i) 
the money being offered for settlement between the Corporate Debtor and the 
second respondent was being paid from his personal funds, including the sale 
of shares held by him in the Corporate Debtor; (ii) the money was generated in 
India and is not linked to the money involved in the proceedings pending in the 
Delaware Court; (iii) the first respondent (Byju Raveendran) has not transferred 
any money or extended any security towards raising the sums for payment of 
the settlement amount. The undertaking reads as follows: 
“… 
3. I state and confirm that no part of the Settlement 
Amount is being paid in violation of any order passed 
by any court or tribunal, including orders passed by 
the Delaware Bankruptcy Court. 
 
4. I have not received any portion of the USD 533 
million that are the subject matter of the proceedings 
before the Delaware Bankruptcy Court and, 
accordingly, no part of those funds have been, or will 
be, used to pay the BCCI. In fact, the funds forming 
part of the Settlement Amount are being paid out of 
my personal funds, as explained in paragraph 8 
below. 
 
5. To clarify, under the terms of the Credit 
Agreement dated 24 November 2021 (the "Credit 
Agreement"), a group of lenders represented by 

PART A 

GLAS Trust LLC (GLAS) disbursed an amount of 
USD 1.2 billion to Byju's Alpha, Inc. (a step-down 
subsidiary of Think & Learn Pvt. Ltd. (TLPL)). Under 
the Credit Agreement, monies disbursed thereunder 
could not be brought into India. Therefore, none of 
the monies disbursed under the Credit Agreement 
(of which the USD 533 million forms a part) has ever 
been brought into India. Indeed, the allegation that I 
have received any sum of monies disbursed under 
the Credit Agreement has never been made by 
GI.AS in any proceeding whatsoever, including the 
proceeding under Section 7 of the IBC filed by it 
before the NCLT. 
 
6. I specifically confirm that there has been no 
violation of the Order dated 18 March 2024 passed 
by the Delaware Bankruptcy Court, and I have not 
taken any steps in contravention of the same. I also 
confirm that I have not directly, indirectly or in any 
form or manner received any sum of money from 
disbursements made under the Credit Agreement. In 
fact, the foreign remittance received by me since 
execution of the Credit Agreement is from two 
secondary sales of my shareholding in TLPL in 
January and November 2022 totalling approximately 
USD 109 million, as demonstrated by the SH-4 
annexed hereto … 
 
7. I further confirm that Byju Raveendran has not 
transferred any money or extended any security of 
his assets towards raising the sums for payment of 
the Settlement Amount to the BCCI. 
 
8. I further state and confirm that the Settlement 
Amount comprises funds raised by me personally: 
 
a. from the sale and the gains/income on such sale 
of shares held personally by me in TLPL between 
May 2015 and January 2022. By way of these 
sales, I had accumulated approximately INR 3600 
crores. The forms SH-4 evidencing these sales are 
hereto annexed and marked Exhibit A. Out of the 
aforementioned amount, approximately INR 1050 
crores was paid as income tax. The IT returns filed 
by me over the relevant period and which would 
reflect these amounts are hereto annexed and 
marked Exhibit B. The remaining amounts of 
approximately INR 2600 crores was infused back 
into TLPL due to its operational needs and to 
ensure that TLPL continues to carry on business 

PART A 

as a going concern, including paying salaries to its 
27000 employees and sustaining the platform 
which has over 150 million students worldwide 
(which is a matter of record). The amounts that 
remained with me were used to pay the first 
tranche of the Settlement Amount (in the amount 
of INR 50 crores) to BCCI on 30 June 2024; and 
 
b. from liquidation of personal assets in India, 
which will be used to pay the balance amount of 
the Settlement Amount.” 
 
19. In view of these developments, on 1 August 2024, the NCLAT passed an interim 
order staying the constitution of the CoC. v. 
Impugned Judgement 
 
20. Before the NCLAT, the appellant contended that (i) Section 12A of the IBC and 
Regulation 30A of the CIRP Regulations 2016 deal with the settlement of claims 
after CIRP is initiated, both before and after the CoC is constituted. The first 
respondent should have, thus, approached the NCLT as mandated by Rule 30A 
instead of invoking the inherent powers of the NCLAT under Rule 11; (ii) NCLAT 
should not exercise its discretionary power under Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules 
because the directors of the Corporate Debtor and its allied entities are 
fugitives, living abroad; have defaulted on government dues; Enforcement 
Directorate proceedings are pending, look out notices have been issued; and 
there has been a significant drop in the valuation of the Corporate Debtor; and 
(iii) the interests of all creditors must be considered while accepting a 
settlement, including the appellant who has a substantial interest with regard to 
the Corporate Debtor. 

PART A 

21. On 2 August 2024, the NCLAT delivered the Impugned Judgement. After 
recording the factual background and submissions of the parties before it, the 
NCLAT outlined its reasoning and analysis in paras 44 to 50 of the Impugned 
Judgement. The NCLAT held the affidavit and undertaking filed by Riju 
Raveendran made it clear that the money was generated by Riju Raveendran 
from his own sources; income tax had been paid on the sales of shares from 
which the amount was generated; and there was no violation of the Order dated 
18 March 2024 passed by the Delaware Court either directly or indirectly. 
Therefore, NCLAT held that in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, 
there was no reason to believe that the money that was being offered by Riju 
Raveendran was linked to the money disbursed to Byju’s Alpha Inc. under the 
Credit Agreement or from the coffers of the Corporate Debtor. 
 
22. Further, it was held that the law regarding the settlement of disputes between 
the parties is in the process of evolution, and this Court has approved the 
invocation of Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules to allow such settlements. Reliance 
was placed on the decisions of this Court in Abhishek Singh vs Huhtamaki 
PPL Limited20 and Kamal K. Singh v. Dinesh Gupta21, in addition to decisions 
of the NCLAT on the point. Further, it was held that the NCLT had granted the 
appellant the liberty to revive its Section 7 petition, in case of any adverse 
developments in the appellate proceedings in the Section 9 petition and thus, 
the right of the applicant to enforce its claims was well protected. 
 
20 2023 SCC Online SC 349 
21 (2022). 

PART A 

23. Accordingly, the settlement between the parties was approved and the order of 
the NCLT admitting the Section 9 petition was set aside. The NCLAT directed 
that in case of a breach of the undertaking and affidavit, the Section 9 Order 
would automatically be revived. The operative directions are extracted below: 
“51. Thus, in view of the aforesaid facts and 
circumstances, in view of the undertaking given and 
affidavit filed, the settlement between the parties is 
hereby approved and as a result thereof, the present 
appeal succeeds and the impugned order is set 
aside, however, with a caveat that in case there is a 
breach in the undertaking given and the affidavit 
filed, the order dated 16.07.2024 passed against the 
present Appellant, shall automatically revive.” 
 
vi. 
Proceedings before this Court and the Delaware Court 
 
24. On 1 August 2024, Byju’s Alpha Inc. and the appellant instituted a motion before 
the Delaware Court seeking a temporary restraining order against Riju 
Raveendran, inter alia restraining him from using his personal assets to satisfy 
the dues of the second respondent. Before the Delaware Court, the appellant 
contended that fraudulent payments were being made by Riju Raveendran to 
pay the operational debt due to the second respondent and dismiss insolvency 
proceedings against the Corporate Debtor, which is “his older brother’s 
crumbling business enterprise in India”. On 8 August 2024, the Delaware Court 
passed an order rejecting the motion. 
 
25. The appellant instituted the present Civil Appeal before this Court, challenging 
the Impugned Judgement of the NCLAT. By an Order dated 14 August 2024, 
this Court issued notice on the appeal and directed that there would be a stay 

PART A 

on the operation of the Impugned Judgment. The second respondent was 
directed to maintain the amount of Rs 158 crores, which has been realized in 
pursuance of the settlement, in a separate escrow account, to abide by further 
directions of this Court. 
 
26. In view of the above directions of this Court granting an interim stay on the 
Impugned Judgement, the CIRP proceedings resumed. On 19 August 2024, 
the IRP addressed a letter to the appellant noting that the CIRP had revived, 
verified the claim submitted by the appellant and admitted the appellant as a 
financial creditor. Accordingly, the IRP constituted the CoC, which consisted of 
four financial creditors, including the appellant. 
 
27. Subsequently, by a letter dated 1 September 2024, the IRP sought to 
reconstitute the CoC and reclassify the claim of the appellant as ‘contingent’. 
The IRP stated that the reclassification of the claim as ‘contingent’ was on 
account of purported disqualification notices issued by the Corporate Debtor to 
certain lenders of the loan, which allegedly disqualified more than sixty percent 
of the lenders and therefore, the appellant no longer had the requisite 
authorization. From the record and submissions before us, it appears that the 
first meeting of the CoC took place on 3 September 2024. 
 
28. On 26 September 2024, this Court reserved its judgment and directed that the 
IRP maintain the status quo and not hold any meeting of the CoC until the 
judgment is pronounced. 

PART B & C 

B. Issues 
 
29. In view of the above background, the following issues arise for our 
consideration: 
a. Whether the appellant, who is not a party to the settlement between the 
second respondent and the Corporate Debtor, has locus in the proceedings 
before this Court; 
b. Whether the NCLAT erred in invoking its inherent powers under Rule 11 of 
the NCLAT Rules 2016 in the presence of a prescribed procedure for 
withdrawal of CIRP and settlement of claims between parties; and 
c. Without prejudice to the above, whether the NCLAT adequately addressed 
the objections raised by the appellant, while exercising its discretionary 
power under Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules 2016. 
 
C. Submissions 

30. Mr Kapil Sibal and Mr Shyam Divan, Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant 
broadly advanced the following submissions: 
a. NCLAT should have refrained from exercising its discretionary power under 
Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules to sanction the settlement when there is a 
prescribed procedure for withdrawal and settlement under Section 12A of 
the IBC read with Regulation 30A of the CIRP Regulations 2016; 
b. The powers conferred on the NCLAT under Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules 
are discretionary and should not be exercised mechanically in cases where 
the withdrawal of the application would prejudice other stakeholders and 

PART C 

may result in numerous other creditors filing insolvency actions against the 
Corporate Debtors on account of their unpaid dues; 
c. NCLAT failed to deal with the objections raised by the appellant about the 
source of the funds and the conduct of the first respondent and his brother, 
Mr Riju Raveendran. Facts such as – the purported fraudulent transfer of 
USD 533 million to a hedge fund in the United States; the orders of the US 
Court restraining the brothers from transferring or dissipating the amount; 
the contempt proceedings against Mr Riju Raveendran; the ongoing 
investigation by the Enforcement Directorate against the first respondent 
and the Corporate Debtor; attempts by the Corporate Debtor to dissipate 
assets – were not adequately dealt with in the Impugned Judgement; 
d. There are clear indications that the Corporate Debtor cannot service its 
outstanding debts to its financial creditors. There has been a 99% drop in 
the valuation of the Corporate Debtor, defaults in paying employees’ 
salaries, the exit of key managerial persons, failure to file financial 
statements, and oppression and mismanagement petitions by the 
shareholders against the promoters, all of which indicate that insolvency 
proceedings are inevitable; 
e. Setting aside the CIRP merely because one of the creditors has recovered 
its dues by way of a settlement agreement, runs contrary to the settled 
position that the IBC cannot be used as a recovery mechanism. Upon 
initiation of insolvency, third-party rights are created in all creditors of the 
corporate debtor; and 

PART C 

f. Riju Raveendran failed to provide the details of the source of funds by way 
of an affidavit. His undertaking was accompanied by an affidavit of a third 
party who claims to be a power of attorney holder of Riju Raveendran. The 
declaration in the undertaking is ambiguous and the figures mentioned do 
not add up so as to enable him to make payments under the settlement 
agreement. 
 
31. Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi and Mr Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Senior Counsel for the 
first respondent advanced the following submissions: 
a. The inherent powers of the NCLAT, under Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules, 
include the power to pass orders permitting the withdrawal of the CIRP. In 
several judgements, after Section 12A was inserted in the IBC, the NCLAT 
has invoked Rule 11 to permit the withdrawal of CIRP; 
b. The appellant has no locus to maintain the present proceedings before this 
Court. In a case of settlement between a corporate debtor and an individual 
creditor, there is no scope for hearing any third-party creditor, as such a 
creditor is free to adopt other remedies for its claims; 
c. Despite liberty being granted to the appellant to revive its Section 7 petition, 
the appellant has failed to do so, because a revival would lead to scrutiny 
of the maintainability of the Section 7 petition. As the appellant has a weak 
case on maintainability, it is seeking to piggyback on the Section 9 NCLT 
Order and is opposing the settlement; 
d. The appellant is indulging in forum shopping. Despite specific liberty to 
revive its Section 7 petition, the appellant chose to move an appeal against 

PART C 

the order of disposal and intervened in the proceedings before the NCLAT 
instituted by the second respondent. In parallel, the appellant also initiated 
proceedings before the Delaware Bankruptcy Court to stall the settlement; 
e. The Corporate Debtor is an ed-tech services business, whose revenue is 
generated from its intellectual property and subscriptions from students. 
Revenues are likely to be hit with each day that the Corporate Debtor 
continues into insolvency, which could lead to classes shutting down, 
disruption of services, teachers resigning, and students dropping out; and 
f. The Corporate Debtor is a solvent company with a running business of 
27,000 employees and 150 million students. A viable company capable of 
repaying its debts must not be admitted into CIRP. 
 
32. Mr Tushar Mehta, the learned Solicitor General appearing for the second 
respondent, supported the arguments of the first respondent in support of the 
Impugned Judgement and also advanced the following submissions: 
a. The IBC aims to prevent the economic death of entities, which involves 
encouraging settlement between the parties. NCLAT passed the Impugned 
Judgement after hearing all concerned parties. Thus, there was no infirmity 
in invoking inherent powers under Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules 2016; 
b. Regulation 30A was a statutory response to the decision of this Court in 
Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. v. Union of India22 and the intent is to encourage 
settlement. The provision is directory as no consequence of non-
compliance is stipulated. It does not contemplate adjudication about the 
 
22 (2019). 

PART C 

factum of settlement, the mode/method of settlement or any specific legal 
ground by the NCLT; 
c. Regulation 30A, even if applicable can have no application when the 
settlement is made using personal funds and not the funds of the corporate 
debtor; and 
d. The payment to BCCI does not prejudice other creditors or stakeholders of 
the Corporate Debtor as it is not made from the possible insolvency estate 
that would be created if the Corporate Debtor goes through CIRP. 
 
33. We also had an opportunity to hear the learned Senior Counsel who appeared 
for the intervenors. Mr Gopal Sankarnarayan appeared for an entity that claims 
to be another Operational Creditor. Another intervention application was moved 
by several shareholders of the Corporate Debtor, who purportedly hold 16.75% 
of its issued and the paid-up share capital. These shareholders have also 
instituted proceedings under Sections 241, 242 and 244 of the Companies Act 
2013 for oppression and mismanagement against the erstwhile management 
of the Corporate Debtor, including the first respondent and Riju Raveendran. 
The counsel for the intervenors advanced submissions broadly on the same 
lines as the appellant. They assailed the acceptance of the settlement 
agreement by the NCLAT and contended that insolvency proceedings against 
the Corporate Debtor are inevitable. 

PART D 

D. Legal Background 
 
i. 
Legal context and fundamental principles 
a. General principles underlying the IBC 
 
34. Before delving into the provisions which constitute the legal framework for the 
withdrawal of CIRP, it is crucial to delineate some of the underlying aims and 
objectives which guide the IBC. These principles will assume relevance while 
analyzing the locus of the appellant and the course of action adopted by the 
NCLAT in the Impugned Judgement. 
 
35. The Statement of Objects and Reasons for the IBC reads as follows: 
“Statement of Objects and Reasons.—There is no 
single law in India that deals with insolvency and 
bankruptcy. Provisions relating to insolvency and 
bankruptcy for companies can be found in the Sick 
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985, 
the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial 
Institutions Act, 1993, the Securitisation and 
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement 
of Security Interest Act, 2002 and the Companies 
Act, 2013. These statutes provide for creation of 
multiple fora such as Board of Industrial and 
Financial Reconstruction (BIFR), Debts Recovery 
Tribunal (DRT) and National Company Law Tribunal 
(NCLT) and their respective Appellate Tribunals. 
Liquidation of companies is handled by the High 
Courts. Individual bankruptcy and insolvency is dealt 
with under the Presidency Towns Insolvency Act, 
1909, and the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 and is 
dealt with by the courts. The existing framework for 
insolvency and bankruptcy is inadequate, ineffective 
and results in undue delays in resolution, therefore, 
the proposed legislation. 
 
2.The objective of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code, 2015 is to consolidate and amend the laws 
relating to reorganisation and insolvency resolution 

PART D 

of corporate persons, partnership firms and 
individuals in a time-bound manner for maximisation 
of value of assets of such persons, to promote 
entrepreneurship, availability of credit and balance 
the interests of all the stakeholders including 
alteration in the priority of payment of government 
dues and to establish an Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Fund, and matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. An effective legal framework for timely 
resolution of insolvency and bankruptcy would 
support development of credit markets and 
encourage entrepreneurship. It would also improve 
Ease of Doing Business, and facilitate more 
investments leading to higher economic growth and 
development. 
 
[…] 
 
5. The 
Code 
seeks 
to 
achieve 
the 
above 
objectives.’” 
 
36. The long title of the IBC provides that it is “an Act to consolidate and amend the 
laws relating to reorganisation and insolvency resolution of corporate persons, 
partnership firms and individuals in a time bound manner for maximisation of 
value of assets of such persons, to promote entrepreneurship, availability of 
credit and balance the interests of all the stakeholders including alteration in the 
order of priority of payment of Government dues and to establish an Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Board of India, and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.” 
 
37. The objectives discernible from the long title and the Statement of Objects and 
Reasons of the IBC were discussed in a decision of a two-judge bench of this 
Court in Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. v. Union of India.23 This Court observed that 
 
23 (2019). 

PART D 

the IBC is a beneficial legislation which attempts to put the Corporate Debtor 
back on its feet. According to this Court, this would involve considering the 
interests of all concerned stakeholders rather than viewing the IBC as a mere 
recovery legislation for individual creditors. This Court, speaking through 
Justice RF Nariman, observed as follows: 
 
“28. It can thus be seen that the primary focus of the 
legislation is to ensure revival and continuation of the 
corporate debtor by protecting the corporate debtor 
from its own management and from a corporate 
death by liquidation. The Code is thus a beneficial 
legislation which puts the corporate debtor back 
on its feet, not being a mere recovery legislation 
for creditors. The interests of the corporate 
debtor have, therefore, been bifurcated and 
separated from that of its promoters/those who 
are in management. Thus, the resolution process is 
not adversarial to the corporate debtor but, in fact, 
protective of its interests. The moratorium imposed 
by Section 14 is in the interest of the corporate 
debtor itself, thereby preserving the assets of the 
corporate debtor during the resolution process. The 
timelines within which the resolution process is to 
take place again protects the corporate debtor's 
assets from further dilution, and also protects all its 
creditors and workers by seeing that the resolution 
process goes through as fast as possible so that 
another 
management 
can, 
through 
its 
entrepreneurial skills, resuscitate the corporate 
debtor to achieve all these ends.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
38. A two-judge Bench of this Court, speaking through one of us (DY Chandrachud, 
J), in Arun Kumar Jagatramka v Jindal Steel & Power Ltd24 also had 
occasion to observe the quantum change in corporate governance and the rule 
of law brought in by the enactment of the IBC. This Court observed as follows: 
 
24 (2021). 

PART D 

“41. … First and foremost, the IBC perceives good 
corporate governance, respect for and adherence to 
the rule of law as central to the resolution of 
corporate insolvencies. Second, the IBC perceives 
corporate insolvency not as an isolated problem 
faced by individual business entities but places 
it in the context of a framework which is founded 
on public interest in facilitating economic growth 
by balancing diverse stakeholder interests. 
Third, the IBC attributes a primacy to the 
business decisions taken by creditors acting as 
a collective body, on the premise that the timely 
resolution of corporate insolvency is necessary 
to ensure the growth of credit markets and 
encourage investment. Fourth, in its diverse 
provisions, the IBC ensures that the interests of 
corporate enterprises are not conflated with the 
interests of their promoters; the economic value 
of corporate structures is broader in content 
than 
the 
partisan 
interests 
of 
their 
managements. These salutary objectives of the IBC 
can be achieved if the integrity of the resolution 
process is placed at the forefront. Primarily, the IBC 
is a legislation aimed at reorganisation and 
resolution of insolvencies. Liquidation is a matter of 
last resort. These objectives can be achieved only 
through a purposive interpretation which requires 
courts, while infusing meaning and content to its 
provisions, to ensure that the problems which beset 
the earlier regime do not enter through the backdoor 
through disingenuous stratagems.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
39. From the above, the following guiding principles emerge, which we must keep 
in mind while determining the issues raised in the present appeal: 
a. A significant change brought about by the IBC was the consolidation of the 
pre-existing fragmented insolvency framework, The aim was to eliminate 
parallel proceedings by various creditors before different fora, given that all 
creditors would be a part of a single insolvency process under the IBC; 
b. The above consolidation also sought to implement the principle of ‘collective 
distribution’, where the interests of all stakeholders were considered. The 

PART D 

CIRP envisaged by the IBC is premised on the principle that each creditor 
of the same class should receive a share that is proportionate to the debt 
owed to him; 
c. IBC must not be used as a tool for coercion and debt recovery by individual 
creditors. Improper use of the IBC mechanism by a creditor includes using 
insolvency as a substitute for debt enforcement or attempting to obtain 
preferential payments by coercing the debtor using insolvency proceedings. 
That the mechanism under the IBC must not be used as a money recovery 
mechanism has been reiterated in a consistent line of precedent by this 
Court;25 and 
d. The interests of the corporate debtor must be detached from those of its 
promoters/those who are in management. A “recalcitrant management”26 
must be prevented from taking advantage of undue delays and preventing 
an inevitable insolvency. In other words, as noted by this Court in Arun 
Kumar Jagatramka (supra), the economic value of corporate structures is 
broader than the partisan interests of their management. b. Nature of the proceedings after admission of the application 
 
40. Chapter II of the IBC provides that CIRP can be invoked in three ways: (i) by a 
financial creditor under Section 7; (ii) by an operational creditor under Section 
9; and (iii) by a corporate debtor itself under Section 10.27 Section 5(11) of the 
 
25 Swiss Ribbons, para 28; 
26 Mobilox, para 36. 
27 Section 6, IBC reads: “6. Persons who may initiate corporate insolvency resolution process. – Where 
any corporate debtor commits a default, a financial creditor, an operational creditor or the corporate debtor 

PART D 

IBC defines the “initiation date” as the date on which the financial creditor, 
operational creditor or corporate applicant makes an application to the NCLT 
for initiating insolvency proceedings, including CIRP. This is distinct from the 
“insolvency commencement date” which is defined in Section 5(12) of the IBC 
as the date of admission of an application for initiating CIRP by the NCLT under 
Sections 7, 9 or 10, as the case may be. 
 
41. Once the application is admitted, the CIRP commences and the NCLT inter alia 
declares a moratorium; issues a public pronouncement of the initiation of CIRP 
and a call for submission of claims; and appoints an IRP.28 Once an IRP is 
appointed, the affairs of the corporate debtor are managed by the IRP,29 who 
inter alia receives and collates all the claims submitted by the creditors pursuant 
to the public announcement of the CIRP.30 After the collation of claims received 
 
itself may initiate corporate insolvency resolution process in respect of such corporate debtor in the manner 
as provided under this Chapter.” 
28 Sections 13, 14, 15, 16, IBC. 
29 Section 17, IBC reads “17. Management of affairs of corporate debtor by interim resolution 
professional. - (1) From the date of appointment of the interim resolution professional, - 
(a) the management of the affairs of the corporate debtor shall vest in the interim resolution professional; 
(b) the powers of the board of directors or the partners of the corporate debtor, as the case may be, shall 
stand suspended and be exercised by the interim resolution professional; 
(c) the officers and managers of the corporate debtor shall report to the interim resolution professional and 
provide access to such documents and records of the corporate debtor as may be required by the interim 
resolution professional; 
(d) the financial institutions maintaining accounts of the corporate debtor shall act on the instructions of the 
interim resolution professional in relation to such accounts and furnish all information relating to the corporate 
debtor available with them to the interim resolution professional. 
 
(2) The interim resolution professional vested with the management of the corporate debtor, shall- 
(a) act and execute in the name and on behalf of the corporate debtor all deeds, receipts, and other 
documents, if any; 
(b)take such actions, in the manner and subject to such restrictions, as may be specified by the Board; 
(c)have the authority to access the electronic records of corporate debtor from information utility having 
financial information of the corporate debtor; 
(d)have the authority to access the books of account, records and other relevant documents of corporate 
debtor available with government authorities, statutory auditors, accountants and such other persons as may 
be specified; and 
(e) be responsible for complying with the requirements under any law for the time being in force on behalf of 
the corporate debtor.” 
30 Section 18(b), IBC. 

PART D 

and the determination of the financial position of the corporate debtor, the IRP 
shall constitute a CoC, which consists of all the financial creditors of the 
corporate debtor.31 The CoC appoints a Resolution Professional32 and the CIRP 
process continues, as prescribed. 
 
42. From this scheme of Chapter II of the IBC, it appears that the admission of an 
application is a significant event that alters the nature of the proceedings, and 
the stakeholders involved. Initially, when the petition is filed by the financial 
creditor, operational creditor or corporate applicant, as the case may be, the 
proceedings are in personam and the only relevant stakeholders are the 
applicant creditor and the corporate debtor. However, once the petition is 
admitted and CIRP is initiated, several significant changes take place, including 
the transfer of the management of the affairs of the corporate debtor to the IRP, 
the declaration of the moratorium, and the collation of the claims against the 
corporate debtor. Therefore, the proceedings now change character – they 
become in rem and are no longer the preserve of only the applicant creditor and 
the corporate debtor and even creditors who were not the original applicants, 
become necessary stakeholders. 
 
43. A three-judge Bench of this Court in Indus Biotech (P) Ltd. v. Kotak India 
Venture (Offshore) Fund33 adjudicated on the question of the stage at which 
the proceedings under the IBC attain the status of in rem and create third-party 
 
31 Section 21, IBC. 
32 “RP” 
33 (2021). 

PART D 

rights for all creditors. This Court held that the trigger point is not the filing of the 
application, but the admission of the application, and observed as follows: 
“17. The procedure contemplated will indicate that 
before the adjudicating authority is satisfied as to 
whether the default has occurred or not, in addition 
to the material placed by the financial creditor, the 
corporate debtor is entitled to point out that the 
default has not occurred and that the debt is not due, 
consequently to satisfy the adjudicating authority 
that there is no default. In such exercise undertaken 
by the adjudicating authority if it is found that there is 
default, the process as contemplated under sub-
section (5) of Section 7 of IB Code is to be followed 
as provided under sub-section (5)(a); or if there is no 
default the adjudicating authority shall reject the 
application as provided under sub-section (5)(b) to 
Section 7 of IB Code. In that circumstance if the 
finding of default is recorded and the adjudicating 
authority proceeds to admit the application, the 
corporate 
insolvency 
resolution 
process 
commences as provided under sub-section (6) and 
is required to be processed further. In such event, 
it becomes a proceeding in rem on the date of 
admission and from that point onwards the 
matter would not be arbitrable. The only course 
to be followed thereafter is the resolution 
process under IB Code. Therefore, the trigger 
point is not the filing of the application under 
Section 7 of IB Code but admission of the same 
on determining default. 
 
26. […] On admission, third-party right is created in 
all the creditors of the corporate debtors and will 
have erga omnes effect. The mere filing of the 
petition and its pendency before admission, 
therefore, cannot be construed as the triggering of a 
proceeding in rem. Hence, the admission of the 
petition for consideration of the corporate insolvency 
resolution process is the relevant stage which would 
decide the status and the nature of the pendency of 
the proceedings and the mere filing cannot be taken 
as the triggering of the insolvency process.” 

PART D 

44. In summary, the scheme of the IBC under Chapter II gives rise to two significant 
principles: 
a. Once the petition is admitted, the proceedings are no longer the preserve 
of the applicant creditor and the debtor. They now become in rem and all 
creditors of the corporate debtor become stakeholders in the process; and 
b. Once the petition is admitted, the management of the affairs of the corporate 
debtor is vested in the IRP and eventually, in the RP. Thus, the corporate 
debtor no longer exists in the form that it did, before the admission of the 
petition. Once CIRP is initiated, the interests of the erstwhile management 
of the corporate debtor must be distinguished from the interests of the 
corporate debtor. ii. 
Legal framework for withdrawal and settlement of claims 
 
a. Evolution of the legal framework 
 
45. Introduced less than a decade ago, the IBC and the various rules and 
regulations promulgated under the Act constitute a relatively nascent legal 
framework. On several occasions, the legislature and the executive have 
responded to the lacunae in the framework identified by this Court and sought 
to fill the gaps by legislating, in the form of amendments to the IBC or 
promulgating rules or regulations, if necessary. The evolution of the legal 
framework in relation to the withdrawal of CIRP after the admission of an 
application moved by a creditor is a classic example of this delicate 
coordination. 

PART D 

46. Under Rule 8 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Application to Adjudicating 
Authority) Rules, 201634, the NCLT may permit the withdrawal of applications 
made by a creditor (under Sections 7, 9 or 10) on a request by the applicant 
before the admission of the application.35 When the IBC was originally enacted 
in 2016, it did not contain any provisions, in the text of the Act or its allied rules 
and regulations, for the withdrawal of CIRP after the application had been 
admitted. Although there was no express provision in this regard, in several 
instances, this Court invoked its powers under Article 142 of the Constitution 
and permitted withdrawal of the CIRP on account of a settlement between the 
creditor and the corporate debtor after the application had been admitted by the 
NCLT.36 
 
47. In one such decision of this Court, namely, Lokhandwala Kataria 
Construction (P) Ltd. v. Nisus Finance and Investment Managers LLP,37 a 
two-judge bench of this Court invoked its power under Article 142 to record the 
settlement of the parties and allow the compromise between the creditor and 
the corporate debtor after the admission of the concerned application. While 
doing so, this Court also prima facie agreed with the proposition that in view of 
Rule 8 of the CIRP Rules, the NCLAT cannot use its inherent powers under 
Rule 11 of the NCALT Rules 2016 to allow a settlement or withdrawal after the 
admission of the application. 
 
34 “CIRP Rules” 
35 “8. Withdrawal of application. —The Adjudicating Authority may permit withdrawal of the application 
made under rules 4, 6 or 7, as the case may be, on a request made by the applicant before its admission.” 
36 Mothers Pride Dairy India Private Limited v. Portrait Advertising and Marketing Private Limited, 2017 SCC 
OnLine SC 1789; Uttara Foods & Feeds (P) Ltd. v. Mona Pharmachem, (2018). 
37 (2018). 

PART D 

48. The above position was followed by the same Bench of this Court in Uttara 
Foods & Feeds (P) Ltd. v. Mona Pharmachem,38 while allowing another 
settlement between the parties under Article 142. However, on this occasion, 
the bench also observed that instead of all such orders coming to this Court to 
utilize its powers under Article 142, the relevant rules may be amended to 
account for cases where an agreement has been reached after admission of 
the application. This Court observed as follows: 
“2. … this Bench had observed that in view of Rule 
8 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Application to 
Adjudicating Authority) Rules, 2016, the National 
Company Law Appellate Tribunal prima facie could 
not avail of the inherent powers recognised by Rule 
11 of the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal 
Rules, 2016 to allow a compromise to take effect 
after admission of the insolvency petition. We are of 
the view that instead of all such orders coming 
to the Supreme Court as only the Supreme Court 
may utilise its powers under Article 142 of the 
Constitution of India, the relevant Rules be 
amended by the competent authority so as to 
include such inherent powers. This will obviate 
unnecessary appeals being filed before this 
Court in matters where such agreement has 
been reached. On the facts of the present case, we 
take on record the settlement between the parties 
and set aside the NCLT order …” 
 
49. Against this backdrop, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs of the Government of 
India set up the Insolvency Law Committee,39 to address the early teething 
challenges arising from the implementation of the IBC.40 The ILC Report, 
submitted on 26 March 2018, also dealt with the issue of withdrawal of CIRP 
proceedings and discussed the existing practice of this Court of granting 
 
38 (2018). 
39 “ILC” 
40 “ILC Report” 

PART D 

“judicial permission” for withdrawal of CIRP after the admission of the 
application of the creditor. In this context, the report discussed the objectives of 
the IBC, drawing from the report of the Bankruptcy Law Reforms Committee 
which preceded the enactment of the IBC, and concluded that: 
“29.1 …it was agreed that once the CIRP is initiated, 
it is no longer a proceeding only between the 
applicant creditor and the corporate debtor but is 
envisaged to be a proceeding involving all creditors 
of the debtor. The intent of the Code is to 
discourage individual actions for enforcement 
and settlement to the exclusion of the general 
benefit of all creditors.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

50. The ILC Report found that in several cases, a settlement may be reached 
amongst “all creditors and the debtor” for withdrawal, and not only between the 
individual applicant creditor and the debtor. In light of this, the ILC unanimously 
agreed that the relevant rules may be amended to provide for withdrawal post-
admission if the CoC approved of such an action by a voting share of ninety per 
cent. Significantly, the report states that the ILC specifically discussed and 
concluded that Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules, 2016 may not be adopted for 
withdrawal of CIRP, and instead Rule 8 of the CIRP Rules may be appropriately 
amended. The observations in the ILC Report on this aspect are as follows: 
“29.2. On a review of the multiple NCLT and NCLAT 
judgments in this regard, the consistent pattern that 
emerged was that a settlement may be reached 
amongst all creditors and the debtor, for the purpose 
of a withdrawal to be granted, and not only the 
applicant creditor and the debtor. On this basis read 
with the intent of the Code, the Committee 
unanimously agreed that the relevant rules may be 
amended to provide for withdrawal post admission if 
the CoC approves of such action by a voting share 
of ninety per cent. It was specifically discussed that 

PART D 

rule 11 of the National Company Law Tribunal Rules, 
2016 may not be adopted for this aspect of CIRP at 
this stage (as observed by the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court in the case of Uttara Foods and Feeds Private 
Limited v. Mona Pharmacem) and even otherwise, 
as the issue can be specifically addressed by 
amending rule 8 of the CIRP Rules.” 
 
51. Accepting the recommendation of the ILC, the legislature introduced Section 
12A in the IBC by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Second Amendment) Act, 
2018 with effect from 6 June 2018.41. It reads as follows: 
“12A. Withdrawal of application admitted under 
section 7, 9 or 10. – 
The Adjudicating Authority may allow the withdrawal 
of application admitted under section 7 or section 9 
or section 10, on an application made by the 
applicant with the approval of ninety per cent. voting 
share of the committee of creditors, in such manner 
as may be specified.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
52. The provision provides for the withdrawal of an application under Sections 7, 9 
and 10 after it has been admitted, with the approval of ninety-percent voting 
share of the CoC. Evidently, Section 12A was made more stringent in 
comparison to Section 30(4) of the IBC, which pertains to approval of the 
Resolution Plan by the CoC. Whereas under Section 30(4) of the IBC, the voting 
share of the CoC for approving the Resolution Plan is sixty-six percent, the 
requirement under Section 12A of the IBC for withdrawal of CIRP is ninety 
percent. The reason for this divergence and high threshold appears to be rooted 
in the reasoning provided in the ILC report that once an application is admitted 
it is no longer a proceeding only between the applicant creditor and the 
 
41 Act No. 26 of 2018. 

PART D 

corporate debtor but is a proceeding involving all creditors of the debtor. 
Significantly, the text of Section 12A only details the procedure for the 
withdrawal of the application after the formation of the CoC (with ninety percent 
of the voting share), but is silent about the withdrawal of an application after the 
application is admitted, but before the CoC is formed. 
 
53. With the introduction of Section 12A in the IBC, the CIRP Regulations were also 
amended to include Regulation 30A which delineated the detailed procedure to 
withdraw an application under Section 12A.42 At the time of its introduction, the 
regulation read as follows: 
“30-A. Withdrawal 
of 
application.— 

An 
application for withdrawal under Section 12-A shall 
be submitted to the interim resolution professional or 
the resolution professional, as the case may be, in 
Form FA of the Schedule before issue of invitation 
for expression of interest under Regulation 36-A. 
(2) The application in sub-regulation (1) shall be 
accompanied by a bank guarantee towards 
estimated cost incurred for purposes of clauses (c) 
and (d) of Regulation 31 till the date of application. 
(3) The committee shall consider the application 
made under sub-regulation (1) within seven days of 
its constitution or seven days of receipt of the 
application, whichever is later. 
(4) Where the application is approved by the 
committee with ninety per cent voting share, the 
resolution professional shall submit the application 
under sub-regulation (1) to the adjudicating authority 
on behalf of the applicant, within three days of such 
approval. 
(5) The adjudicating authority may, by order, 
approve the application submitted under sub-
regulation (4).” 

42 IBBI (CIRP) (Third Amendment) Regulations, 2018 vide Notification No. IBBI/2018-19/GN/REG031, dated 
3rd July, 2018, w.e.f. 04.07.2018. 

PART D 

54. Regulation 30A(1), as it stood originally, required that an application for 
withdrawal shall be submitted to the IRP or the RP in the prescribed form, before 
the invitation for expression of interest under Regulation 30A. It did not provide 
the procedure for withdrawal after the invitation of expression of interest had 
been issued. Regulation 30A(2) provided that the application for withdrawal 
shall be accompanied by a bank guarantee towards the specified estimated 
costs. Regulation 30A(3) mandated that the CoC must consider the application 
within seven days of its constitution or the receipt of the application, whichever 
is later. Finally, Regulation 30A(4) provided that once the CoC approved the 
application with ninety percent voting share, the RP shall submit the application 
to the NCLT on behalf of the applicant, within three days of the approval. Finally, 
under Regulation 30A(5), the NCLT could approve the application submitted by 
an order. 
 
55. Notably, akin to Section 12A, Regulation 30A in its original form, was silent 
about withdrawal in cases where the application had been admitted, but the 
CoC had not been formed. Similarly, Regulation 30A(1) only spoke of 
withdrawal before the invitation of expression of interest had been issued and 
there was no provision which provided for withdrawal after it had been issued. 
Both these gaps were identified in subsequent judgements of this Court. 
 
56. In Brilliant Alloy Private Limited vs S Rajagopal and Ors43, a two-judge 
bench of this Court observed that the requirement in Regulation 30A, as it stood 
 
43 (2022). 

PART D 

then, that the application must be made before the issuance of an invitation for 
expression of interest was only directory. The regulation, it was held, has to be 
read along with Section 12A, which does not contain any bar on withdrawal 
after the issuance of an invitation for expression of interest. 
 
57. The constitutional validity of various provisions of the IBC, including Section 
12A was challenged before this Court. In Swiss Ribbons (supra), a two-judge 
bench of this Court, speaking through Justice Rohinton Fali Nariman, inter alia 
upheld the constitutionality of Section 12A. One of the questions that arose 
before this Court, in this context, was what happens if withdrawal is sought after 
admission of the application, but before the CoC is constituted. This Court 
observed: 
“82. It is clear that once the Code gets triggered by 
admission of a creditor's petition under Sections 7 to 
9, the proceeding that is before the adjudicating 
authority, being a collective proceeding, is a 
proceeding in rem. Being a proceeding in rem, it 
is necessary that the body which is to oversee 
the resolution process must be consulted before 
any individual corporate debtor is allowed to 
settle its claim. A question arises as to what is to 
happen before a Committee of Creditors is 
constituted (as per the timelines that are 
specified, a Committee of Creditors can be 
appointed at any time within 30 days from the 
date of appointment of the interim resolution 
professional). We make it clear that at any stage 
where the Committee of Creditors is not yet 
constituted, a party can approach NCLT directly, 
which Tribunal may, in exercise of its inherent 
powers under Rule 11 of NCLT Rules, 2016, allow 
or disallow an application for withdrawal or 
settlement. This will be decided after hearing all 
the parties concerned and considering all 
relevant factors on the facts of each case. 

PART D 

83. The main thrust against the provision of Section 
12-A is the fact that ninety per cent of the Committee 
of Creditors has to allow withdrawal. This high 
threshold has been explained in the ILC Report 
as all financial creditors have to put their heads 
together to allow such withdrawal as, ordinarily, 
an omnibus settlement involving all creditors 
ought, ideally, to be entered into. This explains 
why ninety per cent, which is substantially all the 
financial creditors, have to grant their approval to an 
individual withdrawal or settlement. In any case, the 
figure of ninety per cent, in the absence of anything 
further to show that it is arbitrary, must pertain to the 
domain of legislative policy, which has been 
explained by the Report (supra). Also, it is clear, that 
under Section 60 of the Code, the Committee of 
Creditors do not have the last word on the 
subject. If the Committee of Creditors arbitrarily 
rejects a just settlement and/or withdrawal claim, 
NCLT, and thereafter, NCLAT can always set 
aside such decision under Section 60 of the 
Code. For all these reasons, we are of the view that 
Section 12-A also passes constitutional muster.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
58. From the above observations of this Court in Swiss Ribbons (supra), the 
following positions of law may be deduced: 
a. Once the petition instituted by a creditor is admitted, the proceedings before 
the NCLT become a ‘collective proceeding’ or a proceeding in rem. Thus, 
the body which oversees the resolution process, i.e. CoC must be consulted 
before allowing the claim to be settled; 
b. This Court recognized that there was a lacuna in relation to cases where 
the CoC had not been formed. Accordingly, it was held that, in such cases, 
the party can approach the NCLT directly, and the NCLT may exercise its 
inherent powers under Rule 11 to allow or disallow the application for 
settlement/withdrawal. However, given the in rem nature of the 

PART D 

proceedings, such an application must be decided only after hearing all the 
parties concerned and considering the relevant factors in the case; 
c. This high threshold of a ninety-percent voting share of the CoC is not 
arbitrary. The idea is that the financial creditors have to put their heads 
together to allow such withdrawal; and 
d. Under Section 60 of the IBC, the decision of the CoC to reject or accept the 
settlement claim can be challenged before the NCLT and then, the NCLAT. 
 
59. In response to the lacunae identified by this Court in Swiss Ribbons (supra) 
and Brilliant Alloy Private Limited (supra), an amendment was made to 
Regulation 30A of the CIRP Regulations.44 This amendment came into effect 
on 25 July 2019 and Regulation 30A in its present form reads as follows: 
“30A. Withdrawal of application. 
(1) An application for withdrawal under section 12A 
may be made to the Adjudicating Authority – 
 
(a) before the constitution of the committee, by the 
applicant through the interim resolution professional; 
(b) after the constitution of the committee, by the 
applicant through the interim resolution professional 
or the resolution professional, as the case may be: 
 
Provided that where the application is made under 
clause (b) after the issue of invitation for expression 
of interest under regulation 36A, the applicant shall 
state the reasons justifying withdrawal after issue of 
such invitation. 
 
(2) The application under sub-regulation (1) shall be 
made in Form FA of the Schedule-I accompanied by 
a bank guarantee- 
(a) towards estimated expenses incurred on or by 
the interim resolution professional for purposes of 
regulation 33, till the date of filing of the application 
under clause (a) of sub- regulation (1); or 
 
44 Notification No. IBBI/2019-20/GN/REG048, dated 25th July, 2019 (w.e.f. 25-07-2019) 

PART D 

(b) towards estimated expenses incurred for 
purposes of clauses (aa), (ab), (c) and (d) of 
regulation 31, till the date of filing of the application 
under clause (b) of sub-regulation (1). 
 
(3) Where an application for withdrawal is under 
clause (a) of sub-regulation (1), the interim 
resolution professional shall submit the application 
to the Adjudicating Authority on behalf of the 
applicant, within three days of its receipt. 
 
(4) Where an application for withdrawal is under 
clause (b) of sub-regulation (1), the committee shall 
consider the application, within seven days of its 
receipt. 
 
(5) Where the application referred to in sub-
regulation (4) is approved by the committee with 
ninety 
percent 
voting 
share, 
the 
resolution 
professional shall submit such application along with 
the approval of the committee, to the Adjudicating 
Authority on behalf of the applicant, within three days 
of such approval. 
 
(6) The Adjudicating Authority may, by order, 
approve the application submitted under sub-
regulation (3) or (5). 
 
(7) Where the application is approved under sub-
regulation (6), the applicant shall deposit an amount, 
towards the actual expenses incurred for the 
purposes referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of 
sub-regulation (2) till the date of approval by the 
Adjudicating Authority, as determined by the interim 
resolution professional or resolution professional, as 
the case may be, within three days of such approval, 
in the bank account of the corporate debtor, failing 
which the bank guarantee received under sub-
regulation (2) shall be invoked, without prejudice to 
any other action permissible against the applicant 
under the Code.” 
 
60. Regulation 30A (1) now provides for the procedure to make an application for 
withdrawal before the NCLT under Section 12A, both before and after the 
constitution of the CoC. Sub-clause (a) of Regulation 30A (1) states that in 

PART D 

cases where the CoC has not been constituted, the applicant may place an 
application for withdrawal before the NCLT, through the IRP. Similarly, sub-
clause (b) of Regulation 30A (1) states that in cases where the CoC is 
constituted, the applicant may place an application for withdrawal before the 
NCLT, through the IRP or the RP, as the case may be. In essence, at both 
stages – before and after the constitution of the CoC – the application for 
withdrawal may only be made through the person appointed to oversee the 
insolvency proceedings, i.e. the IRP or the RP. 
 
61. The proviso to Regulation 30A (1) provides that when the application is made 
after the CoC has been constituted and after the invitation for expression of 
interest has been issued, the applicant shall state the reasons for withdrawal at 
this stage. In essence, the regulation in its amended form, deviates from its 
earlier form by also responding to the decision of this Court in Brilliant Alloy 
Private Limited (supra). Unlike the unamended regulation, the regulation 
acknowledges the possibility of withdrawal even after the invitation for 
expression has been issued. However, it mandates that an application for 
withdrawal in such cases must be accompanied by reasons. 

PART D 

62. Regulation 30A (2) provides that the application must be made in the manner 
prescribed in Form FA of Schedule-I,45 and must be accompanied by a bank 
guarantee towards the specified expenses. Regulation 30A(3) provides that in 
cases where the application for withdrawal is moved before the constitution of 
the CoC, the IRP shall submit the application to the NCLT on behalf of the 
applicant within three days of receipt. Regulations 30A (4) and (5) deal with the 
situation where the CoC has already been constituted. They provide that the 
CoC shall consider the application within seven days of receipt, and 
subsequently, if the application is approved by the CoC with a ninety-percent 
voting share, the RP must submit the application with the approval to the NCLT 
within three days of the approval. Finally, regulation 30A(6) provides that on the 
receipt of the application under both mechanisms (before the CoC and after), 

PART D 

the NCLT may pass an order approving the application submitted by the RP or 
IRP, as the case may be. b. Insights from the evolution of the legal framework 
 
63. In essence, after a series of deliberations by the legislature, the executive and 
nudges by this Court, the framework created by Rule 8 of the NCLT Rules and 
Section 12A of the IBC read with Rule 30A of the CIRP Regulations lays down 
an exhaustive procedure for the withdrawal of an application filed by creditors 
under Sections 7, 9, or 10 of the IBC. Withdrawal may be sought at four stages, 
all of which have a procedure prescribed under the existing framework. These 
may be summarized as follows: 
 
i. 
Before the application under Sections 7, 9 or 10 is admitted by the 
NCLT: Such cases are squarely covered by Rule 8 of the NCLT Rules, 
which requires that the applicant approach the NCLT directly. The NCLT 
may then pass an order permitting the withdrawal of the application. At this 
stage, as the CIRP process has not been initiated, the proceedings are still 
in personam, as between the applicant creditor and the corporate debtor. 
Therefore, while approving the withdrawal at this stage, the NCLT may 
restrict its enquiry to only hear the applicant creditor and corporate debtor, 
and other potential creditors are not stakeholders at this stage. ii. 
After an application under Sections 7, 9, or 10 is admitted, but before 
the CoC has been constituted: Although Section 12A continues to be 

PART D 

silent on this aspect, after the decision in Swiss Ribbons (supra), 
Regulation 30A was amended to provide for this eventuality. An application 
for withdrawal in such cases may be made by the applicant through the 
IRP.46 The IRP will then place the application before the NCLT, which may 
pass an order either approving or rejecting the application. As noted above, 
once the application has been admitted, the proceedings are no longer the 
sole preserve of the applicant creditor and the corporate debtor. They are 
now in rem and at this stage, the NCLT must hear the concerned parties 
and consider all relevant factors before approving or rejecting the application 
for withdrawal. The NCLT being a quasi-judicial body, must not act as a 
mere post office, which stamps and approves every settlement agreement, 
without application of judicial mind. iii. 
After an application under Section 7, 9 or 10 is admitted, the CoC has 
been constituted and the invitation for expression of interest has not 
been issued: Section 12A read with Regulation 30A provides exhaustively 
for this scenario. In such cases, the application for withdrawal is to be placed 
before the NCLT, through the IRP or the RP. The application is first placed 
before the CoC and after ascertaining approval with a ninety percent voting 
share, the RP shall submit the application to the NCLT. iv. 
After an application under Section 7, 9 or 10 is admitted, the CoC has 
been formed and the invitation for expression of interest has been 
 
46 Regulation 30A (1), CIRP Regulations, 2016. 

PART D 

issued: The procedure is the same as that detailed in (iii) above, with the 
added requirement stemming from the proviso to Regulation 30A (1). in such 
cases, the applicant must state the reasons for withdrawal at this belated 
stage. 
 
64. Not only is there an exhaustive framework to deal with withdrawal and 
settlement, but the evolution of the law and the creation of an comprehensive 
framework indicates an attempt to reduce reliance on discretionary powers. As 
detailed above, the IBC and the allied rules and regulations, in their original 
form did not provide any procedure for the settlement/withdrawal of claims after 
admission of the application by the creditor. This Court was compelled to invoke 
Article 142 in decisions such as Lokhandwala Kataria Construction (supra) 
and Uttara Foods & Feeds (P) Ltd. (supra). To reduce reliance on Article 142, 
Section 12A and Regulation 30A were introduced to provide a detailed 
procedure for such cases. In fact, the ILC report which led to the inclusion of 
Section 12A specifically discussed and rejected the proposition that Rule 11 
can instead be used for this purpose. Next, this Court in Swiss Ribbons (supra) 
held 
that 
since 
there 
was 
no 
prescribed 
framework 
to 
allow 
settlement/withdrawal of claims after admission of the application but before the 
CoC was constituted, Rule 11 of the NCLT Rules may be invoked. In response 
to this, to reduce reliance on the inherent powers under Rule 11 and provide 
certainty, necessary amendments were made to Regulation 30A. There is now 
a detailed procedure to deal with withdrawal or settlement at both stages post 
admission – before and after the CoC is constituted. In view of this detailed 

PART D 

framework, the requirement to invoke discretionary power such as Rule 11 of 
the NCLT Rules, or Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules or even the power of this Court 
under Article 142 no longer arises. 
 
65. Mr Tushar Mehta, Senior Counsel for the second respondent, has sought to 
contend that the requirement under Regulation 30A (1) to move an application 
before the NCLT through the IRP, in cases where the CoC is not constituted, is 
a mere technicality which can be dispensed with. The logic he advances is that 
the regulation does not require adjudication by the NCLT about the factum of 
the settlement, the mode of settlement or adjudication on any other ground. His 
submission is that Regulation 30A (1) only requires that the withdrawal 
application be submitted to the IRP in the prescribed Form FA, which is then 
forwarded to the NCLT to mechanically approve the settlement. At this stage, 
according to him, the NCLT is not required to hear any other parties, but only 
approve the application and thus, whether the application is submitted through 
the IRP or whether it is before the NCLT or the NCLAT, is a mere technicality. 
 
66. We do not concur with the above understanding for two broad reasons. a. Firstly, that the application is to be submitted by the IRP rather than the 
parties themselves is not a distinction without difference. As noted above, 
once the application is admitted and CIRP is initiated, it is the IRP who takes 
charge of the affairs of the corporate debtor. The proceedings become 
collective proceedings and the interests of the former management of the 
corporate debtor, become disjunct from the interest of the corporate debtor. 

PART D 

Therefore, the parties (such as the former management of the corporate 
debtor) must submit their application for withdrawal through the IRP who is 
now the person in control of the insolvency proceedings. To subvert this 
requirement would run contrary to the scheme of the IBC and the underlying 
principles discussed in this judgment; and 
 
b. Secondly, the NCLT cannot be considered a post office that merely puts a 
stamp on the withdrawal application submitted by the parties through the 
IRP. The ILC Report, in response to which, the parent provision, i.e. Section 
12A was introduced in the IBC specifically discussed the possibility of the 
creditors, apart from the applicant creditor agreeing to a settlement as the 
underlying reason to permit withdrawal even after initiation of the CIRP. It 
was never fathomed by the ILC that withdrawal of claims would remain a 
unilateral process, even though the application is admitted and CIRP has 
been initiated. Similarly, this Court in Swiss Ribbons (supra), in response 
to which Regulation 30A was amended, specifically observed that in cases 
where withdrawal is sought after initiation of CIRP, but before the CoC is 
constituted, the NCLT must decide on the application after “hearing all the 
parties concerned and considering all relevant factors on the facts of each 
case.” Therefore, the NCLT does conduct an adjudicatory exercise when 
the application for withdrawal is placed before it, and the procedure is not a 
mere technicality. 

PART D 

iii. 
Scope of ‘Inherent Powers’ under Rule 11 
 
67. Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure47 reads as follows: 
“151. Saving of inherent powers of Court.—
Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or 
otherwise affect the inherent power of the Court to 
make such orders as may be necessary for the ends 
of justice or to prevent abuse of the process of the 
Court.” 
 
68. Rule 11 of the NCLT Rules 2016 and Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules 2016, which 
preserve the inherent powers of the NCLT and the NCLAT respectively, mirror 
Section 151 of the CPC and read as follows: 
“11. Inherent powers.- Nothing in these rules shall 
be deemed to limit or otherwise affect the inherent 
powers of the Appellate Tribunal to make such 
orders or give such directions as may be necessary 
for meeting the ends of justice or to prevent abuse 
of the process of the Appellate Tribunal.” 
 
69. In a consistent line of precedent, this Court has held that ‘inherent powers’ may 
be exercised in cases where there is no express provision under the legal 
framework. However, such powers cannot be exercised in contravention of, 
conflict with or in ignorance of express provisions of law. We may helpfully refer 
to the observations of a two-judge bench of this Court in one such case. In Ram 
Chand and Sons Sugar Mills (P) Ltd. v. Kanhayalal Bhargava,48 a two-judge 
bench of this Court, speaking through Justice K Subba Rao (as the learned 
chief Justice then was), opined: 
“5. … Having regard to the said decisions, the scope 
of the inherent power of a court under Section 151 
of the Code may be defined thus: The inherent 
 
47 “CPC” 
48. 

PART D 

power of a court is in addition to and complementary 
to the powers expressly conferred under the Code. 
But that power will not be exercised if its exercise is 
inconsistent with, or comes into conflict with, any of 
the powers expressly or by necessary implication 
conferred by the other provisions of the Code. If 
there are express provisions exhaustively 
covering a particular topic, they give rise to a 
necessary implication that no power shall be 
exercised in respect of the said topic otherwise 
than in the manner prescribed by the said 
provisions. Whatever limitations are imposed by 
construction on the provisions of Section 151 of the 
Code, they do not control the undoubted power 
of the Court conferred under Section 151 of the 
Code to make a suitable order to prevent the 
abuse of the process of the Court.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
70. When a procedure has been prescribed for a particular purpose exhaustively, 
no power shall be exercised otherwise than in the manner prescribed by the 
said provisions. In such cases, the court must be circumspect in invoking its 
‘inherent powers’ to deviate from the prescribed procedure. If such deviation is 
made, the court must justify why this was necessary to “prevent the abuse of 
the process of the Court”. 
 
71. The need to be circumspect while invoking “inherent powers”, when there is an 
exhaustive legal framework is amplified in the context of a legislation like the 
IBC. In Ebix Singapore (P) Ltd. vs. Educomp Solutions Ltd. (CoC),49 a two-
judge bench of this Court, speaking through one of us (DY Chandrachud, J), 
affirmed this position and observed as follows: 
 “Any claim seeking an exercise of the adjudicating 
authority’s residuary powers under Section 60(5)(c) 
IBC, NCLT’s inherent powers under Rule 11 of the 
NCLT Rules or even the powers of this Court under 
 
49 (2022). 

PART E 

Article 142 of the Constitution must be closely 
scrutinized for broader compliance with the 
insolvency framework and its underlying objective. 
The adjudicating mechanisms which have been 
specifically created by the statute, have a narrowly 
defined role in the process and must be circumspect 
in granting reliefs that may run counter to the 
timeliness and predictability that is central to the IBC. 
Any judicial creation of a procedural or 
substantive remedy that is not envisaged by the 
statute would not only violate the principle of 
separation of powers, but also run the risk of 
altering the delicate coordination that is 
designed by the IBC framework and have grave 
implications on the outcome of the CIRP, the 
economy of the country and the lives of the 
workers and other allied parties who are 
statutorily bound by the impact of a resolution or 
liquidation of a Corporate Debtor.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
E. Application to the instant case 
 
72. In the preceding section, we have analyzed the law with regard to (i) the 
principles governing IBC relevant to contextualize the consequences of 
withdrawing CIRP; (ii) the nature of the proceedings after admission of an 
application by a creditor; (iii) the evolution of the legal framework for the 
withdrawal of CIRP or settlement of claims; and (iv) the scope of Rule 11 of the 
NCLAT Rules 2016. We will now apply the above discussion to the specific 
issues before this Court in the present factual context, namely, the locus of the 
appellant to institute the present proceedings and the approach of the NCLAT 
in the Impugned Judgment. 

PART E 

i. 
Locus of the appellant before this Court 
 
73. The counsel for the respondents sought to argue that the appellant does not 
have the locus to maintain the present proceedings before this Court. They 
contend that in a case for settlement between the Corporate Debtor and the 
second respondent, there is no scope for hearing any other creditors, such as 
the appellant. We do not find merit in this submission. 
 
74. Section 62 of the IBC governs statutory appeals to the Supreme Court from the 
orders of the NCLAT. The provision reads as follows: 
“62. Appeal to Supreme Court – (1) Any person 
aggrieved by an order of the National Company Law 
Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the 
Supreme Court on a question of law 
such order under this Code within forty-five days 
from the date of receipt of such order. 
 
(2) The Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that a 
person was prevented by sufficient cause from filing 
an appeal within forty-five days, allow the appeal to 
be filed within a further period not exceeding fifteen 
days.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
75. The provision stipulates that “any person” who is aggrieved by the order of the 
NCLAT may file an appeal before the Supreme Court within the prescribed 
limitation period. Similar language is used in Section 61 of the IBC, which 
provides for appeals to NCLAT from orders of the NCLT.50 The use of the 
phrase “any person aggrieved” indicates that there is no rigid locus requirement 
 
50 “61. Appeals and Appellate Authority.- 
(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained under the Companies Act 2013 (18 of 2013), any 
person aggrieved by the order of the Adjudicating Authority under this part may prefer an appeal to the 
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal. 
[…]” 

PART E 

to institute an appeal challenging an order of the NCLT, before the NCLAT or 
an order of the NCLAT, before this Court. Any person who is aggrieved by the 
order may institute an appeal, and nothing in the provision restricts the phrase 
to only the applicant creditor and the corporate debtor. As noted above, once 
the CIRP is initiated, the proceedings are no longer restricted to the individual 
applicant creditor and the corporate debtor but rather become collective 
proceedings (in rem), where all creditors, such as the appellant, are necessary 
stakeholders. The appellant is not an unrelated party to the CIRP, but is in fact, 
an entity whose claims had been verified by the IRP vide letter 19 August 2024. 
The appellant who claims to be a Financial Creditor, has expressed reasonable 
apprehensions about the prejudice it would face if there were roundtripping of 
the funds, and the prioritization of the debts of the second respondent, an 
operational creditor. 
 
76. In any event, the appellant had moved an application before the NCLAT seeking 
impleadment as a respondent and the objections of the appellant were 
specifically recorded and addressed in the Impugned Judgement. Therefore, 
there is no doubt that the appellant falls within the ambit of the phrase “any 
person aggrieved” and has the locus standi to institute the present Civil Appeal 
before this Court. 

PART E 

ii. 
Approach of the NCLAT in the Impugned Judgement 
 
77. The appellant contends that the NCLAT erred in invoking its inherent powers 
under Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules in the presence of a prescribed procedure 
dealing with the withdrawal of CIRP. The respondent, on the other hand, 
contends that at the time of executing the settlement agreement, the CoC was 
not formed and in such situations, Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules may be invoked 
to allow the settlement. In view of the detailed discussion in Part D of this 
judgement, we find considerable force in the submissions of the appellant on 
this point. 
 
78. In paragraph 63 of this judgement, we identified the four stages at which a 
procedure for the withdrawal of CIRP or settlement of claims is contemplated in 
the existing legal framework. The situation before the NCLAT in the present 
case fell within serial number (ii), that is, when the application of a creditor has 
been admitted and CIRP has been initiated, however, the CoC has not been 
formed. When settlement was sought by the first respondent before the NCLAT, 
the Section 9 petition had been admitted and the Section 7 petition had also 
been disposed of on that basis. However, admittedly, on this date, i.e. 31 July 
2024, the CoC had not been constituted and the NCLAT subsequently stayed 
the formation of the CoC. 
 
79. In such cases, the legal framework mandates that an (i) application for 
withdrawal be moved; (ii) the application has to be moved through the IRP; and 
(iii) it be placed before the NCLT for approval. None of these requirements were 

PART E 

met in the present case. First and foremost, there was no formal application 
instituted to seek the withdrawal of the CIRP. The settlement agreement was 
taken on record and approved by the NCLAT based on the submissions and 
assurances of the counsel before it and the affidavits/undertakings filed by the 
parties. Further, the first respondent, who is a former director of the Corporate 
Debtor, did not move the application through the IRP and instead approached 
the NCLAT directly. Finally, the request to approve the settlement was moved 
before the NCLAT during appellate proceedings, instead of being placed before 
the NCLT. Despite these grave deviations, the NCLAT still proceeded with 
approving the settlement and setting aside the CIRP by invoking its inherent 
power under Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules. 
 
80. We are of the view that recourse to Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules was not 
warranted in the present circumstances. As noted above, ‘inherent powers’ 
cannot be used to subvert legal provisions, which exhaustively provide for a 
procedure. To permit the NCLAT to circumvent this detailed procedure by 
invoking its inherent powers under Rule 11 would run contrary to the carefully 
crafted procedure for withdrawal. In the Impugned Judgement, the NCLAT does 
not provide any reasons for deviating from this procedure or the urgency to 
approve the settlement without following the procedure. The correct course of 
action by the NCLAT would have been to stay the constitution of the CoC and 
direct the parties to follow the course of action in Section 12A read with 
Regulation 30A of the CIRP Regulations 2016. This legal framework for such 

PART E 

withdrawal was formulated after giving due consideration to the appropriate 
procedure for withdrawal and balancing it with the objectives of the IBC. 
 
81. Even if the procedural infirmity is kept aside, once the CIRP was admitted, the 
proceedings became collective, and all creditors of the Corporate Debtor 
became stakeholders. As noted in Swiss Ribbons (supra), even while invoking 
Rule 11 to allow withdrawal, the NCLT must hear all the concerned parties and 
consider all relevant factors on the facts of each case. The appellant raised 
detailed objections before the NCLAT to the source of the funds for the 
settlement and a reasonable apprehension that there was round tripping of 
funds, in violation of the order passed by the Delaware Court on 18 March 2024. 
These objections were summarily dismissed by the NCLAT, relying solely on 
the undertaking filed by Riju Raveendran. The only finding in this regard is found 
in paragraph 44. The NCLAT relies entirely on the undertaking filed by Riju 
Raveendran and states that “although, the Applicant is not satisfied about the 
undertaking but the Applicant has also not brought on record any evidence to 
the contrary that the money which is being offered has actually been brought 
by Riju Raveendran from the money disbursed to the borrower in terms of credit 
agreement or has been taken out of the coffers of the CD.” Alleged facts such 
as the fraudulent transfer of USD 533 million to a hedge fund in the United 
States; the orders of the US Court restraining the brothers from transferring or 
dissipating the amount; the contempt proceedings against Mr Riju Raveendran; 
the ongoing investigation by the Enforcement Directorate against the first 
respondent and the Corporate Debtor; and other attempts by the Corporate 
Debtor to dissipate assets, were not adequately addressed by the NCLAT. 

PART E 

iii. 
Decisions of this Court cited in the Impugned Judgement 
 
82. The respondents relied on the decisions of this Court in Ashok G. Rajani v. 
Beacon Trusteeship Ltd.51, and Abhishek Kumar (supra) to argue that before 
the CoC is formed, the proceedings are between the applicant creditor and the 
debtor and thus, Rule 11 can be invoked to allow the settlement. In the 
Impugned Judgement too, the NCLAT relies on the decisions of this Court in 
Abhishek Kumar (supra) and Kamal K Singh (supra), to justify the invocation 
of Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules and observe that there has been “a change in 
the law on settlement”. The respondents are correct to contend that each of 
these decisions was rendered after Section 12A was inserted and Regulation 
30A was amended. However, it is important to understand the context in which 
this Court upheld the invocation of Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules and whether 
these decisions considered the prescribed procedure under Section 12A and 
the amended Regulation 30A. We are of the considered view that these 
judgements do not advance the case of the respondents. 
 
83. In Kamal Singh (supra), a two-judge bench of this Court passed a brief order 
setting aside an order of the NCLT, which dismissed an application filed under 
Rule 11 of the NCLT Rules 2016 for withdrawal of CIRP based on a settlement 
arrived at before the constitution of the CoC. This Court relied on the 
observations in para 82 of Swiss Ribbons (supra) referred to above, wherein 
this Court stated that at the stage when the CoC has not been constituted, the 
 
51. 

PART E 

NCLT may exercise its inherent powers under Rule 11 to allow or disallow an 
application for withdrawal or settlement. It may be noted that there is no 
reference in this order to the prescribed procedure under Section 12A read with 
Regulation 30A, although the proceedings took place well after their insertion. 
As noted above, in response to the decision of this Court in Swiss Ribbons 
(supra), there was a change in the legal framework and Regulation 30A was 
amended to specifically provide for a procedure for withdrawal before the CoC 
is constituted. The intention was to account for the lacuna identified in Swiss 
Ribbons (supra) and at the same time, reduce the reliance on ‘inherent powers’ 
by prescribing a procedure for withdrawal at this stage. In our view, as the order 
overlooks the relevant legal provisions and fails to even refer to the existing 
legal framework under Regulation 30A, it would be per incuriam and is not 
binding on this Court. 
 
84. The same infirmity is found in Ashok G. Rajani (supra), a judgement rendered 
by a two-judge bench of this Court. In this case, too, the petition filed by a 
creditor against a corporate debtor had been admitted, but the CoC had not 
been constituted. The decision refers to Section 12A of the IBC but fails to even 
acknowledge the amendment to Regulation 30A, which specifically provided for 
such an eventuality. Instead, this Court proceeded to hold while Section 12A of 
the IBC permits withdrawal after admission of the application by the creditor, it 
only provides for the procedure for withdrawal after the CoC has been 
constituted, without laying down a bar on withdrawal before the constitution of 
the CoC. According to the two-judge bench, the question of approval of the CoC 
by the requisite percentage of votes can only arise after the CoC is constituted 

PART E 

and thus, Rule 11 must be invoked to allow withdrawal. This observation was 
made without as much as a passing reference to Regulation 30A, which 
specifically governs such a situation. 
 
85. The decision of this Court in Abhishek Kumar (supra) rendered by a two-judge 
bench of this Court speaking through Justice Vikram Nath, correctly identifies 
the legal framework. However, it is distinguishable from the present factual 
situation and the findings of this Court do not support the case of the 
respondents. The facts are comparable vis-à-vis the stage of the proceedings 
– the petition had been admitted, but the CoC had not been constituted. 
However, in that case, the IRP had moved an application under Regulation 30A 
of the CIRP Regulations. Instead of adjudicating upon the application under 
Regulation 30A, the NCLT took the view that Regulation 30A is a mere directory 
provision and dismissed the application. The NCLT vacated the stay on the 
constitution of the CoC and directed that the application under 12A be decided 
directly (i.e. including for compliance with the requirement of a ninety-percent 
voting share of the CoC). This Court set aside the order of the NCLT on the 
ground that Regulation 30A provides a complete mechanism for dealing with 
the applications filed under such a provision, and it is not necessary to get the 
approval of a ninety percent voting share of the CoC if the application for 
withdrawal is moved before the constitution of the CoC. On the other hand, in 
the present case, there was no application filed through the IRP before the 
NCLT under Regulation 30A at all. Therefore, this decision is not applicable to 
the present case. 

PART F 

F. Conclusion 

86. For the above reasons, we allow the present appeal and set aside the impugned 
judgment of the NCLAT dated 2 August 2024 in the above terms. At this stage, 
it would not be appropriate for this Court to adjudicate on the objections of the 
appellant to the settlement agreement on merits. The issues raised are the 
subject matter of several litigations in different fora, including the Delaware 
Court and investigation by various authorities, including the Enforcement 
Directorate, which are pending. 
 
87. During the course of the proceedings before this Court, the CoC has been 
constituted. The parties are at liberty to invoke their remedies, to seek a 
withdrawal or settlement of claims, in compliance with the legal framework 
governing the withdrawal of CIRP. Nothing in this judgment should be construed 
as a finding on the conduct of any of the parties or other stakeholders involved 
in the insolvency proceedings. 
 
88. The amount of Rs 158 crore, along with accrued interest, if any, which has been 
maintained in a separate escrow account pursuant to the Order of this Court 
dated 14 August 2024, is to be deposited with the CoC. The CoC is directed to 
maintain this amount in an escrow account until further developments and to 
abide by the further directions of the NCLT. 

89. The civil appeal and special leave petition shall stand disposed of accordingly. 

PART F 

90. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of...….…….……………………………………CJI 
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 

…….……………………………………………J 
[J B Pardiwala] 

…….……………………………………………J 
 [Manoj Misra] 

New Delhi; 
October 23, 2024.