IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

State of U.P. & Ors. 

…Appellants 

Versus 
 
M/S Lalta Prasad Vaish and sons 

 …Respondent 

With 

With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 

With 
 
 With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
Diary No. 41507 of 2019 
With 
 
With 
Diary No. 7447 of 2023 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
With 
 
And With 

JUDGMENT 

Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 

Table of Contents 
A. Background... 5 
i. 
Relevant constitutional provisions... 5 
ii. 
The judgment in Synthetics (7J)... 8 
iii. 
The aftermath of Synthetics (7J)... 16 
iv. The Reference Order(s)... 22 
B. Submissions... 26 
i. 
Appellants’ submissions... 26 
ii. 
Respondent’s submissions... 35 
C. 
The distinction between potable and non-potable alcohol... 42 
D. 
Issues... 45 
E. Analysis... 45 
i. 
The constitutional distribution of legislative power... 45 
ii. 
Scheme of legislative entries... 48 
iii. 
The field covered by Entry 52 of List I and Entry 8 of List II... 51 
a. 
The scope of Entry 8... 52 
I. 
The meaning of ‘that is to say’... 52 
II. 
Product or industry based entry... 55 

b. 
Scope of Entry 52 of List I: the absence of “to the extent to which”... 57 
c. 
Reconciling the potential overlap between Entry 52 of List I and Entry 8 
of List II... 63 
iv. Scope of Entry 8: Meaning of ‘intoxicating liquor’... 70 
a. 
Precedent on the interpretation of ‘intoxicating liquor’: exploring FN 
Balsara and Southern Pharmaceuticals... 71 
b. 
The legal import of ‘intoxicating liquor’... 79 
c. 
Evolution of the legislative lists on ‘intoxicating liquor’... 85 
d. 
The harmonious interpretation... 96 
v. 
The correctness of the decision in Synthetics (7J)... 102 
vi. The impact of the decision on Item 26 of the First Schedule of IDRA

vii. 
The (ir)relevance of the decision in Tika Ramji to the dispute... 115 
viii. 
Section 18G of IDRA and Entry 33 of List III... 119 
F. Conclusion... 120 

PART A 

A. Background 
1. 
“Intoxicating liquor” falls within the legislative domain of the State Legislatures 
under Entry 8 of the State list, List II, of the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution. The issues which arise for adjudication in this reference pertain 
to the scope of the power of the State Legislatures under Entry 8 and the 
meaning of the phrase “intoxicating liquor”. The question is whether 
“intoxicating liquor” in Entry 8 only includes potable alcohol, such as alcoholic 
beverages or also includes alcohol which is used in the production of other 
products. In Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. v. State of UP,1 (“Synthetics 
[7J]), a seven-Judge Bench delineated the scope of the regulatory powers of 
State Legislatures on “intoxicating liquor”. The correctness of Synthetics [7J] 
(supra) has been referred to a larger bench. We answer the reference in this 
judgment. i. 
Constitutional provisions 
2. 
The State has the legislative competence under Entry 24 of List II over 
‘industries’ but this is subject to entries 7 and 52 of List I.2 Under Entry 52 of 
List I, Parliament has legislative competence over such industries, the control 
of which by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the 
public interest3. Entry 7 of List I deals with industries which are declared by 
Parliament by law to be necessary for the purpose of defence or for the 
 
1 (1990) 
2 “24. Industries subject to the provisions of Entries 7 and 52 of List I” 
3 “52. Industries, the control of which by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the 
public interest.” 

PART A 

prosecution of war.4 Under Entry 33 of List III, the State Legislatures and 
Parliament can legislate on trade and commerce in, and the production, 
supply and distribution of the products of industries controlled by Parliament 
under Entry 52 of List I.5 Entry 8 of List II deals with ‘intoxicating 
liquors’6.These words are followed by the expression “that is to say, the 
production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale of 
intoxicating liquors”. The Seventh Schedule also demarcates taxing powers 
related to alcohol separately. Entry 84 of List I (before it was amended by the 
Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act 2016) enabled 
Parliament to levy duties of excise on tobacco and other goods manufactured 
or produced in India except alcoholic liquors for human consumption but 
including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol.7 Entry 51 of 
List II confers the State Legislature the competence to levy duties of excise, 
 
4 “7. Industries declared by Parliament by law to be necessary for the purpose of defence or for the 
prosecution of war.” 
5 “33. Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of – 

The products of any industry where the control of such industry by the Union is declared by 
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest, and imported goods of the same kind as such 
products; 

Foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils; 

Cattle fodder, including oilcakes and other concentrates; 

Raw cotton, whether grinned or ungrinned, and cotton seed; and 

Raw jute.” 
6“8. Intoxicating liquors, that is to say, the production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale 
of intoxicating liquors” 
7 “84. Duties of excise on tobacco and other goods manufactured or produced in India except- 
(a) Alcoholic liquors for human consumption; 
(b) Opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, 
But including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any substance included in sub-
paragraph (b) of this entry. 
But including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any substance included in sub-
paragraph (b) of this entry.” 

PART A 

inter alia, on alcoholic liquors for human consumption but not including 
medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol.8 
3. 
In exercise of the power under Article 2469 read with Entry 52 of List I, 
Parliament enacted the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act 195110. 
Section 2 of IDRA stipulates that it is expedient in public interest that the Union 
should take control of the industries specified in the First Schedule to the 
enactment. Item 26 of the First Schedule read as follows: 
“26. Fermentation industries: 

Alcohol 

Other products of fermentation industries” 
 
4. 
In 2016, Item 26 of the First Schedule to the IDRA was amended to exclude 
potable alcohol from the ambit of the Item.11 Item 26 reads as follows after 
the amendment: 
“26. Fermentation industries (other than potable 
alcohol): 

Alcohol 

Other products of fermentation industries” 

5. 
Section 18-G of IDRA12 grants the Central Government the power to regulate 
the supply and distribution “of any article or class of articles relatable to a 
 
8 “51. Duties of excise on the following goods manufactured or produced in the State and counterveiling 
duties at the same or lower rates on similar goods manufactured or produced elsewhere in India:- 
(a) Alcoholic liquors for human consumption; 
(b) Opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, 
But not including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any substance included in 
sub-paragraph (b) of this entry. 
9 “246. Subject matter of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States.” 
10 “IDRA” 
11 The Industries (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act 2016 
12 “18G. Power to control supply, distribution, price, etc., of certain articles.— 
(1) The Central Government, so far as it appears to it to be necessary or expedient for securing the equitable 
distribution and availability at fair prices of any article or class of articles relatable to any scheduled industry, 

PART A 

scheduled industry” for securing equitable distribution and availability at fair 
prices. ii. 
The judgment in Synthetics (7J) 
6. 
The United Provinces Excise Act 191013 was enacted to “consolidate and 
amend the law in force in the United Provinces relating to the import, export, 
transport, manufacture, sale and possession of intoxicating liquor and of 
intoxicating drugs”. In exercise of the powers under the UP Excise Act, the 
 
may, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, by notified order, provide for 
regulating the supply and distribution thereof and trade and commerce therein. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub-section (1), a notified order made 
thereunder may provide— 
(a) for controlling the prices at which any such article or class thereof may be bought or sold; 
(b) for regulating by licences, permits or otherwise the distribution, transport, disposal, acquisition, 
possession, use or consumption of any such article or class thereof; 
(c) for prohibiting the withholding from sale of any such article or class thereof ordinarily kept for 
sale; 
(d) for requiring any person manufacturing, producing or holding in stock such article or class thereof 
to sell the whole or the part of the articles so manufactured or produced during a specified period or 
to sell the whole or a part of the article so held in stock to such person or class of persons and in 
such circumstances as may be specified in the order; 
(e) for regulating or prohibiting any class of commercial or financial transactions relating to such 
article or class thereof which in the opinion of the authority making the order are, or if unregulated 
are likely to be, detrimental to public interest; 
(f) for requiring persons engaged in the distribution and trade and commerce in any such article or 
class thereof to mark the articles exposed or intended for sale with the sale price or to exhibit at 
some easily accessible place on the premises the price-lists of articles held for sale and also to 
similarly exhibit on the first day of every month, at such other time as may be prescribed, a statement 
of the total quantities of any such articles in stock; 
(g) for collecting any information or statistics with a view to regulating or prohibiting any of the 
aforesaid matters; and 
(h) for any incidental or supplementary matters, including, in particular, the grant of issue of licences, 
permits, or other documents and charging of fees therefor. 
(3) Where in pursuance of any order made with reference to clause (d) of sub-section (2), any person sells 
any article, there shall be paid to him the price therefor— 
(a) where the price can consistently with the controlled price, if any, be fixed by agreement, the price 
so agreed upon; 
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the price calculated with reference to the controlled 
price, if any, fixed under this section; 
(c) where neither clause (a) nor clause (b) applies, the price calculated at the market-rate prevailing 
in the locality at the date of sale. 
(4) No order made in exercise of any power conferred by this section shall be called in question in any Court. 
(5) Where an order purports to have been made and signed by an authority in exercise of any power conferred 
by this section, a Court shall, within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), presume that 
such order was so made by that authority. 
Explanation.—In this section, the expression “article or class of articles” relatable to any scheduled industry 
includes any article or class of articles imported into India which is of the same nature or description as the 
article or class of articles manufactured or produced in the scheduled industry.” 
13 “UP Excise Act” 

PART A 

Government of the Untied Provinces levied vend fee14 on ‘denatured spirit’ 
from the wholesale dealer of denatured spirit. The UP Excise Act was 
amended to include Section 24-A. Section 24-A provided that the Excise 
Commissioner may grant licence for the manufacture or sale of any ‘foreign 
liquor’. ‘Foreign Liquor’ was defined in the subordinate Rules to include “all 
rectified, perfumed, medicated and denatured spirit.”15 The constitutional 
validity of the amendment including Section 24-A was challenged before the 
Allahabad High Court. The High Court upheld the challenge. The UP State 
Legislature enacted the U.P Excise (Amendment) (Re-enactment and 
Validation) Act 1976 including Section 24-A relying on the decisions of this 
Court in Nashirwar v. State of MP16 and Har Shanker v. Dy. Excise and 
Taxation Commissioner17. The Allahabad High Court upheld the validity of 
the U.P Excise (Amendment) (Re-enactment and Validation) Act 1976.18 
7. 
 The appellants in Synthetics & Chemicals v. State of UP19 (“Synthetics 
[2J]”), held licenses for wholesale vend of ‘denatured spirit’. They instituted 
proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution before the Allahabad High 
Court for seeking a direction to quash the notification by which vend fee was 
levied from a wholesale licence dealer of ‘denatured spirit’. The High Court 
dismissed the petitions. It held that the phrase ‘intoxicating liquors’ in Entry 8 
of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution includes denatured spirit 
 
14 Vend fee means the fee that is paid by a licenses dealer to sell the products in retain. 
15 Section 4(2) of the UP Act provides that the State may declare what shall be deemed to be foreign liquor 
or country liquor 

 SC 414 
18 1976 ALJ 436 (FB) 
19 (1980) 

PART A 

and that the State was, therefore, competent to levy the vend fee on 
denatured spirit. 
8. 
 Proceedings under Article 136 were instituted for challenging the decision of 
the High Court. Proceedings were also initiated under Article 32 challenging 
the constitutional validity of the levy of vend fee. A two-Judge Bench of this 
Court in Synthetics (2J) (supra) heard the writ petition and the appeals 
against the judgments of the Allahabad High Court together. Three issues 
arose before the Bench. On the issue of the meaning of the phrase 
‘intoxicating liquor’ in Entry 8, the two-Judge Bench referred to the decisions 
of this Court in State of Bombay v. FN Balsara20, Nashirwar (supra) and 
Har Shanker (supra) and held that the decisions indicate that the phrase 
‘intoxicating liquor’ in Entry 8 of List II comprises of liquor which contains 
alcohol, both potable and non-potable.21 The second issue was whether in 
view of IDRA, the power of the State to regulate alcohol (both potable and 
non-potable) was denuded. In particular, reference was made to the 
notification issued by the Union under Section 18-G of the IDRA prescribing 
the price of various types of alcohol and rectified spirit. The two-Judge Bench 
referred to the decision of a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Tika Ramji v. 
State of UP22 and entry 33 of List III to hold that the State Legislature had the 
power to legislate regarding the production, supply and distribution of the 
products of the industries notified by Parliament under Entry 52 of List I.23 

21 (1980) [18] 
 SC 676 
23 (1980) [25-28] 

PART A 

The two-Judge Bench further held that the Ethyl Alcohol (Price Control) Order 
issued by the Central Government in exercise of the power under Section 
18G of IDRA did not take away the exclusive rights of the State Government 
relating to intoxicating liquor.24 The third issue was whether the phrase 
‘foreign liquor’ in Section 24-A includes denatured spirit or only alcohol for 
human consumption. The Bench held that the meaning of the phrase cannot 
be restricted to alcohol for human consumption since “when liquor is put to 
any use such as manufacture of other articles, the liquor is all the same 
consumed.”25 
9. 
Review petitions were filed against the decision of this Court in Synthetics 
(2J) (supra). Writ petitions were also filed for challenging the rules by which 
vend fees were levied in Uttar Pradesh, and provisions of various laws 
enacted by the then State of Bombay, and the States of Tamil Nadu and 
Andhra Pradesh by which exclusive privilege of dealing with any intoxicant 
was vested in the State. The matters were heard by a seven-Judge Bench in 
Synthetics(7J) (supra). 
10. Justice Sabyasachi Mukharji, writing for himself and five other judges framed 
the following issues for consideration: 
“2. The main question that falls for consideration in 
these matters is whether the vend fee in respect of 
the industrial alcohol under different legislations and 
rules in different States is valid. […] The questions 
with which we are mainly concerned are the 
following: 
 
24 (1980) [28] 
25 (1980) [34] 

PART A 

Whether the power to levy excise duty in case of 
industrial alcohol was with the State legislature or 
the Central legislature; 
What is the scope and ambit of Entry 8 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution? 
Whether, the State Government has exclusive right 
or privilege of manufacturing, selling, distributing etc. of alcohols including industrial alcohol. In this 
connection, the extent, scope and ambit of such right 
or privilege has also to be examined.” 
 
11. The decision, first, laid down the meaning of the terms, ‘rectified spirit’, 
‘industrial alcohol’, and ‘ethyl alcohol’. The decision noted that the petitioners 
and appellants were manufacturers of ‘ethyl alcohol’ and that ‘ethyl alcohol’, 
which is also known as rectified spirit is an industrial alcohol. The judgement, 
used the three phases interchangeably: 
“74. It has to be borne in mind that by common standards ethyl 
alcohol (which has 95 per cent) is an industrial alcohol and is 
not fit for human consumption. The petitioners and the 
appellants were manufacturing ethyl alcohol(95 per cent) 
(also known as rectified spirit) which is an industrial alcohol. 
ISI specification has divided ethyl alcohol (as known in the 
trade) into several kinds of alcohol. Beverage and industrial 
alcohols are clearly and differently treated. Rectified spirit for 
industrial purposes is defined as “spirit purified by distillation 
having a strength not less than 95 per cent of volume by ethyl 
alcohol”. Dictionaries and technical books would show that 
rectified spirit (95 per cent) is an industrial alcohol and is not 
potable as such. It appears, therefore, that industrial alcohol 
which is ethyl alcohol (95 per cent) by itself is not only non-
potable but is highly toxic. The range of spirits of potable 
alcohol is from country spirit to whisky and the ethyl alcohol 
content varies between 19 to about 43 per cent. These 
standards are according to the ISI specifications. In other 
words ethyl alcohol (95 per cent) is not alcoholic liquor for 
human consumption but can be used as a raw material input 
after processing and substantial dilution in the production of 
whisky, gin, country liquor, etc.” 

PART A 

12. This Court allowed the challenge on the following grounds: 
a. 
The phrase ‘intoxicating liquor’ in Entry 8 means ‘liquor which is 
consumable by human being as it is” for the following reasons: (i) In FN 
Balsara (supra), this Court was not aware of the full use of alcohol as 
industrial alcohol26; and (ii) Only two decisions of this Court have dealt 
with industrial alcohol. One was the decision in Synthetics (2J) (supra) 
and the other was the decision in Indian Mica and Micancite Industries 
v. State of Bihar27 in which this Court held that Parliament had the 
legislative competence to levy tax on alcoholic liquor not fit for human 
consumption28; 
b. 
The provisions that are challenged are not regulatory but seek to levy a 
tax.29 List II does not confer the State Legislature the power to levy of 
tax on industrial alcohol30; 
c. 
In view of Item 26 of the First Schedule to IDRA, the control of alcohol 
industries vests exclusively in the Union. Thus, the power to issue 
licenses to manufacture both potable and non-potable alcohol vests in 
the Central Government;31 
d. 
The State can also not regulate industrial alcohol as a ‘product’ of the 
controlled industry in terms of Entry 33 of List III because the Union 
 
26 (1990) [74] 
27 (1971) 
28 (1990) [75] 
29 On the distinction between tax and fee (see (1990) [69-73] 
30 (1990) [83] 
31 (1990) [85] 

PART A 

occupies the whole field on industrial alcohol as evinced by Section 18G 
of the IDRA32; 
e. 
Even otherwise, the impugned provisions do not regulate a product of 
the scheduled industry. Rather, they deal with the manufacture and sale 
of industrial alcohol33; 
f. 
The power of the States to legislate on the subject of alcohol is restricted 
to laws which (paragraph 86 of Synthetics (7J) (supra)): 
i. 
Prohibit potable alcohol in terms of Entry 6 of List II which concerns 
public health; 
ii. 
Lay down regulations to ensure that non-potable alcohol is not 
diverted and misused as a substitute for potable alcohol; 
iii. 
Charge excise duty on potable alcohol and sales tax under Entry 
52 of List II. However, sales tax cannot be charged on industrial 
alcohol; and 
iv. 
Charge fees on a quid pro quo basis, in return for some service 
rendered by the state, as distinct from fees for grant of a privilege 
in terms of Indian Mica (supra). 
13. However, the judgment in paragraph 88 makes the following observations: 
“On an analysis of the aforesaid decisions and 
practice, we are clearly of the opinion that in respect 
of industrial alcohol the States are not authorised to 
 
32 (1990) [85] 
33 (1990) [85] 

PART A 

impose the impost they have purported to do. In that 
view of the matter, the contentions of the petitioners 
must succeed and such impositions and imposts 
must go as being invalid in law so far as industrial 
alcohol is concerned. We make it clear that this will 
not affect any impost so far as potable alcohol as 
commonly understood is concerned. It will also not 
affect any imposition of levy on industrial alcohol fee 
where there are circumstances to establish that 
there was quid pro quo for the fee sought to be 
imposed. This will not affect any regulating measure 
as such.” 
 
14. Paragraph 88 lays down the following three principles: 
a. 
States do not have the competence to levy tax on industrial alcohol; 
b. 
States have the competence to levy tax on potable alcohol; and 
c. 
States have the competence to levy fee on industrial alcohol. 
15. Justice Oza in his concurring opinion held: 
a. 
The legislative entries in List I and List II clearly demarcate the taxing 
powers of Parliament and State Legislature. Entry 84 of List I covers levy 
of excise duty on alcoholic liquor for other than human consumption and 
Entry 51 of List II covers levy of excise duty on alcoholic liquor for human 
consumption34; 
b. 
Parliament controls the alcohol industry since Item 26 of IDRA deals with 
industry based on fermentation and alcohol. The competence of the 
State Legislature under Entry 8 can only be subject to IDRA35; and 
 
34 (1990) [97] 
35 (1990) [100] 

PART A 

c. 
The regulation of the State under Entry 8 of List II can only be limited to 
prevent the conversion of alcoholic liquors for industrial use for human 
consumption. Regulatory fee can be levied by the State for this limited 
purpose. iii. 
The aftermath of Synthetics (7J) 
16. Subsequently, the interpretation of the decision in Synthetics (7J) (supra) 
came up before this Court in numerous occasions. In Shri Bileshwar Khand 
Udyog Khedut Sahakari Mandali v. State of Gujarat36, the constitutional 
validity of Section 58-A of the Bombay Prohibition Act 1949 was challenged. 
Section 58-A enabled the State Government to direct that “the manufacture, 
import, export, transport, storage, sale, purchase, use, collection or cultivation 
of any intoxicant, denatured spiritous preparations, hemp, mhowra flowers or 
molasses” would be in the supervision of persons appointed by them and the 
costs of such staff were required to be borne by the person engaged in the 
activity. This Court rejected the challenge. Relying on Synthetics (7J) 
(supra), the two-Judge Bench observed that though industrial alcohol is not 
covered by the regulatory powers under Entry 8 or the taxing power under 
Entry 51 of List II, the State has powers to ensure that industrial alcohol is not 
diverted to be used as potable alcohol and this is covered by Entry 33 of List 
 
36 (1992) 

PART A 

III.37 This decision was followed by another two-Judge Bench in Gujchem 
Distillers India v. State of Gujarat38. 
17. In State of AP v. McDowell39, the prohibition of sale and consumption of 
intoxicating liquor in the State of Andhra Pradesh was challenged. The 
petitioners submitted that the State did not have the competence to prohibit 
consumption. For this purpose, reference was made to the observations in 
paragraph 85 of Synthetics(7J) (supra), where the Court had observed that 
after the enactment of IDRA, the power to issue licenses to manufacture both 
potable and non-potable liquor vested in Parliament. The three-Judge Bench 
rejected the argument by referring to observations in paragraph 86(a) 
Synthetics (7J) (supra) that States have the power to enact legislation in the 
nature of prohibiting potable liquor.40 In Vam Organic Chemicals v. State of 
UP41 [“Vam Organic I”], the rules issued under the UP Excise Act providing 
for power to issue licenses for denaturation of spirit and levy of denaturing fee 
was challenged. Justice A M Ahmadi (as the learned Chief Justice then was) 
writing for the two-Judge Bench noted that Synthetics(7J) (supra) did not 
 
37 “4. […] Levy as a fee under Entry 8 of List II of Seventh Schedule or excise duty under Entry 51 are different 
than cost of supervision charged under Section 58-A. The former has to stand the test of a levy being in 
accordance with law on power derived from one of the constitutional entries. Since Synthetics and Chemicals 
case [Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. v. State of U.P., (1990) ] finally brought down the curtain in 
respect of industrial alcohol by taking it out of the purview of either Entry 8 or 51 of List II of Seventh Schedule 
the competency of the State to frame any legislation to levy any tax or duty is excluded. But by that a provision 
enacted by the State for supervision which is squarely covered under Entry 33 of the Concurrent List which 
deals with production, supply and distribution which includes regulation cannot be assailed. The bench 
in Synthetics and Chemicals case [Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. v. State of U.P., (1990) ] made 
it clear that even though the power to levy tax or duty on industrial alcohol vested in the Central Government 
the State was still left with power to lay down regulations to ensure that non-potable alcohol, that is, industrial 
alcohol, was not diverted and misused as substitute for potable alcohol. This is enough to justify a provision 
like Section 58-A.” 
38 (1992) 
39 1996 
40 1996 [33] 
41 (1997) 

PART A 

hold that the State will not have any power over ‘industrial alcohol’.42 
Specifically, the two-Judge Bench referred to the observations in paragraph 
86(b) that the State may lay down regulations to ensure that non-potable 
alcohol is not misused as a substitute for potable alcohol. Justice Ahmadi 
observed that the process of denaturing was to ensure it was not misused as 
potable alcohol which would be covered by the observations in Synthetics 
(7J) (supra).43 
18. In Bihar Distillery v. Union of India44, the petitioner challenged the State’s 
cancellation of their license for preparing “rectified spirit” on the ground that 
the State lacked competence in view of Synthetics(7J) (supra). Justice B P 
Jeevan Reddy, writing for the two-Judge Bench held that the observations in 
paragraph 85 that Parliament has legislative competence over both potable 
and non-potable alcohol in view of the enactment of IDRA was a typographical 
error.45 The Bench further observed that Synthetics (7J) (supra) was mainly 
concerned with legislative competence over “denatured rectified spirit” (which 
was exclusively and wholly industrial alcohol) and not “rectified spirit” (which 
could be used directly for industrial purposes or denatured for industrial 
purposes or used to prepare liquor for human consumption.)46 This Court held 
that the line of demarcation must be drawn at the stage of clearance of the 
 
42 (1997) [13] 
43 (1997) [13,14] “14. It is to be noticed that the States under Entries 8 and 51 of List II read with 
Entry 84 of List I have exclusive privilege to legislate on intoxicating liquor or alcoholic liquor for human 
consumption. Hence, so long as any alcoholic preparation can be diverted to human consumption, the 
States shall have the power to legislate as also to impose taxed etc. In this view, denaturation of spirit is not 
only an obligation on the States but also within the competence of the States to enforce. [ emphasis supplied] 
44 (1997) 
45 (1997) [12] 
46 (1997) [23] 

PART A 

rectified spirit since it was used for the preparation of both potable alcohol 
(over which the State had competence under Entry 8 of List II) and non-
potable alcohol (over which the State did not have competence under Entry 
8 of List II): 
“23. The line of demarcation can and should be 
drawn at the stage of clearance/removal of the 
rectified spirit. Where the removal/clearance is for 
industrial purposes (other than the manufacture of 
potable liquor), the levy of duties of excise and all 
other control shall be of the Union but where the 
removal/clearance is for obtaining or manufacturing 
potable liquors, the levy of duties of excise and all 
other control shall be that of the States. This calls for 
a joint control and supervision of the process of 
manufacture of rectified spirit and its use and 
disposal.” 
19. The decision further elucidated the realm of competence of the State and the 
Union with respect to (a) industries engaged in manufacturing rectified spirit 
meant exclusively for supply to industries; (b) industries engaged exclusively 
in manufacturing rectified spirit for production of potable alcohol; and (c) 
industries engaged in both of the above. This demarcation will be discussed 
in detail in the subsequent sections of the judgment. To understand the 
manner in which Bihar Distillery (supra) interpreted the judgment in 
Synthetics (7J) (supra), it is sufficient at this stage to know that the 
demarcation of the competence was based on the purpose for which the 
rectified spirit was used. 
20. In Government of Haryana v. Haryana Brewery47, a two-Judge Bench 
noted the dissonance in multiple decisions interpreting the judgment in 
 
47 (1997) 

PART A 

Synthetics(7J) (supra) and directed that the papers may be placed before 
the Chief Justice for listing the matters before the Constitution Bench. In 
particular, the Bench noted the observations in (i) McDowell (supra) that the 
State has competence over production to sale of “intoxicating liquor”; (ii) Vam 
Organic I (supra), that State has competence over “denatured spirit”; and (iii) 
Bihar Distillery (supra) that the State’s competence over “rectified spirit’ 
depended on the purpose for which spirit was going to be used. The Bench 
also noted the observations of a three-Judge Bench in State of UP v. Modi 
Distillery48 that the State does not have the legislative competence to levy 
excise duty on the material or input that is used in the process of producing 
alcoholic liquor for human consumption by relying on Synthetics (7J) 
(supra)49. However, it must be noted that the Bench in Modi Distillery 
(supra), specifically recorded that it does not “express any opinion in regard 
to the power of the State to regulate the manufacture of alcoholic liquors for 
human consumption.”50 
21. Meanwhile, another two-Judge Bench51 referred the decision in Bihar 
Distillery (supra) to a larger Bench on the ground that it was prima facie 
contrary to the scheme of legislative competence as examined by the 
Constitution Bench of this Court and the three-Judge Bench decision of this 
Court in Modi Distillery (supra). The three-Judge Bench in Deccan Sugar & 
 
48 (1995) 
49 In this case, the challenge was to the levy of excise duty on wastage in the preparation of Indian Made 
Foreign Liquor (IMFL), pipeline wastage and obscuration (which is the process of adding caramel to spirit for 
the preparation of rum. The Bench relied on the observations in Synthetics (7J) that the phrase ‘alcoholic 
liquor for human consumption’ means the liquor that is consumable “as it is” to hold that the State does not 
have the power to levy excise duty on the stages of manufacture or preparation of the liquor. 
50 (1995) [14] 
51 Deccan Sugar and Abkari Co. Ltd. V. Commissioner of Excise, AP (1998) 

PART A 

Abkari v. Commissioner of Excise, AP52, without overruling the decision in 
Bihar Distillery (supra) observed that this Court in Synthetics (7J) held that 
the State Legislature does not have the competence to levy any excise duty 
on “rectified spirit”.53 Subsequently, another two-Judge in State of UP v. Vam 
Organic54 [“Vam Organic (II)”], dealt with the challenge to the levy of license 
fee on ‘denatured industrial alcohol’, a raw material used in the preparation of 
Organic compounds. In that case, the State had submitted that it had the 
power to levy the fee because denatured alcohol could be renatured to 
produce potable alcohol which is covered by paragraph 86(b) of the decision 
in Synthetics (7J). The Bench rejected the submission holding that the State 
Government is competent to levy fee to ensure that industrial alcohol (which 
the judgment used alternatively for ethyl alcohol) is not “surreptitiously 
converted into potable alcohol so that … the public is protected from 
consuming illicit liquor”. However, the Bench relying on Vam Organic I 
(supra) noted that the power stops with denaturing and that even if denatured 
alcohol can be re-natured, the States would not have the power to regulate it. 
The relevant observations are extracted below: 
“43. […] We are of the view that the State 
Government is competent to levy fee for the purpose 
of 
ensuring 
that 
industrial 
alcohol 
is 
not 
surreptitiously converted into potable alcohol so that 
the State is deprived of revenue on the sale of such 
potable alcohol and the public is protected from 
consuming such illicit liquor. But this power stops 
with the denaturation of the industrial alcohol. 
Denatured spirit has been held in Vam Organics-
I to be outside the seism of the State Legislature. 
 
52 (2004) 
53 (2004) [2] 
54 (2004) 

PART A 

Assuming that denatured spirit may by whatever 
process be renatured (a proposition which is 
seriously disputed by the respondents) and then 
converted into potable liquor, this would not give the 
State the power to regulate it. Even according to the 
demarcation of the fields of legislative competence 
as envisaged in Bihar Distillery industrial alcohol for 
industrial purposes falls within the exclusive control 
of the Union and according to Bihar Distillery 
“denatured rectified spirit, of course, is wholly and 
exclusively industrial alcohol.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
iv. 
The Reference Order(s) 
22. Separately, the State of UP levied an ad valorem licence fee on the sale of 
specially denatured alcohol by a wholesale vendor to those holding a licence 
under Form FL 4155 of the UP Excise Act. The fee was levied under the 
provisions of the UP Spirit Rules. The petitioner in RP Sharma v. State of 
UP56 instituted a writ petition before the Allahabad High Court, inter alia, for 
challenging the relevant rule and for a refund of the fee collected by the state. 
23. A Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court allowed the petition, relying on 
the decision in Vam Organic-II (supra) since the fee was levied on the sale 
of denatured spirit and not to ensure that rectified spirit was not diverted for 
human consumption. The State of UP preferred an appeal against the 
decision before this Court, resulting in the present proceedings. The Court 
issued notice on the matter and granted an interim stay of the judgment of the 
High Court on 27 August 2004. By its order dated 25 October 2007, a three-
 
55 Form FL 41 is meant for those industries where alcohol is used as a solvent but some alcohol continues 
to remain in final products such as lacquers, varnish, polishes, adhesives, anti-freezers and brake fluids. 
56 2004 SCC OnLine All 159. 

PART A 

Judge Bench of this Court in State of UP v. Lalta Prasad57 agreed with the 
submissions advanced by counsel for the appellants on the need for 
reconsideration by a larger bench. Numerous decisions were relied on to 
argue that Section 18G of the IDRA would not deprive the States of the power 
to enact laws with respect to Entry 33 of List III. The appellants argued that a 
notification ought to be issued under Section 18G for the field under Entry 33 
to be occupied. Justice Altmas Kabir, writing for the three-Judge Bench 
observed that that the question of whether Section 18G occupies the field of 
Entry 33 on the alcohol industry needs to be referred to a Constitution Bench: 
“26. … The 7 Judge Bench did not also have the 
benefit of the reasoning in Ch. Tikaramji’s case 
(supra) which had held that in the absence of any 
notified order under Section 18-G of the 1951 Act no 
question of repugnancy could arise, which Mr. 
Dwivedi urged, recognised the State’s power to 
legislate with regard to matters under Entry 33 of List 
III notwithstanding the provisions and existence of 
Section 18-G in the 1951 Act. 

27. Mr. Dwivedi then went on to refer to the judgment 
of this Court in SIEL Limited v. Union of India (1998) 
 wherein the learned Judges relying on the 
policy decision in Ch. Tikaramji’s case (supra) 
explained and distinguished the decision of the 7 
Judge Bench in Synthetics and Chemicals case 
(supra). […] 
28. Yet another case referred to by Mr. Dwivedi was 
the decision of a Constitution Bench of 5 Judges of 
this Court in Belsund Sugar v. State of Bihar (1999) 
 […]. In the said case also it was observed 
by the Constitution Bench that in the absence of 
promulgation of any statutory order covering the filed 
under Section 18-G it could not be said that mere 
existence of a statutory provision for entrustment of 
such power would result in regulation of purchase 
and sale of flour even if it is a scheduled industry. It 
may be noted that even while noting the decision of 
 
57 2007 

PART A 

the 7 Judge Bench in Synthetics and Chemicals 
case (supra) the Court placed reliance on the 
decision rendered in the SIEL Ltd. Case (supra). 
… 
35. On consideration of the aforesaid submissions 
made on behalf of the respective parties, we are of 
the view that Mr. Dwivedi’s submissions have a good 
deal of force, since by virtue of the interpretation 
of Section 18-G in the Synthetics and Chemicals 
case (supra) the power of the State to legislate 
with matters relating to Entry 33 of List III have 
been ousted, except to the extent as explained in 
the Synthetics and Chemicals case in paragraphs 
63-64 of the judgment, where the State’s power to 
regulate, as far as regulating the use of alcohol, 
which would include the power to make provisions to 
prevent and/or check industrial alcohol being used 
as intoxicant liquor, had been accepted. … As 
submitted by Mr. Dwivedi, the 7 Judge Bench did 
not have the benefit of the views expressed by 
this Court earlier in Ch. Tikaramji case (supra) 
where the State’s power to legislate under the 
Concurrent List stood ousted by legislation by 
the Central Government under Entry 52 of List I 
and also in view of Section 18-G of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. 
36. In our view, if the decision in the Synthetics and 
Chemicals case (supra) with regard to the 
interpretation of Section 18-G of the 1951 Act is 
allowed to stand, it would render the provisions of 
Entry 33 (a) of List III nugatory or otiose. 
37. We are, therefore, also of the view that this 
aspect of the matter requires reconsideration by a 
larger Bench of this Court, particularly, when the 
views expressed by 7 Judge Bench on the aforesaid 
question have been distinguished in several 
subsequent decisions of this Court, including the two 
decisions rendered by Constitution Benches of five 
Judges.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 

PART A 

24. This Court formulated six questions for adjudication by a larger Bench. They 
are reproduced below: 
a. 
Does Section 2 of the IDRA have any impact on the field covered by 
Section 18G of the same or Entry 33 of List III of the Seventh Schedule? b. 
Does Section 18G of the aforesaid Act fall under Entry 52 of List I of the 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, or is it covered by Entry 33 of List 
III thereof? c. 
In the absence of any notified order by the Central government under 
Section 18G of the above Act, is the power of the State to legislate in 
respect of matters enumerated in Entry 33 of List III ousted? d. 
Does the mere enactment of Section 18G of the IDRA, give rise to a 
presumption that it was the intention of the Central government to cover 
the entire field in respect of Entry 33 of List III so as to oust the States’ 
competence to legislate in respect of matters relating thereto? e. 
Does the mere presence of Section 18G of the IDRA, oust the State’s 
power to legislate in regard to matters falling under Entry 33(a) of List 
III? f. 
Does the interpretation given in Synthetics (supra), in respect of Section 
18G of the IDRA correctly state the law regarding the States’ power to 
regulate industrial alcohol as a product of the Scheduled industry under 
Entry 33 of List III in view of clause (a) thereof?

PART B 

25. The batch was placed before a Constitution Bench pursuant to the above 
order. By an order dated 8 December 2010, the Constitution Bench observed 
that the decision in Synthetics (7J) (supra) requires to be considered by a 
Bench of nine Judges and directed the matter be placed before a larger 
Bench: 
“Having meticulously examined the judgment of the 
Constitution Bench of seven learned Judges in the 
case of Synthetics and Chemical Limited & Ors. vs. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., reported in 1990 (1) 
SCC 109, we are of the view that the matter requires 
consideration by a Bench of nine Judges.” 
26. Though the three-Judge Bench by an order 25 October 2007 only referred the 
issue of the interplay between Section 18-G of the IDRA and Entry 33 of List 
III to the Constitution Bench, the order of the Constitution Bench categorically 
noted that the correctness of the decision in Synthetics (7J) ought to be 
reconsidered by a nine Judge Bench. Thus, this Bench is not limited to the 
questions framed by the three-Judge Bench. 
B. Submissions 
i. 
Appellants’ submissions 
27. This Court held in Synthetics (7J) (supra) that denatured spirit is industrial 
alcohol and is outside the jurisdiction of States under Entry 8, List II of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. It held that Entry 8, List II deals only 
with potable alcohol. Mr Dinesh Dwivedi, learned senior counsel representing 
the State of UP assailed the reasoning in Synthetics (7J) (supra) and argued 
that the States have jurisdiction over industrial alcohol. He submitted that: 

PART B 

a. 
Legislative entries are fields of legislation and must be read widely and 
construed liberally to maintain the federal balance. The exclusive 
jurisdiction of the States cannot be ousted by a Parliamentary 
enactment. Article 245 of the Constitution is subject to Article 246 and 
therefore the division of legislative powers must be given their full effect; 
b. 
The term ‘intoxicating liquors’ appearing in Entry 8 of List II of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution has a rich history and legislative 
practice accompanying it; 
c. 
The term ‘intoxicating liquors’ in Entry 8 of List II is borrowed from Entry 
31, List II of the 1935 Act. The 1935 Act was enacted by the British 
Parliament when the term ‘intoxicating liquors’ had attained a specific 
meaning. This meaning can be discerned from Section 110 of the 
License Consolidation Act 1910 and Sections 3, 4, 5, 116 of the Spirit 
Act 1880; 
d. 
In British legislations, the words ‘intoxicating liquors’ were defined to 
include spirit of all kinds including fermented and distilled spirits. The 
terms ‘intoxicating liquors’ and ‘spirit’ or ‘liquor of all kinds’ were used 
interchangeably in laws in England; 
e. 
Various provincial statutes defined the words ‘liquor’ and ‘sprit’ to include 
all liquids containing alcohol.58 These legislations were enacted with the 
knowledge that alcohol is used for industrial purposes. ‘Intoxicating 
 
58 Bombay Abkari Act 1878, Madras Abkari Act 1886, Bengal Excise Act 1909, Bihar Excise Act 1915, MP 
Excise Act 1915, Punjab Excise Act 1914, Chhattisgarh Excise Act 1915 and UP Excise Act 1910. 

PART B 

liquors’ in Entry 8 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution 
is a comprehensive phrase which connotes all liquids containing alcohol. 
Therefore, liquor and spirit including industrial alcohol have always been 
under the jurisdiction of States; 
f. 
The 1935 Act used different phrases in Entries 31 and 40 of List II of its 
Seventh Schedule. These entries are relatable to Entries 8 and 51 of List 
II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution respectively. Whereas the 
phrase ‘alcoholic liquor for human consumption’ is used in Entry 51 List 
II for taxation purposes, Entry 8 of List II uses the word ‘intoxicating 
liquors’. Similarly, Entry 84 of List I uses the phrase ‘alcoholic liquor not 
for human consumption’ and Article 47 uses the phrase ‘intoxicating 
drinks’. It would be irrational to presume that the framers of the 
Constitution used different phrases to mean the same thing; 
g. 
The term ‘liquors’ used in a legislation under Entry 31 of List II of the 
Seventh Schedule to the 1935 Act was accepted to mean all alcoholic 
liquids by this Court in FN Balsara (supra). The language of Entry 8 of 
List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution is borrowed from Entry 
31 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the 1935 Act and must be 
deemed to have the same meaning; 
h. 
Entry 84 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution uses the 
phrase ‘alcoholic liquor not for human consumption’. Usage of widely 
different terms in the Constitution would appear irrational if ‘intoxicating 
liquors’ was understood to exclude alcohols used in industries; 

PART B 

i. 
Entry 8 of List II includes alcohols used in industries. Since it is a specific 
entry in List II, alcohols used in industries will be excluded from the 
general entry on industries in Entry 24 of List II. The Union cannot take 
over any industry in pursuance of Entry 52 of List I unless the industry 
falls under Entry 24 of List II. Therefore Parliament cannot takeover 
industrial alcohol by making a declaration under the IDRA, which relates 
to Entry 52 of List I; 
j. 
Entry 8 of List II is not subject to any other entry in the Seventh Schedule. 
The Constitution makes specific mention where it intends a legislative 
field to be subject to other entries in the Seventh Schedule; and 
k. 
Synthetics (7J) (supra) fell into error by not considering the traditional 
meaning of ‘intoxicating liquors’. It also failed to notice all previous 
decisions, like Ch Tika Ramji v. State of UP,59 which defined ‘industry’ 
for the purpose of Entry 24 of List II and Entry of 52 List I and delineated 
its scope. It held that the product of an industry notified under the IDRA 
falls under Entry 33 of List III. 
28. Mr Dwivedi submitted that Entry 8 of List II governs the production, 
manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors. 
Since alcohols used in industries fall within the remit of ‘intoxicating liquors’ 
the State legislature has exclusive and inalienable jurisdiction in this field. 
However, in the alternative, the industry i.e. the production and manufacture 
of alcohols used in industries, would be governed by the general entry, Entry 
 
59. 

PART B 

24 of List II, which can be taken over by the Union upon a declaration under 
Entry 52, List I. The product of the industry would be governed by Entries 26 
and 27 of List II and would require a declaration under Entry 33 of List III for 
the Union to occupy the field. He argued that only the production and 
manufacture of industrial alcohol would be governed by the Union List even if 
the requirement of a declaration under Entry 52 of List I is met by Section 2 
of the IDRA read with Entry 26 of the First Schedule to the IDRA. However, 
no corresponding declaration is made under Section 18G of the IDRA to 
satisfy the requirements of Entry 33, List III. The Central government would 
be required to issue a notified order under Section 18G of the IDRA to claim 
control over the product. No such order has been issued and therefore the 
product remains in the exclusive domain of the State. Therefore, the Union 
has not occupied the field under Entry 33, List III. 
29. Mr Arvind Datar, learned senior counsel took us through the process of 
making denatured alcohol and potable liquor from molasses or grains. He 
argued that a license is required to make ENA and another license is required 
to make denatured spirit out of ENA. The process of denaturation is done 
before a State Excise Officer and the excise or duty payable against ENA and 
denatured spirit changes drastically. He argued that States can regulate 
potable alcohol as well as denatured spirits because the process of 
denaturing takes place within the same premises. 

PART B 

30. Mr Datar argued that the Synthetics (7J) (supra) must be overruled because: 
a. 
In para 74 of the judgment, this Court erred in assuming that industrial 
alcohol and rectified spirit are the same substance. Rectified spirit or 
ethyl alcohol, which is per se for human consumption, cannot be used 
interchangeably 
with 
industrial 
alcohol 
which 
has 
undergone 
denaturation. Ethyl alcohol or rectified spirit usually undergoes 
denaturation for the purpose of their use in industries. This would involve 
payment of fees and obtaining of licenses for the process; 
b. 
The expression ‘alcoholic liquor for human consumption’ in Entry 51 of 
List II was mistakenly read as ‘alcoholic liquor fit for human consumption’ 
which has a widely different meaning.60 For example, molasses despite 
not being capable of final consumption, as it is, would be alcohol for 
human consumption. It would undergo a process for making it fit for 
human consumption. However, that does not take away from the fact 
that molasses is intended for human consumption and is susceptible to 
excise. Alcoholic liquor for human consumption means that the alcoholic 
liquor is capable of being consumed by humans. It would fall under Entry 
51, List II while denatured alcohol would fall under Entry 84, List I; 
c. 
Everything except denatured spirit is alcohol for human consumption 
because it has the potential to be consumed by humans. The process of 
denaturation is carried out only to make the alcohol sufficiently 
disagreeable for human consumption to avoid its misuse. ENA and 
 
60 Paras 52, 54, Synthetics (supra). 

PART B 

rectified spirit may therefore be for human consumption and cease to be 
such upon undergoing denaturation. Mr Datar emphasized that the State 
does not have the power to levy tax on ENA in terms of Synthetics (7J) 
(supra) despite being for human consumption. Such an interpretation 
has drastically reduced the ability of States to levy tax under Entry 51 of 
List II; 
d. 
Unlike what was held in Synthetics (7J) (supra), there are no licenses 
to manufacture industrial alcohol because what is manufactured is only 
the ENA. ENA can be denatured for the purpose of alcohol used in 
industries. However, it does not require separate manufacturing units; 
e. 
The 158th Report of the Law Commission of India sought to address the 
practical problems which arose from the judgment of this Court in 
Synthetics (7J) (supra). It noted that the excise laws in force across 
different States in the country made no distinction between liquors used 
for human consumption or for other purposes. These pre-Constitution 
laws closely regulated and controlled the manufacture, possession, sale 
and transport of all alcohol and the Union government had no say in the 
matter. The Report clarified that there is no such thing as ‘industrial 
alcohol’ and that rectified spirit which has 95% alcohol may be used for 
industrial and non-industrial purposes. Accordingly, the report opined 
that litigation on the issue be avoided by bringing an amendment to the 
IDRA, namely, the substitution of item 26 in the First Schedule to the 
IDRA with the phrase “Fermentation Industries but not including alcohol.” 

PART B 

This was to enable the States to levy excise duties on alcohol which had 
been the case for over a century prior to the judgment of this Court in 
Synthetics (supra). Parliament did not amend the IDRA as suggested 
by the Law Commission but instead only excluded potable alcohol from 
the purview of the Union with retrospective effect from the 
commencement of the IDRA; and 
f. 
Synthetics (7J) (supra) must be overruled because it suffers from 
inconsistency in holding that the States have nothing to do with alcohol 
as well as holding that they can levy a regulatory fee.61 
31. Mr Datar submitted that the phrase ‘that is to say’ featuring in Entry 8 of List 
II of the Seventh Schedule connotes that the entry is exhaustive. Such a 
reading would mean that the entire journey of intoxicating liquor – from 
production to purchase and sale will fall within the remit of Entry 8 of List II. 
Since Entry 8 of List II is exhaustive and is not subject to any other entry in 
List I or List III, it cannot be transgressed by a law made by Parliament. 
32. Relying on the State of Madras v. Gannon Dunkerley,62 Mr Datar argued 
that to understand the meaning of ‘intoxicating liquors’, which has not been 
defined in the Constitution, the Court may identify if the expression is nomen 
juris and adopt the meaning which the word has obtained over a passage of 
time. The British law i.e. the Spirits Act 1880 includes denatured alcohol. 
Similarly, this Court in India Mica (supra) and FN Balsara (supra) held that 
 
61 Para 86. Synthetics (supra) 
62. 

PART B 

intoxicating liquor includes denatured spirits. Mr Datar also presented a list of 
legislation enacted at around the same time which included denatured alcohol 
in the same category as liquor. Mr Datar relied on the judgment of this Court 
in SIEL Ltd v. Union of India63 to argue that the subjects enumerated in Entry 
33, List III are excluded from Entry 52, List I. Lastly, he urged that since 
Section 18G of the IDRA does not specify that it extends to ‘production’, even 
the issuance of a notified order would not result in the occupation of the field 
by the Union with respect to production. 
33. Mr Jaideep Gupta, learned senior counsel, supplemented the case of the 
appellants. He submitted that if this Court were not inclined to hold that all 
alcohol falls under Entry 8 of List II then, in the alternative, the judgment of 
this Court in Synthetics (7J) (supra) must be overruled on the ground that 
the three-fold classification of Tika Ramji (supra) has not been followed. This 
Court in Tika Ramji (supra) devised a threefold classification as pre-
production, production and post-production. It held that only the second 
category i.e. production would be covered by the word ‘industry’. He 
submitted that the State therefore has the power to regulate the manufacture 
of ENA which would fall under the pre-production category. The State would 
also have the power to regulate the distribution of denatured alcohol. 
Buttressing this point, Mr Jaideep Gupta argued that it becomes imperative 
for the State to regulate the distribution of denatured alcohol because it may 
be renatured and distributed as potable alcohol which will lead to tragedies. 
 
63 (1998). 

PART B 

He argued that it becomes imperative for the State to regulate such instances 
under Entry 8 of List II as well as Entry 6 of List II which deals with public 
health. 
34. Mr V Giri, learned senior counsel, differed from other counsel for the 
appellants and submitted that denatured alcohol would be excluded from the 
ambit of the term ‘intoxicating liquors’ and would therefore fall under Entry 24 
of List II. However, he supported the arguments of the other counsel on a 
notified order under Section 18G of the IDRA being a prerequisite for 
Parliament to occupy the field under Entry 33 of List III. 
35. Mr Balbir Singh, learned senior counsel, and Mr Shadan Farasat and Dr. 
Vivek Sharma, learned counsel, have supported the above arguments on 
behalf of the appellants. ii. 
Respondent’s submissions 
36. Mr R Venkataramani, learned Attorney General for India appearing for the 
Union of India submitted that: 
a. 
The production, manufacture, trade and commerce, supply and 
distribution constitute a chain of economic activity and may not be looked 
at separately. Therefore, the process of production necessarily includes 
the series of actions of trade, commerce, supply and distribution. This 
implies that there is a symbiotic relationship between Entry 52 of List I 
and Entry of 33 List III and they may not be looked at separately. Entry 
52 of List I and Entry 33 of List III are a family of entries which are 

PART B 

interconnected. Entry 52 of List I can also include and touch upon all 
matters relating to an industry that is brought under the control of the 
Union. These matters can be production, trade, commerce, supply and 
distribution, etc.; 
b. 
Entry 52 of List I is a special entry uncontrolled by any other entry 
including Entry 8 of List II. It envisages the possibility of uniform control 
at the federal level of any declared industry by removing it from the 
individual jurisdiction of the States. Such uniform control serves the 
purpose of subserving the common good, equitable distribution, fair 
prices, utility of the products of an industry for serving the interests of all 
the States, etc.; 
c. 
To the extent that Parliament legislates with respect to an industry, the 
powers of the States under Entries 26 and 27 of List II are denuded. 
Similarly, the powers of the States under Entry 33 of List III are denuded 
if Parliament has occupied the field. Merely because a notified order is 
not issued would not leave the subject to be legislated upon by the 
States. This is because the lack of regulation or notification may be to 
serve the interest of the industry. The principle elucidated in Tika Ramji 
(supra) is not a principle of universal application i.e., in the absence of a 
notified order under Section 18G, the IDRA will not be a dormant law 
and the States will not derive their competence to deal with all or any 
matters otherwise exhaustively dealt with by Section 18G; 

PART B 

d. 
The observations in SIEL (supra) and Tika Ramji (supra) are incorrect 
in completely separating Entry 52 of List I from Entry 33 of List III. It is 
open to Parliament to enact laws in respect of trade and commerce, 
production, supply, distribution. The fact that the IDRA touches upon a 
certain field is enough to oust the jurisdiction of the State completely; 
e. 
All uses of liquids containing alcohol, other than those meant for human 
consumption, would fall under one category which is non-potable 
alcohol. Non-potable alcohol must fall outside Entry 8 of List II. 
Accordingly, the 2016 amendment to Entry 26 of Schedule I of the IDRA 
must be taken to have validly taken over non-potable alcohol; 
f. 
The focus of the framers while drafting the provisions concerning alcohol 
in the Constitution was temperance, regulation of trade and commerce 
in consumable alcohol preparations and to raise revenue; 
g. 
Entry 8 of List II cannot be interpreted to carve anything out of Entry 52, 
List I and Entry 33, List III. The judgment of this Court in ITC Ltd v. 
Agricultural Produce Market Committee,64 is inapplicable to the 
present case because ITC (supra) was determined in the context of 
overlapping entries. The ‘fermentation industry’ has been dealt with 
under the IDRA, which is a self-contained legislation; 
h. 
The term ‘intoxicating liquors’ in Entry 8 of List II does not include all 
classes of alcoholic liquids. The use of the phrase ‘that is to say’ 
 
64 (2002). 

PART B 

occurring in Entry 8 of List II only refers to the range of activities 
concerning one class of alcohol, namely potable alcohol, and is not 
referable to other classes of liquor; 
i. 
The framers of the Constitution may not have been aware of many 
industrial uses of alcohol and that all alcohol is neither consumable by 
humans nor intoxicating in nature; and 
j. 
The Report of the Industrial Alcohol Committee in 1920 observed that it 
was difficult to define ‘intoxicating liquors’ since there was no intrinsic 
difference between alcohol intended for potable and non-potable 
purposes. 
37. Mr Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General of India, argued that the 
adjudication on the interplay of Sections 2 and 18G of the IDRA with Entry 52 
of List I and Entry 33 of List III will have a bearing on other legislation and 
therefore the ruling in this case may not be restricted to the industry of alcohol. 
The division of legislative powers has undergone four stages: (a) the 
devolution of powers to the Federal legislature and the Provincial legislatures 
under the Devolution Rules, Government of India Act 1919;65 (b) the division 
of subjects between the Centre and the Provinces under the 1935 Act; (c) the 
draft Constitution which was placed before the Constituent Assembly; and (d) 
the entries as they were finally adopted in the Constitution. The Solicitor 
General submitted that: 
 
65 “1919 Act” 

PART B 

a. 
Some industries have always been considered as necessarily under 
Union control. This may be because it is in national interest, requires 
uniform regulation throughout the country, or when the industry or its 
products are sought to be equitably distributed. Entry 52 of List I is in 
furtherance of the federal principle; 
b. 
Entry 20 of the Central Subject List in the Devolution Rules framed under 
the 1919 Act which corresponds to Entry 52 of List I of the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution used the term ‘development’. A similar 
provision was inserted as Entry 34, List I of the Seventh Schedule to the 
1935 Act which also used the term ‘development’. This entry was further 
retained as Entry 64 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the draft 
Constitution. However, after debates in the Constituent Assembly the 
entry gained the form in which it appears today in Entry 52 of List I. The 
word ‘development’ was dropped from the entry but the word ‘control’ 
was retained. Therefore, the term ‘control’ must have been intended to 
connote a wider meaning than its earlier versions; 
c. 
This is borne out by the Constituent Assembly debates where Dr BR 
Ambedkar responded to amendments which sought to introduce the 
term ‘development and control’ in draft Entry 64, List I. He stated that the 
intention of the Drafting Committee was not merely to allow the Union to 
take over the development of an industry but also other aspects; 
d. 
Tika Ramji (supra) must be overruled because: 

PART B 

i. 
It did not consider the Constituent Assembly debates and wrongly 
restricted the meaning of industry to manufacturing and production 
only; 
ii. 
All aspects from the sourcing of raw materials to the distribution of 
products must fall within the powers of the Union to take control of 
an industry under Entry 52 of List I; 
iii. 
Article 366(12) did not define the term ‘goods’ to include raw 
materials in particular; 
iv. 
Entry 27 of List II is subject to Entry 33 of List III. The implication of 
this aspect was not sufficiently dealt with by the Court in Tika Ramji 
(supra); and 
v. 
It is expedient in public interest that alcohol is regulated by a 
Central legislation. Currently, the IDRA occupies the field, and any 
State law on alcohol, other than potable alcohol, will be repugnant 
to the IDRA. The holding in Tika Ramji (supra), that there must be 
a notified order in force pursuant to Section 18G for there to be 
repugnancy is not correct. Further, it was obiter dicta; 
e. 
Synthetics (7J) (supra) rightly did not consider the observations in Tika 
Ramji (supra) regarding the absence of a notified order by the Union 
government; 
f. 
The debates in the Constituent Assembly would show that the framers 
of the Constitution intended the Union to have some control over the 

PART B 

trade and commerce, production, supply and distribution which led to the 
introduction of a concurrent list entry which is identifiable as Entry 33 of 
List III; 
g. 
The power of taxation over potable alcohol has always been with the 
States and the power of taxation over non-potable alcohol has always 
been with the Union. This is borne out by the evolution of Entry 84 of List 
I and Entry 52 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. The 
control and the taxing power were cumulatively given to the provinces 
under Entry 16 of the provincial subject list of the Devolution Rules under 
the 1919 Act. Under the 1935 Act, Entry 45 of List I specifically excluded 
‘alcoholic liquor for human consumption’ from the domain of the Union 
and correspondingly included it under the State list as Entry 40 of List II; 
h. 
The term ‘intoxicating liquors’ in Entry 8 of List II means a beverage 
which has the effect of intoxication upon consumption. The term is not 
used elsewhere in the Seventh Schedule and instead the term ‘alcoholic 
liquor for human consumption’ is used in taxing entries. The 
terminological variation is because the incidence of tax is relevant in a 
taxing entry. Accordingly, since intoxication is not the incidence of 
taxation but the effect of consuming alcoholic liquor, it is not used in the 
taxing entries; 
i. 
Similarly, in Article 47, the term ‘intoxicating drinks’ is used to connote 
all drinks which have the effect of intoxication regardless of its alcoholic 
content, for example, Indian hemp;

PART C 

j. 
This Court, in Synthetics (7J) (supra), held that ‘intoxicating liquors’ is 
limited to ‘alcoholic liquor fit for human consumption’. FN Balsara 
(supra) defined liquor in a different context and did not deal with 
legislative competence; and 
k. 
Industrial alcohol is a subject which affects the entire nation and requires 
a uniform approach. This is evidenced by national laws and policies such 
as the Indian Power Alcohol Act 1948, Ethyl Alcohol (Price Control) 
Order 1966 and the National Biofuel Policy 2018. 
38. Mr Dhruv Agrawal, learned senior counsel; Mr Abhimanyu Bhandari; Mr Omar 
Ahmad; Ms Tahira Karanjawala; Ms Sansriti Pathak; Mr Pawan Shree 
Agarwal; Mr S Nandakumar; and Mr Akash Bajaj, learned counsel, have 
supported the above arguments on behalf of the respondent. 
C. The distinction between potable and non-potable alcohol 
39. Before delineating the issues that fall for the consideration of this Court, 
certain preliminary remarks on the process of preparation of potable alcohol, 
that is, alcohol that is used as a beverage must be made. The raw material 
for potable alcohol is generally molasses and grain66, which is fermented and 
distilled to produce rectified spirit. Rectified spirit, also known as ethyl alcohol, 
contains about 95% alcohol and some impurities which can affect flavour and 
aroma. Rectified spirit is used as a solvent in pharmaceutical and cosmetic 
products. Though rectified spirit is not generally used in the preparation of 
 
66 See FB Wright, Distillation of Alcohol and De-Naturing (2nd ed. 1907) 

PART C 

alcoholic beverages, it may be used to produce home-made liqueurs.67 Extra 
Neutral Alcohol is a highly purified form of ethanol which contains more than 
96% alcohol. ENA has a neutral taste and smell and is mostly used as a base 
for the preparation of premium beverages. Additionally, it is also used in the 
production of products like perfumes and mouthwashes. Absolute alcohol is 
ethanol that contains less than 1% water and more than 99% alcohol.68 The 
high purity of the alcohol makes it ideal for the preparation of pharmaceutical 
products, cosmetics and chemical manufacturing that require a water-free 
solvent.69 
40. ‘Industrial alcohol’ is a common term that is used to denote the alcohol that is 
used in industries. As indicated above, all the above three variants of ethanol 
are used in various industrial preparations. While ENA is usually used for the 
preparation of alcoholic beverages, rectified spirit is also used to prepare 
certain alcoholic beverages. Denaturation is a process by which ethanol is 
deliberately made undrinkable by adding chemicals known as ‘denaturants’ 
to make it poisonous or foul smelling and unsuited for ingestion by humans. 
Denaturants can be added to any of the three forms of ethanol (ENA, rectified 
spirit and absolute alcohol). Denatured alcohol is also further classified into 
‘Completely Denatured Alcohol’ and ‘Specially Denatured Alcohol’. Both 
these formulations contain denaturants making it unconsumable. However, in 
completely denatured alcohol, the denaturants cannot be easily removed 
 
67 Stuart Walton, Norma Miller, An Encyclipedia of Spirits & Liqueurs and How to Cook with Them (2000) 
68 See FB Wright, Distillation of Alcohol and De-Naturing (2nd ed. 1907) 
69 See KA Jacques, TP Lyons, DR Kelsall (ed), The Alcohol Textbook: A reference for the beverage, fuel and 
industrial alcohol industries (4th ed. Nottingham University Press) 

PART C 

while in ‘specially denatured alcohol’, they can be easily removed.70 In view 
of this complexity, where the materials for the preparation of potable alcohol 
are also used for the preparation of other products, a simplistic classification 
of ‘potable’ and ‘non-potable’ alcohol cannot be made for the purposes of this 
judgment. 
41. This is also evident from the submissions by counsel on the scope of Entry 
8 of List II. The counsel made the following submissions: 
a. 
Entry 8 only includes the final product of potable alcohol, that is alcoholic 
beverages for human consumption. Entry 8 does not include ENA which 
is a raw material for the preparation of beverage71; 
b. 
Entry 8 includes ENA and potable alcohol72; 
c. 
Entry 8 includes ENA, potable alcohol and the process of ‘denaturing’ 
ENA73; and 
d. 
Entry 8 includes ENA, potable alcohol and denatured alcohol74. 

70 See Alcohol Denaturants-Specification (Second Revision), ICS 71.100.80 
71 See submissions of Mr Tushar Mehta, learned SG. 
72 See submissions of V Giri, counsel for petitioner 
73 See Vam Organic (II) 
74 See submissions of Mr Dwivedi and Mr Datar senior counsel 

PART D & E 

D. Issues 
42. With the above preliminary observations, we have formulated the following 
issues: 
a. Whether Entry 52 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution 
overrides Entry 8 of List II; 
b. Whether the expression ‘intoxicating liquors’ in Entry 8 of List II of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution includes alcohol other than 
potable alcohol; and 
c. Whether a notified order under Section 18G of the IDRA is necessary 
for Parliament to occupy the field under Entry 33 of List III of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. 
E. Analysis 
i. 
The constitutional distribution of legislative power 
43. One of the prominent features of a federal Constitution is the distribution of 
legislative powers between the Union and the States. Article 246 provides for 
the distribution of legislative powers between Parliament and the State 
Legislatures. Clause (1) of Article 246 stipulates that Parliament has exclusive 
power to make laws with respect to any matter enumerated in the Union List 
(List I to the Seventh Schedule) notwithstanding anything in the State or the 
Concurrent Lists. Clause (2) stipulates that Parliament and the State 
Legislatures have the power to legislate on any matter enumerated in the 
Concurrent List (List III of the Seventh Schedule) subject to the power of 

PART E 

Parliament under Clause (1) but notwithstanding the power of the State 
Legislatures under Clause (3). Clause (3) provides that subject to clauses (1) 
and (2), the State Legislatures have the power to legislate on any matter 
enumerated in the State List (List II of the Seventh Schedule) of the Seventh 
Schedule. Further, Clause (4) provides for the power of Parliament to enact 
laws for Union Territories. It states that Parliament may enact laws for any 
part of the territory of India which is not included in a State. This power 
includes the power of Parliament to make laws with respect to entries 
enumerated in the State list, for Union Territories. 
44. The federal balance of the distribution of legislative powers between the 
Union and the States rests on the interpretation of the phrase 
“notwithstanding” in Clause (1) of Article 246 and “subject to” in Clause (3) of 
Article 246. It is more than clear that the phrases provide predominance to 
Parliament over State Legislatures. The federal balance lies not on the 
recognition that the Constitution grants Parliament predominant legislative 
power but on the identification of the scope of such predominance. The scope 
of the non-obstante clause in Article 246(1) and the subjugation clause in 
Article 246(3) must not be interpreted in isolation but along with the 
substantive provisions of the clauses. Clause (1) of Article 246 grants 
Parliament the “exclusive power” to enact laws with respect to matters in List 
I. Similarly, Clause (3) of Article 246 grants the Legislature of States, the 
“exclusive power” to enact laws with respect to matters in List II. On a holistic 
interpretation of the provisions, it is clear that the non-obstante clause in 
Article 246(1) and the subjugation clause in Article 246(3) do not permit 

PART E 

Parliament to enact laws with respect to the entries in List II. Each of the 
legislative bodies are sovereign and supreme within the sphere that is 
allocated to them in the Seventh Schedule.75 What then is the purpose of the 
non-obstante and subjugation clause? It is crucial to note that Clause (1) of 
Article 246 stipulates that the power of Parliament to make laws with respect 
to entries in List I is ‘notwithstanding’ not just the power to make laws with 
respect to matters in the Concurrent list but also the power to make laws with 
respect to matters in the State List. A combined reading of the non-obstante 
clause and the subjugation clause along with the use of the phrase “exclusive 
power” means only one thing, that when there is a conflict between the entries 
in List I and List II, the power of Parliament supersedes. 
45. The judgment of this Court in Hoechst Pharmaceuticals v. State of Bihar76 
is the locus classicus on the constitutional scheme of legislative distribution. 
The decision holds that when there is a conflict between an entry in List I and 
entry in List II which is not ‘capable of reconciliation’77, the power of 
Parliament to legislate with respect to a field covered by List I must supersede 
the exercise of power by the State legislature to that extent.78 The judgment 
also proceeded to lay down the manner in which the entries in List I and List 
II must be reconciled79: 
 
75 Jindal Stainless Steel v. State of Haryana, (2017) [617] 
76 (1983) 
77 Also see In re Central Provinces and Berar Act 14 of 1938, AIR 1939 FC 1 
78 (1983) [38] 
 FC 1 [41] 

PART E 

a. In case of a seeming conflict between the entries in the two lists, the 
entries must be read together without giving a narrow and restricted 
meaning to either of the entries in the Lists; and 
b. If the entries cannot be reconciled by giving a wide meaning, it must 
be determined if they can be reconciled by giving the entries a 
narrower meaning. 
46. In State of WB v. Committee for Protection of Democratic Rights80, a 
Constitution Bench held that the principle of federal supremacy in Article 246 
can be resorted to only when there is an ‘irreconcilable direct conflict’ 
between the entries in List I and List II.81 
ii. 
Scheme of legislative entries 
47. The lists in the Seventh Schedule demarcate the legislative fields between 
Parliament and the State Legislatures. They do not confer power but stipulate 
broad fields of legislation.82 The source of the power of Parliament and State 
Legislatures emanates from Articles 245 and 246 of the Constitution. These 
provisions in the Constitution have been borrowed from Sections 99 and 100 
of the Government of India Act 193583 with necessary modifications. The 
demarcation of legislative fields is based on a deliberate design as well as on 
the principles of federalism. Matters requiring coordination between different 
regions of the country or of national importance have been placed in the field 
 
80 (2010) 
81 (2010) [27]; Also see In re C.P & Berar Taxation Act, AIR 1939 FC 1 
82 See Calcutta Gas Co. (Proprietary) Ltd. v. State of W.B.,; Union of India v. HS 
Dhillon, (1971); TMA Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka, (2002). 
83 “1935 Act” 

PART E 

of Parliament. Matters requiring localized focus and limited or no coordination 
between States have been placed in the State List. Fields of legislation which 
may require either uniform legislation for the entire nation or context and 
region-specific accommodation, depending on the circumstance, are placed 
in the Concurrent List. Moreover, the three lists make a clear distinction 
between general entries and taxation entries. The power of taxation cannot 
be derived from a general entry.84 The entries in the legislative lists do not 
cast an obligation to legislate or to legislate in a particular manner. Within the 
confines of an entry, the legislature exercises plenary power subject to the 
provisions of the Constitution.85 
48. Numerous language devices are used in the Seventh Schedule to prevent the 
conflict of entries and ensure a clear demarcation of the fields of entry. The 
entries in List II use the following language devices: 
a. 
‘Subject to’ a specific provision of List I or List III: Entries 2,17,22, 
24,26,27,33 and 57; 
b. 
‘Subject to’ provisions of an entire list with regard to the subject matter: 
Entry 13; 
c. 
‘Not specified in’ or ‘other than those specified in’ List I: Entries 13, 32 
and 63; and 
 
84 State of Karnataka v. State of Meghalaya, (2023); Union of India v. HS Dhillon, (1971); MPV Sundararamier & Co. v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1958) 9 STC 298; R Abdul Quader & Co. v. 
STO, (1964); HM Seervai, Constitutional Law of India, Volume 3 (4th edn.) [25.57] 2340-2341. 
85 United Province v. Atiqa Begum, (1940) FCR 110; Constitution of India, Article 13 

PART E 

d. 
‘Subject to’ law made by Parliament or ‘subject to’ any limitations 
imposed by Parliament by law: Entries 37 and 50. 
49. With respect to category (a) above, where an Entry in List II is subject to an 
entry or entries in List I or List III, the extent of the legislative field covered by 
the entry in List II is circumscribed by the domain covered by the entries in 
Lists I or III to which the entry in List II is subject. For example, Entry 22 of 
the State List deals with “courts of wards subject to the provisions of Entry 34 
of List I”. Entry 34 of List I provides for “Courts of wards for the estates of 
Rulers of Indian States”. The legislative field in Entry 22 of List II is wider than 
the field of Entry 34 of List I. Hence the subjection of Entry 22 of List II to Entry 
34 of List I indicates that that the field assigned to the States is circumscribed 
to the extent of the field assigned to Parliament in Entry 34 of List I. Barring 
the express legislative device of subordination, the States have complete 
power to enact laws over the fields specified in List II of the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constitution. The authority of the State Legislature to enact laws on 
those entries of List II which are not expressly made subject to other entries 
has maintained the federal balance of legislatures under the Constitution.86 
50. The devices of language used in the Seventh Schedule prevent the overlap 
between entries in various Lists. Now, what of the instances where there is 
an overlap between provisions in different entries but the Constitution does 
not use a device to resolve it? It must be recalled that the federal supremacy 
of Parliament on legislative competence can only be resorted to when there 
 
86 ibid 

PART E 

is an ‘irreconcilable direct conflict’ between entries in different lists. It is crucial 
to note the difference between ‘overlap’ and ‘conflict’. An overlap occurs when 
two or more things or fields partially intersect. However, a conflict occurs 
when two or more entries operate in the exactly same field. Courts while 
dealing with an overlap of legislative entries must endeavour to diminish the 
overlap and not enhance it by including it in the field of conflict. The federal 
supremacy accorded to Parliament ticks in at the stage of ‘conflict’. 
51. The legislative entries must be given a wide meaning. All incidental and 
ancillary matters which can be fairly and reasonably comprehended must be 
brought within them87. However, if there is an overlap between two entries 
the Court must endeavour to interpret the entries harmoniously. While 
interpreting the entries harmoniously, it must be ensured that no entry is 
rendered redundant. This principle of construction applies equally to entries 
within the same List and entries within different lists.88 The principle of 
parliamentary supremacy must be applied only when the attempted 
reconciliation by the above methods of interpretation fails. iii. 
The field covered by Entry 52 of List I and Entry 8 of List II 
52. Entry 8 of List II reads as follows: 
“Intoxicating liquors, that is to say, the production, 
manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale 
of intoxicating liquors”. 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
87 United Provinces v. Atiqa Begum, (1940) FCR 110; Western India Theatres Ltd. V. Cantonment Board, 
Elel Hotels & Investments Ltd. V. Union of India; Godfrey Phillips India Ltd. V. State of UP (2005) 
88 See Harakchand Ratanchand Banthia v. Union of India, (1969) 

PART E 

a. The scope of Entry 8 
I. 
The meaning of ‘that is to say’ 
53. Entry 8 of List II deals with ‘intoxicating liquor’. The Entry specifies the scope 
of the provision by the usage of the phrase ‘that is to say’. The Entry stipulates 
that it includes everything from the production to the sale of intoxicating liquor, 
with the use of the expressions ‘production, manufacture, possession, 
transport, purchase and sale’. The Entry specifies the breadth of the provision 
by couching it in over broad terms. There are a few entries which provide such 
a specification, by the use of the words “that is to say”89. Otherwise, the 
general language of the Seventh Schedule is to merely mention the field such 
as ‘gas and gas-works’90, or ‘fisheries’91, or ‘census’92, or ‘public health and 
sanitation; hospitals and dispensaries’93. Entry 25 of List II specifies ‘gas and 
gas-works’ without clarifying the scope of the provision. Similarly, Entry 21 of 
List II specifies ‘fisheries’. Even within the entries that provide some 
specification, there are two kinds. First, entries where the meaning of the field 
is clarified. For example, Entry 71 of List I deals with the field of ‘Union 
Pensions’. The phrase ‘that is to say’ is then used to specify the meaning of 
the phrase ‘Union Pensions’ as pensions payable by the Government of India 
or out of the Consolidated Fund of India94. This specification operates more 
or less as a definition clause. Second, the phrase is used to specify the scope 
 
89 Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India; Entry 71 to List I, Entry 5 to List II, Entry 13 of List II, Entry 
17 of List II, Entry 18 of List II, Entry 42 of List II 
90 Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India; Entry 25 of List II 
91 Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India; Entry 21 of List II 
92 Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India; Entry 69 of List I 
93 Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India; Entry 6 of List II 
94 Other examples include Entry 13 of List II which specifies the meaning of ‘communications’ to mean roads, 
bridges, ferries and Entry 42 of List II which specifies State pensions to mean pensions payable by the State 
or out of the Consolidated Fund of the State. 

PART E 

of the provision. For example, Entry 5 of List II reads as “local government, 
that is to say, the constitution and powers of municipal corporations, 
improvement trusts…”95 Entry 8 falls in the latter category. 
54. The next question is whether the phrase ‘that is to say’ used in Entry 8 limits 
or explains the scope of the entry. The interpretation of the phrase ‘that is to 
say’ has fallen for the consideration of this Court earlier in numerous cases.96 
This Court has adopted both views. Benches have interpreted the expression 
as a limiting as well as an explanatory device. In Bhola Prasad v. The King 
Emperor97, the Federal Court dealt with the meaning of the phrase ‘that is to 
say’ in Entry 31 of the Provincial List in the 1935 Act. Entry 31 of the Provincial 
List read as “Intoxicating liquors and narcotic drugs, that is to say, the 
production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale of 
intoxicating liquors, opium and other narcotic drugs.” The issue was whether 
the Provincial Government had the competence to issue a notification 
prohibiting the possession of intoxicating liquor. The Federal Court held that 
the Provincial Government had the competence to prohibit though Entry 31 
does not expressly grant the power to ‘prohibit’. The Court noted that the 
words that follow the phrase ‘that is to say’ were explanatory or illustrative and 
not words of either amplification or limitation. However, in other judgments 
 
95 Other examples include Entry 17 of List II which reads as “water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation 
and canals, drainage and embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 
56 of List I” and Entry 18 of List II which reads as ‘Land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land tenures 
including the relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural 
land; land improvement and agricultural loans; and colonization. 
96 State of Karnataka v. Balaji Computers; Bansal Wire Industries v. State of UP (2011); Sait 
Rikaji Furtarnal v. State of AP (1991) Supp (1) SCC 202; CST v. Popular Trading Company (2000); State of Punjab v. Devans Modern Brewaries (2004); State of Bombay v. Bombay Education 
Society (1954) 
97 (1942) 4 FCR 17 

PART E 

dealing with taxing provisions, this Court has held that the expression ‘that is 
to say’ is employed to exhaustively enumerate.98 While interpreting the 
expression ‘that is to say’, it must not be lost that it features in the legislative 
list which must be interpreted widely and to include all ancillary items. The 
interpretation of taxing statutes (which must be construed strictly) and 
legislative entries in the Seventh Schedule(which are required to be construed 
widely and liberally) cannot be the same. This was noticed by the Constitution 
Bench in State of Bombay v. Bombay Education Society99. 
55. In State of Punjab v. Devans Modern Breweries100, the levy of tax on the 
import of potable liquor manufactured in other States was challenged. Justice 
SB Sinha in his dissenting opinion, considered the scope of the words ‘that is 
to say’ in Entry 8 of List II. Relying on the decisions in CST v. Popular 
Trading101 and Indian Aluminium Co. Ltd. v. Assistant Commissioner of 
Commercial Taxes (Appeals)102, the learned Judge held that the expression 
‘that is to say’ in Entry 8 of List II is descriptive, enumerative and exhaustive 
 
98 State of Karnataka v. Balaji Computers; Bansal Wire Industries v. State of UP, (2011) [20]; Sait 
Rikhaji Furtarnal v. State of AP (1991) Supp (1) SCC 202 [4]; CST v. Popular Trading Company (2005) 
99 (1954); “12. […] He points out that one of the meanings of the word “namely” as given in Oxford 
English Dictionary, Vol. VII, p. 16 is “that is to say” and he then refers us to the decision of the Federal Court 
in Bhola Prasad v. King Emperor [Bhola Prasad v. King Emperor,: (1942) 4 FCR 17 
at p. 25] where it was stated that the words “that is to say” were explanatory or illustrative words and not 
words either of amplification or limitation. It should, however, be remembered that those observations were 
made in connection with one of the legislative heads, namely, Entry 31 of the Provincial Legislative List. The 
fundamental proposition enunciated in R. v. Burah [R. v. Burah, (1878) LR 3 AC 889 (PC)] was that Indian 
Legislatures within their own sphere had plenary powers of legislation as large and of the same nature as 
those of Parliament itself. In that view of the matter every entry in the legislative list had to be given the widest 
connotation and it was in that context that the words “that is to say”, relied upon by the learned Attorney 
General, were interpreted in that way by the Federal Court. To do otherwise would have been to cut down 
the generality of the legislative head itself. The same reason cannot apply to the construction of the 
Government Order in the present case for the considerations that applied in the case before the Federal 
Court have no application here.” [emphasis supplied] 
100 (2004) 
101 (2000) 
102 (2001) 

PART E 

and circumscribes the scope of the said entry to a great extent.”103 However, 
the opinion did not consider the decisions in Bhola Prasad (supra) and State 
of Bombay v. Bombay Education Society104 and instead referred to the 
interpretation of the expression in taxing statutes. For the above reasons, the 
expression ‘that is to say’ in Entry 8 of List II cannot be interpreted to 
circumscribe the scope of the entry. The words that follow ‘that is to say’ are 
illustrative and explanatory of the scope of the provision. The expression does 
not limit the scope of the entry. Thus, the scope of Entry 8 of List II cannot be 
limited to the ‘production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and 
sale’ of Intoxicating Liquor. 
II. 
Product or industry based entry 
56. The Seventh Schedule differentiates between an industry and the product of 
the industry. Entry 24 of List II deals with industries. Entries 26 and 27 of List 
II deal with products of industries. Entry 26 deals with “Trade and commerce 
within the State subject to the provisions of Entry 33 of List III”. Entry 27 
provides for “Production, supply and distribution of goods subject to the 
provisions of Entry 33 of List III”. Entry 33 of List III enables both Parliament 
and the State Legislature to enact laws with respect to trade and commerce 
in, and the production, supply and distribution of, inter alia, the products of the 
industry where control by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be in 
the public interest. Thus, if the Union has control over an industry under Entry 
52 of List I, both Parliament and the State Legislature will have the 
 
103 (2001) [158] 
104 (1954) 

PART E 

competence with respect to the products in terms of Entry 33 of List III. Under 
Entries 26 and 27 of List II, the State Legislature has the exclusive power to 
enact laws with respect to the products of the industries covered by Entry 24 
of List II. Parliament has the competence to legislate on any ‘industry’ 
provided that it satisfies the condition stipulated in Entry 52 of List I (control 
by the Union being declared by a law of Parliament to be in the public interest). 
The necessary corollary of the enactment of the law under Entry 52 is that the 
products of the industry are shifted to the Concurrent list from the State List. 
57. The scope of Entry 8 must be interpreted in this background. If Entry 8 is a 
product-based Entry, it will only cover the consumable end-product. However, 
if it is an industry-based Entry, it would cover the production of the product as 
well.105 Entries 24, 26 and 27 of List II are general entries relating to industry 
and the products of the industries. A distinction between industry and product 
is made in List II to give effect to the legislative scheme by which certain 
industries may be controlled by the Union under Entry 52 of List I but products 
of those industries which are placed in the Concurrent list under Entry 33. To 
give effect to this unique demarcation, it was necessary to separate the 
entries relating to industries and products in List II. However, Entry 8 is a 
specific entry dealing only with ‘intoxicating liquor’. The distinction made 
between industry and products in the general entries to give effect to the 
scheme of legislative distribution on industries is not adopted in Entry 8. We 
have in the preceding sections emphasised that the primary principle of 
 
105 See Tika Ramji v. State of UP, AIR 1956 SC 676 

PART E 

interpreting entries in the legislative lists is to provide a wide meaning to them. 
A narrow interpretation must only be adopted when either (a) the scope of the 
Entry is limited by the use of language devices; or (b) a wide interpretation 
creates an overlap between entries within the same list or different lists. For 
example, Entry 25 of List II provides States the competence over “gas and 
gas-works”. This Court in Calcutta Gas Company (supra) did not interpret 
the Entry to only include the product of ‘gas and gas works’ but rather 
interpreted it to include the industry. This is the construction which is in 
consonance with settled principles of interpretation. 
58. Entry 8 in itself indicates that the intent is to ensure that it is read as broadly 
as possible. The Entry itself covers the ‘production, manufacture, possession, 
transport, purchase and sale’ of intoxicating liquors. Thus, it is clear that the 
Entry seeks to regulate everything from the stage of the raw materials to the 
consumption of ‘intoxicating liquor’. Entry 8 of List II includes both the industry 
and the product of ‘intoxicating liquor’. b. Scope of Entry 52 of List I: the absence of “to the extent to which” 
59. Entry 24 of List II deals with ‘Industries’. The entry is subject to entries 7 and 
52 of List I. Entry 7 of List I deals with industries which are declared by 
Parliament by law to be necessary for the purpose of defence or for the 
prosecution of war. Entry 52 of List I deals with industries, the control of which 
by the Union is declared by Parliament to be expedient in the public interest. 
The State Legislature will have the competence to enact laws with respect to 
‘industries’. However, Parliament has the power to deal with such industries 

PART E 

which are necessary to be in the control of the Union for: (a) public interest; 
(b) defence; and (c) prosecution of war. Thus, the State Legislature will have 
the competence to enact laws with respect to all industries, unless Parliament 
has taken control of the industry under Entries 52 or 7 of List I. 
60. A comparison may be drawn to Entry 54 of List I and Entry 23 of List II to cull 
out the scope of Entry 52 of List I. Entry 23 of List II deals with the “regulation 
of mines and mineral development subject to the provisions of List I with 
respect to regulation and development under the control of the Union.” Entry 
54 of List I deals with the “regulation of mines and mineral development to 
the extent to which such regulation and development under the control of 
Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in public interest.” 
The expression ‘to the extent to which’ is absent in Entry 52 of List I. In 
Mineral Area Development Authority v. M/s Steel Authority of India106, a 
nine-Judge Bench of this Court dealt with the scope of Entry 52 of List I and 
in particular, the purport of the expression “to the extent to which”. One of the 
contentions before the nine-Judge Bench was that the State Legislature does 
not have any power under Entry 23 of List II because the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act 1957107 is a complete code that occupies 
the entire field relating to regulation of mines and mineral development. 
Rejecting the argument, the majority held that the words “to the extent to 
which” indicates that “besides declaring that it is taking under its control any 
subject relating to the regulation of mines and mineral development, 

107 “MMDRA” 

PART E 

Parliament has to specify the extent to which the Parliamentary regulation is 
deemed expedient in the public interest.”108 
61. As opposed to Entry 54, Entry 52 does not use the words “to the extent to 
which”. The question is whether the State Legislature is denuded from 
legislating on an industry which is controlled under the IDRA or any other 
similar legislation enacted under Article 246 read with Entry 52. Section 2 of 
IDRA provides that the Union takes control over the industries specified in the 
First Schedule. In Ishwari Khetan Sugar Mills v. State of UP109, a 
Constitution Bench of this Court dealt with the constitutional validity of the UP 
Sugar Undertakings (Acquisition) Act 1971 which was challenged on the 
ground that the State Legislature lacked the legislative competence. While 
demarcating the scope of Entry 52 of List I and Entry 24 of list II, Justice D A 
Desai (writing for himself and two other Judges), observed that the degree 
and extent of control acquired by Parliament upon a declaration under Entry 
52 would depend on the legislation enacted “spelling out the degree of control 
assumed”. The relevant observations are extracted below: 
“7. […] Entry 52 List I on its own language does not 
contemplate a bald declaration for assuming control 
over specified industries, but the declaration has to 
be by law to assume control of specified industries 
in public interest. The legislation enacted pursuant to 
the power to legislate acquired by declaration must 
be for assuming control over the industry and the 
declaration has to be made by law enacted, of which 
declaration would be an integral part. Legislation for 
assuming control containing the declaration will spell 
out the limit of control so assumed by the 
declaration. Therefore, the degree and extent of 
 
108 [158-161] 
109 (1980) 

PART E 

control that would be acquired by Parliament 
pursuant to the declaration would necessarily 
depend upon the legislation enacted spelling out the 
degree of control assumed. A mere declaration 
unaccompanied by law is incompatible with Entry 52 
List I. A declaration for assuming control of specified 
industries coupled with law assuming control is a 
prerequisite for taking legislative action under Entry 
52 List I. The declaration and the legislation pursuant 
to declaration to that extent denude the power of 
State Legislature to legislate under Entry 24 List II.” 
 
62. The opinion of Justice D A Desai referred to the judgments of this Court in 
Baijnath Kedia v. State of Bihar110 and State of Haryana v. Chanan Mal111 
“on an identical Entry 54, List I.”112 It was also argued that Section 2 of 
IDRA113, unlike Section 2 of MMDRA114 does not provide that the Union shall 
take control “to the extent herewith provided”, and thus, IDRA takes full control 
over the scheduled industries. Rejecting the argument, Justice D A Desai 
noted that the “words of limitation on the power to make declaration are ‘by 
law’”.115 Justice R S Pathak, as the learned Chief Justice then was, (writing 
for himself and Justice Koshal) observed that he would refrain from 
expressing any opinion on this issue and that the challenge to the validity of 
the impugned enactment could be disposed of without a reference to Entries 
52 of List I and 24 of List II.116 
 
110 (1970) 
111 (1976) 
112 (1980) [8] 
113 “2. Declaration as to expediency of control by Union: It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public 
interest that the Union should take under its control the industries specified in the First Schedule.” 
114 “2. Declaration as to expediency of Union Control.- It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public 
interest that the Union should take under its control the regulation of mines and the development of minerals 
to the extent hereinafter provided.” [emphasis supplied] 
115 (1980) [11] 
116 “44.[…] It seems to us that the observations made by this Court in Hingir-Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. v. State 
of Orissa [AIR 1961 SC 459: (1961) ], State of Orissa v. M.A. Tulloch and Co. [AIR 1964 SC 
1284: (1964) ], Baijnath Kadio v. State of Bihar [(1969), 847-848: AIR 1970 SC 1436: (1970), 113] and State of Haryana v. Chanan Mal [(1977), 351: AIR 1976 SC 1654: (1976), 700] cannot be of assistance in this behalf. In each of those cases, the declaration made 

PART E 

63. In ITC (supra), another Constitution Bench briefly dealt with this issue. It was 
argued that this Court in Ishwari Khetan (supra) equated Entry 52 of List I 
with Entry 54 of List II. Justice Y K Sabharwal, as the learned Chief Justice 
then was, writing for the majority specifically rejected the argument that Entry 
54 was equated with Entry 52 and observed that the “decision does not adopt 
the mines and minerals cases for the purposes of considering the scope of 
Entry 52 of List I.”117 
64. We agree with the opinion of Justice Desai in Ishwari Khetan (supra). Entries 
52 and 54 of List I (and entries 23 and 24 of List II) are unique. Though entries 
23 and 24 stipulate that they are subject to specific entries in List I, they are 
actually subject to the law made by Parliament under the entries. The entries 
are unique in the sense that the scope of an entry in the State List is not 
subjected to another entry in the Union List but rather by the law made by 
Parliament. The consequence of this is that when stretched to the extreme, 
Parliament may by law declare that all industries must be in the control of the 
Union. This would enable Parliament to render an entry in the State List 
otiose. As held in the preceding section of this judgment, the entries must be 
interpreted to maintain the federal balance. When there are two possible 
interpretations of the entries, the Court must choose the one that maintains 
the federal balance. Entries 24 of List I and 52 of List II maintain the federal 
balance in a unique way. The members of the Constituent Assembly thought 
 
by Parliament in the concerned enactment limited the control of the mines and the development of minerals 
to the extent provided in the enactment. Whether the terms in which the declaration has been framed in 
Section 2 of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act — a declaration not expressly limiting control 
of the specific industries to the extent provided by the Act — can be construed as being so limited is a matter 
which, we think, we should deal with in some more appropriate case.” 
117 (2002) [31] 

PART E 

it fit to include ‘industries’ as a legislative field in the State List because it 
requires localized focus. If the draftspersons thought otherwise, they could 
have included the Entry in the Union List or even the Concurrent List. The 
unique placement of these entries must be considered and given due effect. 
The entries must not be interpreted in a manner that would, in effect for all 
purposes, place the entry in the Concurrent List. 
65. The question is whether an implied limitation can be read into Entry 52 of List 
I in the absence of the expression “to the extent to which”. If an implied 
limitation is not read into the Entry, Parliament by a simple declaration may 
take over the complete industry and subject the power of the State Legislature 
to make any provision with respect to that industry to the power of Parliament. 
This interpretation diminishes the scope of competence of the State 
Legislature under Entry 24 of List II. Such an interpretation completely tilts the 
federal balance that entries 52 of List I and 24 of List II seek to maintain. The 
power of Parliament in Entry 52 of List I is defined by the phrase ‘control’. 
The Entry does not read as “industries, declared by Parliament by law to be 
expedient in the public interest.” The Entry states “Industries, the control of 
which by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the 
public interest.” The law enacted by Parliament must not be an abstract 
declaration but must specify the extent of control that is necessary to be taken 
in public interest. The State Legislature will have the competence to legislate 
with respect to the field which is not the subject matter of control. The 
legislative competence of the State Legislature is only denuded to the extent 

PART E 

of the ‘control’ by the Union declared by the law of Parliament to be expedient 
in the public interest. c. Reconciling the potential overlap between Entry 52 of List I and Entry 8 of 
List II 
66. Having discerned the scope of Entry 52 of List I, it next needs to be considered 
if Entry 52 of List I and Entry 8 of List II overlap, and if they overlap, whether 
they can be reconciled. 
67. At this juncture, the decisions of this Court that have dealt with the interplay 
of Entry 52 of List I and entries of List II need to be referred to. In Calcutta 
Gas Company v. State of West Bengal118, a Constitution Bench dealt with 
the overlap between Entry 52 of List I and Entry 25 of List II. Entry 25 of List 
II provides for ‘gas and gas works’. The Legislature of West Bengal enacted 
the Oriental Gas Company Act 1960. The constitutional validity of the 
enactment was challenged on the ground that Entry 24 of List II which deals 
with industries is subject to Entry 52 of List I and thus, Entry 25 of List II must 
be confined to matters which are not covered by Entry 24. In short, the 
submission was that the ‘industry’ of gas and gas works will be covered by 
Entry 24 of List II and the other matters relating to gas and gas works will be 
covered by Entry 25 of List II. Justice Subba Rao writing for the Constitution 
Bench held that the ‘industry’ of gas and gas works will be covered by Entry 
25 for the following reasons119: 
 
 SC 1044 
 SC 1044 [9] 

PART E 

a. Entry 25 of List II will become redundant if Entry 24 of List II (read 
along with Entries 25 and 26 which deal with trade, commerce, 
production, supply and distribution of products) covers the industry of 
‘gas and gas works’; 
b. The alternative, allows Entries 24 and 25 to operate fully in their 
respective fields. Entry 24 must be interpreted to cover the entire field 
of industry while Entry 25, the specific industry of gas and gas 
works;120 and 
c. Parliament cannot enact laws on the gas industry under Entry 52 
because the meaning of ‘industry’ in Entry 24 of List II and Entry 52 
of List I is the same. Since Entry 24 does not cover the gas industry, 
it cannot be included in Entry 52 as well.121 
68. In McDowell (supra), the constitutional validity of the Andhra Pradesh 
Prohibition Act 1995 was under challenge. The enactment prohibited the 
selling, buying, consumption and manufacture of liquor. It was submitted that 
the State did not have the competence to enact the statute because the 
manufacture and production of intoxicating liquors is an industrial activity 
 
120 “9. […] If industry in Entry 24 is interpreted to include gas and gas works, Entry 25 may become redundant, 
and in the context of the succeeding entries, namely Entry 26, dealing with trade and commerce, and 
Entry 27, dealing with production, supply and distribution of goods it will be deprived of all its 
contents and reduced to “useless lumber”. If industrial, trade, production and supply aspect are taken out of 
Entry 25, the substratum of the said entry would disappear: in that event we would be attributing to the authors 
of the Constitution ineptitude, want of precision and tautology. On the other hand, the alternative contention 
enables Entries 24 and 25 to operate fully in their respective fields: while Entry 24 covers a very wide field, 
that is, the field of the entire industry in the State, Entry 25, dealing with gas and gas-works, can be confined 
wo a specific industry, that is, the gas industry.” [emphasis supplied] 
121 “11. […] As we have indicated earlier, the expression “industry” in Entry 52 of List I bears the same 
meaning as that in Entry 24 of List II, with the result that the said expression in Entry 52 of List I also does 
not take in a gas industry.” 

PART E 

covered by Item 26 of the Schedule to IDRA. It may be recalled that Item 26 
before the 2016 amendment included alcohol and other products of 
fermentation industry. The three-Judge Bench of this Court rejected the 
submission. Justice Jeevan Reddy, writing for the Bench, observed that: 
a. Entry 8 expressly refers to ‘production and manufacture’ of 
intoxicating liquor. Including the production and manufacture of liquor 
in Entry 24 of List II (and as a consequence in Entry 52 of List I), would 
amount deleting the words “production and manufacture” in Entry 8; 
b. Entry 24 is a general entry and Entry 8 is a specific entry. On the 
application of the principle of generalia specialibus non derogant 
(general things do not derogate from specific things), the industry of 
intoxicating liquor will not fall under the general entry (Entry 24) but 
the special entry (Entry 8); and 
c. Entry 52 only governs Entry 24 and not Entry 8. Thus, the industry of 
intoxicating liquor cannot be taking over by Parliament under Entry 
52.122 
 
122 “26. […] Entry 24 is a general entry relating to industries whereas Entry 8 is a specific and special entry 
relating inter alia to industries engaged in production and manufacture of intoxicating liquors. Applying the 
well-known rule of interpretation applicable to such a situation (special excludes the general), we must hold 
that the industries engaged in production and manufacture of intoxicating liquors do not have within Entry 24 
but do fall within Entry 8. This was the position at the commencement of the Constitution and this is the 
position today as well. Once this is so, the making of a declaration by Parliament as contemplated by Entry 
52 of List I does not have the effect of transferring or transplanting, as it may be called, the industries engaged 
in production and manufacture of intoxicating liquors from the State list to Union List. As a matter of fact, 
Parliament cannot take over the control of industries engaged in the production and manufacture of 
intoxicating liquors by making a declaration under Entry 52 of List I, since the said entry governs only Entry 
24 in List II but not Entry 9 in List II.” 

PART E 

Referring to the decision in Calcutta Gas Company (supra), the three-Judge 
Bench observed that Entry 8 is more specific as compared to Entry 24 because 
the former expressly refers to ‘production and manufacture’, and thus, it is all 
the more clear that the production of liquor cannot be covered by Entry 52.123 
69. In Calcutta Gas Company (supra) and McDowell (supra), this Court adopted 
the following established principles of interpretation to resolve the overlap 
between legislative entries: (a) generalia specialibus non derogant; (b) an 
interpretation which does not render an entry redundant must be adopted; 
and (c) parliamentary supremacy in Article 246 will only operate if the entries 
in the State List and the Union List cannot be reconciled. The approach in 
Calcutta Gas Company (supra) and McDowell (supra) on the issue of 
reconciling the conflict between the entries varies on one aspect. In Calcutta 
Gas Company (supra), the Constitution Bench adopted a three-step 
analysis: 
a. On an application of the principle of generalia specialibus non 
derogant, the industry of the specific entry (in this case, the gas 
industry) was traced to Entry 25 and not Entry 24 (which is a general 
entry); 
b. Entry 52 is co-extensive with Entry 24. Thus, the scope of Entry 54 is 
circumscribed by the scope of Entry 24; and 
 
123 “28. […] Article 246 cannot be invoked to deprive the State Legislatures of the powers inhering in them by 
virtue of entries in List II. To wit, once an enactment, in pith and substance, is relatable to Entry 8 in List II or 
for that matter any other entry in List II, Article 246 cannot be brought into yet hold that State Legislature is 
not competent to enact that law.” 

PART E 

c. The gas industry is included in Entry 25 (and not Entry 24) which is 
not subject to Entry 52. Thus, Entry 52 cannot cover the gas industry. 
70. In McDowell (supra), the three-Judge Bench applied the principle that the 
State Legislature has full competence to enact laws with respect to those 
entries which are not expressly subject to an entry in List I or List III. 
71. The question is whether Parliament under Entry 52 of List I takes over the 
industry of intoxicating liquor covered by Entry 8. The answer is in the 
negative. Irrespective of whether the term ‘industry’ is interpreted in a narrow 
or a wide manner (a point that is vehemently contested by both sides), the 
industry of intoxicating liquor cannot be taken over by Parliament under Entry 
52 of List I for the following reasons: 
a. 
The general principle is that legislative lists must be interpreted widely. 
The question that the Court must pose is whether the two entries would 
overlap when interpreted widely. If they overlap, the Court must 
reconcile them. But the method of reconciliation must maintain the 
federal balance. The courts must not apply the principle of legislative 
supremacy of Parliament at the stage of reconciliation. As explained 
above, such an exercise would tilt the federal balance towards the 
Union; 
b. 
The only limitation in Entry 52 is that the control of the industry by the 
Union must be necessary for public interest. Parliament can legislate on 
any industry, provided that it satisfies the condition prescribed in the 
Entry. Thus, Entry 52 when read independent of any other entry of List 

PART E 

I, List II and List III does not preclude the inclusion of the industry of 
intoxicating liquor (provided that the Union is able to prove that its control 
is necessary in public interest). Similarly, Entry 8 of List II, when read 
independently also includes, inter alia, the production and manufacture 
of intoxicating liquor which is included within the meaning of industry. 
Thus, Entry 52 of List I and Entry 8 of List II overlap on the aspect of 
‘industry’ of intoxicating liquor; 
c. 
Entry 8 of List II is not subject to Entry 52 of List I. Thus, the State 
Legislature has the exclusive competence to enact a law on the field in 
Entry 8. The Court must distinguish between entries that are expressly 
subject to entries in the Union List and entries that are not. When one 
entry is not subject to the other, the Court must harmonise the overlap 
of the entries; 
d. 
The only way to reconcile the entries is either to exclude the industry of 
intoxicating entry from Entry 52 of List I or Entry 8 of List II. The Court 
while reconciling the provisions, must ensure that neither of the entries 
is rendered redundant. The principle of generalia specialibus non 
derogant is used by courts to ensure that the harmonisation of the 
entries does not render an entry redundant. In Wavery Jute Mills Co. 
Ltd. v. Raymon & Co124, the issue was whether Parliament or the State 
Legislature had the competence to enact laws with respect to ‘forward 
markets’. Applying the principles of generalia specialibus non derogant, 
 
124 (1963) 

PART E 

this Court held that the Union will have competence over ‘forward 
contracts’ in terms of Entry 48 of List I (stock exchanges and future 
markets) and that if it is brought within Entry 26 of List II (trade and 
commerce), Entry 48 will become redundant. Similarly, in Jayant Verma 
v. Union of India125, this Court applied the principle to resolve the 
overlap between Entry 30 of List II and Entry 45 of List I. A special entry 
must prevail over a general entry, otherwise, the special entry may 
become redundant; and 
e. 
Entry 52 of List I is a general entry dealing with industry. Entry 8 of List 
II is a special entry dealing with one particular industry.126 The 
consequence of interpreting Entry 52 to cover the industry of ‘intoxicating 
liquor’ is two-fold: first, it would amount to deleting the words ‘production, 
manufacture’ in Entry 8; and second, the State Legislature also loses its 
exclusive competence to legislate upon the product of the industry, 
rendering Entry 8 fully redundant. This is because the legislative 
competence on products of industries covered by Entry 52 of List I is 
placed in Entry 33 of List III. 
72. As a consequence, Parliament does not have the legislative competence to 
enact a law taking control of the industry of intoxicating liquor under Entry 52 
of List I. 

125 (2018) 
126 Calcutta Gas company (supra) and McDowell (supra) 

PART E 

iv. 
Scope of Entry 8: Meaning of ‘intoxicating liquor’ 
73. Entry 8 of List II is a general entry and not a taxing entry. However, it is a 
special entry in the sense that it specifically enumerates ‘intoxicating liquors’ 
as a legislative field to the exclusion of all other general entries under which 
it may have otherwise been subsumed. The Entry stipulates that intoxicating 
liquors would fall within the legislative domain of States. The arguments of the 
counsel on either side on the scope of Entry 8 of List II rest on the 
interpretation of the expression “intoxicating liquor’. 
74. The appellants rely on the meaning of ‘liquor’ in statutes which predate the 
Constitution to argue that the framers of the Constitution were aware of the 
sense in which the phrase was used at the time and, that it included denatured 
alcohol. In response, the Union argues that the word ‘intoxicating’ occurring 
in the expression ‘intoxicating liquors’ must not be rendered redundant by 
adopting the interpretation accorded to Entry 8 of List II by the appellants. It 
argues that ‘intoxicating liquors’ means beverages which are per se meant for 
human consumption for the purpose of intoxication without dilution or 
modification by any process. The Union also relies on the legal history of the 
division of legislative fields between the Union and the States in support of its 
argument that only Parliament is competent to legislate with regard to 
denatured alcohol. 

PART E 

a. Precedent on the interpretation of ‘intoxicating liquor’: exploring FN Balsara 
and Southern Pharmaceuticals 
75. The respondents have relied on the interpretation of the phrase ‘intoxicating 
liquor’ in the judgment of the Bombay High Court in FN Balsara v. State of 
Bombay127. The petitioners have strongly relied on the decision of this Court 
in FN Balsara (supra) which overturned the judgment of the Bombay High 
Court. 
76. The petitioner in Balsara (supra) had one bottle of whisky, one bottle of 
brandy, one bottle of wine, two bottles of beer, one bottle of medicated wine, 
one bottle of eau-de-cologne, one bottle of lavender water and some bottles 
of medicinal preparations. The petitioner invoked the writ jurisdiction of the 
High Court to challenge the validity of the Bombay Prohibition Act 1949.128 As 
the name suggests, the statute sought to put in place and enforce the policy 
of prohibition of alcohol. It was enacted with reference to Entry 31 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the 1935 Act, which was similar to Entry 8 of List II 
of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, in respect of intoxicating liquors. 
The Act defined ‘intoxicant’ as “any liquor, intoxicating drug, opium or any 
other substance which the Provincial Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette declare to be an intoxicant…”129 ‘Liquor’ was defined to 
include “all liquids containing alcohol”.130 The definition clause was 
challenged on the ground that it was beyond the competence of the State 
 
127 1950 SCC OnLine Bom 57 
128 “Bombay Prohibition Act” 
129 Bombay Prohibition Act 1949; Section 2(22) 
130 Bombay Prohibition Act 1949; Section 2(24) 

PART E 

Legislature under the entries in List II and List III of the 1935 Act. Chief Justice 
M C Chagla, writing for the Bench, held that the State Legislature did not have 
the competence to enact laws with respect to the “legitimate use of alcoholic 
preparations which are not beverages” and “the use of medicinal and toilet 
preparations containing alcohol”.131 In short, the High Court held that 
‘intoxicating liquor’ in Entry 31 of List II of the 1935 Act did not include all 
liquids with alcohol, and thus, the definition was beyond the scope of the 
State Legislature. The reasons for the interpretation were thus: 
a. 
Liquor ordinarily means a strong drink as opposed to a soft drink. In any 
event, it must be a beverage which is ordinarily drunk; 
b. 
The difference in the words qualifying ‘liquor’ in entries 31132 and 40(a)133 
of List II in the 1935 Act (the Entry corresponding to Entry 51 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution) is very significant. In Entry 31, 
the word used is ‘intoxicating’. In Entry 40(a), the word used is ‘alcoholic’. 
In the Whitepaper of 1933, the entry dealt with ‘alcoholic liquor’ which 
was substituted with the expression intoxicating liquor. With the 
substitution, non-intoxicating liquor was excluded from the scope of the 
Entry; and 
 
131 1950 SCC OnLine Bom 57 [36] 
132 “31. Intoxicating liquors and narcotic drugs, that is to say, the production, manufacture, possession, 
transport, purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors, opium and other narcotic drugs, but subject, as respects 
opium, to the provisions of List I and, as respects poisons and dangerous drugs, to the provisions of List III.” 
133 “40. Duties of excise on the following goods manufactures or produced in the Province and countervailing 
duties at the same or lower rates on similar goods manufactured or produced elsewhere in India- (a) alcoholic 
liquors for human consumption…” 

PART E 

c. 
Medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol are neither liquor nor 
intoxicating. Thus, they are excluded from the scope of the Entry. 
The 18th amendment to the US Constitution prohibits the sale, manufacture 
and transportation of ‘intoxicating liquor’.134 The petitioners relied on 
judgments of the US Supreme Court to substantiate the submission that the 
State Legislature can legislate on all liquids containing alcohol. The High 
Court, upon an analysis of judgments noted that they only hold that 
‘intoxicating liquor’ could cover drinks that contain a small percentage of 
alcohol, even if it does not produce an intoxicating effect. The Court further 
noted that the judgments of the US Courts hold that the State cannot regulate 
the legitimate use of non-beverage, and medicinal and toilet preparations 
containing alcohol, but only regulate their use for noxious purposes. Upon 
the analysis of the decisions, the High Court held that the State: (a) has the 
competence to legislate on alcoholic liquids which are not normally consumed 
as drinks; (b) cannot legislate on the “legitimate” use of alcoholic preparations 
which are not beverages; and (c) cannot legislate on the use of medicinal and 
toilet preparations containing alcohol. 
77. The appeals against the judgment of the High Court were allowed by a 
Constitution Bench of this Court in FN Balsara (supra). This Court noticed the 
meaning of the word ‘liquor’ by referring to its dictionary meaning and also 
assessed the meaning assigned to it in various enactments including the 
 
134 18th Amendment to the US Constitution; Section 1: “After one year from the ratification of this article the 
manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors within, the importation thereof into, or the 
exportation thereof from the United States and all territory subject to the jurisdiction thereof for beverage 
purposes is hereby prohibited.” 

PART E 

National Prohibition Act 1919 in the USA, the Licensing (Consolidating) Act 
1910 and the Spirits Act 1880 in England. It also referred to the Indian 
enactments, namely, the Bombay Abkari Act 1878, the Bengal Excise Act 
1909, the Punjab Excise Act 1914 and the UP Excise Act 1910. The judgment, 
authored by Justice Fazl Ali, was careful to clarify that the Court was not 
suggesting that the definition of ‘liquor’ in the Bombay Prohibition Act was 
borrowed from the statutes in the USA or England but that they were referred 
to show that the term was “capable of being used in a wide sense”.135 Based 
on its analysis, this Court observed that: 
a. 
While ‘liquor’ was commonly understood to mean a drink or beverage 
produced by fermentation or distillation, the various enactments referred 
to indicated that the phrase extended to liquids which were not, strictly 
speaking, beverages136; 
b. 
The definitions of ‘liquor’ and ‘intoxicating liquor’ in the provincial statutes 
consistently included liquids containing alcohol. The framers of the 1935 
Act were aware of the ‘accepted sense’ of the meaning assigned to the 
term in the various provincial laws137; and 
c. 
Therefore, the term ‘intoxicating liquors’ in Entry 31 of List II of the 
Seventh Schedule to the 1935 Act included not only beverages which 
intoxicate but also all liquids containing alcohol. While this may not have 
been the meaning attributed to ‘intoxicating liquors’ in common parlance, 
 
135 [43] 
136 [41] 
137 [44] 

PART E 

the numerous statutory definitions made it clear that the expression in 
Entry 31 of List II of the 1935 Act was broad and included all liquids 
containing alcohol.138 
78. The Constitution Bench also approached the question from the perspective 
of the entries on ‘public health’ and ‘public order’, and Article 47139 of the 
Constitution. The Bench noted that the word ‘liquor’ must be given a wide 
meaning to include “all alcoholic liquids which may be used as substitutes for 
intoxicating drinks, to the detriment of health.” 140 On the consideration of the 
meaning of the phrase, both from the perspective of legislative meaning and 
the constitutional directive of prohibiting intoxicating drinks which are injurious 
to health, this Court reversed the finding of the High Court.141 
79. Though the High Court held that the definition of ‘liquor’ in the Bombay 
Prohibition Act is ultra vires and this Court reversed the finding, there is one 
commonality between both the decisions. Neither of the decisions limited the 
scope of the phrase to the common parlance meaning of ‘intoxicating 
beverages’. Both the decisions held that the entry covered liquor which may 
not produce ‘intoxication’ but which may be used for noxious purposes. The 
difference is one of degree. While the High Court held that all liquids 
 
138 [44] 
139 “47. Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public 
health.- The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and 
the improvement of public health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavor to 
being about prohibition of the consumption, except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs 
which are injurious to health.” 
140 [45] 
141 See Paragraph 48: “… the idea of prohibition is connected with public health, and to enforce prohibition 
effectively the wider definition of the word “liquor” would have to be adopted so as to include all alcoholic 
liquids which may be substitutes for intoxicating drinks, to the detriment of health. On the whole, I am unable 
to agree with the High Court’s finding, and hold that the definition of ‘liquor’ in the Bombay prohibition Act is 
not ultra vires.” [emphasis supplied] 

PART E 

containing alcohol will not be covered by Entry 31 of List II, this Court held 
otherwise. However, the conclusion of this Court on the scope of the phrase 
cannot be read detached from observations that a wider definition of 
intoxicating liquor is necessary to cover other products which ‘may be used 
as substitutes for intoxicating drinks’. 
80. In Southern Pharmaceuticals and Chemical v. State of Kerala142, the 
appellants challenged the constitutional validity of the provisions of the Abkari 
Act, as amended by the Abkari (Amendment) Act 1967 and Kerala Rectified 
Spirit Rules 1972 which regulated the use of alcohol for the preparation of 
medicines. Item 22 of the Schedule to IDRA specifies the “drugs and 
pharmaceuticals” industry. The contention was that the State Legislature did 
not have the competence to enact laws because the field was covered by 
Parliament through IDRA. The issue before the three-Judge Bench of this 
Court was whether the State Legislature had the competence to enact a law 
related to medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol under Entry 8 
of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. This Court held that the 
State had the competence to enact the impugned laws under Entry 8 of List 
II because the legislations are confined to ensuring the proper utilisation of 
rectified spirit in the manufacture of medicinal and toilet preparations.143 After 
referring to the decision of this Court in FN Balsara (supra), the Bench held 
that only medicinal preparations which are capable of being misused for 
 
142 (1981) 
143 (1981) [14] 

PART E 

“noxious” purpose can be considered ‘intoxicating liquor’.144 This Court held 
that the test to determine if it can be misused is whether the article in question 
can be used as a beverage: 
“19. The general test for determining what 
medicinal preparations containing alcohol are 
capable of being misused and, therefore, must be 
considered intoxicating within the meaning of 
the term “intoxicating liquor”, is the capability of 
the article in question for use as a beverage. The 
impugned provisions have been enacted to 
ensure that rectified spirit is not misused under 
the pretext of being used for medicinal and toilet 
preparations containing alcohol. It was argued 
that this definition was therefore ultra vires the 
powers of the State legislature, which could only 
make laws related to alcoholic beverages.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
81. The observations of this Court in Southern Pharmaceuticals (supra) follow 
the precedent in FN Balsara (supra) that preparations which contain alcohol 
will be covered by the phrase ‘intoxicating liquor’ in Entry 8 to prevent its 
‘noxious use’. In Indian Mica (supra), the appellant challenged the vires of 
the rule levying licence fee to possess denatured spirit. The Rules were 
framed under the Bihar and Orissa Excise Act 1915. The State would have 
the competence to enact a law levying fee on denatured spirit under Entry 66 
 
144 “18. … The power to legislate with regard to intoxicating liquor carries with it the power to regulate the 
manufacture, sale and possession of medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol, not for the purpose 
of interfering with the right of citizens in the matter of consumption or use for bona fide medicinal and toilet 
preparations, but for preventing intoxicating liquors from being passed on under the guise of 
medicinal and toilet preparations. It was within the competence of the State legislature to prevent the 
noxious use of such preparations, i.e. their use as a substitute for alcoholic beverages.” [emphasis 
supplied] 

PART E 

of List II145 if the spirit was covered by the phrase ‘intoxicating liquor’ in Entry 
8 of List II. Denatured spirit in this case was used as a raw material for the 
preparation of another product (micanite). In this case, the Constitution Bench 
held that denatured spirit is ‘intoxicating liquor’ and thus, covered by Entry 8 
of List II.146 Further it was held that the fee charged will be valid if the levy has 
a reasonable relationship with the services rendered by the Government.147 
82. It is clear from the analysis of the above judgments that the meaning of the 
phrase ‘intoxicating liquor’ in Entry 8 of List II has been expanded beyond the 
narrow definition of alcoholic beverages that produce an ‘intoxicating effect’ 
upon consumption. Liquids which contain alcohol and which can possibly be 
used (or misused) as intoxicating liquor have been included within the 
meaning of the phrase. 
83. We will test this proposition in the subsequent sections. In our opinion, there 
are four possible approaches that we can adopt to determine the meaning of 
the expression ‘intoxicating liquor’. The first is through the identification of the 
‘legislative meaning’ of the phrase intoxicating liquor; the second is through 
legislative history; the third, is the common parlance test, and the fourth is the 
principle of workability. We will discuss the merits and demerits of each of the 
above approaches in turn. 
 
145 “66. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any Court.” 
146 (1971) [3] 
147 (1971) [11] 

PART E 

b. The legal import of ‘intoxicating liquor’ 
84. The petitioners submit that the expression ‘intoxicating liquor’ is a term of 
recognised legal import because it has been used in numerous statutes that 
pre-date the 1935 Act, where the phrase was first used in Entry 31 of List II. 
The principle of ‘legal import’ has been used by this Court to interpret entries 
in the Seventh Schedule. In Gannon Dunkerley (supra), a Constitution 
Bench dealt with the interpretation of Entry 48 of List II of the Seventh 
Schedule to the 1935 Act which specified the field of ‘taxes on the sale of 
goods’. This Court was required to interpret the phrase ‘sale of goods’. On 
one side it was contended that the term must be given the ‘popular meaning’ 
and on the other side, it was contended that it must be given the ‘legal 
meaning’. This Court chose the latter. The Bench laid down the standard to 
determine when a phrase has obtained a legal meaning. This Court laid down 
a two-prong test: first, the phrase should have acquired a well-recognised, 
definite and precise meaning in law148; and second, the legal import of the 
word must be practically unanimous.149 It is also crucial to note that in this 
 
148 “The ratio of the rule of interpretation that words of legal import occurring in a statute should be construed 
in their legal sense is that those words have, in law acquired a definite and precise sense, and that, 
accordingly, the legislature must be taken to have intended that they should be understood in that sense. In 
interpreting an expression used in a legal sense, therefore, we have only to ascertain the precise 
connotation which it possesses in law.” [emphasis supplied] 
149 “It will be seen from the foregoing that there is practical unanimity of opinion as to the import of the word 
“sale” in its legal sense 

PART E 

case, the popular meaning of the phrase was not widely different from the 
legal meaning150.151 
85. The judgment of this Court in Gannon Dunkerley (supra) must be read in the 
context of the settled principle of interpreting legislative entries, that the 
entries must be conferred the widest meaning possible. Interpreting a phrase 
or words in the Legislative Lists based on the legal import of the phrase is, 
thus, in many ways an exception to the settled principle of interpreting entries. 
This is for the simple reason that the legislative entries delimit the scope of 
competence of the legislative bodies. If the entries are interpreted based on 
the meanings or definitions in a legislation, the purpose of the Seventh 
Schedule may become redundant. Further, the statute does not define 
phrases based on popular or common parlance meaning but rather based on 
the scope of the legislation and the manner in which the provisions are 
drafted. A deeming fiction is often used to define phrases by conferring 
artificial meanings.152 The interpretation based on ‘legislative meaning’ 
elucidated in Gannon Dunkerley (supra), which narrows the interpretation of 
 
150 “Now, in its popular sense, a sale is said to take place when the bargain is settled between the parties, 
though property in the goods may not pass at that stage, as where the contract relates to future or 
unascertained goods, and it is that sense that the learned Judge would appear to have had in his mind when 
he spoke of a commercial or business sense. But apart from the fact that these observations were obiter, 
this Court has consistently held that though the word “sale” in its popular sense is not restricted to 
passing of title, and has a wider connotation as meaning the transaction of sale, and that in that sense an 
agreement to sell would, as one of the essential ingredients of sale, furnish sufficient nexus for a State to 
impose a tax..” [emphasis supplied] 
151 The judgement in Gannon Dunkerley’s case (supra) was held to be constitutionally superseded on other 
aspects by subsequent cases including Kone Elevator India (P) Ltd. v. State of T.N., (2014). 
However, the principle of interpretation referred to in this judgment continues to be good law. 
152 See Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation v. GTL Infrastructure Limited (2017) [13] “13. “… it 
would be self-defeating to understand the meaning and scope of Entry 49 of List II by reference to the 
definition clauses in the Gujarat Act. Definitions contained in the statute may at times be broad and 
expansive; beyond the natural meaning of the words or may even contain deeming provisions. Though the 
wide meaning that may be ascribed to a particular expression by the definition in a statute will have to be 
given effect to, if the statute is otherwise found to be valid, it will, indeed, be a contradiction in terms to test 
the validity of the statute on the touchstone of it being within the legislative entry, by a reference to the 
definition contained in the statute” 

PART E 

entries, thereby creating an exception to the rule of wide interpretation should 
only be employed by Courts when the twin tests highlighted above. The tests 
are (a) the phrase should have acquired a well-recognised, definite and 
precise meaning in law; and (b) the legal import of the word must be practically 
unanimous. Additionally, we also are of the view that the legislative meaning 
interpretation should be adopted only when the deviation from the popular 
meaning of the phrase is not too wide. The legislative meaning cannot be 
used to artificially narrow legislative entries. We also deem it necessary to 
note that we must be cognizant that the standard of ‘legislative meaning’ is 
employed to identify the ‘intent’ of the framers of the Constitution and belongs 
to the originalist school of thought, which has been consistently opposed by 
this Court over the years.153 For these reasons, the principle of interpretation 
elucidated in Gannon Dunkerley (supra) must be used cautiously by Courts. 
86. Let us now proceed to determine if the phrase ‘intoxicating liquor’: (a) has a 
definite and precise meaning in law; (b) is unanimous; and (c) has a legal 
meaning that is not widely different from its popular meaning. We must refer 
to the pre-constitutional statutes for this purpose because the expression 
‘intoxicating liquor’ was first used in the 1935 Act. The table below indicates 
the definition of ‘Liquor’, ‘intoxicating liquor’, and ‘spirits’ in numerous pre-
constitutional statutes: 
 
153 See Gannon Dunkerley (supra): “… Sales tax was not a subject which came into vogue after the 
Government of India Act 1935. It was known to the framers of that statute and they made express provision 
for it under Entry 48.” 

PART E 

Bombay Abkari Act 1878” 
Liquor is defined in an inclusive 
manner. 
It 
includes 
“all 
liquid 
consisting 
of 
or 
containing 
alcohol…denatured or not.”154 
Madras Abkari Act 1886 
Liquor 
includes 
….all 
liquid 
consisting of or containing alcohol.155 
Spirits means any liquor containing 
alcohol and obtained by distillation, 
whether it is denatured or not.156 
Abkari Act 1077 
Liquor 
includes 
…. all 
liquid 
consisting of or containing alcohol.157 
Bengal Excise Act 1909158 
Intoxicant 
means 
any 
liquor.159 
Liquor means liquid consisting and 
containing alcohol.160 Spirit means 
any 
liquor 
containing 
alcohol, 
whether denatured or not.161 
 
154 Bombay Abkari Act 1978; Section 3(7) 
155 Madras Abkari Act 1886; Section 3(9) 
156 Madras Abkari Act 1886; Section 3(8) 
157 Abkari Act 1077; Section 3(10) 
158 Similar definitions in Bihar and Orissa Excise Act 1915; Sections 2(14); 2(19) 
159 The Bengal Excise Act 1909; Section 2(12a) 
160 The Bengal Excise Act 1909; Section 2(14) 
161 The Bengal Excise Act 1909; Section 2(19) 

PART E 

Madhya Pradesh Excise Act 1915162 Liquor means ‘intoxicating liquor’ and 
includes …. all liquid consisting of or 
containing alcohol.163 
National Prohibition Act 
The word ‘liquor’ or the phrase 
‘intoxicating 
liquor’ 
shall 
be 
construed to include alcohol, brandy, 
whisky, rum, gin, beer, ale, porter, 
and wine, and in addition thereto any 
spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented 
liquor, 
liquids, 
and 
compounds, 
whether 
medicating, 
proprietary, 
patented, or not and by whatever 
name called, containing one-half of 1 
per centum or more of alcohol by 
volume which are fit for use for 
beverage purposes. 
The Licensing (Consolidating Act) 

Intoxicating liquor means (unless 
inconsistent with the context) spirits, 
wine, beer, porter, cider, perry and 
sweets, and any fermented, distilled, 
or spiritous liquor which cannot, 
 
162 Similar definitions in The Punjab ‘article’ Excise Act 1914; Section 2(14); The Chhattisgarh Excise Act 
1915; Section 2(13); United Province Excise Act 1910; Section 3(11) 
163 MP Excise Act 1916; Section 2(13) 

PART E 

according to any law for the time 
being in force, be legally sold without 
an excise law.164 
Spirits Act 1880 
Spirits 
means 
spirits 
of 
any 
description, and includes all liquids 
mixed with spirits, and all mixtures, 
compounds, or preparations made 
with spirits.165 
 
87. The Abkari Acts have generally defined the phrase ‘liquor’ to mean liquids 
containing alcohol including denatured alcohol. However, the Abkari Acts do 
not define the phrase ‘intoxicating liquor’. In Excise Acts, ‘liquor’ was defined 
to mean ‘intoxicating liquor’ and included liquids containing alcohol. Thus, 
none of the pre-constitutional statutes have defined the phrase ‘intoxicating 
liquor’ for it to have acquired a legal meaning. The phrase was defined in the 
Licensing (Consolidating Act) 1910 which regulated the United Kingdom. It 
cannot be concluded that the phrase used in the Indian Constitution has 
acquired a legal meaning based on a definition clause in one statute which 
applied to the United Kingdom. The definition of ‘liquor’ in pre-constitutional 
statutes as liquids containing alcohol cannot be transposed to interpret the 
legislative entry. The phrase used in the legislative entry is ‘intoxicating liquor’. 
 
164 The Licensing (Consolidating Act) 1872; Section 74 
165 Spirits Act 1880; Section 3 

PART E 

The definition of one part of the expression in statutes cannot be used to 
interpret expressions that are used to indicate a collective meaning, 
particularly when the common parlance definition starkly varies. The common 
parlance meaning of ‘intoxicating liquor’ means liquor which causes 
intoxication, that is, which causes someone to lose control. Thus, the three-
prong test to identify if “Intoxicating Liquor” has acquired legislative meaning 
has not been satisfied. c. Evolution of the legislative lists on ‘intoxicating liquor’ 
88. We proceed to consider the evolution of the legislative field relating to 
‘intoxicating liquor’ to determine the meaning of the expression. The evolution 
of the legislative entries must be traced from the Devolution Rules formulated 
under the 1919 Act.166 The Devolution Rules classified legislative subjects for 
the purpose of distinguishing the functions of the local legislatures from those 
of the federal legislature. Alcohol was placed in the ‘Provincial List’ of the First 
Schedule to the Devolution Rules (equivalent to List II or the State List in the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution). Entry 16 of the Provincial List 
concerned alcohol. It is reproduced below: 
“16. Excise, that is to say, the control of production, 
manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale of 
alcoholic liquor and intoxicating drugs, and the levying of 
excise duties and licence fees on or in relation to such articles, 
but excluding, in the case of opium, control of cultivation, 
manufacture and sale for export.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
166 The Devolution Rules were made by the Governor General in Council with the sanction of the Secretary 
of State in Council in exercise of the powers conferred by Sections 45A and 129A of the Government of India 
Act 1919. 

PART E 

89. Instead of two distinct entries, one which covered taxation and the other which 
covered regulation, the Devolution Rules contained a single entry in the 
Provincial List which extended to both aspects. The Entry related to (a) levy 
of excise duties; (b) levy of fee; and (c) general regulation. That it concerned 
taxation is evident from the term ‘excise’ and the ‘levying of excise duties’. 
The words “the control of production, manufacture, possession, transport, 
purchase and sale” indicate that the Entry extended to regulation as well. The 
expression used in Entry 16 was ‘alcoholic liquor’ as opposed to ‘intoxicating 
liquor’. However, it must be noted that the provision deals with both ‘alcoholic 
liquor’ and ‘intoxicating drugs’. 
90. The approach adopted in the 1935 Act differed from the 1919 Act. Entry 45 of 
List I of the Seventh Schedule to the 1935 Act stipulated the federal domain 
over duties of excise. It is reproduced below: 
“45. Duties of excise on tobacco and other goods 
manufactured or produced in India except — 
(a) alcoholic liquor for human consumption; 
(b) opium, Indian hand and other narcotic drugs and 
narcotics; non-narcotic drugs; 
(c) medicinal and toilet preparations containing 
alcohol or any substance included in sub-paragraph 
(b) of this entry.” 
 
91. Alcoholic liquor for human consumption was among the three categories 
which was excluded from the ambit of legislative competence of the Federal 
legislature. Entries 31 and 40 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the 1935 
Act stipulated the Provincial legislative domain over intoxicating liquors and 
narcotics, and duties of excise respectively. They are reproduced below: 

PART E 

“31. Intoxicating liquors and narcotic drugs, that 
is to say, the production, manufacture, possession, 
transport, purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors, 
opium and other narcotic drugs, but subject, as 
respects opium, to the provisions of List I and, as 
respects poisons and dangerous drugs, to the 
provisions of List III. 
 
… 
 
40. Duties of excise on the following goods 
manufactured or produced in the Province and 
countervailing duties at the same or lower rates on 
similar goods manufactured or produced elsewhere 
in India- 
(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption; 
(b) opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and 
narcotics; non-narcotic drugs; 
(c) medicinal and toilet preparations containing 
alcohol or any substance included in sub-paragraph 
(b) of this entry.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 

92. The three categories which were excluded from duties of excise on goods 
produced or manufactured in India (in Entry 45 of List I) were incorporated in 
Entry 40 of List II. Thus, duties of excise on alcoholic liquors for human 
consumption was a subject assigned to the Provinces. The following changes 
on the legislative scope on ‘alcoholic liquors’ were introduced in the 1935 Act: 
a. 
Taxation and regulation were placed in separate entries. Entry 40 of List 
II concerned duties of excise, inter alia, on ‘alcoholic liquors for human 
consumption.’ On the other hand, Entry 31 of List II covered the 
regulation of ‘intoxicating liquors’ and other substances; 
b. 
The Federal legislature could levy duties of excise on tobacco and other 
goods manufactured in India but not on alcoholic liquor for human 

PART E 

consumption, medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol, and 
other specified goods; 
c. 
The Provincial legislatures could levy duties of excise on alcoholic liquor 
for human consumption, medicinal and toilet preparations containing 
alcohol, and other specified goods produced in the province; and 
d. 
Entry 31 of List II was a regulatory entry covering intoxicating liquors and 
narcotic drugs and the production, manufacture, possession, transport, 
purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors, opium and other narcotic 
drugs. Hence, the regulatory power in relation to intoxicating liquor lay 
with the Provincial legislatures and not the Federal legislature. Where 
Entry 16 of the Provincial List of the Devolution Rules as well as Entries 
45 of List I and 40 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the 1935 Act used 
the term ‘alcoholic liquors’, Entry 31 of List II used the expression 
‘intoxicating liquors’. This term was first used in the 1935 Act. 
93. The Seventh Schedule to the Constitution also placed the regulatory powers 
and the taxing powers relating to alcohol in separate entries. Entry 8 of List II 
of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution deals with ‘intoxicating liquors’. 
Entry 8 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution varies from Entry 
31 of List II of the 1935 Act in a significant manner. Entry 8 only deals with 
‘intoxicating liquor’. It does not cover narcotic drugs and opium. Entry 31 
conferred the Provincial Legislature, the competence to legislate with respect 
to narcotic drugs which included opium. It was subject to Entries in List I and 

PART E 

List II which dealt with opium167 and ‘poison and dangerous drugs’168. The 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution placed opium in List I169 and List III170, 
completely removing it from List II. 
94. Entry 84 of List I deals with duties of excise of goods except a few. The Entry 
read as follows before the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) 
Act 2016: 
“84. Duties of excise on tobacco and other goods 
manufactured or produced in India except- 
(a) Alcoholic liquors for human consumption 
(b) Opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and 
narcotics, 
But including medicinal and toilet preparations 
containing alcohol or any substance included in sub-
paragraph (b) of this entry.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
95. Entry 51 of List II deals with duties of excise, inter alia, on alcoholic liquor: 
“51. Duties of excise on the following goods 
manufactured 
or 
produced 
in 
the 
State 
and 
countervailing duties at the same or lower rates on 
similar goods manufactured or produced elsewhere in 
India:- 
(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption; 
(b) opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and 
narcotics; 
but not including medicinal and toilet preparations 
containing alcohol or any substance included in sub-
paragraph (b) of this entry.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 

167 Government of India Act 1935, Entry 31 of List I 
168 Government of India Act 1935, Entry 19 of List III 
169 Constitution of India 1950, Entry 59 of List I 
170 Constitution of India 1950, Entry 19 of List III 

PART E 

96. The only change with respect to the legislative competence on duties of 
excise from the 1935 Act is that Parliament (and not the State Legislature as 
it was envisaged under the 1935 Act) has the competence to enact laws with 
respect to medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or narcotic 
substances, opium and Indian hemp.171 
97. The Constituent Assembly Debates which the Union of India referred to 
ascertain the meaning of the phrase ‘intoxicating liquor’ are not of assistance. 
The phrases ‘alcoholic liquor for human consumption’ and ‘intoxicating liquor’ 
were used for the first time in the 1935 Act. Entry 16 of the Provincial List of 
the Devolution Rules dealt with ‘alcoholic liquor and intoxicating drugs”. The 
provision dealt both with regulatory power and excise power. It is necessary 
to trace the development between the 1909 Rules and the 1935 Act to 
understand the context of substituting the expression ‘alcoholic liquor’ with 
‘intoxicating liquor’ in the regulatory entry but retaining it in the taxing entry. 
98. The 1935 Act was based on the White Paper (1931) on the proposals for 
Indian Constitutional Reform172 and the Report of the Joint Select Committee 
on Indian Constitutional Reform173 which was constituted to examine and 
report upon the proposals contained in the White Paper.The White Paper 
 
171 The reason for providing Parliament the power to enact laws with respect to the excise duty on medicinal 
and toilet preparations containing alcohol is reflected in the footnote to Entry 86 of List I in the Draft 
Constitution of India 1948 as follows: “The committee is of the opinion that duties of excise on medicinal and 
toilet preparation containing alcohol or any substance included in sub-paragraph (b) of this entry should be 
included in this entry as duties leviable by the Union, as it thinks that uniform rates of excise duty should be 
fixed in respect of these goods in all states for the sake of development of the pharmaceutical industry. The 
levy of different rates in different States is likely to lead to discrimination in favour of goods imported from 
foreign countries which would be detrimental to the interest of Indian manufacturers as was pointed out by 
the Drugs Enquiry Committee in their report in 1931.”; See Shiva Rao (Vol II) pg. 666 
172 “White Paper”; See Command Paper 4268 
173 “Joint Committee”; See Report of the Joint Select Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform 

PART E 

recommended the demarcation of regulatory and taxation powers relating to 
alcohol. However, both the entries used the words ‘alcoholic liquor’.174 The 
Report of the Joint Committee suggested the following two revisions to the 
entries related to alcohol: (a) the relevant entry in the Federal List provided 
that the Union did not have the competence to levy excise duty on “potable 
alcoholic liquor”175 and the Provincial List conferred States the competence 
to levy excise duty on “potable alcoholic liquor”176; and (b) the regulatory 
provision in List II dealt with the “production, manufacture, possession, 
transport, purchase and sale of liquors, opium and other drugs and narcotics 
not covered by item 19 of List III.”177 
99. Two revisions were further made to the entries as they appear in the 
Government of India Bill 1935 which were subsequently reflected in the 
Government of India Act 1935. The phrase ‘potable alcoholic liquor’ was 
substituted with the phrase ‘alcoholic liquor’ in the taxing entry and the phrase 
‘liquor’ was substituted with the phrase ‘intoxicating liquor’ in the regulatory 
 
174 See Joint Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform (Volume 1 Part I) 369; “26. Control of production, 
manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale of alcoholic liquors, drugs and narcotics.”; “27. 
Imposition and regulation of duties of excise on alcoholic liquors, drugs and narcotics other than tobacco.” 
175 List I, Entry 49 of the Revised Lists; See Joint Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform (Volume 1 Part 
I) 152 “46. Duties of excise on the manufacture and production of tobacco and other articles except- 

Potable alcoholic liquors; 

Toilet and medicinal preparations containing alcohol, Indian hemp, opium or other drugs or 
narcotics; 

Opium, Indian hemp, and other drugs and narcotics. 
176 List II, Entry 19 of the Revised Lists; See Joint Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform (Volume 1 Part 
I) 155 “19. Duties of excise on the manufacture and production of – 

Potable alcoholic liquors; 

Toilet and medicinal preparations containing alcohol, Indian hemp, opium or other drugs 
and narcotics; 

Opium, narcotics, hemp and other drugs. 
177 List II, Entry 18 of the Revised Lists; See Joint Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform (Volume 1 Part 
I) 155 “18. Production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale of liquors, opium and other 
drugs and narcotics not covered by item 19 of List III.” 

PART E 

entry. The table below reflects the evolution of the Legislative entries relating 
to alcohol: 
Enactment 
Taxing Entry 
Regulatory Entry 
Devolution Rules 
‘alcoholic liquor’178 
White Paper 
‘alcoholic liquor’179 
‘alcoholic liquor’180 
Joint Select Committee 
on Indian Constitutional 
Reform 
‘potable 
alcoholic 
liquor’181 
‘liquor’182 
Government of India 
Act 1935 
‘alcoholic 
liquor 
for 
human consumption’183 
‘intoxicating liquor’184 
Constitution of India 
‘alcoholic 
liquor 
for 
human consumption’185 
‘intoxicating liquor’186 
 
100. Before we proceed to lay down our inferences upon a study of the evolution 
of legislative entries, we clarify that the issue before this Bench is squarely 
related to the interpretation of the expression ‘intoxicating liquor’. The 
 
178 Devolution Rules; Entry 16 of the Provincial List 
179 Command paper 4268; Entry 26 of List II: “26. Control of production, manufacture, possession, transport, 
purchase and sale of alcoholic liquors, drugs and narcotics.” 
180 Command paper 4268; Entry 27 of List II: “27. Imposition and regulation of duties of excise on alcoholic 
liquors, drugs and narcotics other than tobacco.” 
181 Report of the Joint Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform; Entry 49 of List I 
182 Report of the Joint Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform; Entry 19 of List II 
183 Government of India Act 1935; Entry 45 of list I 
184 Government of India Act 1935; Entry 31 of list II 
185 Constitution of India 1950; Entry 84 of List I 
186 Constitution of India 1950; Entry 8 of List II 

PART E 

meaning of the expression ‘alcoholic liquor for human consumption’ and 
whether it can be read as ‘alcoholic liquor fit for human consumption’ is not 
before this Bench. 
101. The Report of the Joint Committee does not explain why the expression 
‘alcoholic liquor’ was substituted with the phrases ‘liquor’ in the regulatory 
entry and ‘potable alcoholic liquor’ in the taxing entry. While the Report 
explains the reasons for a few revisions from the White Paper, the entries 
relating to alcohol are not one of them.187 However, the paragraph extracted 
below provides some clarity: 
“241. 
It 
would 
extend 
this 
chapter 
to 
an 
unreasonable length if we were to set out in detail all 
the changes which a revision of the three Lists has 
involved. We are less willing to do so, because we 
recognise that the revised Lists themselves will 
require further expert scrutiny before they are 
finally submitted to Parliament as part of the 
legislative proposals of His Majesty’s Government. 
We think, however, that if the revised Lists are 
compared with the Lists in the White Paper, such 
changes as have been made, in addition to those 
already mentioned will, for the most part, be found to 
speak for themselves.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
102. While the revisions are not accompanied by any reasons, it is clear that the 
intention of the Joint Committee was to differentiate between the product 
covered by the regulatory entry and the taxing entry. It is also clear that the 
Committee was aware of the possibility of alcohol not being understood as 
just a final ‘consumable product’ but also as a raw material in the production 
 
187 Joint Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform (Volume I Part I) 148-149. 

PART E 

of other products. The Report of the Joint Committee specifically conferred 
the States, competence over “toilet and medicinal preparations containing 
alcohol, Indian help, opium or other drugs and narcotics.”188 While the taxing 
entry recognised the distinction between liquor that is used as a beverage and 
is a product in itself by using the words ‘potable alcoholic liquors’, and other 
products that contain alcohol, the regulatory entry does not create that 
distinction. The regulatory entry only refers to ‘liquor’, which is a much larger 
all-encompassing phrase. 
103. We are unable to trace the discussions that led to a further revision in the 
1935 Act, where the expression ‘potable liquor’ was substituted with ‘alcoholic 
liquor for human consumption’, and ‘liquor’ was substituted with the 
expression ‘intoxicating liquor’. However, it is clear that the use of the phrases 
as they appear in the relevant entries of the 1935 Act and the Constitution of 
India was a matter well-thought of. 
104. Another point that needs to be noted based upon a study of the evolution of 
legislative entries is that until the 1935 Act, the regulatory entry covered 
narcotic drugs and opium along with ‘alcoholic liquor’/’liquor’/’intoxicating 
liquor’. There are two possible interpretations of the expression “intoxicating 
liquor”, as it appeared in the 1935 Act, on an application of the principle of 
noscitur a sociss, that is, the principle by which the meaning of an ambiguous 
expression may be ascertained by reference to the meaning of the words 
 
188 Report of the Joint Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform; Entry 19(ii) of List II 

PART E 

associated with it189. It could be interpreted to mean liquor that has an 
intoxicating effect upon consumption since narcotic drugs and opium also 
produce intoxication. The expression ‘intoxicating liquor’ could also mean the 
regulation of alcohol used in the production of other products since opium and 
narcotic drugs are also used as raw materials in the production of other 
products (like pain relivers) 
105. Mr TT Krishnamachari moved an amendment to delete references to narcotic 
drugs and opium in Entry 40 of List II of the Draft Constitution 1948 (which 
correspondes to Entry 31 of List II of the 1935 Act). The amendment was 
adopted by the Assembly. Mr Krishnamachari submitted that it was necessary 
to delete references to opium and narcotic drugs because they were covered 
by other entries in List I and List III: 
“This amendment is necessary because we have 
shifted poisons and drugs to the Concurrent List and 
opium happens to be in the Central List. This entry, 
therefore, will suffice for the purposes of State 
Governments.”190 
 
106. An analysis of the evolution of the legislative entries relating to alcohol does 
not provide an unambiguous interpretation. While the evolution of the entries 
does indicate that the drafters were aware of the distinction between potable 
alcohol and alcohol used as a raw material in the production of other products, 
there is no clear answer to whether ‘intoxicating liquor’ includes both. The 
 
189 See Rainbow Steels v. Sales Tax Commissioner, UP AIR 1981 SC 2010; State of Bombay v. Hospital 
Mazdoor Sabha, AIR 1960 SC 610, 613; Rohit Pulp and Paper Mills Ltd v. Collector of Central Excise, AIR 
1991 SC 754 
190 Constituent Assembly Debates (2 September 1949) Volume IX 

PART E 

evolution of the entries provides us with some context and background but 
not a conclusive answer. We now proceed to apply the third principle of 
interpretation, the workability or harmonious interpretation principle. d. The harmonious interpretation 
107. The expression ‘intoxicating liquor’ can possibly be interpreted to mean the 
following: 
a. Alcohol which is used as a beverage for human consumption such as 
beer or gin, that is, potable liquor; 
b. If liquor means liquid, then Entry 8 of List II includes all liquids which 
contain alcohol; and 
c. Alcohol which is used as a raw material to prepare other products 
such as pharmaceutical products and cosmetic drugs. This could 
include denatured alcohol but also other types of alcohol that are used 
in the production of products without denaturing it. 
108. A preliminary observation needs to be made. It may be recalled that the State 
does not have the competence to levy excise duty with respect to toilet and 
medical preparations containing alcohol. However, this cannot influence the 
interpretation of the phrase ‘intoxicating liquor’ in Entry 8 of List II. The 
Seventh Schedule demarcates the legislative competence on taxes and 
regulation. It is settled law that the Legislature cannot derive taxation powers 
from a general regulatory entry.191 Thus, the lack of competence to levy tax 
 
191 MPV Sundararamier & Co. v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1958) 9 STC 298 

PART E 

on products other than alcoholic beverage cannot influence the interpretation 
of the regulatory entry. They operate in separate spheres. We now proceed 
to interpret the phrase ‘intoxicating liquor’. 
109. The Oxford English Dictionary provides multiple meanings of the word 
‘Liquor’. They include: (a) alcoholic drinks, especially spirits; (b) water used in 
brewing; (c) liquid that has been produced in or used for cooking; and (d) 
liquid from which a substance has been crystallized or extracted. Liquor thus 
broadly takes two meanings, of an alcoholic beverage or liquid. The word 
‘intoxicate’ is defined to mean: (a) cause someone to lose control of their 
senses; (b) poison; and (c) excite or exhilarate. 
110. The dictionary meanings of the phrases ‘liquor’ and ‘intoxicate’ are variable. 
If liquor is interpreted to mean ‘liquid’ instead of an alcoholic beverage and 
intoxication a reference to alcohol, the Entry would cover all liquids that 
contain alcohol. However, if liquor is interpreted to mean alcoholic beverage, 
the Entry would only cover alcoholic beverages for human consumption which 
causes intoxication, that is, potable alcohol. 
111. Entry 51 of List II refers to duties of excise on, inter alia, “alcoholic liquors for 
human consumption’. Article 47 which is placed in the Part on the Directive 
Principles of State Policy stipulates that the State shall endeavour to bring 
prohibition of the consumption of intoxicating drinks and drugs injurious to 
health, except for medicinal purposes. The provision lists this as one of the 
aspects of the duty of the State to improve public health. The phrase liquor is 
also used in multiple places in the 6th Schedule to the Constitution. The 6th 

PART E 

Schedule stipulates provisions on the administration of Tribal Areas in the 
States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. Paragraphs 12, 12AA 
and 12B provide for the application of Acts of Parliament and of the 
Legislature of the State to the autonomous districts and regions in the States 
of Assam, Tripura and Mizoram. The provisions stipulate that the enactments 
of the Legislature of the State “prohibiting or restricting the consumption of 
any non-distilled alcoholic liquor” would not apply to the autonomous Districts 
or autonomous regions192. The expressions in the 6th Schedule will not be of 
aid to interpret Entry 8 because it refers to a legislation enacted by the State 
Legislature under Entry 8. 
112. Thus, the Constitution uses three distinct expressions relating to alcohol: 
“intoxicating liquor”, “alcoholic liquor for human consumption” and 
“intoxicating drinks”. The evolution of the entries in the legislative Lists 
indicate that it was a conscious decision to substitute ‘alcoholic liquor’ with 
‘intoxicating liquor’ in the regulatory provision. It was also a conscious 
decision to use different phrases in the taxing entry and the regulatory entry. 
We do not think that it is necessary for us to lay down the contours of the 
different phrases used in the Constitution. That is a decision for another day 
and in another case. However, it is still possible to draw some inferences from 
the different uses. The expressions “alcoholic liquor for human consumption” 
and ‘intoxicating drink’ are used in the context of ‘consumption’. However, the 
provision relating to “intoxicating liquor” is not limited to its consumption. It 
 
192 Unless the District Council by a public notification directs to give effect to the Act. The District Council may 
also direct that the Act shall have effect subject to ‘exceptions or modifications’; See Paragraphs 12, 12AA 
and 12B of the 6th Schedule. 

PART E 

stretches to its ‘production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase 
and sale of intoxicating liquors’ and beyond. The second difference is the use 
of the expression ‘intoxicating’ instead of ‘alcoholic’ as the adjective to liquor. 
The following inferences can be drawn from the above differences: 
a. 
‘Alcoholic liquor’ defines the scope of the provision based on the 
ingredient, that is, ‘alcohol’. In contrast, ‘intoxicating liquor’ defines the 
scope of the provision based on the effect, that is, intoxication. Thus, 
even liquor which colloquially or traditionally is not considered as 
alcoholic liquor may be covered by the phrase ‘intoxicating liquor’ if it 
produces the effect of intoxication; 
b. 
“Intoxicate” means the ability of someone to lose control of their 
behaviour. It could also mean poison. Thus, the purpose of substituting 
the adjective which indicates the ingredient (alcohol) with the impact 
(intoxication) seems to be enhance the scope of the Entry to cover liquor 
which has an impact on health; and 
c. 
The public interest purpose of the provision is evident from the 
accompanying words in the provision which includes every stage from 
its production to consumption within the scope of the Entry. The public 
interest purpose of the provision is also evident from the evolution of the 
Entry. The relevant entry in the 1935 Act also regulated narcotic drugs 
and opium along with intoxicating liquor. References to narcotic drugs 
and opium were deleted to prevent its overlap with entries in the 
Concurrent list. As highlighted in the previous section, a common thread 

PART E 

that runs through alcohol, narcotic drugs and opium is that they are 
products which can be noxiously used because they are also used as 
raw materials in the production of other products. 
It is clear from the above analysis that the meaning of the phrase ‘intoxicating 
liquor’ cannot be restricted to potable alcoholic liquor, that is, alcohol that is 
sold as a beverage. 
113. At this juncture, it is relevant to recall that all entries in the Seventh Schedule 
must be given a wide interpretation and Entry 8 of List II when interpreted 
widely covers everything from the raw materials required for the production to 
the consumption of ‘intoxicating liquor’. It must also be recalled that a few of 
the materials that are used to prepare potable alcohol (such as rectified spirit 
and ENA) are also used to prepare other pharmaceutical and cosmetic 
products. For example, ENA and rectified spirit are also used to prepare 
products such as varnish and hand sanitizer. Hand sanitizer is a 
pharmaceutical product which is covered by Entry 19 of List III of the 
Concurrent List which deals with “drugs”. Since all entries must be interpreted 
widely, Entry 19 will also include the production and manufacture of drugs and 
will thus cover the materials (ENA or rectified spirit) used for the preparation. 
Usually the entries cover the materials used for the purpose of producing the 
product covered by that Entry. However, alcohol is an inherently noxious 
substance that is prone to misuse affecting public health at large. The purpose 
of Entry 8 is to cover alcohol that could be used noxiously to the detriment of 
public health. The Entry covers all alcohol that could be ‘prone’ to noxious 

PART E 

use. It also covers variants of alcohol that are not used for the preparation of 
potable alcohol but which could be misused to harm public health. This 
interpretation is in consonance with the mischief sought to be covered by the 
Entry. Thus, while the entry covers ENA and rectified spirit which are used in 
the preparation of potable alcohol, it also covers variants of alcohol such as 
denatured alcohol which though are not used in the preparation of potable 
alcohol, are prone to be misused. 
114. It is not disputed that denatured alcohol is prepared by adding substances 
which are called denaturants to give the alcohol a foul smell and taste. The 
very purpose of denaturing ethanol to prepare denatured alcohol is to make 
it undrinkable. This Court in VAM Organic (II) (supra) held that the State can 
regulate the process of preparing denatured alcohol because it is done to 
ensure that the public is protected from consuming illicit liquor but not the 
product of denatured spirit even if it can be renatured and converted to 
potable liquor.193 The petitioners further sought to make a classification 
between Specially Denatured Alcohol and Completely Denatured Alcohol. It 
was argued that though Specially Denatured Alcohol is not fit for human 
consumption, it can be made potable by certain recovery processes while 
there is no such possibility in Completely Denatured Alcohol.194 It was argued 
that Entry 8 must at the least cover Specially Denatured Alcohol. The issue 
of whether denatured alcohol can be renatured to produce potable alcohol is 
 
193 “43. […] But this power stops with the denaturation of the industrial alcohol. Denatured spirit has been 
held in Vam Organic-I to be outside the seism of the State Legislature. Assuming that denatured spirit may 
by whatever process be renatured (a proposition which is seriously disputed by the respondents) and then 
converted into potable liquor, this would not give the State the power to regulate it.[…]” 
194 See Alcohol Denaturants-Specification (Second Revision), ICS 71.100.80 

PART E 

immaterial for the purposes of delineating the field of Entry 8 of List II. As held 
above, Entry 8 does not only cover potable alcohol but alcohol which may be 
used noxiously also. Thus, the test to be adopted is not whether the alcohol 
could be converted and used for the preparation of alcoholic beverages but 
whether it could be mischievously used for its preparation or as a substitute. 
115. It was also argued by the petitioners that the phrase ‘intoxicating liquor’ must 
be interpreted to mean liquid containing alcohol. The consequence of this 
interpretation would be that it would include liquid products which may be 
covered by other entries, thereby, causing an overlap of the entries. For 
example, if interpreted in the above manner, the product of ‘hand sanitizer’ 
will be covered by both Entry 8 of List II (‘intoxicating liquor’) and Entry 19 of 
List III (‘drugs’). Since the Entry must be read widely, it will then cover 
everything relating to the production of the drug, substantially reducing the 
scope of Entry 19 because other products of the pharmaceutical and cosmetic 
industry will be covered by Entry 8. This interpretation will not be in 
consonance with the settled principle of interpretation that an interpretation 
that promotes the workability of provisions must be adopted. This 
interpretation of the phrase is also in consonance with the precedents that we 
have analysed in section E(iv)(a) of this judgment. v. 
The correctness of the decision in Synthetics (7J) 
116. Having interpreted Entry 8 of List II, we now turn to the decision in Synthetics 
(7J) (supra). This Court in Synthetics (7J) (supra) did not undertake an 
independent analysis of the meaning of the phrase ‘intoxicating liquor’. 

PART E 

Without any discussion, the seven-Judge Bench readily concluded that the 
interpretation of the Bombay High Court and not this Court in FN Balsara 
(supra) is the correct approach. The only reasoning that this Court offered 
was that when the Constitution Bench in FN Balsara (supra) interpreted the 
phrase, it was not aware of the full potentiality of industrial alcohol: 
“74. […] It appears that in the light of the new 
experience and development, it is necessary to state 
that “intoxicating liquor” must mean liquor which is 
consumable by human being as it is and as such 
when the word “liquor” was used by Fazl Ali J., they 
did not have the awareness of full use of alcohol as 
industrial alcohol. It is true that alcohol was used for 
industrial purposes then also, but the full potentiality 
of that user was not comprehended or understood. 
With the passage of time, meanings do not change 
but new experiences give new color to the meaning.” 
 
117. These observations are erroneous for the following reasons: 
a. 
The High Court in FN Balsara v. State of Bombay (supra) did not limit 
the meaning of ‘intoxicating liquor’ to its common parlance meaning, that 
is, potable alcoholic liquor. It also included alcoholic liquids which are 
not normally consumed as drinks. On appeal, the Constitution Bench 
held that a wider definition of intoxicating liquor is necessary to cover 
other products which may be used as substitutes for intoxicating drinks. 
[See section E (iv)(a) of this judgment]. This Court held that the 
expression must be given a wide meaning precisely because it 
recognised the potentiality of the wide use of alcohol for industrial 
purposes and its consequent misuse; and 

PART E 

b. 
The Constitution itself recognises the industrial use of alcohol. Entries 
84 of List I (before the amendment in 2016) and 51 of List II specifically 
refer to medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol. 
Thus, the use of alcohol for industrial preparations was well within the 
knowledge of this Court in FN Balsara (supra). 
118. This Court in Synthetics (7J) (supra) did not determine the meaning of the 
expressions ‘intoxicating’ or ‘liquors’ or ‘intoxicating liquors’ independently. It 
did not compare the difference in the language used to describe alcohol or 
liquor in different provisions of the Constitution to understand the significance 
of the difference. Only Article 47 was referred to in the following terms: 
“77. Article 47 of the Constitution imposes upon the 
State the duty to endeavour to bring about 
prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal 
purpose of intoxicating drinks and products which 
are injurious to health. If the meaning of the 
expression “intoxicating liquor” is taken in the wide 
sense adopted in Balsara case, it would lead to an 
anomalous result. Does Article 47 oblige the State to 
prohibit even such industries as are licensed under 
the IDR Act but which manufacture industrial 
alcohol? This was never intended by the above 
judgements or the Constitution.” 
 
119. Although Article 47 was mentioned, the distinction between the purpose of a 
constitutional provision in Part IV and a legislative entry was not appreciated. 
This leads to an incorrect inference, namely, that holding Entry 8 of List II 
includes non-potable alcohol would amount to placing an obligation on the 
state to prohibit non-potable alcohol in terms of Article 47. There is no doubt 
that Article 47 refers only to intoxicating drinks which means potable alcohol. 

PART E 

However, an analysis of the differences in the terminologies without 
appreciating that the reference in Article 47 is made in the context of 
consumption leads to an erroneous conclusion. 
120. Further, in Synthetics (7J) (supra), this Court concluded that the impugned 
fees are in the nature of a tax. In that case, the only entries that this Court 
ought to have dealt with are Entries 84 of List I and Entry 51 of List II. Entry 8 
deals with regulatory power and is not a taxing entry. It is a settled principle 
that a tax cannot be levied under a general entry.195 
121. In spite of holding that the fee charged was a tax and that the State Legislature 
does not have the competence to levy tax on industrial alcohol, the Bench 
proceeded to analyse the relationship between Entry 52 of List I196 and Entry 
8 of List II in paragraph 84 of the judgment. The Bench noted that the “levy of 
impost” is not possible in view of the occupation of the field by IDRA and that 
in view of IDRA, the power to issue licences to manufacture both potable and 
non-potable alcohol is vested in the Central Government.197 These 
observations are erroneous for the following reasons: 
a. 
Under Entry 52 of List I, Parliament has the competence to enact laws 
with respect to certain industries, the control of which by the Union is 
necessary in public interest. It is a general entry. It does not confer any 
taxing power. Thus, Entry 52 of List I may only impact the entries in List 
II that deal with the regulatory aspect of industries as we have explained 
 
195 See MPV Sundararamier & Co. v. State of AP, AIR 1958 SC 468 
196 See Synthetics (7J) [84] 
197 See Synthetics (7J) [85] 

PART E 

in the previous section of this judgment. It does not have any impact on 
taxing entries. Thus, the observation in paragraph 84 of Synthetics (7J) 
(supra) is overruled; and 
b. 
We have also held that Parliament in exercise of the power under Article 
246 read with Entry 52 of List I cannot legislate with respect to the field 
covered by Entry 8 of List II. The observations in paragraph 85 of 
Synthetics (7J) (supra) that after the amendment to IDRA in 1956 
bringing fermentation industries within the scope of the enactment, the 
Union has competence over both potable and non-potable alcohol is 
overruled. The law enacted in terms of Entry 52 of List I cannot render 
any entry of List II (including Entry 8) otiose. Thus, Parliament cannot 
take over the field covered by Entry 8. 
122. In paragraph 86 of the judgment, this Court in Synthetics (7J) (supra) held 
that after the inclusion of the fermentation industry in the schedule to IDRA, 
the State only had legislative competence to: 
a. enact any legislation in the nature of prohibition of potable liquor 
referable to Entry 6 of List II and regulating powers; 
b. lay down regulation to ensure that non-potable alcohol is not diverted 
and misused as a substitute for potable alcohol; 
c. levy excise duty and sales tax on potable alcohol under Entry 52 of List 
II. However, the State cannot levy sales tax on industrial alcohol 
because “under the Ethyl Alcohol (Price Control) Orders, sales tax 
cannot be charged by the State on industrial alcohol”; and 

PART E 

d. in case the State is rendering any service, it may charge fees based on 
quid pro quo. Reliance was placed on observations in Indian Mica 
(supra). 
123. Since this Court in Synthetics (7J) (supra) held that the State lost the 
competence to enact a legislation on potable alcohol because IDRA occupies 
the field and that it did not have the competence to enact a law on non-potable 
alcohol, it traced regulations relating to alcohol to Entry 6 of List II which deals 
with “public health”. Viewing the consumption of potable alcohol as a public 
health concern on a reading of Article 47 along with Entry 6 of List II, this 
Court held that the State has the competence to deal with (a) and (b) above. 
In view of our holding that: (a) the expression ‘intoxicating liquor’ in Entry 8 is 
not limited to alcoholic beverages; and (b) Entry 52 of List II cannot occupy 
the field covered by Entry 8 of List II, the observations in Synthetics (7J) 
(supra) by which alcohol was only traced to the entry on public health is 
erroneous. It cannot be denied that there is a degree of overlap between Entry 
8 and Entry 6 of List II. However, Entry 8 of List II cannot be rendered 
redundant for all purposes by a declaration by parliamentary law under Entry 
52 of List I. Such as interpretation, as held above, would completely tilt the 
federal balance in the favour of Parliament. 
124. Paragraph 86(d) must be read along with paragraph 88 extracted in the earlier 
part of the judgment. The Bench only placed reliance on the decision in Indian 
Mica (supra) to arrive at this conclusion. In paragraph 3 of Indian Mica 
(supra), the Constitution Bench held as follows: 

PART E 

“Denatured spirit though an alcoholic liquor is not fit 
for human consumption. The power to levy duty on 
the same was and is given to the Central Legislature. 
But the same being intoxicating liquor, the 
Provincial Legislature under the 1935 Act and at 
present the State Legislature has power to levy fee. 
The power of any Legislature to levy fee is 
conditioned by the fact that it must be by and large a 
quid pro quo for the services rendered.” 

(emphasis supplied) 
 
125. The conclusion in Indian Mica (supra) that the State Legislature has the 
competence to levy fees on denatured alcohol (which this Court in Synthetics 
(7J) (supra) interchangeably uses with industrial alcohol) is premised on the 
wide interpretation of the phrase intoxicating liquor in Entry 8 of List II to 
include denatured alcohol. However, this Court in Synthetics (7J) (supra) 
expressly rejected this interpretation. The State Legislature would have the 
competence to levy fees in terms of Entry 66 of List II in respect of any of the 
matters in the List. Thus, the conclusion in paragraph 86(d) creates an 
inherent inconsistency within the judgment. We have overruled the 
interpretation in Synthetics (7J) (supra) on the scope of Entry 8 and the 
interaction between Entry 8 and Entry 52 of List. The phrase ‘intoxicating 
liquor’ in Entry 8 includes denatured alcohol. Thus, the State will have the 
competence to levy fees with respect to denatured alcohol, but for the reasons 
in this judgment. 
126. Reference may be made to judgments of this Court interpreting Synthetics 
(7J) which are summarised in Section A(iii) of this judgment. This Court 
interpreted Synthetics (7J) (supra) in the following manner: 

PART E 

a. 
The State has the competence to legislate upon industrial alcohol as a 
product of the controlled industry under Entry 33 of List III198; 
b. 
The State has the competence to legislate upon the process of 
producing denatured spirit but not the product of denatured spirit 
because the process is related to preventing the diversion of non-potable 
liquor to potable liquor;199 
c. 
The State does not have the competence to legislate upon rectified 
spirit200; and 
d. 
The State has the competence to legislate upon rectified spirit that is 
used for the purpose of preparing potable alcohol201. 
127. Before we proceed to analyse the correctness of these observations based 
on the law that we have laid down in this judgment, it is necessary to expound 
upon how this Court in Bihar Distillery (supra) drew a purpose based 
demarcation of the legislative fields. The heart of the reasoning of the Court 
is reproduced below: 
“23. … Take a case where two industries ‘A’ and ‘B’ 
come forward with proposals to manufacture 
rectified spirit; ‘A’ says that it proposes to 
manufacture rectified spirit and then denature it 
immediately and sell it as industrial alcohol while ‘B’ 
says that it will manufacture rectified spirit and utilise 
it entirely for obtaining country liquor (arrack or by 
whatever other name, it may be called) or for 
manufacturing IMFLs from out of it or to supply it to 
others 
for 
the 
said 
purpose. 
According 
 
198 Shri Bileshwar Khand Udyog Khedut Sahakari Mandali (supra) 
199 See VAM Organic(I) (supra) and VAM Organic (II) (supra) 
200 Deccan Sugar (supra) 
201 Bihar Distillery (supra) 

PART E 

to Synthetics [(1990): 1989 Supp (1) 
SCR 623], ‘A’ is under the exclusive control of the 
Union and the only powers of the State are those as 
are enumerated in para 86 quoted above. But what 
about ‘B’? The rectified spirit manufactured by it is 
avowedly meant only for potable purposes. Can it 
yet be called “industrial alcohol”? Can it still be said 
that the State concerned has no power or authority 
to control and regulate industry ‘B’ and that the Union 
alone will control and regulate it until the potable 
liquors are manufactured? The Union is certainly not 
interested in or concerned with manufacture or 
process of manufacture of country liquor or IMFLs. 
Does this situation not leave a large enough room for 
abuse and misuse of rectified spirit? It should be 
remembered that according to many States before 
us, bulk of the rectified spirit produced in their 
respective States is meant for and is utilised for 
obtaining or manufacturing potable liquors. Can it be 
said even in such a situation that the State should 
fold 
its 
hands 
and 
wait 
and 
watch 
till 
the potable stage is reached. … It is these and many 
other situations which have to be taken into 
consideration and provided for in the interests of law, 
public health, public revenue and also in the 
interests of proper delineation of the spheres of the 
Union and the States. The line of demarcation can 
and 
should 
be 
drawn 
at 
the 
stage 
of 
clearance/removal of the rectified spirit. Where 
the removal/clearance is for industrial purposes 
(other than the manufacture of potable liquor), the 
levy of duties of excise and all other control shall be 
of the Union but where the removal/clearance is for 
obtaining or manufacturing potable liquors, the levy 
of duties of excise and all other control shall be that 
of the States. This calls for a joint control and 
supervision of the process of manufacture of 
rectified spirit and its use and disposal.” 

(emphasis supplied) 
 
128. This Court in Bihar Distillery (supra) held that where rectified spirit is 
manufactured only for the purpose of converting it into potable alcohol, it 
cannot be termed ‘industrial alcohol’. It was of the opinion that it was ill-
conceived to allow for a legal structure where the States would step in only 

PART E 

after alcohol was made potable as this would either result in a lacuna in 
regulation or permit the Union to regulate a field which it was not empowered 
to in terms of the Seventh Schedule. The three-Judge Bench held that the line 
of demarcation should be drawn at the stage of clearance or removal of 
rectified spirit. Put differently, the Bench held that the purpose for which the 
rectified spirit was manufactured would determine whether the Union or the 
States would tax and control it. It elaborated that: 
a. 
Industries which manufactured rectified spirit exclusively for supply to 
industries other than those which manufactured potable liquor would be 
under the total and exclusive control of the Union including for the 
purpose of levying excise duty. This extended to denatured alcohol as 
well. The power of the States with respect to this category was limited to 
ensuring that such alcohol was not illegally diverted to create potable 
alcohol. The States could levy regulatory fees to defray the costs of the 
staff deployed for this purpose; 
b. 
Industries which manufactured rectified spirit exclusively for the purpose 
of manufacturing potable alcohol would be under the total and exclusive 
control of the States in all respects and at all stages including levying 
excise duty; and 
c. 
The power to permit the establishment of industries which manufactured 
rectified spirit for both the purposes delineated above as well as the 
regulation of such industries would be exclusively with the Union. The 
Union could levy excise duty on rectified spirit which was cleared or 

PART E 

removed for supply to industries and the States could levy excise duty 
on rectified spirit which was cleared or removed for manufacturing 
potable alcohol. The removal or clearance of alcohol would be under the 
joint supervision of the Union and the States to ensure that excise duty 
was not evaded. 
129. In Bihar Distillery (supra), the issue before this Court was whether the State 
has the competence to regulate raw material (“rectified spirit”) for the 
preparation of “intoxicating liquor” which was interpreted to only mean potable 
liquor. Justice Jeevan Reddy, writing for the three-Judge Bench, saw it fit to 
draw a purpose based delineation because rectified spirit could be used to 
prepare both potable alcohol and other products. The shortcoming of this 
reasoning is evident in the manner in which the Bench deals with composite 
industries, that is, industries which manufacture both rectified spirit for the 
purpose of potable alcohol and the production of other products. The 
regulation of such composite industries was held to be with the Union though 
there was no constitutional basis for such a division. This Bench, having 
expounded on the meaning of “intoxicating liquor” to include variants of 
alcohol which are prone to be misused, the interpretations of Synthetics (7J) 
summarised in paragraph 126 of this judgment are overruled. The 
classification of alcohol into potable and non-potable (or industrial alcohol) is 
oversimplistic. Alcohol (such as ENA or rectified spirit) which is used to 
prepare potable alcohol is also used to prepare other products of the 
pharmaceutical industry. An interpretation that ENA or rectified spirit which is 
used in the preparation of potable liquor is ‘industrial alcohol’ and is thus 

PART E 

outside the scope of Entry 8 limits the field covered by the Entry even if 
‘intoxicating liquor’ is interpreted to only mean potable liquor. Further, we also 
see no merit in the classification between the process of making denatured 
spirit and the product of denatured spirit since we have held that the 
expression intoxicating liquor includes denatured spirit. vi. 
The impact of the decision on Item 26 of the First Schedule of IDRA 
130. The Law Commission of India in its 158th Report on the amendment of the 
IDRA, released in 1998 noted that the decision in Synthetics (7J) (supra) 
created “several practical problems” and that “there is no such thing as 
industrial alcohol”. The Law Commission recommended that Item 26 of the 
IDRA which read “Fermentation industries” be substituted to read 
“Fermentation industries but not including alcohol”. Item 26 was substituted 
in 2016 to read “Fermentation industries (other than potable alcohol)”.202 
While the Law Commission recommended removing alcohol as a whole from 
the scope of the IDRA, Parliament by the 2016 amendment only removed 
potable alcohol from the scope of the enactment. The Statement of Objects 
and Reasons indicates that the amendment to the IDRA was to harmonise 
the Act with the decision of this Court in Bihar Distillery (supra). The relevant 
portion of the Statement of Objects and Reasons is reproduced below: 
“The Supreme Court of India, in the case of Bihar 
Distillery v. Union of India (AIR 1997 SC 1208), has 
held that in the interest of proper delineation of the 
spheres of the Union and the States, the line of 
demarcation should be drawn at the stage of 
clearance or removal of the rectified spirit. Where the 
 
202 See the Industries (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act 2016. 

PART E 

removal or clearance is for industrial purposes (other 
than the manufacture of potable liquor), the levy of 
duties of excise and all other control shall be with the 
Union and where the removal or clearance is for 
obtaining or manufacturing potable liquors, the levy 
of duties of excise and all other control shall be with 
the States. 
In the backdrop of the above judgment of the 
Supreme Court, the Law Commission of India had 
recommended in its 158th Report that the Heading 
26 of the First Schedule to the Act be substituted as 
“Fermentation Industries but not including Alcohol”. 
The recommendation of the Law Commission of 
India was examined in depth by the Government. If 
the subject “Alcohol” is taken out of the First 
Schedule to the Act, both industrial alcohol and 
potable alcohol would come under the purview 
of the State Government which is not in 
consonance with the judgment of the Supreme 
Court. Moreover, the effect of implementation of the 
recommendation of the Law Commission would be 
that the subject “Alcohol” which covers both 
industrial alcohol and potable alcohol would no 
longer be a Central subject.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
131. The Statement of Objects and Reasons indicates that the recommendation of 
the Law Commission was not accepted because the effect of accepting the 
recommendation would be that both ‘industrial alcohol’ and potable alcohol 
would be in the domain of the States, and that this would be contrary to Bihar 
Distillery (supra). Hence, the IDRA was amended to remove only potable 
alcohol from Item 26 of IDRA. 
132. We have held above that Parliament under Entry 52 of List I does not have 
the legislative competence to enact a law taking control of the industry of 
intoxicating liquor. The State Legislatures will have control over the industry 
of ‘intoxicating liquor’. Parliament could not have taken control of the field 
covered by Entry 8 since we have interpreted intoxicating liquor to include 

PART E 

alcohol other than potable alcohol as well. Therefore, Item 26 of the First 
Schedule to the IDRA must be read as excluding the industry of “intoxicating 
liquor”, as interpreted in this judgment. vii. 
The (ir)relevance of the decision in Tika Ramji to the dispute 
133. In Tika Ramji (supra), sugarcane farmers instituted proceedings under Article 
32 of the Constitution challenging the constitutional validity of the Uttar 
Pradesh Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Act 1953203 and 
two notifications issued by the State government under the Act. The 
constitutional validity of the UP Sugarcane Act was challenged on the ground 
that the State Legislature did not have the competence because Item 8 of the 
Schedule to the IDRA notified ‘sugar’ as one of the controlled industries, and 
that the legislation regulating sugarcane was in pith and substance related to 
‘sugar’. The Constitution Bench, inter alia, held that: 
a. 
Industry in the wide sense of the term comprises of three different 
aspects: (i) raw materials which are an integral part of the industrial 
process; (ii) the process of manufacture or production; and (iii) the 
distribution of the products of the entries204; 
b. 
The Seventh Schedule creates a demarcation based on the above three 
stages. Entry 27 of List II deals with the production, supply and 
distribution of goods subject to the provisions of Entry 33 of List III. The 
term ‘goods’ is defined by Article 366(12) of the Constitution and 
 
203 “UP Sugarcane Act”. 
204 Tika Ramji (supra) [24] 

PART E 

includes materials, commodities and articles. ‘Materials’ includes raw 
materials. Thus, the raw materials for industries would be covered by 
Entry 27 of List II. The products would also fall under Entry 27 of List II, 
except in the case of a controlled industry in which case they would be 
covered by Entry 33 of List III. Entry 24 of List II would deal with the 
process of manufacture or production, unless it is a controlled industry 
under Entry 52 of List I205. Thus, the phrase ‘industry’ in Entry 24 of List 
II and Entry 52 of List I takes the narrow meaning of process of 
production and manufacture; 
c. 
Section 18G of the IDRA enables the Union Government to regulate 
supply and distribution, and trade and commerce of certain ‘articles’. It 
does not extend to the production of articles. Raw materials are essential 
ingredients for manufacture or production but they are not of the same 
nature or description as the articles produced by the process of 
manufacture. The articles or class of articles relatable to the scheduled 
industry could only comprise of finished products of a cognate character. 
Raw materials, not being finished products, are not articles which are 
relatable to the scheduled industry covered by Section 18G206; 
d. 
Sugarcane is a raw material for the production of sugar. Consequently, 
it is not an article relatable to the sugar industry and does not fall within 
the scope of Section 18G. The IDRA did not affect the legislative powers 
 
205 ibid 
206 Tika Ramji (supra) 32 

PART E 

of the State Legislature with respect to sugarcane. Therefore, the UP 
Sugarcane Act was not repugnant to the IDRA207; and 
e. 
Even if it were assumed that sugarcane was relatable to the sugar 
industry under Section 18G, the Central Government had not issued a 
notified order, as required by the provision. The mere possibility that a 
notified order may be issued could not lead to repugnancy. Such an 
order was an essential prerequisite for repugnancy to arise208. 
134. The decision in Tika Ramji (supra) was relied upon by this Court in Calcutta 
Gas (supra), Kannan Devan Hills Produce v. State of Kerala209, Ganga 
Sugar Corporation v. State of UP210, B Viswanathiah & Co. v. State of 
Karnataka211 and the majority in ITC (supra) on the aspect of the meaning of 
industry covered by Entry 24 of List II. The dissenting opinion of Justice 
Pattanaik for himself and Justice Bharucha in ITC (supra) doubted the 
correctness of Tika Ramji (supra) on that aspect. 
135. The Union of India submitted that the inclusion of ‘raw materials’ in Entry 27 
of List II (and their consequential exclusion from the definition of ‘industry’ in 
Entry 24 of List II and Entry 52 of List I) in Tika Ramji (supra) must be 
overruled. It was submitted that ‘industry’ as it features in the legislative lists 
includes raw materials as well. The learned Solicitor General submitted that 
if the restrictive meaning in Tika Ramji (supra) is overruled, then the State 
 
207 id 
208 id 
209 (1972) 
210 (1980) 
211 (1991) 

PART E 

will not have competence to legislate on ENA used for the preparation of 
potable alcohol under Entry 8. 
136. We have in the preceding section held that the industry of intoxicating liquor 
is covered by Entry 8 and not Entry 52. Thus, even if a broad meaning is given 
to the word ‘industry’ in Entry 52, it will not impact the decision in this case 
because Entry 8 is the specific entry which applies to the industry of 
intoxicating liquor. 
137. The meaning of the phrase ‘industry’ in Entry 52 will only impact this decision 
if (a) Entry 52 of List I includes raw materials necessary for the industry; and 
(b) Entry 8 of List II includes the process of manufacture but does not include 
the stage anterior to it (that is, raw materials). If an expansive meaning is 
given to the word ‘industry’, the raw materials to an industry will be covered 
by Entry 24 of List II and Entry 52 of List I (if it is a controlled industry). It will 
not be covered by Entry 27 of List II. If Entry 8 of List II does not include raw 
material but only the process to manufacture and final product, it is only then 
that the competence to enact laws on the raw material for the industry (in this 
case, ENA) will lie with Parliament. 

PART E 

138. We are of the opinion that the holding in Tika Ramji (supra) is not relevant to 
the dispute for the following reasons: 
a. 
We have interpreted the phrase ‘intoxicating liquor’ in Entry 8 to include 
ENA since it could be noxiously used; and 
b. 
Notwithstanding the above, if the ground for overruling the holding in 
Tika Ramji (supra) is that manufacture/production cannot be 
disconnected from raw materials, it would equally apply to the industry 
of intoxicating liquor covered by Entry 8 of List II. In Section C (iii)(a) of 
this judgment, we have concluded that the words ‘that is to say’ are 
illustrative. They are not exhaustive of the contents of the Entry. Thus, 
Entry 8 cannot be interpreted to exclude raw materials used for the 
production of intoxicating liquor merely because the Entry does not 
expressly provide for them. On an application of the principle that entries 
ought to be interpreted widely, the raw materials for the production and 
manufacture of intoxicating liquor, as interpreted in this judgment will be 
covered by Entry 8. viii. 
Section 18G of IDRA and Entry 33 of List III 
139. To recall, this Court in Synthetics (7J) (supra) held that the State cannot 
regulate ‘industrial alcohol’ as a product of the controlled industry because 
the Union has occupied the field by Section 18G of IDRA.212 The questions 
referred by the three-Judge Bench in Lalta Prasad (supra) all relate to the 
 
212 Synthetics (7J) [85] 

PART F 

issue of whether Section 18G of the IDRA occupies the field in Entry 33 of 
List III or whether the field is occupied only when an order is notified under 
Section 18G. There is no necessity to determine the correctness of this 
observation in this reference since the Legislature of the State will have the 
competence to regulate denatured alcohol in view of our interpretation of the 
expression ‘intoxicating liquor’ in Entry 8 of List II. 
 
F. Conclusion 
 
140. In view of the discussion above, the following conclusions emerge: 
a. 
Entry 8 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution is both an 
industry-based entry and a product-based entry. The words that follow 
the expression “that is to say” in the Entry are not exhaustive of its 
contents. It includes the regulation of everything from the raw materials 
to the consumption of ‘intoxicating liquor’; 
b. 
Parliament cannot occupy the field of the entire industry merely by 
issuing a declaration under Entry 52 of List I. The State Legislature’s 
competence under Entry 24 of List II is denuded only to the extent of the 
field covered by the law of Parliament under Entry 52 of List I; 
c. 
Parliament does not have the legislative competence to enact a law 
taking control of the industry of intoxicating liquor covered by Entry 8 of 
List II in exercise of the power under Article 246 read with Entry 52 of 
List I; 

PART F 

d. 
The judgments of the Bombay High Court in FN Balsara v. State of 
Bombay (supra), this Court in FN Balsara (supra) and Southern 
Pharmaceuticals (supra) did not limit the meaning of the expression 
‘intoxicating liquor’ to its popular meaning, that is, alcoholic beverages 
that produce intoxication. All the three judgments interpreted the 
expression to cover alcohol that could be noxiously used to the detriment 
of health; 
e. 
The expression ‘intoxicating liquor’ in Entry 8 has not acquired a 
legislative meaning on an application of the test laid down in Ganon 
Dunkerley (supra); 
f. 
The study of the evolution of the legislative entries on alcohol indicates 
that the use of the expressions “intoxicating liquor” and “alcoholic liquor 
for human consumption” in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution 
was a matter well-thought of. It also indicates that the members of the 
Constituent Assembly were aware of use of the variants of alcohol as a 
raw material in the production of multiple products; 
g. 
Entry 8 of List II is based on public interest. It seeks to enhance the 
scope of the entry beyond potable alcohol. This is inferable from the use 
of the phrase ‘intoxicating’ and other accompanying words in the Entry. 
Alcohol is inherently a noxious substance that is prone to misuse 
affecting public health at large. Entry 8 covers alcohol that could be used 
noxiously to the detriment of public health. This includes alcohol such 
as rectified spirit, ENA and denatured spirit which are used as raw 

PART F 

materials in the production of potable alcohol and other products. 
However, it does not include the final product (such as a hand sanitiser) 
that contains alcohol since such an interpretation will substantially 
diminish the scope of other legislative entries; 
h. 
The judgment in Synthetics (7J) (supra) is overruled in terms of this 
judgment; 
i. 
Item 26 of the First Schedule to the IDRA must be read as excluding the 
industry of “intoxicating liquor”, as interpreted in this judgment; 
j. 
The correctness of the judgment in Tika Ramji (supra) on the 
interpretation of word ‘industry’ as it occurs in the legislative entries does 
not fall for determination in this reference; and 
k. 
The issue of whether Section 18G of the IDRA covers the field under 
Entry 33 of List III does not arise for adjudication in view of the finding 
that denatured alcohol is covered by Entry 8 of List II. 
141. The reference is answered in the above terms. 

PART F 

142. The Registry is directed to obtain administrative instructions from the Chief 
Justice for placing the matters before an appropriate Bench...….…….……………………………………CJI 
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]..….…….………………………………………J 
[Hrishikesh Roy]..….…….………………………………………J 
[Abhay S Oka] 

…….……………………………………………J 
[J B Pardiwala] 

…….……………………………………………J 
 [Manoj Misra] 

…….……………………………………………J 
 [Ujjal Bhuyan] 

…….……………………………………………J 
 [Satish Chandra Sharma] 

…….……………………………………………J 
 [Augustine George Masih] 
 
New Delhi; 
October 23, 2024 

 Etc. 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
STATE OF U.P. & OTHERS 

 Civil Appeal No 151 of 2007

VERSUS 
M/s. LALTA PRASAD VAISH AND SONS 

WITH 

 Etc. 

 Etc. 

ORDER ON REFERENCE 

NAGARATHNA, J. 
 
Table of Contents 
S. No. 
Particulars 
Page 
No. 
1. 
Opening Paragraphs 

2. 
Genesis of the controversy 

3. 
Conclusions arrived at by the learned Chief Justice 

4. 
Submissions 

5. 
Relevant Constitutional Framework 

6. 
Interpretation of Legislative Entries 

a. 
Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee 

b. 
FN Balsara 

c. 
Atiqa Begum 

d. 
Calcutta Gas Company 

e. 
RMDC 

f. 
MPV Sundararamier 

7. 
Scheme of IDRA 

8. 
Article 47: Directive Principle of State Policy 

a. 
Cooverjee B. Bharucha 

b. 
Sristikar Dowerah 

c. 
FN Balsara 

d. 
Nagendra Nath 

e. 
Amar Chandra Chakraborty 

f. 
Harinarayan Jaiswal 

g. 
Nashirwar 

h. 
Har Shankar 

i. 
Khoday Distilleries 

9. 
Survey of Judicial Precedents 

a. 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) 

b. 
Synthetics and Chemicals (2J) 

c. 
Bileshwar Khand Udyog 

d. 
Gujchem Distillers 

e. 
Modi Distillery 

 Etc. f. 
Shree Krishna Gyanoday Sugar Ltd. g. 
Bihar Distillery 

h. 
McDowell 

i. 
Vam Organic I 

j. 
Haryana Brewery Ltd. k. 
Industrial Corporation (P) Ltd. l. 
Vam Organic II 

10. 
Analysis of Judicial Dicta 

a. 
Indian Mica 

b. 
Southern Pharmaceuticals 

c. 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) 

d. 
Synthetics and Chemicals (2J) 

e. 
Bileshwar Khand Udyog 

f. 
Shree Krishna Gyanoday Sugar Ltd 

g. 
Bihar Distillery 

h. 
Vam Organic I 

i. 
Vam Organic II 

11. 
Further Analysis 

12. 
Meaning of “intoxicating liquors” 

13. 
A Historical Perspective 

14. 
Constituent Assembly Debates 

15. 
Analysis of relevant Entries in the three Lists 

a. 
Ishwari Khetan 

b. 
Meaning of “subject to” 

c. 
Hingir Rampur 

d. 
Shri Krishna 

e. 
South India Corporation 

f. 
Ashok Leyland Ltd. g. 
Calcutta Gas Company 

16. 
Entry 33(a) – List III vs. Entry 52 - List I: Observations in 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) 

17. 
Article 254, Repugnancy and Doctrine of Occupied Field 

18. 
Mineral Area and Development Authority 

19. 
Mar Appraem Kuri Company 

20. 
Importance of “Industrial Alcohol” to the Indian Economy 

21. 
Conclusion on interplay of legislative Entries 

22. 
Effect of overruling Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) 

23. 
My answers to the questions formulated 

24. 
My answers to the conclusions of learned Chief Justice 

 Etc. 
 
I have perused the comprehensive and erudite opinion 
authored by Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India Dr. Dhananjaya 
Y. Chandrachud on the questions referred to this nine-Judge 
Bench. I respectfully dissent on certain aspects of the said 
opinion and express my reasons therefor. 
1.1 The sum and substance of all the questions referred to this 
Bench could be crystallised on the short point for consideration, 
namely, whether the expression “intoxicating liquors” in Entry 8 
-List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India 
includes within its scope and ambit “industrial alcohol” and 
consequently, whether a State Legislature has the competence to 
legislate on “industrial alcohol”. My short answer is that there is 
a lack of legislative competence in the State Legislature when 
viewed from the constitutional framework and statutory 
framework of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1951 (for short, “IDRA”) passed by the Parliament on the strength 
of Entry 52 – List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution 
of India and having regard to Section 2 of the said Act read with 
its various provisions and the First Schedule thereto, 
particularly, Item 26 which deals with “Fermentation Industries” 

 Etc. 
 
(other than potable alcohol). However, the discussion on scope 
and ambit of Entry 33(a) – List III of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution is distinct and shall be discussed later. Therefore, 
Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, 
AIR 1990 SC 1927 (“Synthetics and Chemicals (7J)”), has 
been correctly decided by the seven-Judge Bench of this Court. 
On the aspect of Section 18G of the IDRA occupying the field and 
consequently, whether the State Legislatures are denuded of 
their powers on the content of the subject matter of the said 
Section in the context of Entry 33(a) – List III as per first part of 
Article 254(1) shall be adverted to later. I propose to discuss the 
reasons for aforesaid view. 
1.2 Since the Entries under discussion are in their respective 
Lists of the “Seventh Schedule of the Constitution”, it would be 
unnecessary to refer to them as being part of “Seventh Schedule 
of the Constitution” in the following discussion. 
Genesis of the controversy: 
2. 
The genesis of this present controversy insofar as the 
reference to the nine-Judge Bench is concerned, emanates from 

 Etc. the judgment of the seven-Judge Bench of this Court in 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J). The said judgment authored 
by Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. (as His Lordship then was) held that 
the scope of the expression “intoxicating liquors” in Entry 8 – List 
II did not extend to “industrial alcohol” and regulation of the 
same by State Legislature is impermissible in law having regard 
to the constitutional framework, particularly the relevant Entries 
of Lists I and II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of 
India. The said dictum of the seven-Judge Bench was doubted 
by a three-Judge Bench of this Court in State of UP vs. M/s 
Lalta Prasad Vaish vide order dated 25.10.2007 and the 
following questions were formulated for consideration by a larger 
Bench: 
“Q. 1. Does Section 2 of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951, have any impact on the field 
covered by Section 18-G of the said Act or Entry 33 of 
List III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution? 
 
Q. 2. Does Section 18-G of the aforesaid Act fall under 
Entry 52 of List I of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution, or is it covered by Entry 33 of List III 
thereof? 
 
Q. 3. In the absence of any notified order by the Central 
Government under Section 18-G of the above Act, is the 
power of the State to legislate in respect of matters 
enumerated in Entry 33 of List III ousted? 

 Etc. 
 
Q. 4. Does the mere enactment of Section 18-G of the 
above Act, give rise to a presumption that it was the 
intention of the Central Government to cover the entire 
field in respect of Entry 33 of List III so as to oust the 
States' competence to legislate in respect of matters 
relating thereto? 
 
Q. 5. Does the mere presence of Section 18-G of the 
above Act, oust the State's power to legislate in regard to 
matters falling under Entry 33(a) of List III? 
 
Q. 6. Does the interpretation given in Synthetics and 
Chemicals case, (1990) in respect of 
Section 18-G of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951, correctly state the law regarding 
the States' power to regulate industrial alcohol as a 
product of the scheduled industry under Entry 33 of List 
III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution in view of 
Clause (a) thereof?” 
 
2.1 A similar view was expressed by a five-Judge Bench in very 
same case wherein this Court was of the view that the matter has 
to be considered by a Bench of nine-Judges. 
2.2 In view of the nature of questions raised by the three-Judge 
Bench as well as the five-Judge Bench of this Court, the 
correctness or otherwise of judgment of this Court in Synthetics 
and Chemicals (7J) is being considered by this nine-Judge 
Bench. 

 Etc. 
 
Conclusions arrived at by the learned Chief Justice: 
3. 
His Lordship, the Chief Justice has overruled the judgment 
in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) and has arrived at the 
following conclusions: 
“In view of the discussion above, the following 
conclusions emerge: 
 
a. 
Entry 8 of list II of the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution is both an industry-based entry and a 
product-based entry. The words that follow the 
expression “that is to say” in the Entry are not 
exhaustive of its contents. It includes the regulation 
of everything from the raw materials to the 
consumption of ‘intoxicating liquor’; 
 
b. 
Parliament cannot occupy the field of the entire 
industry merely by issuing a declaration under 
Entry 52 of List I. The State Legislature’s 
competence under Entry 24 of List II is denuded only 
to the extent of the field covered by the law of 
Parliament under Entry 52 of List I; 
 
c. 
Parliament does not have the legislative competence 
to enact a law taking control of the industry of 
intoxicating liquor covered by Entry 8 of List II in 
exercise of the power under Article 246 read with 
Entry 52 of List I; 
 
d. 
The judgments of the Bombay High Court in FN 
Balsara v. State of Bombay (supra), this Court in 
FN Balsara (supra) and Southern Pharmaceuticals 
(supra) did not limit the meaning of the expression 
‘intoxicating liquor’ to its popular meaning, that is, 
alcoholic beverages that produce intoxication. All 
the three judgments interpreted the expression to 
cover alcohol that could be noxiously used to the 
detriment of health; 

 Etc. e. 
The expression ‘intoxicating liquor’ in Entry 8 has 
not acquired a legislative meaning on an application 
of the test laid down in Ganon Dunkerley (supra); 
 
f. 
The study of the evolution of the legislative entries 
on alcohol indicates that the use of the expressions 
“intoxicating liquor” and “alcoholic liquor for human 
consumption” in the Seventh Schedule was a matter 
well-thought of. It also indicates that the members 
of the Constituent Assembly were aware of use of the 
variants of alcohol as a raw material in the 
production of multiple products; 
 
g. 
Entry 8 of List II is based on public interest. It seeks 
to enhance the scope of the entry beyond potable 
alcohol. This is inferable from the use of the phrase 
‘intoxicating’ and other accompanying words in the 
Entry. Alcohol is inherently a noxious substance 
that is prone to misuse affecting public health at 
large. Entry 8 covers alcohol that could be used 
noxiously to the detriment of public health. This 
includes alcohol such as rectified spirit, ENA and 
denatured spirit which are used as raw materials in 
the production of potable alcohol and other 
products. However, it does not include the final 
product (such as a hand sanitiser) that contains 
alcohol 
since 
such 
an 
interpretation 
will 
substantially diminish the scope of multiple other 
legislative entries; 
 
h. The judgment in Synthetics (7J) (supra) is 
overruled in terms of this judgment; 
 
i. 
Item 26 of the First Schedule to the IDRA must be 
read as excluding the industry “intoxicating liquor”, 
as interpreted in this judgement; 
 
j. 
The correctness of the judgment in Tika Ramji 
(supra) on the interpretation of word ‘industry’ as it 
occurs in the Legislative entries does not fall for 
determination in this reference; and 

 Etc. k. 
The issue of whether Section 18G of the IDRA covers 
the field under Entry 33 of List III does not arise for 
adjudication in view of the finding that denatured 
alcohol is covered by Entry 8 of List II.” 
 
3.1 While coming to the aforesaid conclusions, His Lordship, 
the Chief Justice of India has held that the entire industry of 
“intoxicating liquors” including raw materials is covered by Entry 
8 – List II and is completely out of Entry 52 – List I; that the scope 
and ambit of Entry 8 – List II covers both potable and non-potable 
alcohol and therefore, only State Legislatures have the power to 
regulate the subject. I respectfully disagree. 
3.2 While coming to the aforesaid conclusions, significant 
judgments of this Court in State of Bombay vs. FN Balsara, 
AIR 1951 SC 318 (“FN Balsara”); Ch. Tika Ramji vs. State of 
Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1956 SC 676 (“Tika Ramji”); Calcutta 
Gas Company (Proprietary) Ltd. vs. State of West Bengal, 
AIR 1962 SC 1044 (“Calcutta Gas Company”); Indian Mica 
and Micanite Industries vs. State of Bihar, (1971) 
(“Indian Mica”); Ishwari Khetan Sugar Mills (P) Ltd. vs. State 
of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1980 SC 1955 (“Ishwari Khetan”); 
State of AP vs. McDowell & Co., (1996) 

 Etc. 
 
(“McDowell”); Bihar Distillery vs. Union of India, (1997) (“Bihar Distillery”); Vam Organic Chemicals Ltd. vs. State of U.P., (1997), (“Vam Organic I”); and 
State of UP vs. Vam Organic Chemicals Ltd., (2004) (“Vam Organic II”), amongst others, have been discussed. 
Submissions: 
4. 
As the learned Chief Justice has recorded the submissions 
of the respective parties in detail, I need not be repetitive except 
highlighting the submissions of the learned senior counsel Sri 
Rakesh Dwivedi, Sri Datar and Sri Jaideep Gupta and other 
counsel for the appellants. The main contention of the appellants 
is that the States have jurisdiction over “industrial alcohol” and 
therefore the judgment of this Court in Synthetics and 
Chemicals (7J) is incorrect. The expression “intoxicating 
liquors” in Entry 8 – List II of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution cannot be restricted to alcoholic liquors for human 
consumption by a deduction from a reading of Entry 84 – List I 
with Entry 51 – List II. In other words, “intoxicating liquors” 
cannot be equated with only “alcoholic liquors for human 
consumption”. On the other hand, it is contended that the 

 Etc. expression “intoxicating liquors” has attained a specific meaning 
over the passage of time which is more expansive than “alcoholic 
liquors for human consumption”. 
4.1 The further submission was that only the production and 
manufacture of “industrial alcohol” would be governed by the 
Union List even if the requirement of a declaration under Section 
2 of the IDRA read with Item 26 of the First Schedule thereto is 
as per Entry 52 – List I. However, when it comes to Entry 33 – 
List III, there is need for a notified order to claim exclusive 
jurisdiction on a product of a scheduled industry. If no such 
order has been issued, the legislative powers of the State would 
remain exclusive. It was further submitted that alcoholic liquors 
for human consumption means it is capable of being consumed 
by humans and it would fall under Entry 51 – List II, while 
denatured alcohol such as ethyl alcohol or rectified spirit which 
usually undergoes denaturation for the purposes of their use in 
industries would fall under Entry 84 – List I. That everything, 
except denatured spirit is alcohol for human consumption 
because it has the potential to be consumed by humans. That 
Extra Neutral Alcohol (‘ENA’, for short) and rectified spirit may 

 Etc. therefore be understood to be for human consumption and 
ceases to be such only upon undergoing denaturation. But 
according to the judgment in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J), 
the States do not have the power to levy tax on ENA despite being 
fit for human consumption. This position of law in the aforesaid 
decision has restricted the competence of the States to levy tax 
under Entry 51 – List II. That pursuant to the aforesaid decision, 
the Law Commission in its 158th Report suggested an 
amendment to the IDRA by which Item 26 in the First Schedule 
has been amended to mean that “Fermentation Industries” 
would not include “potable alcohol” with retrospective effect. It 
was contended that this amendment does not in any way clear 
the confusion created in the aforesaid case and hence, 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) may be overruled. It was also 
contended that in Tika Ramji, this Court has devised a three-
fold classification as pre-production, production and post-
production and it was only in the second category i.e. production 
which would be covered by the word “industry”. 
4.2 Taking a different stance, Sri V. Giri submitted that 
denatured alcohol is excluded from the scope of the term 

 Etc. 
 
“intoxicating liquors” in Entry 8 – List II and is covered under 
Entry 24 – List II. Further, unless a notified order under Section 
18G of the IDRA is issued, the Parliament cannot occupy the field 
under Entry 33 – List III merely on the strength of the said 
provision being brought on the statute book. 
4.3 On the other hand, Sri R. Venkataramani, learned Attorney 
General, leading the arguments for the Union of India and other 
respondents contended that Entry 52 – List I and Entry 33 – List 
III are interrelated as they touch upon matters relating to a 
scheduled industry under the provisions of the IDRA, whose 
control is with the Union. It was contended that Entry 52 – List 
I is provided in order to ensure a uniform control and 
development of an industry throughout the length and breadth 
of the country. This is not only in the interest of the scheduled 
industry but also to achieve equitable distribution of the 
products of such industry and as an economic measure. As a 
result, in respect of a scheduled industry, the powers of the State 
under Entries 26 and 27 - List II are denuded. Also, if the field is 
occupied by the Parliament (Union) and the States are denuded 
of their powers under Entry 33 – List III. Therefore, the judgment 

 Etc. in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) would not call for a 
reconsideration as it was correctly decided. It was further 
contended that all liquids containing alcohol would fall under 
two categories, namely, those meant for human consumption 
(potable alcohol) and non-potable alcohol. Entry 8 – List II deals 
with only potable alcohol meant for human consumption as a 
beverage. Thus, non-potable alcohol is outside the scope of Entry 
8 – List II. The amendment to Item 26 of First Schedule of IDRA 
has clarified this position. Further, the use of the expression 
“that is to say” in Entry 8 – List II refers to the various activities 
concerning potable alcohol and does not refer to any other class 
of liquor. 
4.4 Learned Solicitor General of India submitted that the 
controversy in this case must be tread carefully as it would have 
a bearing on other legislation. That having regard to national 
interest, there is a requirement for a uniform development 
throughout the country in respect of the products of an industry 
that are sought to be equally distributed, and, therefore, the 
control of such industries is taken over by the Union exercising 
powers in relation to Entry 52 – List I. That the IDRA is an 

 Etc. instance of such legislation. It was contended that the judgment 
in Tika Ramji insofar as it held that there must be a notified 
order in force pursuant to Section 18G for the doctrine of 
repugnancy to apply is not correct and in Synthetics and 
Chemicals (7J), the judgment in Tika Ramji was rightly not 
considered. The expression “intoxicating liquors” in Entry 8- List 
II means a beverage which has the effect of intoxication upon 
consumption. In Synthetics and Chemicals (7J), this Court 
held that “intoxicating liquors” is “alcoholic liquors fit for human 
consumption”. Other learned counsel for the respondents have 
adopted the above arguments. 
5. 
On enumerating the questions for opinion of this nine-
Judge Bench, the following issues have been crystallised for 
consideration in paragraph 42 of the judgment of the learned 
Chief Justice of India which read as under: 
“42. 
With the above preliminary observations, we have 
formulated the following issues: 
 
a. 
Whether Entry 52 of List I of the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constitution overrides Entry 8 of List II; 
 
b. 
Whether the expression ‘intoxicating liquors’ in 
Entry 8 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution includes alcohol other than potable 
alcohol; and 

 Etc. c. 
Whether a notified order under Section 18G of the 
IDRA is necessary for Parliament to occupy the field 
under Entry 33 of List III of the Seventh Schedule to 
the Constitution.” 
 
Relevant Constitutional Framework: 
6. 
Article 265 of the Constitution mandates that no tax shall 
be levied or collected except by authority of law. Article 366 is a 
definition clause and it states that in the Constitution, unless 
the context otherwise requires, the expressions mentioned 
therein have the meanings thereby respectively assigned to them. 
For the purpose of this case, Article 366(12) and (28) are relevant 
and the same read as under: 
“Article 366. Definitions.- In this Constitution, unless 
the context otherwise requires, the following expressions 
have the meanings hereby respectively assigned to them, 
that is to say – 
xxx 
(12) “goods” includes all materials, commodities and 
articles; 
xxx 
(28) “taxation” includes the imposition of any tax or 
impost, whether general or local or special and “tax” 
shall be construed accordingly;” 
 
The aforesaid definition of ‘taxation’ is not exhaustive but 
inclusive in nature to include not only any tax in the usual 

 Etc. understanding of the said expression or tax stricto senso but also 
any levy akin to a tax. There can be no cavil to the proposition 
that before any tax or impost could be levied or collected, it must 
have the authority of law vide Article 265 including legislative 
competence. 
6.1 Article 246 of the Constitution deals with distribution of 
legislative powers between the Parliament and State Legislature, 
while Article 254 speaks of inconsistency between the laws made 
by Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of States. They 
read as under: 
“246. Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and 
by the Legislatures of States.—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything in clauses (2) and (3), Parliament has exclusive 
power to make laws with respect to any of the matters 
enumerated in List 1 in the Seventh Schedule (in this 
Constitution referred to as the "Union List"). 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3), Parliament 
and subject to clause (1), the Legislature of any State 
also, have power to make laws with respect to any of the 
matters enumerated in List III in the Seventh Schedule 
(in this Constitution referred to as the "Concurrent 
List"). 
 
(3) Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of any 
State has exclusive power to make laws for such State 
or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters 
enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule (in this 
Constitution referred to as the 'State List'). 

 Etc. 
 
(4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect to 
any matter for any part of the territory of India not 
included in a State notwithstanding that such matter is 
a matter enumerated in the State List. xxx 
254. 
Inconsistency 
between 
laws 
made 
by 
Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of 
States.—(1) If any provision of a law made by the 
Legislature of a State is repugnant to any provision of a 
law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent 
to enact, or to any provision of an existing law with 
respect to one of the matters enumerated in the 
Concurrent List, then, subject to the provisions of clause 
(2), the law made by Parliament, whether passed before 
or after the law made by the Legislature of such State, 
or, as the case may be, the existing law, shall prevail and 
the law made by the Legislature of the State shall, to the 
extent of the repugnancy, be void. 
 
(2) Where a law made by the Legislature of a State with 
respect to one of the matters enumerated in the 
Concurrent List contains any provision repugnant to the 
provisions of an earlier law made by Parliament or an 
existing law with respect to that matter, then, the law so 
made by the Legislature of such State shall, if it has been 
reserved for the consideration of the President and has 
received his assent, prevail in that State: 
 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent 
Parliament from enacting at any time any law with 
respect to the same matter including a law adding to, 
amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the 
Legislature of the State.” 
 
6.2 With regard to the allocation of subjects under the three 
Lists, namely, List I - Union List; List II - State List and List III - 
Concurrent List, it may be useful to refer to the Devolution Rules 

 Etc. drawn under the Government of India Act, 1919 and the 
Government of India Act, 1935 which are the precursors to the 
distribution of legislative powers between the Union and the 
States under the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. 
Some of the salient aspects concerning the distribution of the 
legislative powers between Parliament and State Legislature as 
per the three Lists in the backdrop of the provisions could be 
alluded to. 
6.3 Article 246 of the Constitution deals with the distribution 
of legislative powers between the Union and the States. The said 
Article has to be read along with the three Lists, namely, the 
Union List, the State List and the Concurrent List. The taxing 
powers of the Union as well as the States are also demarcated as 
separate Entries in the Union List as well as the State List i.e. 
List I and List II respectively. The Entries in the Lists are fields 
of legislative powers conferred under Article 246 of the 
Constitution. In other words, the Entries define the areas of 
legislative competence of the Union and the State Legislature. 
(vide: State of Karnataka vs. State of Meghalaya, (2023) para 56), (“State of Karnataka”). 

 Etc. 
 
Interpretation of Legislative Entries: 
6.4 On the aspect of interpretation of legislative Entries in the 
three Lists, the following principles are apposite as discussed in 
State of Karnataka: 

The power to legislate, which is dealt with under Article 246 
has to be read in conjunction with the Entries in the three 
Lists which define the respective areas of legislative 
competence of the Union and State Legislatures. While 
interpreting these Entries, they should not be viewed in a 
narrow or myopic manner but by giving the widest scope to 
their meaning, particularly, when the vires of a provision of 
a statute is assailed. In such circumstances, a liberal 
construction must be given to the Entry by looking at the 
substance of the legislation and not its mere form. However, 
while interpreting the Entries in the case of an apparent 
conflict, every attempt must be made by the Court to 
harmonise or reconcile them. Where there is an apparent 
overlapping between two Entries, the doctrine of pith and 
substance is applied to find out the true character of the 
enactment and the Entry within which it would fall. The 

 Etc. doctrine of pith and substance, in short, means, if an 
enactment substantially falls within the powers expressly 
conferred by the Constitution upon the Legislature which 
enacted it, the same cannot be held to be invalid merely 
because it incidentally encroaches on matters assigned to 
another Legislature. Also, in a situation where there is 
overlapping, the doctrine has to be applied to determine to 
which Entry, a piece of legislation could be related to. In 
order to examine the true character of an enactment or a 
provision thereof, due regard must be had to the enactment 
as a whole and to its scope and object. It is said that the 
question of invasion into another legislative territory has to 
be determined by substance and not by degree. 
(ii) In case of any conflict between Entries in List I and List II, 
the power of Parliament to legislate under List I will 
supersede when, on an interpretation, the two powers 
cannot be reconciled. But if a legislation in pith and 
substance squarely falls within any of the Entries of List II, 
the State Legislature's competence cannot be questioned on 
the ground that the field is covered by the Union list or the 

 Etc. 
 
Concurrent list vide Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee vs. Bank 
of Commerce Limited, Khulna, AIR 1947 P.C. 60 
(“Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee”). According to the pith and 
substance doctrine, if a law is, in its pith and substance 
within the competence of the Legislature which has made 
it, it will not be invalid because it incidentally touches upon 
the subject lying within the competence of another 
Legislature vide FN Balsara. 
(iii) Once the legislation is found to be ‘with respect to’ the 
legislative Entry in question, unless there are other 
constitutional prohibitions, the power would be unfettered. 
It would also extend to all ancillary and subsidiary matters 
which 
can 
fairly 
and 
reasonably 
be 
said 
to 
be 
comprehended in that topic or category of legislation vide 
United Provinces vs. Atiqa Begum, AIR 1941 FC 16 
(“Atiqa Begum”). 
(iv) Another important aspect while construing the Entries in 
the respective Lists is that every attempt should be made to 
harmonise the contents of the Entries so that interpretation 
of one Entry should not render the entire content of another 

 Etc. 
 
Entry nugatory vide Calcutta Gas Company. This is 
especially so when some of the Entries in a different List or 
in the same List may overlap or may appear to be in direct 
conflict with each other. In such a situation, a duty is cast 
on the Court to reconcile the Entries and bring about a 
harmonious construction. Thus, an effort must be made to 
give effect to both Entries and thereby arrive at a 
reconciliation or harmonious construction of the same. 

In short, the Entries in the different Lists should be read 
together without giving a narrow meaning to any of them. 
The powers of the Union and the State Legislature are 
expressed in precise and definite terms. Hence, there can 
be no broader interpretation given to one Entry than to the 
other. Even where an Entry is worded in wide terms, it 
cannot be so interpreted as to negate or override another 
Entry or make another Entry meaningless. In case of an 
apparent conflict between different Entries, it is the duty of 
the Court to reconcile them in the first instance. 
(vi) Further, where one Entry is made “subject to” another 
Entry, all that it means is that out of the scope of the former 

 Etc. 
 
Entry, a field of legislation covered by the latter Entry has 
been reserved to be specially dealt with by the appropriate 
Legislature. 
(vii) Also, when one Entry is general and another is specific, 
normally, the latter will exclude the former on a subject of 
legislation. 
 
6.5 The sequitur to the aforesaid discussion is that if the 
Legislature passes a law which is beyond its legislative 
competence, it is a nullity ab-initio. The Legislation is rendered 
null and void for want of jurisdiction or legislative competence 
vide RMDC vs Union of India, AIR 1957 SC 628 (“RMDC”). 
6.6 On a close perusal of the Entries in the three Lists, it is 
discerned that the Constitution has divided the topics of 
legislation into the following three broad categories: 
(i) Entries enabling laws to be made; 
(ii) Entries enabling taxes to be imposed; and 
(iii) Entries enabling fees and stamp duties to be collected. 
6.7 Thus, the Entries on levy of taxes are specifically 
mentioned. Therefore, as such, there cannot be a conflict of 

 Etc. taxation power of the Union and the State. In substance, the 
taxing power can be derived only from a specific taxing Entry in 
an appropriate List. Such a power has to be determined by the 
nature of the tax and not the measure or machinery set up by 
the statute. In this context, reliance could be placed on MPV 
Sundararamier vs. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1958 SC 
468 (“MPV Sundararamier”), wherein at paragraph 51 it was 
observed as under: 
“51. In List I Entries 1 to 81 mention the several matters 
over which Parliament has authority to legislate. Entries 
82 to 92 enumerate the taxes which could be imposed 
by a law of Parliament. An examination of these two 
groups of entries shows that while the main subject of 
legislation figures in the first group, a tax in relation 
thereto is separately mentioned in the second. Thus, 
Entry 22 in List I is “Railways”, and Entry 89 is 
“Terminal taxes on goods or passengers, carried by 
railway, sea or air; taxes on railway fares and freights”. 
If Entry 22 is to be construed as involving taxes to be 
imposed, then Entry 89 would be superfluous. Entry 41 
mentions “Trade and commerce with foreign countries; 
import and export across customs frontiers”. If these 
expressions are to be interpreted as including duties to 
be levied in respect of that trade and commerce, then 
Entry 83 which is “Duties of customs including export 
duties” would be wholly redundant. Entries 43 and 44 
relate to incorporation, regulation and winding up of 
corporations. 
Entry 

provides 
separately 
for 
corporation tax. Turning to List II, Entries 1 to 44 form 
one group mentioning the subjects on which the States 
could legislate. Entries 45 to 63 in that List form another 

 Etc. group, and they deal with taxes. Entry 18, for example, 
is “Land” and Entry 45 is “Land revenue”. Entry 23 is 
“Regulation of mines” and Entry 50 is “Taxes on mineral 
rights”. The above analysis—and it is not exhaustive of 
the entries in the Lists—leads to the inference that 
taxation is not intended to be comprised in the main 
subject in which it might on an extended construction 
be regarded as included, but is treated as a distinct 
matter for purposes of legislative competence. And this 
distinction is also manifest in the language of Article 248 
clauses (1) and (2) and of Entry 97 in List I of the 
Constitution. Construing Entry 42 in the light of the 
above scheme, it is difficult to resist the conclusion that 
the power of Parliament to legislate on inter-State trade 
and commerce under Entry 42 does not include a power 
to impose a tax on sales in the course of such trade and 
commerce.” 
 
6.8 What falls for interpretation in these cases is the content, 
interplay and meaning of Entries 52 and 84 – List I, Entries 8, 
24, 26, 27, 51 – List II and Entry 33 – List III. The aforesaid 
Entries read as under: 
“List – I 
52. Industries, the control of which by the Union is 
declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the 
public interest. xxx 
84. Duties of excise on tobacco and other goods 
manufactured or produced in India except:— 

alcoholic liquors for human consumption; 

opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and 
narcotics, 

 Etc. but 
including 
medicinal 
and 
toilet 
preparations 
containing alcohol or any substance included in sub-
paragraph (b) of this entry. 
List – II 
8. Intoxicating liquors, that is to say, the production, 
manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale 
of intoxicating liquors. xxx 
24. Industries subject to the provisions of Entries 7 and 
52 of List I. xxx 
26. Trade and commerce within the State subject to the 
provisions of entry 33 of List III. 
27. Production, supply and distribution of goods subject 
to the provisions of entry 33 of List III. xxx 
51. 
Duties 
of 
excise 
on 
the 
following 
goods 
manufactured 
or 
produced 
in 
the 
State 
and 
countervailing duties at the same or lower rates on 
similar goods manufactured or produced elsewhere in 
India:— 
(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption; 
(b) opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and 
narcotics, 
but not including medicinal and toilet preparations 
containing alcohol or any substance included in sub-
paragraph (b) of this entry. 
List – III 
33. Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply 
and distribution of,— 
(a) the products of any industry where the control of 
such industry by the Union is declared by 
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public 

 Etc. interest, and imported goods of the same kind as 
such products; 
(b) foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils; 
(c) cattle 
fodder, 
including 
oilcakes 
and 
other 
concentrates; 
(d) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginned, and cotton 
seed; and 
(e) raw jute.” 
 
For a better understanding of the discussion to follow, it 
would be relevant to refer to the scheme of the IDRA. 
Scheme of IDRA: 
7. 
The Preamble of the IDRA states that it is an Act to provide 
for the development and regulation of certain industries. Section 
2 declares that it is expedient in the public interest that the 
Union should take under its control the industries specified in 
the First Schedule to the said Act. Hence, the question would be, 
whether, the Parliament by law has declared it expedient in 
public interest that the Union should take control of certain 
industries. Section 2 of the IDRA, for immediate reference, reads 
as under: 
“2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the 
Union.- It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the 
public interest that the Union should take under its 
control the industries specified in the First Schedule.” 

 Etc. 

In the First Schedule to the said Act, Item 26 reads as under: 
“26. Fermentation Industries: 

Alcohol. 

Other products of fermentation industries.” 
 
Item 26 of the First Schedule to the Act was amended on 
14.05.2016 by Act 27 of 2016 with retrospective effect from 
08.05.1952 and it reads as under: 
“26. Fermentation Industries (Other than Potable 
Alcohol): 

Alcohol. 

Other products of fermentation industries.” 
 
7.1 Section 3 of the IDRA is the definition clause and the 
relevant definitions read as under: 
“3. Definitions. – In this Act, unless the context 
otherwise requires,- 
xxx 
(d) “industrial undertaking” means any undertaking 
pertaining to a scheduled industry carried on in one or 
more factories by any person or authority including 
Government; 
(dd) “new article”, in relation to an industrial 
undertaking which is registered or in respect of which a 
licence or permission has been issued under this Act, 
means— 
(a) any article which falls under an item in the First 
Schedule other than the item under which articles 
ordinarily 
manufactured 
or 
produced 
in 
the 

 Etc. industrial undertaking at the date of registration or 
issue of the licence or permission, as the case may 
be, fall; 
(b) any article which bears a mark as defined in the 
Trade Marks Act, 1940 (5 of 1940), or which is the 
subject of a patent, if at the date of registration or 
issue of the licence or permission, as the case may 
be, 
the 
industrial 
undertaking 
was 
not 
manufacturing or producing such article bearing 
that mark or which is the subject of that patent; 
(e) “notified order” means an order notified in the 
Official Gazette; 
xxx 
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 
(h) “Schedule” means a Schedule to this Act; 
(i) “scheduled industry” means any of the industries 
specified in the First Schedule; 
xxx 
(k) words and expressions used herein but not defined in 
this Act and defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 
1956), have the meanings respectively assigned to them 
in that Act.” 
 
7.2 Chapter II of the Act deals with the Central Advisory 
Council and Development Councils while Chapter III speaks of 
regulation of scheduled industries. The headings of Sections 10 
to 18 are noted within Chapter III. The said provisions deal with, 
inter alia, registration of existing industries, issuance of licence 
for producing or manufacturing of new articles, conducting 

 Etc. investigation to be made into scheduled industries. Chapter IIIA 
speaks 
of 
direct 
management 
or 
control 
of 
industrial 
undertakings by Central Government in certain cases while 
Chapter IIIAA speaks of management or control of industrial 
undertakings owned by companies in liquidation. Chapter IIIAB 
deals with the power to provide relief to certain industrial 
undertakings while Chapter IIIAC speaks of liquidation or 
reconstruction of companies. Chapter IIIB deals with control of 
supply, distribution, price, etc., of certain articles was inserted 
by Act 26 of 1953. 
7.3 Section 18G which is in the said Chapter is relevant for the 
purpose of this case, reads as under: 
“18G. Power to control supply, distribution, price, 
etc., of certain articles.—(1) The Central Government, 
so far as it appears to it to be necessary or expedient for 
securing the equitable distribution and availability at 
fair prices or any article or class of articles relatable to 
any scheduled industry, may, notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other provisions of this Act, by notified 
order, provide of regulating the supply and distribution 
thereof and trade and commerce therein. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers 
conferred by sub-section (1), a notified order made 
thereunder may provide— 
(a) for controlling the prices at which any such article 
or class thereof may be bought or sold; 

 Etc. 
 
(b) for regulating by licences, permits or otherwise the 
distribution, 
transport, 
disposal, 
acquisition, 
possession, use or consumption of any such article 
or class thereof; 
(c) for prohibiting the withholding from sale of any such 
article or class thereof ordinarily kept for sale; 
(d) for requiring any person manufacturing, producing 
or holding in stock any such article or class thereof 
to sell the whole or part of the articles so 
manufactured or produced during a specified period 
or to sell the whole or a part of the articles so held 
in stock to such person or class of persons and in 
such circumstances as may be specified in the 
order; 
(e) for regulating or prohibiting any class of commercial 
or financial transactions relating to such article or 
class thereof which in the opinion of the authority 
making the order are, or if unregulated are likely to 
be, detrimental to public interest; 
(f) for requiring persons engaged in the distribution 
and trade and commerce in any such article or class 
thereof to mark the articles exposed or intended for 
sale with the sale price or to exhibit at some easily 
accessible place on the premises the price-lists of 
articles held for sale and also to similarly exhibit on 
the first day of every month, or at such other time 
as may be prescribed, a statement of the total 
quantities of any such articles in stock; 
(g) for collecting any information or statistics with a 
view to regulating or prohibiting any of the aforesaid 
matters; and 
(h) for any incidental or supplementary matters, 
including, in particular, the grant or issue of 
licences, permits or other documents and the 
charging of fees therefor. 

 Etc. 
 
(3) Where, in pursuance of any order made with 
reference to clause (d) of sub-section (2), any person sells 
any article, there shall be paid to him the price therefor— 
(a) where the price can consistently with the controlled 
price, if any, be fixed by agreement, the price so 
agreed upon; 
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the price 
calculated with reference to the controlled price, if 
any, fixed under this section; 
(c) where neither clause (a) nor clause (b) applies, the 
price calculated at the market rate prevailing in the 
locality at the date of sale. 
(4) No order made in exercise of any power conferred by 
this section shall be called in question in any court. 
(5) Where an order purports to have been made and 
signed by an authority in exercise of any power conferred 
by this section, a court shall, within the meaning of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), presume that 
such order was so made by that authority. 
Explanation.— In this section, the expression “article or 
class of articles” relatable to any scheduled industry 
includes any article or class of articles imported into 
India which is of the same nature or description as the 
article or class of articles manufactured or produced in 
the scheduled industry.” 
 
7.4 The reason as to why Section 18G was inserted to the IDRA 
must be noted. In paragraph 3 of the Statement of Objects and 
Reasons, it has been stated as under: 
“At present, the power to control prices and distribution 
of various goods under this Act is confined to industrial 
undertakings registered or licensed under the Act. In all 
other cases, it is necessary to have recourse to powers 

 Etc. derived from the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) 
Act, 1946 and the Supply and Prices of Goods Act, 1950. 
Both these enactments have a limited period of life. It is 
proposed to add a chapter taking power to control the 
distribution and price of goods produced in scheduled 
industries and of similar goods even, though they may 
be of imported origin.” 
 
The aforesaid reflects that the IDRA has brought under 
Central control the development and regulation of a number of 
important industries, the activities of which affect the country as 
a whole and the development of which must be governed by 
economic factors of all-India import. 
Similarly, in the Statement of Objects and Reasons of 
Amendment Act 72 of 1971, it has been stated as under: 
“The industries included in the First Schedule to the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 are 
those the control of which by the Union has been 
considered to be expedient in the public interest. The 
proper development of these industries is vital to the 
economic development of the country. These industries 
not only substantially contribute to the Gross National 
Product of the country, but also afford gainful 
employment to millions of people.” 
 
7.5 Section 29E was inserted with effect from 14.05.2016 by 
Act 27 of 2016. As already noted, Item 26 of the First Schedule 
deals with “Fermentation Industries” and after amendment by 

 Etc. 
 
Act 27 of 2016 with retrospective effect from 08.05.1952, 
“Fermentation Industries” have been clarified as “other than 
potable alcohol”. Therefore, alcohol and other products of 
“Fermentation Industries” would refer to products which are 
“other than potable alcohol”. 
Article 47: Directive Principle of State Policy: 
8. 
Since we are trying to ascertain the true meaning of 
“intoxicating liquors” in Entry 8 – List II, Article 47 of the 
Constitution of India, which is a Directive Principle of the State 
Policy, is relevant as the said Article deals, inter alia, with 
intoxicating drinks. The same reads as under: 
“47. Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition 
and the standard of living and to improve public 
health 
The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition 
and the standard of living of its people and the 
improvement of public health as among its primary 
duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to 
bring about prohibition of the consumption except for 
medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs 
which are injurious to health.” 
 
What is significant are the words “the State shall endeavour 
to bring about prohibition of the consumption, except for 
medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks which are injurious to 

 Etc. health”. It is on the basis of the said Directive Principle that 
several prohibition and excise laws have been enacted in several 
States as a constitutional goal to improve the health of the people 
of India in the context of prevention and prohibition of 
consumption of “intoxicating liquors”. The manufacture, export, 
import, transport or sale of “intoxicating liquors” is prohibited 
except in accordance with a licence, permit or pass granted in 
that behalf. The State legislations confer power on State 
Governments in matters concerning liquor licensing and also 
with regard to imposition of excise duty. 
8.1 The following decisions of this Court could be considered at 
this stage as they are of relevance to the controversy under 
consideration: 
a) In Cooverjee B. Bharucha vs. Excise Commissioner and 
the Chief Commissioner, Ajmer, AIR 1954 SC 220 
(“Cooverjee B. Bharucha”), the right of a citizen to carry on 
trade and business in liquor under Article 19(1)(g) of the 
Constitution was considered. The impact of liquor on a 
person who consumes it as well as on the society was 
discussed. With reference to an American decision in 

 Etc. 
 
Crowley vs. Christensen, (1890) 34 Law Ed. 620 
(“Crowley”) at p. 623, it was observed that when liquor is 
consumed, first of all it affects the person who consumes it, 
and subsequently, it affects those who are immediately 
connected and dependent upon him. Hence, there is a need 
to regulate the business of manufacture and trade in liquor. 
It was observed that no citizen has an inherent right to sell 
“intoxicating liquors” in retail. This is because the business 
of liquor is attended with danger to the community. It can, 
therefore, be entirely prohibited or regulated as per the 
discretion of the Government and the Authority concerned. 
It was held that Regulation could also be in the form of 
issuance of licences to eligible persons under a particular 
legislation. The provisions of regulation of liquor, which 
permit certain eligible persons to carry on the trade to the 
exclusion of the general public and thereby possibly create a 
monopoly, is also permissible in law. b) In State of Assam vs. Sristikar Dowerah, AIR 1957 SC 
414 (“Sristikar Dowerah”), it was observed as under: 

 Etc. 
 
“no person has any absolute right to sell liquor and 
that the purpose of the Act and the rules is to control 
and restrict the consumption of intoxicating liquors, 
such control and restriction being obviously 
necessary for the preservation of public health and 
morals, and to raise revenue.” 
 
 The above observation is in line with Article 47 of the 
Constitution of India which is a Directive Principle. c) The constitutional validity of the Bombay Prohibition Act, 
1949 was challenged in FN Balsara. One of the arguments 
raised was that the said Act could be justified under Entry I 
-List II which relates to public order. This was by placing 
reliance on a tendency in Europe and America with regard to 
alcoholism as a menace to public order. However, the said 
submission was not pursued further before this Court as 
there were other express provisions under the pertinent 
Entry which dealt with “intoxicating liquors”. The short 
question considered was whether the Bombay Prohibition 
Act, 1949 in pith and substance was a law relating to 
possession and sale, etc. of “intoxicating liquors” or whether 
it related to import and export of “intoxicating liquors”. 
Dealing with the validity of the aforesaid Act, this Court 

 Etc. noted the word “liquor” ordinarily means “a strong drink as 
opposed to soft drink” but it must in any event be a beverage 
which is ordinarily drunk as noted by the Bombay High 
Court. The High Court further noted that although the State 
Legislature 
may 
prevent 
the 
consumption 
of 
non-
intoxicating beverages and also prevent the use as drinks of 
alcoholic liquids which are not normally consumed as 
drinks, it cannot prevent the legitimate use of alcoholic 
preparations which are not beverages nor the use of 
medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol. This 
view was challenged before this Court. Noting the several 
meanings of “liquor” from the Oxford English Dictionary, it 
was observed that as a general meaning it is a liquid but as 
a special meaning it means a drink or beverage produced by 
fermentation or distillation. It was observed that this is the 
popular and most widely accepted meaning and the basic 
idea of beverage prominently ran through the main 
provisions of the various Acts of this country as well as 
America and England, relating to “intoxicating liquor”. 
Reference was made to the definition of “intoxicating liquors” 

 Etc. in various overseas jurisdiction and also Bombay Abkari Act, 
1878 as well as other provincial Acts such as the Punjab 
Excise Act, 1914; the UP Excise Act, 1910; Madras Abkari 
Act, 1886, etc. It was observed that the framers of the 
Government of India Act, 1935 could not have been entirely 
ignorant of the acceptance in which the word “liquor” covers 
not only those alcoholic liquids which are generally used for 
beverage purposes and produce intoxication, but also all 
liquids containing alcohol. It may be that the latter meaning 
is not the meaning which is attributed to the word “liquor” 
in common parlance especially when that word is prefixed by 
the qualifying word “intoxicating”, but in my opinion having 
regard to the numerous statutory definitions of that word, 
such a meaning could not have been intended to be excluded 
from the scope of the term “intoxicating liquor” as used in 
Entry 31 – List II. Consequently, on analysing the provisions 
of the impugned Act, it was observed that only those 
provisions which affected the possession, selling and 
consumption of any medicinal and toilet preparations and 
commendation of any intoxicant or hemp were invalid. 

 Etc. d) In Nagendra Nath vs. Commissioner of Hills Division, 
AIR 1958 SC 398 (“Nagendra Nath”), it was reiterated that 
there is no inherent right in a citizen to sell liquor and that 
the control and restriction over the consumption of 
“intoxicating liquors” was necessary for the preservation of 
public health and morals and to raise revenue. e) The question, whether Section 43 of the Bengal Excise Act, 
1909, under which the licence of a liquor contractor was 
withdrawn, violated Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution of 
India was considered in Amar Chandra Chakraborty vs. 
Collector of Excise, Government of Tripura, AIR 1972 SC 
1863 (“Amar Chandra Chakraborty”). It was observed 
that in view of the injurious effect of excessive consumption 
of liquor on health, the trade or business must be treated as 
a class by itself and it cannot be treated on par with other 
trades while testing the matter from the angle of Article 14 
of the Constitution. f) In State of Orissa vs. Harinarayan Jaiswal, AIR 1972 
SC 1816 (“Harinarayan Jaiswal”), it was observed that 
one of the important purposes of selling the exclusive right 

 Etc. to vend liquor was to raise revenue and since the 
Government had the power to sell exclusive privileges, there 
was no basis for contending that the owner of the privileges 
could not decline to accept the highest bid if it thought that 
the price offered was inadequate. g) Similarly, in Nashirwar vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 
1975 SC 360 (“Nashirwar”), it was observed that there was 
no fundamental right of citizens to carry on trade or to do 
business in liquor. It was observed in the said case as under: 
“There are three principal reasons to hold that there 
is no fundamental right of citizens to carry on trade 
or to do business in liquor. First, there is the police 
power of the State to enforce public morality to 
prohibit trades in noxious or dangerous goods. 
Second, there is power of the State to enforce an 
absolute prohibition of manufacture or sale of 
intoxicating liquor. Article 47 states that the State 
shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the 
consumption except for medicinal purposes of 
intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious 
to health. Third, the history of excise law shows that 
the State has the exclusive right or privilege of 
manufacture or sale of liquor.” 
 
h) In Har Shankar vs. The Deputy Excise and Taxation 
Commissioner, AIR 1975 SC 1121 (“Har Shankar”), this 
Court, speaking through Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J, observed 

 Etc. that the State has the power to prohibit trades which are 
injurious to the health and welfare of the public, that 
elimination and exclusion from business is inherent in the 
nature of liquor business as no person has an absolute right 
to deal in liquor. Also, all forms of dealings in liquor have, 
due to their inherent nature, been treated as a class by 
themselves by all civilized communities. Therefore, the 
contention that the persons who carry on trade or business 
in liquor have an unrestricted fundamental right as such 
was rejected. Thus, it was observed that while a citizen has 
a right to do business in liquor, the State can make law 
imposing reasonable restrictions on the said right in public 
interest. 
Summarising the aforesaid judgments in Har Shankar, 
it was observed that there is no fundamental right to carry 
out trade or business in intoxicants. The State, under its 
regulatory powers, has the right to prohibit absolutely every 
form of activity in relation to intoxicants, its manufacture, 
storage, export, import, sale and possession. In all their 
manifestations, these rights are vested in the State and 

 Etc. indeed without such vesting there can be no effective 
regulation of various forms of activities in relation to 
intoxicants. Therefore, the States’ right to regulate activities 
in relation to intoxicants to the extent of prohibiting would 
imply that even when permission to deal with intoxicants is 
granted, the same can be regulated. This is because the 
rights in regard to intoxicants belong to the State and it is 
open to the Government to part with those rights for a 
consideration. The power of the Government to charge a 
price for parting with its rights and not the mode of fixing 
that price is what constitutes the essence of the matter. It 
was also held that neither does the label affixed to the price 
determine the true nature of the charge levied by the 
Government nor its right to levy the same. By use of the 
expression “licence fee” or “fixed fee”, what is meant is the 
price or consideration which the Government charges to the 
licencees for parting with its privileges and granting them the 
licences. That the object of imposing licence fee is for the 
purpose of regulation so that the number of persons who 
wish to engage in liquor trade are kept under check and 

 Etc. within reasonable limits. It was also observed that the 
Government can, on its own, trade in its own rights or 
privileges and can deal with liquor or grant leases of its rights 
and issue requisite permits or licences or passes on payment 
of such fees as may be prescribed. Ultimately, it was 
observed that the amount payable by the licencees on the 
basis of the bids offered by them in auctions is neither a fee 
in the technical sense, nor a tax, but is in the nature of the 
price of a privilege. It was also held that the State has the 
power to grant liquor licences on payment of such fees as the 
consideration for parting with the privileges that the State 
has. That the payment demanded is in the form of excise 
revenue, which could be in the form of any payment, duty, 
fee, tax or fine ordered under the provisions of a particular 
enactment or Rules made thereunder relating to liquor or 
intoxicating drugs but would not include a fine imposed by 
a Court of law. That such an imposition could be recovered 
in the manner authorised by law. Consequently, in Har 
Shankar, this Court repelled the contention of the retailed 

 Etc. vendors of country liquor holding licences for the sale of 
liquor in specified vends. i) In Khoday Distilleries Ltd. vs. State of Karnataka, 
(1995) (“Khoday Distilleries”), the Constitution 
Bench of this Court summarised the law on the subject 
relating to right to carry on trade or business in “potable 
liquor” as under: 
“(a) The rights protected by Article 19(1) are not 
absolute but qualified. The qualifications are stated 
in clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19. The fundamental 
rights guaranteed in Article 19(1)(a) to (g) are, 
therefore, 
to 
be 
read 
along 
with 
the 
said 
qualifications. Even the rights guaranteed under the 
Constitutions of the other civilized countries are not 
absolute but are read subject to the implied 
limitations on them. Those implied limitations are 
made explicit by clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19 of our 
Constitution. 
 
(b) The right to practise any profession or to carry on 
any occupation, trade or business does not extend 
to practising a profession or carrying on an 
occupation, trade or business which is inherently 
vicious and pernicious, and is condemned by all 
civilised societies. It does not entitle citizens to carry 
on trade or business in activities which are immoral 
and criminal and in articles or goods which are 
obnoxious and injurious to health, safety and 
welfare of the general public, i.e., res extra 
commercium, (outside commerce). There cannot be 
business in crime. 

 Etc. 
 
(c) Potable liquor as a beverage is an intoxicating 
and depressant drink which is dangerous and 
injurious to health and is, therefore, an article which 
is res extra commercium being inherently harmful. A 
citizen has, therefore, no fundamental right to do 
trade or business in liquor. Hence the trade or 
business in liquor can be completely prohibited. 
(d) Article 47 of the Constitution considers 
intoxicating drinks and drugs as injurious to health 
and impeding the raising of level of nutrition and the 
standard of living of the people and improvement of 
the public health. It, therefore, ordains the State to 
bring about prohibition of the consumption of 
intoxicating drinks which obviously include liquor, 
except for medicinal purposes. Article 47 is one of 
the directive principles which is fundamental in the 
governance of the country. The State has, therefore, 
the power to completely prohibit the manufacture, 
sale, possession, distribution and consumption of 
potable liquor as a beverage, both because it is 
inherently a dangerous article of consumption and 
also because of the directive principle contained in 
Article 47, except when it is used and consumed for 
medicinal purposes. 
(e) For the same reason, the State can create a 
monopoly either in itself or in the agency created by 
it for the manufacture, possession, sale and 
distribution of the liquor as a beverage and also sell 
the licences to the citizens for the said purpose by 
charging fees. This can be done under Article 19(6) 
or even otherwise. 
(f) For the same reason, again, the State can impose 
limitations and restrictions on the trade or business 
in potable liquor as a beverage which restrictions are 
in nature different from those imposed on the trade 
or business in legitimate activities and goods and 
articles which are res commercium. The restrictions 
and limitations on the trade or business in potable 

 Etc. liquor can again be both under Article 19(6) or 
otherwise. The restrictions and limitations can 
extend to the State carrying on the trade or business 
itself to the exclusion of and elimination of others 
and/or to preserving to itself the right to sell licences 
to do trade or business in the same, to others. 
(g) When the State permits trade or business in the 
potable liquor with or without limitation, the citizen 
has the right to carry on trade or business subject 
to the limitations, if any, and the State cannot make 
discrimination between the citizens who are 
qualified to carry on the trade or business. 
(h) The State can adopt any mode of selling the 
licences for trade or business with a view to 
maximise its revenue so long as the method adopted 
is not discriminatory. 
(i) The State can carry on trade or business in 
potable liquor notwithstanding that it is an 
intoxicating drink and Article 47 enjoins it to 
prohibit its consumption. When the State carries on 
such business, it does so to restrict and regulate 
production, supply and consumption of liquor which 
is also an aspect of reasonable restriction in the 
interest of general public. The State cannot on that 
account be said to be carrying on an illegitimate 
business. 
(j) The mere fact that the State levies taxes or fees on 
the production, sale and income derived from 
potable liquor whether the production, sale or 
income is legitimate or illegitimate, does not make 
the State a party to the said activities. The power of 
the State to raise revenue by levying taxes and fees 
should not be confused with the power of the State 
to prohibit or regulate the trade or business in 
question. The State exercises its two different 
powers on such occasions. Hence the mere fact that 
the State levies taxes and fees on trade or business 

 Etc. in liquor or income derived from it, does not make 
the right to carry on trade or business in liquor a 
fundamental right, or even a legal right when such 
trade or business is completely prohibited. 
(k) The State cannot prohibit trade or business in 
medicinal and toilet preparations containing liquor 
or alcohol. The State can, however, under Article 
19(6) place reasonable restrictions on the right to 
trade or business in the same in the interests of 
general public. 
(l) Likewise, the State cannot prohibit trade or 
business in industrial alcohol which is not used as 
a beverage but used legitimately for industrial 
purposes. The State, however, can place reasonable 
restrictions on the said trade or business in the 
interests of the general public under Article 19(6) of 
the Constitution. 
(m) The restrictions placed on the trade or business 
in industrial alcohol or in medicinal and toilet 
preparations containing liquor or alcohol may also 
be for the purposes of preventing their abuse or 
diversion for use as or in beverage.” 
(underlining by me) 
 
Survey of Judicial Precedents: 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J): 
9. 
Since the main controversy in this case turns on the 
correctness of the decision in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J), 
it is necessary to advert to the same in some detail. 

 Etc. 
 
9.1 In the said case, the main contour of the controversy was 
whether vend fee in respect of “industrial alcohol” under different 
legislations and rules in different States was valid. In this 
context, the following three questions were considered: 
“(i) 
whether the power to levy excise duty in case of 
industrial alcohol was with the State Legislature or the 
Central Legislature? what is the scope and ambit of Entry 8 of List II of 
the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution? whether, the State Government has exclusive right 
or privilege of manufacturing, selling, distributing, etc. of 
alcohols including industrial alcohol. In this connection, 
the extent, scope and ambit of such right or privilege has 
also to be examined.” 
 
9.1.1 In this background, the expressions “intoxicating 
liquors” and “alcoholic liquors for human consumption” were 
considered and also Article 47 of the Constitution which deals 
with the State’s duty regarding the improvement of public health 
and to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for 
medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are 
injurious to health. Reference was also made to Entry 52 – List I 
which deals with industries, the control of which by the Union is 
declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in public interest. 

 Etc. 
 
9.1.2 It was the contention of the petitioners therein that the 
IDRA was enacted with a view to developing and controlling 
various important industries. Section 2 of the IDRA declares that 
it is expedient in the public interest that Union should take 
under its control the industries specified in the First Schedule. 
9.1.3 The said case did not concern primarily with potable 
alcohol for the purpose of human consumption but with ethyl 
alcohol (rectified spirit) as an industrial raw material for 
manufacture of downstream products. This Court concerned 
itself with the taxing power of the States to impose and levy 
excise duty on “industrial alcohol” and/or imposts such as vend 
fees. “Power Alcohol” was defined as ethyl alcohol containing not 
less than 95.5 per cent volume of ethanol measured at 60°F, 
corresponding to 74.4 over proof strength. That rectified spirit 
was ethyl alcohol or ethanol with 96 per cent alcohol. On 
dehydration, ethyl alcohol with 99.5 per cent volume of ethanol 
is produced. 
9.1.4 This Court noted that on 08.05.1952, the Parliament 
enforced the IDRA which contains, inter alia, Section 18G which 

 Etc. was inserted w.e.f. 01.10.1953, whereby the Central Government 
was empowered for securing equitable distribution and 
availability at fair prices of any article or class of articles relatable 
to any scheduled industry to provide for regulating the supply 
and distribution thereof, and trade and commerce therein by a 
notified order. The notified order was also to provide for 
controlling the prices at which such article or class of articles 
could be bought or sold. The said Act was amended in 1956. Item 
26 was inserted in the First Schedule to the said Act and 
empowered the Central Government to control the “Fermentation 
Industries” including alcohol industries. 
Under the UP Licences for the Possession of Denatured Spirit 
and Specially Denatured Spirit Rules, 1976, special licence for 
possession of denatured spirit for industrial purposes was 
required. “Special denatured spirit” was defined as spirit 
rendered “unfit for human consumption”. As per the Rules, 
licences for possession of denatured spirit including specially 
denatured spirit for industrial purposes were to be of three kinds 
– (i) Form FL 39; (ii) Form FL 40; and (iii) Form FL 41. 

 Etc. 
 
9.1.5 In that background, it was submitted on behalf of the 
Union of India that the legislative competence of the State 
enactments in various States will have to be determined with 
reference to following Entries in List I – 7, 52, 59, 84, 96, 97 and 
Entries in List II - 8, 24, 26, 27, 51, 52, 54, 56, 62 and Entries 
in List III - 19 and 33. That there is a dichotomy between Entry 
84 – List I and Entry 51 – List II but this would not control the 
interpretation of other Entries. It was urged that there was no 
such dichotomy as regards Entry 8 – List II as it is not subject to 
Entry 52 – List I as the subject matters of these two Entries are 
different. That Entry 52 – List I deals with industries while Entry 
8 – List II deals with “intoxicating liquors”. The power to levy 
taxes is to be read from the Entry relating to taxes and not from 
the general Entry. That industry is a topic of legislation left to the 
Parliament and to the State. Identifying of Entries is by reference 
to a declaration under Entry 7 – List I and Entry 52 – List I. The 
aspect of legislation with regard to subject matter of Entries is 
the topic “industry”. On the other hand, the subject matter of 
legislation under Entry 8 – List II is the topic “intoxicating 

 Etc. liquors”. Therefore, according to the Union of India, there was no 
conflict. 
9.1.6 In view of the above submission on behalf of the Union 
of India, the only question which was to be determined was, 
whether, “intoxicating liquors” in Entry 8 – List II is confined to 
potable liquor or includes all liquors. That the State Legislature 
had no power to levy excise duty on “industrial alcohol” as the 
latter is “not fit for human consumption” and the State 
Legislature will have power to levy fee in respect of all alcohol 
(see Entry 66 read with Entry 6 - List II). The State Legislature 
has power to legislate on the topic “intoxicating liquors” under 
Entry 8 - List II. It being a general Entry, will not comprehend a 
power of taxation but will comprehend a power to levy fee read 
with Entry 66 – List II. 
9.1.7 According to the Union of India, with regard to industries 
the control of which by the Union is declared by Parliament by 
law to be expedient in public interest, Parliament will have 
exclusive legislative competence vide Entry 52 - List I. This power 
includes the power to declare by Parliament that control by the 

 Etc. 
 
Union of industries relating to all types of alcohol is expedient in 
public interest. Once Parliament makes such a declaration, the 
State Legislature will be denuded of its power under Entry 24 - 
List II on the aspect “industry” with respect to all subject matters. 
9.1.8 It was also contended that the power to collect the lump 
sum amount by way of auction by any right or otherwise 
conferring the right to sell alcohol is neither a power to levy tax 
nor a power to levy fee but it will fall within the legislative 
competence of the State Legislature under Entry 8 – List II. But 
this power will extend only to alcohol for human consumption. 
Also, there can be a complete prohibition with regard to 
manufacture and sale of alcohol fit for human consumption 
because there is no fundamental right to carry on business in 
alcohol even for human consumption (see Article 47 of the 
Constitution and other judgments already discussed). The State 
can, therefore, collect an amount called vend fee, shop rent etc. for conferring on a citizen the right to manufacture and sell 
alcoholic liquors if it is fit for human consumption. This power 
cannot extend to “industrial alcohol” or “alcohol contained in the 
medicinal or toilet preparations”. According to the Union of India, 

 Etc. there was no power to levy such rent or fee with regard to 
“industrial alcohol” because (a) “industrial alcohol” and 
“alcoholic liquors for medicinal and toilet preparations” cannot 
be completely prohibited; (b) as there is a right to carry on 
business in “industrial alcohol”, any prohibition on manufacture 
of “industrial alcohol”, would be violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the 
Constitution. Therefore, in the absence of a power to completely 
prohibit, there will be no power to collect sums for conferring 
rights to manufacture or sell except the levy of taxes and fees. 
9.1.9 On behalf of the State of UP, it was submitted that in 
order to appreciate the controversy, it was necessary to realise 
that the real problem arises from the fact that the denaturants 
can be converted into renaturants through an illicit process. 
Therefore, they supported the levy. It was submitted that the 
vend fee on denatured alcohol or denatured spirit or what is 
known as “industrial alcohol” has been challenged on mainly two 
grounds, namely, (a) States lack legislative competence, and (b) 
after the enactment of the IDRA, the States’ power is completely 
lost. 

 Etc. 
 
9.1.10 
The contention of the State was that there is no 
dichotomy between ethyl alcohol to be used for beverages and to 
be used for “industrial purposes”. The levy, in any case, was on 
manufacture of ethyl alcohol and not on its use. The levy was 
stipulated jointly or severally both under Entries 8 and 51 - List 
II; Entry 33 - List III, and as per police powers, regulatory and 
other incidental charges were collected. That levy was a 
regulatory power under Articles 19(6) and 19(6)(ii) of the 
Constitution. 
9.1.11 
According to the State, Parliament has no power to 
legislate on “industrial alcohol”, since “industrial alcohol” was 
also “alcoholic liquors for human consumption”. It was 
contended that Entry 84 - List I expressly excludes alcoholic 
liquors for human consumption and therefore, the residuary 
Entry 97 - List I will not operate as against its own legislative 
interest. The aforesaid submissions were made on the 
assumption that “industrial liquor” or “ethyl alcohol” is fit for 
human consumption. 

 Etc. 
 
9.1.12 
This Court stated that the expression must be 
understood in its common and normal sense. “Industrial alcohol” 
as it is, is incapable of being consumed by a normal human 
being. The expression ‘consumption’ must also be understood in 
the sense of direct physical intake by human beings in this 
context. That utilisation in some form or the other is 
consumption for the benefit of human beings if “industrial 
alcohol” is utilised for production of rubber tyres, etc. It was held 
that the utilisation of those tyres in the vehicles used by human 
beings cannot, in the context in which the expression has been 
used in the Constitution, be understood to mean that alcohol has 
been for human consumption. 
9.1.13 
This Court observed that when the framers of the 
Constitution used the expression “alcoholic liquors for human 
consumption”, they meant and still the expression means, that 
“liquor which as it is consumable in the sense capable of being 
taken by human beings as such as a beverage or a drink” and 
Entry 84 - List I must be understood in that sense. It was 
contended that denatured spirit could also be by appropriate 
cultivation or application or admixture with water etc., 

 Etc. transformed into ‘alcoholic liquors for human consumption’ and 
as such, transformation would not entail any process of 
manufacture as such. There is no organic or fundamental change 
in this transformation. However, this aspect was not examined, 
the reason being that the Constitutional provisions specially 
dealing with the delimitation of powers in a federal polity must 
be understood in a broad commonsense point of view as 
understood by common people for whom the Constitution is 
made. Alcoholic or “intoxicating liquors” must be understood as 
these are, not what these are capable of or able to become. 
Consequently, in paragraph 86 it was concluded as follows: 
“86. The position with regard to the control of 
alcohol industry has undergone material and 
significant change after the amendment of 1956 to 
the IDR Act. After the amendment, the State is left 
with only the following powers to legislate in respect 
of alcohol: 

It may pass any legislation in the nature of 
prohibition of potable liquor referable to 
Entry 6 of List II and regulating powers. 

It may lay down regulations to ensure that 
non-potable alcohol is not diverted and 
misused as a substitute for potable 
alcohol. 

The State may charge excise duty on 
potable alcohol and sales tax under Entry 
52 of List II. However, sales tax cannot be 

 Etc. charged on industrial alcohol in the 
present case, because under the Ethyl 
Alcohol (Price Control) Orders, sales tax 
cannot be charged by the State on 
industrial alcohol. 

However, in case State is rendering any 
service, as distinct from its claim of so-
called grant of privilege, it may charge fees 
based on quid pro quo. See in this 
connection, the observations of Indian 
Mica case [(1971): 1971 
Supp SCR 319: AIR 1971 SC 1182].” 
 
9.1.14 
Oza, J. gave a concurring separate opinion wherein he 
considered the question relating to validity of the levies made by 
the States on alcohol which is utilised by the industries for 
manufacturing the products where alcohol is a raw material. 
Some of these industries themselves (i) manufacture alcohol as 
they have their own distilleries and from their distilleries through 
pipelines it goes to their industrial units where this is used as a 
raw material (ii) whereas some are industries which purchase 
alcohol or denatured spirit on being allotted by the Government. 
9.1.15 
On a comparison of the language of Entry 84 – List I 
and Entry 51 – List II, it was observed by Oza, J. that the powers 
of taxation on alcoholic liquors have been based on the way in 
which they are used, as admittedly alcoholic liquors is a very 

 Etc. wide term and may include variety of types of alcoholic liquors 
but the Constitution-makers distributed them into two heads: 
(a) for human consumption 
(b) other than for human consumption 
9.1.16 
Alcoholic liquors which are for human consumption 
were put in Entry 51 - List II authorising the State Legislature to 
levy tax on them whereas alcoholic liquors other than for human 
consumption have been left to the Central Legislature under 
Entry 84 – List I for levy of duty of excise. This scheme of the 
Entries in two Lists clearly indicates the line of demarcation for 
purposes of taxation of alcoholic liquors. What has been 
excluded in Entry 84 has specifically been put within the 
authority of the State for purposes of taxation. 
9.1.17 
Speaking about Entry 8 – List II, it was observed that 
this Entry talks about “intoxicating liquors” and further it refers 
to production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase 
and sale of “intoxicating liquors”. From the scheme of Entries in 
the three Lists, it is clear that taxing Entries have been 
specifically enacted conferring powers of taxation whereas other 

 Etc. 
 
Entries pertain to the authority of the Legislature to enact laws 
for purposes of regulation. That the declaration is made by the 
Parliament 
and 
this 
industry, 
i.e., 
industry 
based 
on 
fermentation and alcohol has been declared to be an industry 
under the IDRA and, therefore, is directly under the control of 
the Centre, and in respect of regulation the authority of the State 
Legislature in Entry 8 - List II could only be subject to the IDRA 
or Rules made thereunder by the Centre. 
9.1.18 
It was observed that high concentration of ethyl 
alcohol which is a product of distillation after fermentation is 
extracted in various concentrations and can also be extracted in 
a very high concentration above 90 per cent which is generally 
termed as rectified spirit. It is used as raw material for various 
industries. It is often supplied after being mixed with methylated 
alcohol or being denatured by other processes only to safeguard 
against its use for conversion into alcoholic beverages for human 
consumption. Ethyl alcohol is diluted by water and its 
percentage is brought to 40 or 45 or below then it becomes fit for 
human consumption. 

 Etc. 
 
9.1.19 
The contention of the States was that various duties 
for purposes of regulation were imposed to prevent the 
conversion of rectified spirit or methylated alcohol to be diverted 
from industrial to potable use. In other words, the contention 
was that these levies had been imposed in order to prevent the 
conversion of alcoholic liquors which are not fit for human 
consumption to those which are fit for human consumption. 
Therefore, the levies could be justified as regulatory fees. 
9.1.20 
The said contention was repelled and it was concluded 
that Entry 8 – List II could not be invoked to justify the levy by 
the State in respect of alcoholic liquors which are not made for 
human consumption. Thus, the Court held that alcoholic liquors 
which are made for human consumption would not include 
alcoholic liquors not made for human consumption or “industrial 
alcohol”. 
Synthetics and Chemicals (2J): 
9.2 In State of U.P. vs. Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd., 
(1991) (“Synthetics and Chemicals (2J)”), a two-
Judge Bench of this Court (speaking through Sahai J. who also 

 Etc. wrote the concurring judgment along with Thommen, J.) 
observed that the High Court relied upon the observations in 
paragraph 86 of the judgment of the Constitution Bench in 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J), namely, “sales tax cannot be 
charged on “industrial alcohol” and, therefore, held that due to 
operation of the Ethyl Alcohol (Price Control) Orders, sales tax 
cannot be charged by the State on “industrial alcohol” and struck 
down the levy. 
9.2.1 In Synthetics and Chemicals (2J), it was categorically 
argued by the learned Advocate General appearing for the State 
of Uttar Pradesh that the reference to “sales tax” in the judgment 
of this Court between the same parties (before seven-Judge 
Bench) was accidental and did not arise from the judgment. This 
was because the levy of sales tax was not in question at any stage 
of the arguments nor was the question considered as it was not 
in issue. In fact, the question which arose for consideration in 
the earlier litigation was in regard to the validity of “vend fee and 
other fees” charged by the States. This Court held that vend fee 
or transport fee and similar fees, unless supported by quid pro 
quo, interfered with the control exercised by the Central 

 Etc. 
 
Government under IDRA and the various orders made 
thereunder with respect to prices, licences, permits, distribution, 
transport, disposal, acquisition, possession, use, consumption, 
etc., of articles related to a controlled industry, “industrial 
alcohol” being one of them. The casual reference to sales tax in 
the concluding portion of the judgment was accidental and per 
incuriam was the submission. 
9.2.2 While considering the said plea, this Court observed that, 
the only question which had to be determined between the same 
parties in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) was, “whether 
“intoxicating liquors” in Entry 8 - List II was confined to potable 
liquor or includes all liquors.” Answering this question, this 
Court categorically held that “intoxicating liquors” within the 
meaning of Entry 8 - List II was confined to “potable liquor” and 
did not include “industrial liquor”. 
9.2.3 Therefore, the only question that was considered by the 
seven-Judge Bench of this Court was whether the State could 
levy “excise duty” or “vend fee” or “transport fee” and the like by 
recourse to Entry 51 or 8 - List II in respect of “industrial 

 Etc. alcohol”. This Court by a detailed discussion in the seven-Judge 
Bench decision had observed that the impugned statutory 
provisions purportedly levying fees or enforcing restrictions in 
respect of “industrial alcohol” were impermissible in view of the 
control assumed by the Central Government in exercise of its 
power under Section 18G of the IDRA in respect of a declared 
industry falling under Entry 52 - List I, read with Entry 33 - List 
III. 
9.2.4 In this decision, it was observed that the aforesaid 
decision of this Court was not an authority for the proposition 
canvassed by the assessee in challenging the provision. This 
Court could not have intended to say that the Price Control 
Orders made by the Central Government under the IDRA 
imposed a fetter on the legislative power of the State under Entry 
54 - List II to levy taxes on the sale or purchase of goods. The 
reference to sales tax in paragraph 86 of that judgment was 
merely accidental or per incuriam and therefore, had no effect. 
9.2.5 In the earlier litigation of Synthetics and Chemicals 
(7J), the question was whether the State Legislature could levy 

 Etc. vend fee or excise duty on “industrial alcohol”. The seven-Judge 
Bench answered in the negative as “industrial alcohol” being 
unfit for human consumption, the State Legislature was 
incompetent to levy any duty of excise either under Entry 51 or 
Entry 8 - List II of the Seventh Schedule. 
The judgment of this Court in Synthetics and Chemicals 
(7J) has been considered in later decisions and they could be 
adverted to at this stage itself. 
Bileshwar Khand Udyog: 
9.3 In Shri Bileshwar Khand Udyog Khedut Sahakari 
Mandali Ltd. vs. State of Gujarat, (1992) 
(“Bileshwar Khand Udyog”), it was observed that Synthetics 
and Chemicals (7J) finally brought down the curtain in respect 
of “industrial alcohol” by taking it out of the purview of both 
Entry 8 and Entry 51 - List II and the competency of the State to 
frame any legislation to levy any tax or duty was excluded. But 
by that a provision enacted by the State for supervision which is 
squarely covered under Entry 33 – List III which deals with 
production, supply and distribution which includes regulation 
cannot be assailed. It was further observed as under: 

 Etc. 
 
“ 4. …The Bench in Synthetic & Chemical's case made it 
clear that even though the power to levy tax or duty on 
industrial alcohol vested in the Central Government the 
State was still left with power to lay down regulations to 
ensure that non-potable alcohol, that is, industrial 
alcohol, was not diverted and misused as substitute for 
potable alcohol. … In paragraph 88 of the decision it was 
observed that in respect of industrial alcohol the States, 
were not authorised to impose the impost as they have 
purported to do in that case but that did not effect any 
imposition of fee where there were circumstance, to 
establish that there was quid pro quo for the fee nor it 
will affect any regulatory measure.” 
 
9.4 It was further observed that the principle of occupied field 
precluded States from trenching on any power which was already 
covered by a Central legislation. But in absence of any provision 
in IDRA touching upon regulation or ensuring that “industrial 
alcohol” was not diverted the State was competent to legislate on 
it under Entry 33 – List III. 
Gujchem Distillers: 
9.5 In Gujchem Distillers India Ltd. vs. State of Gujarat, 
(1992) (“Gujchem Distillers”), the judgment in 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) was followed and the fee of 7 
paise per litre was held to be a regulatory measure, namely, for 
denaturation of spirit and supervision of the said process. 

 Etc. 
 
Modi Distillery: 
9.6 In State of UP vs. Modi Distillery, (1995) 
(“Modi Distillery”), the facts were that the Allahabad High Court 
had allowed the writ petitions filed by the respondents therein 
who are manufacturers of Indian-made foreign liquor and 
quashed the orders impugned demanding excise duty from them. 
Referring to the provisions of the UP Excise Act, 1910 and the 
definitions therein on the different types of liquor, this Court 
speaking through Bharucha, J. (as he then was) observed in 
paragraphs 9, 10 and 11 as under: 
“9. It is convenient now to note the judgment of a Bench 
of seven learned Judges of this Court in Synthetics and 
Chemicals Ltd. v. State of U.P. [(1990) ] 
This Court stated that it had no doubt that the framers 
of the Constitution, when they used the expression 
“alcoholic liquors for human consumption”, meant, and 
the expression still means, that liquor which, as it is, is 
consumable in the sense that it is capable of being taken 
by human beings as such as a beverage or drink. 
Alcoholic or intoxicating liquors had to be understood as 
they were, not what they were capable of or able to 
become. Entry 51 of List II was the counterpart of Entry 
84 of List I. It authorised the State to impose duties of 
excise on alcoholic liquors for human consumption 
manufactured or produced in the State. It was clear that 
all duties of excise save and except the items specifically 
excepted in Entry 84 of List I were generally within the 
taxing power of the Central Legislature. The State 
Legislature had limited power to impose excise duties. 

 Etc. 
 
That power was circumscribed under Entry 51 of List II. 
It had to be borne in mind that, by common standards, 
ethyl alcohol (which had 95 per cent strength) was an 
industrial 
alcohol 
and 
was 
not 
fit 
for 
human 
consumption. The ISI specifications had divided ethyl 
alcohol (as known in the trade) into several kinds of 
alcohol. Beverages and industrial alcohols were clearly 
and differently treated. Rectified spirit for industrial 
purposes was defined as spirit purified by distillation 
having a strength not less than 95 per cent by volume of 
ethyl alcohol. Dictionaries and technical books showed 
that rectified spirit (95 per cent) was an industrial 
alcohol and not potable as such. It appeared, therefore, 
that industrial alcohol, which was ethyl alcohol (95 per 
cent), by itself was not only non-potable but was highly 
toxic. The range of potable alcohol varied from country 
spirit to whisky and the ethyl alcohol content thereof 
varied between 19 to about 43 per cent, according to the 
ISI specifications. In other words, ethyl alcohol (95 per 
cent) 
was 
not 
an 
alcoholic 
liquor 
for 
human 
consumption but could be used as a raw material or 
input, after processing and substantial dilution, in the 
production of whisky, gin, country liquor, etc. In the 
light of experience and development, it was necessary to 
state that “intoxicating liquor” meant only that liquor 
which was consumable by human beings as it was. 
 
10. What the State seeks to levy excise duty upon in the 
Group ‘B’ cases is the wastage of liquor after distillation, 
but before dilution; and, in the Group ‘D’ cases, the 
pipeline 
loss 
of 
liquor 
during 
the 
process 
of 
manufacture, before dilution. It is clear, therefore, that 
what the State seeks to levy excise duty upon is not 
alcoholic liquor for human consumption but the raw 
material or input still in process of being rendered fit for 
consumption by human beings. The State is not 
empowered to levy excise duty on the raw material or 
input that is in the process of being made into alcoholic 
liquor for human consumption. 

 Etc. 

11. That the measure of excise duty upon alcoholic 
liquor for human consumption is the alcoholic strength 
thereof does not make any difference in this behalf. It is 
only the alcoholic strength of the final product which is 
relevant.” 
 
In paragraph 14, it was further observed as under: 
14. … The demand for excise duty is not a regulatory 
measure. The power of the State to levy excise duty 
cannot be expanded with reference to its power to 
regulate manufacture. We are not required to and do not 
express any opinion in regard to the power of the State 
to regulate the manufacture of alcoholic liquors for 
human consumption. 
 
9.6.1 Consequently, the appeals were allowed with regard to 
levy of excise duty upon wastage of Indian-made foreign liquor 
exported outside the State of Uttar Pradesh. Rest of the appeals 
were dismissed. 
Shree Krishna Gyanoday Sugar Ltd.: 
9.7 In Shree Krishna Gyanoday Sugar Ltd. vs. State of 
Bihar, (1996), (“Shree Krishna Gyanoday Sugar 
Ltd.”), the question was whether Rule 9 of the Bihar & Orissa 
Excise Rules, 1990, framed under the Bihar and Orissa Excise 
Act, 1915, was ultra vires the said Act. In the alternative, the 
question was whether the said Rule covered the appellants' 

 Etc. distilleries which were manufacturing not only denatured spirit 
but also potable liquor. 
9.7.1 It was contended that the distilleries of the appellants 
therein were having composite licences to manufacture not only 
denatured spirit and other spirits for industrial use but were also 
manufacturing potable spirit or country liquor and that for these 
distilleries the State had no power or jurisdiction to invoke Rule 
9 of the Rules. The High Court repelled the contention of the 
appellants therein. It was held that Rule 9 was not ultra vires 
the provisions of the aforesaid Act. It was cautioned that if a 
distillery which manufactures denatured spirit attempts to alter 
any denatured spirit with the intention that such spirit may be 
used for human consumption, whether as a beverage or 
internally as a medicine, it would be committing an offence which 
is punishable under Section 49 of the aforesaid Act. Therefore, it 
was permissible for the Excise Authorities under the Act to 
supervise the working of such distilleries so that they may not 
commit such offences and to oversee their manufacturing 
activities. This was because the denatured spirit, if illegally 
altered and made fit for human consumption, would have a 

 Etc. devastating effect on the health of consumers and may even 
result in fatal consequences or loss of vision and other pernicious 
physical handicaps. Therefore, supervision was provided at the 
cost of distilleries and the licencees of the distilleries will have to 
bear the cost of maintenance of such supervision. The same 
would squarely fall within the regulatory powers for framing 
Rules with a view to see that the provisions of the aforesaid Act 
are not stifled or tinkered with by such licencee distilleries. 
9.7.2 It was observed that the expression “commercial” would 
fall in the same category as denatured spirit, meaning thereby 
those spirits which are not fit for human consumption. They 
would not cover potable spirits even assuming that they are 
commercial spirits. That, the expression “other commercial 
spirits” as contemplated by the Rule are those spirits which are 
unfit for human consumption and they do not cover potable 
liquor which cannot fall in line with denatured spirit. Thus, it 
was observed that the expression “or any other commercial 
spirit” must mean those spirits which fall in the category of 
spirits unfit for human consumption like denatured spirits which 
are used for “industrial purposes” or any other purpose other 

 Etc. than for human consumption. It was held that Rule 9 of the 
aforesaid Rule would apply to only those distilleries which were 
licenced solely and wholly for the purpose of manufacturing 
either denatured spirit or any other commercial spirit unfit for 
human consumption but would not include those distilleries 
which are licenced for manufacturing along with denatured spirit 
or other industrial spirits unfit for human consumption, also 
potable liquor which is fit for human consumption. Hence, it was 
observed that the appellant therein, who had composite and 
multiple licences to manufacture potable liquor, was outside the 
sweep of second part of Rule 9 of the aforesaid Rules. That to 
such distilleries the first part of the Rule may apply wherein the 
State will have to bear the cost of providing supervisors and 
establishments for that purpose but the cost of such 
establishment cannot be foisted on such distilleries. 
Bihar Distillery: 
9.8 In Bihar Distillery, narrating the history with regard to the 
legislations on rectified spirit and in the context of the IDRA, and 
the incorporation of Item 26 in the First Schedule of the said Act 
which deals with “Fermentation Industries”: (i) Alcohol, (ii) other 

 Etc. products of “Fermentation Industries”, this Court, speaking 
through Jeevan Reddy, J., noted that the decision in Synthetics 
and Chemicals (7J) called for demarcation of the spheres of the 
Union and the States, particularly in the matter of alcoholic 
liquors. 
9.8.1 This Court observed that insofar as “intoxicating 
liquors”/potable liquors are concerned, it is the exclusive 
province of the States. But for manufacturing “intoxicating 
liquors”, or for manufacturing “industrial alcohol”, as the case 
may be, one must have to manufacture or purchase alcohol. It is 
only thereafter that the alcohol is either converted into 
“industrial alcohol” (by denaturing it) or into “potable liquors” by 
reducing the strength of alcohol (which is normally of 95% purity 
or above). Alcohol can however be used for industrial purposes 
even without denaturing it. To say that the States step in only 
when alcohol becomes potable and not before it, creates a doubt 
and enough room for abuse apart from difficulties of supervision 
and regulation, such as, in the matter of licensing such 
industries — whether the Centre alone or the States or both 
should do it. Therefore, notices were issued to all the State 

 Etc. 
 
Governments as well as Union of India and the interplay between 
the Entries of Lists I, II and III which are under consideration 
here and which are extracted above, were discussed. 
9.8.2 It was opined that Entry 51 - List II and Entry 84 - List I 
complement each other inasmuch as both provide for duties of 
excise. However, Entry 51 - List II empowers the State to levy 
duties of excise on alcoholic liquors for human consumption, 
which is expressly excluded from Entry 84 - List I. Therefore, 
alcoholic liquors may be used for several purposes, one of which 
is meant for human consumption. It was further observed that 
Entry 8 – List II does not use the expression “alcoholic liquors for 
human consumption” but employs the expression “intoxicating 
liquors” and significantly, the words “for human consumption” is 
conspicuous by its absence. According to Jeevan Reddy, J., this 
is for the obvious reason that the very word “intoxicating” 
signifies “for human consumption”. Thus, Entry 8 - List II 
emphasizes all aspects of “intoxicating liquors” within the State's 
sphere, i.e., to say production, manufacture, possession, 
transport, purchase and sale of “intoxicating liquors”. In this 
context, Entry 6 - List II was relied upon to observe that the said 

 Etc. 
 
Entry, which, inter alia, deals with “public health”, has a close 
nexus to prohibiting or regulating consumption of “intoxicating 
liquors”. 
9.8.3 It was next opined that clause (a) in Entry 33 – List III is 
also significant. That though the control of certain industries 
may have been taken over by the Union by virtue of a declaration 
made by Parliament in terms of Entry 52 - List I, yet the “trade 
and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution 
of the products of such industry” is placed in the Concurrent 
List. According to Jeevan Reddy, J., this would mean that it 
could be regulated by both by the Union as well as by the States, 
subject, of course, to Article 254 of the Constitution. 
9.8.4 It was observed that insofar as the field is not occupied 
by the laws made by the Union, the States are free to legislate. It 
was further observed that Entry 24 - List II is in the nature of a 
general Entry. It deals with industries but is made expressly 
subject to Entries 7 and 52 - List I. That by making a declaration 
in terms of Entry 52 - List I in Section 2 of the IDRA, the Union 
has taken control of the several industries mentioned in the 

 Etc. 
 
Schedule to the Act. As a result, the States have been denuded 
of their power to legislate with respect to those industries on that 
account. It was further observed that a three-Judge Bench in 
McDowell had held that Entry 52 overrides only Entry 24 - List 
II and no other Entry in List II. That Entry 8 – List II is not 
overborne in any manner by Entry 52 – List I, which means that 
so far as “intoxicating liquors” are concerned, they are within the 
exclusive sphere of the States. 
9.8.5 Referring to the judgment of Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. ( 
as he then was) in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J), particularly 
paragraph 85, it was observed that the expression “both potable 
and” is an accidental error as the judgment in its earlier 
paragraphs had stated that so far as potable alcohol is 
concerned, they are governed by Entry 8 – List II and are within 
the exclusive domain of the States. The said judgment did not 
intend to convey that the industries engaged in the manufacture 
or production of potable liquors have been controlled by the 
Union by virtue of Item 26 of the First Schedule to the IDRA. So 
far as potable liquors are concerned, their manufacture, 
production, possession, transport, purchase and sale are within 

 Etc. the exclusive domain of the States and the Union of India has no 
say in the matter. 
9.8.6 In this case, the Court further noted the contentions 
urged on behalf of the State to the effect that rectified spirit is 
“intoxicating liquors” within the meaning of Entry 8 - List II and 
hence outside the purview of Entry 24 - List II, which would in 
turn mean that the Union cannot take over its control by making 
a declaration in terms of Entry 52 - List I. Further Item 26 of the 
Schedule to the IDRA is ineffective and invalid insofar as it seeks 
to regulate the production and manufacture, etc. of rectified 
spirit. The State submitted that the decision to the contrary in 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) is not correct and requires 
reconsideration. 
9.8.7. The State next contended that Entry 51 - List II and Entry 
84 - List I speak of “alcoholic liquors for human consumption” 
and not “alcoholic liquors “fit” for human consumption”. That 
the judgment in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J), read the word 
“fit” in the Entries and thus curtailed the legislative power of the 
States. It was further contended that rectified spirit is really and 

 Etc. essentially “intoxicating liquors” and by the process of “reduction 
of liquor” by adding water and spices (optional) does not cease it 
to be “intoxicating liquors”. In the State of U.P., bulk of the 
rectified spirit is used for the purpose of obtaining country liquor 
or IMFLs and a small quantity is used for industrial purposes. 
Therefore, the expression “intoxicating liquors” must include 
rectified spirit. It was further submitted that during the course 
of manufacture of rectified spirit, potable liquor comes into 
existence and the main raw material for rectified spirit is 
molasses. 
9.8.8 However, on behalf of the distilleries, it was contended 
that there is no good reason for doubting the correctness of the 
decision in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) or for referring the 
issue to a larger Constitution Bench of nine or more Judges. This 
was because if the States' submission were to be accepted, then 
Item 26 in the Schedule to the IDRA would become superfluous 
and meaningless. Therefore, this Court in Synthetics and 
Chemicals (7J) speaking through Sabyasachi Mukharji, J., drew 
a line between the respective spheres of the Union and the 
States. It was also contended that despite the insertion of Item 

 Etc. 
 
26 in the IDRA, the State was not totally denuded of any power 
to make a law with respect to rectified spirit or for that matter 
“industrial alcohol”. In this regard, Entry 33 - List III and Section 
18G read with other provisions of the IDRA were considered and 
by placing reliance on Tika Ramji, it was observed that “the 
possibility of an order under Section 18G being issued by the 
Central Government would not be enough. The existence of such 
an order would be the essential prerequisite before any 
repugnancy could ever arise”. 
9.8.9 On a conspectus consideration, this Court held that the 
decision in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J), did not deal with 
the aspects which arose for consideration in this case and that it 
was mainly concerned with “industrial alcohol”, i.e., denatured 
rectified spirit. While holding that rectified spirit is “industrial 
alcohol”, it recognised at the same time that it can be utilised for 
obtaining country liquor (by diluting it) or for manufacturing 
Indian Made Foreign Liquor (“IMFL”). When the decision says 
that rectified spirit with 95% alcohol content v/v is “toxic”, what 
it meant was that if taken as it is, it is harmful and injurious to 
health. By saying “toxic”, it did not mean that it cannot be 

 Etc. utilised for potable purposes either by diluting it or by blending 
it with other items. The Court in Bihar Distillery noted that the 
undeniable fact is, that rectified spirit is both “industrial alcohol” 
as well as a liquor which can be converted into country liquor 
just by adding water. It is also the basic substance from which 
IMFL are made. Denatured rectified spirit, of course, is wholly 
and exclusively “industrial alcohol”. It was observed that this 
basic factual premise which was not and could not be denied by 
any one raised certain aspects for consideration therein which 
were not raised or considered in Synthetics and Chemicals 
(7J). 
9.8.10 
It was noted that Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) did 
not deal with rectified spirit which could be converted into 
potable alcohol and was merely concerned with “industrial 
alcohol” which could not be so converted, i.e., denatured rectified 
spirit. A distinction was drawn between industries engaged in 
manufacturing rectified spirit meant exclusively for supply to 
industries (industries other than those engaged in obtaining or 
manufacturing of potable liquor), whether after denaturing it or 
without denaturing it, and industries engaged in manufacturing 

 Etc. rectified spirit exclusively for the purpose of obtaining or 
manufacturing potable liquor. In the first case, the industry was 
to be under “the total and exclusive control of the Union and be 
governed by the IDRA and the rules and regulations made 
thereunder”. As far as the second case is concerned, it was noted 
that “they shall be under the total and exclusive control of the 
States in all respects and at all stages including the 
establishment of the distillery”. 
9.8.11 
It was thus noted that Synthetics and Chemicals 
(7J) was mainly concerned with “industrial alcohol”, i.e., 
denatured rectified spirit. This Court raised several questions 
with regard to the supervision of the manufacture of country 
liquor or IMFL, which is not the concern of the Union but the 
bulk of the rectified spirit produced in many States is meant for 
and is utilised for obtaining or manufacturing potable liquors. 
The question was then at what stage, would the State intervene 
in the process of manufacture of potable liquor - whether until 
the stage of potable liquor is reached, or whether there has to be 
supervision even at a stage prior thereto by the States. This 
Court took into consideration the fact that under Entry 33(a) - 

 Etc. 
 
List III, the States do have the power to legislate on this field, 
provided the field is not occupied by any law made by the Union. 
Further, in the interests of law, public health, public revenue and 
also in the interests of proper delineation of the spheres of the 
Union and the States, it was noted that there has to be a clear 
line of demarcation drawn at the stage of clearance or removal of 
rectified spirit. In the matter of the levies, when the removal or 
clearance is for industrial purpose, the levy of duties of excise 
and all other control is with the Union but when the 
removal/clearance is for obtaining or manufacturing potable 
liquors, the levy of duties and all other control is with the States. 
It was observed that there is a need for joint control and 
supervision of the process of manufacture of rectified spirit and 
its use and disposal. Hence, certain observations were made by 
way of elaboration by taking into consideration the nature of the 
product and its use, namely supply for industries or “industrial 
alcohol” or use for potable purposes and the circumstances of 
misuse of rectified spirit (for industrial purposes) by diverting it 
for potable purposes, which are as under: 

 Etc. 
 
(1) (a) So far as industries engaged in manufacturing 
rectified spirit meant exclusively for supply to 
industries (industries other than those engaged in 
obtaining or manufacture of potable liquors), 
whether after denaturing it or without denaturing it, 
are concerned, they shall be under the total and 
exclusive control of the Union and be governed by 
the IDR Act and the rules and regulations made 
thereunder. In other words, where the entire 
rectified spirit is supplied for such industrial 
purposes, or to the extent it is so supplied, as the 
case may be, the levy of excise duties and all other 
control including establishment of distillery shall be 
that of the Union. 
 
(b) The power of the States in the case of such an 
industry is only to see and ensure that rectified 
spirit, whether in the course of its manufacture or 
after its manufacture, is not diverted or misused for 
potable purposes. They can make necessary 
regulations requiring the industry to submit 
periodical statements of raw material and the 
finished product (rectified spirit) and are entitled to 
verify their correctness. For this purpose, the States 
will also be entitled to post their staff in the 
distilleries and levy reasonable regulatory fees to 
defray the cost of such staff. 
 
(2) So far as industries engaged in the manufacture of 
rectified spirit exclusively for the purpose of 
obtaining or manufacturing potable liquors — or 
supplying the same to the State Government or its 
nominees for the said purpose — are concerned, 
they shall be under the total and exclusive control 
of the States in all respects and at all stages 
including the establishment of the distillery. In other 
words, where the entire rectified spirit produced is 
supplied for potable purposes — or to the extent it 
is so supplied, as the case may be — the levy of 

 Etc. excise duties and all other control shall be that of 
the States. 
 
(3) So far as industries engaged in the manufacture of 
rectified spirit, both for the purpose of (a) supplying 
it to industries (other than industries engaged in 
obtaining 
or 
manufacturing 
potable 
liquors/ 
intoxicating liquors) and (b) for obtaining or 
manufacturing or supplying it to Governments/ 
persons for obtaining or manufacturing potable 
liquors are concerned, the following is the position: 

(a) The power to permit the establishment and 
regulation of the functioning of the distillery is 
concerned, it shall be the exclusive domain of the 
Union. But so far as the levy of excise duties is 
concerned, the duties on rectified spirit removed/ 
cleared for supply to industries (other than 
industries engaged in obtaining or manufacturing 
potable liquors), shall be levied by the Union; 
 
b) 
the 
duties 
of 
excise 
on 
rectified 
spirit 
cleared/removed for the purposes of obtaining or 
manufacturing potable liquors shall be levied by the 
State Government concerned. The disposal, i.e., 
clearance and removal of rectified spirit in the case 
of such an industry shall be under the joint control 
of the Union and the State concerned to ensure 
evasion 
of 
excise 
duties 
on 
rectified 
spirit 
removed/cleared from the distillery. c) It is obvious that in respect of these industries 
too, the power of the States to take necessary steps 
to ensure against the misuse or diversion of rectified 
spirit meant for industrial purposes (supply to 
industries other than those engaged in obtaining or 
manufacturing potable liquors) to potable purposes, 
both during and after the manufacture of rectified 
spirit, continues unaffected. 

 Etc. d) Any rectified spirit supplied, diverted or utilised 
for 
potable 
purposes, 
i.e., 
for 
obtaining 
or 
manufacturing potable liquors shall be supplied to 
and/or utilised, as the case may be, in accordance 
with the State excise enactment concerned and the 
rules and regulations made thereunder. If the State 
is so advised, it is equally competent to prohibit the 
use, diversion or supply of rectified spirit for potable 
purposes. 
 
(4) It is advisable and necessary that the Union 
Government makes necessary rules/regulations 
under the IDR Act directing that no rectified spirit 
shall be supplied to industries except after 
denaturing it save those few industries (other than 
those industries which are engaged in obtaining or 
manufacturing potable liquors) where denatured 
spirit cannot be used for manufacturing purposes. 
 
(5) So far as rectified spirit meant for being supplied to 
or utilised for potable purposes is concerned, it shall 
be under the exclusive control of the States from the 
moment it is cleared/removed for that purpose from 
the distillery — apart from other powers referred to 
above. 
 
(6) The power to permit the establishment of any 
industry engaged in the manufacture of potable 
liquors including IMFLs, beer, country liquor and 
other intoxicating drinks is exclusively vested in the 
States. The power to prohibit and/or regulate the 
manufacture, 
production, 
sale, 
transport 
or 
consumption of such intoxicating liquors is equally 
that of the States. 
 
9.8.12 
The aforesaid decision in Bihar Distillery was 
doubted in Deccan Sugar and Abkari Co. Ltd. vs. 
Commissioner of Excise, (1998) (“Deccan Sugar 

 Etc. and Abkari Co. Ltd.”), and the appeals were referred to a larger 
Bench which followed Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) and Modi 
Distillery without expressly overruling the decision in Bihar 
Distillery. Opining that Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) 
continued to hold the field, it was noted that the State’s power 
was limited to regulation of non-potable alcohol for the limited 
purpose of preventing its use as alcoholic liquors. Ultimately, 
the appeal filed by the state was dismissed as the levies could 
not be treated as a regulatory measure. 
McDowell: 
9.9 In McDowell, the State of Andhra Pradesh had prohibited 
the manufacture of liquor by an amendment in the Andhra 
Pradesh Prohibition Act, 1995. The appellants therein who were 
manufactures 
of 
“intoxicating 
liquors” 
challenged 
the 
constitutional validity of the Act by which the Prohibition Act was 
amended to include Section 7-A by which the manufacture of 
liquor came to be prohibited. This was owing to the lack of 
legislative competence in view of Item 26 in the First Schedule of 
the IDRA, which according to the writ petitioners therein, vested 
the control of alcohol industries exclusively in the Union and 

 Etc. denuded the State Legislature of its power to licence or regulate 
the manufacture of liquor. This argument was further based on 
the fact that “Fermentation Industries” were included in the 
Schedule of the IDRA and hence the State was denuded of its 
power to licence and regulate manufacture of liquor which 
industry and its product were within the exclusive province of 
the Union and hence the State lost its competence to grant, 
refuse or renew the licences The position of law was reiterated as 
under: - 
"It follows from the above discussion that the power to 
make a law with respect to manufacture and 
production and its prohibition (among other matters 
mentioned in Entry 8 in List-II) belongs exclusively to 
the State Legislatures. Item 26 in the First Schedule to 
the IDR Act must be read subject to Entry 8 and for 
that matter, Entry 6 in List II. So read, the said item 
does not and cannot, deal with manufacture, 
production of intoxicating liquors. All the petitioners 
before us are engaged in the manufacture of 
intoxicating liquors. The State Legislature is, therefore, 
perfectly competent to make a law prohibiting their 
manufacture and production in addition to their sale, 
consumption, possession and transport with reference 
to Entries 8 and 6 in List-II of the Seventh Schedule to 
the Constitution read with Article 47 thereof." 
 
The Civil Appeals were dismissed by this Court. 

 Etc. 
 
Vam Organic I: 
9.10 In Vam Organic I, the Notification dated 18.05.1990 
issued by the Excise Commissioner, Uttar Pradesh, was assailed 
before the High Court and the writ petition was dismissed. By 
the said Notification, certain amendments were made to the 
Rules published vide Notification dated 26.09.1910. Section 41 
of the UP Excise Act, 1910 gave power to the Excise 
Commissioner to make Rules, inter alia, for regulating the 
manufacture, supply, storage or sale of any intoxicant. The 
earlier Rule 2 was substituted by a new Rule 2 titled 
“Denaturation of Spirit”. The amended Rule provided for a new 
licence for denaturation of spirit in a prescribed form to be issued 
by the Collector to all distilleries situated within his district 
holding licence PD-1 or PD-2 and persons holding licences FL-
16, FL-39, FL-40 and FL-41 to denature the spirit. A licence fee 
for denaturation of spirit at the rate of 7 paise per litre was levied 
in advance. The appellants in this case who were manufacturers 
of vinyl acetate monomer (a basic organic chemical for which 
“industrial alcohol” was the main feed stock being produced in 
the distillery) contended that the entire “industrial alcohol” 

 Etc. produced was denatured as per the method approved by the 
State Excise Authorities and was being used in their factory for 
manufacturing vinyl acetate monomer. The appellants held 
licences in the form of FL-39 to enable them to use the “industrial 
alcohol” as the main raw material for their product. The 
notification was challenged on two grounds: firstly, that the State 
of Uttar Pradesh has no power to legislate in respect of “industrial 
alcohol” or to levy taxes in respect thereof. Secondly, that the levy 
being not based on quid pro quo was otherwise bad. 
9.10.1 
In this case, before considering the legal contentions, 
this Court highlighted the difference between “industrial 
alcohol”, denatured spirit and potable liquor. Ethyl alcohol was 
noted to be rectified spirit of 95% v/v in strength. Rectified spirit 
was highly toxic and unfit for human consumption. However, 
rectified spirit diluted with water was noted to be country liquor. 
Rectified spirit, as it was, can be used for manufacture of various 
other products like chemicals, etc. Rectified spirit, produced for 
industrial use was required by a Notification issued under the 
Act to be denatured in order to prevent the spirit from being 
directed to human consumption. Rectified spirit was denatured 

 Etc. by adding denaturants which made the spirit unpalatable and 
nauseating. As such rectified spirit could be converted to potable 
liquor but once denatured it could be used only as “industrial 
alcohol”. 
9.10.2 
 It was observed that in Synthetics and Chemicals 
(7J) the question of legislative competence of the State to impose 
tax or levy on “industrial alcohol” was ruled in the negative, so 
far as ethyl alcohol/rectified spirit is concerned. Further, even if 
the State had the regulatory power to prevent misuse of 
“industrial alcohol” for potable purposes, such power did not 
include power to levy any impost. It was further observed that 
denaturation is a statutory duty imposed by a notification under 
the U.P. Excise Act and as no service by the State was being 
provided for the same, no fee could be charged and even if the 
State had to incur any expenses for enforcement of the 
requirement of denaturation, there is no quid pro quo between 
the expenses incurred and the fees charged. This Court noted 
that the term “industrial alcohol” is not used in any of the Lists 
and whether alcoholic liquors other than “alcoholic liquors for 
human consumption” or “intoxicating liquors” was a State 

 Etc. subject or a Union subject should be the real controversy. It was 
with a view to describing that particular kind of liquor the term 
“industrial alcohol” is used. It was observed that after an 
analysis of all the provisions of law giving the Union Parliament 
and the State Legislature jurisdiction to legislate on alcohol, this 
Court in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) held that the 
impugned notifications therein, imposing certain fees as vend fee 
or transport fee, etc. were within the legislative competence of 
the State. That this Court was fully aware of the fact that rectified 
spirit was the ingredient for “intoxicating liquors” or alcoholic 
liquors for human consumption although rectified spirit/ethyl 
alcohol as well as denatured spirit are referred to as “industrial 
alcohol” in that judgment. This Court did not hold that the State 
will have no power whatsoever in relation to “industrial alcohol”. 
In fact, in the judgment in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J), the 
Court has enumerated the various areas relating to “industrial 
alcohol” in which the State could still legislate or make rules. In 
that regard paragraph 86 of the judgment in Synthetics and 
Chemicals (7J) was quoted. Of course, the same has been 
explained in Synthetics and Chemicals (2J), discussed above. 

 Etc. 
 
This Court observed in this case that denaturation of spirit 
meant for industrial use is meant to prevent misuse of non-
potable alcohol for human consumption and as such was 
specifically mentioned by the Court to be within the legislative 
competence of the State. This Court observed in para 14 as 
under: 
“14. It is to be noticed that the States under Entries 8 
and 51 of List II read with Entry 84 of List I have 
exclusive privilege to legislate on intoxicating liquor or 
alcoholic liquor for human consumption. Hence, so long 
as any alcoholic preparation can be diverted to human 
consumption, the States shall have the power to legislate 
as also to impose taxes etc. In this view, denaturation of 
spirit is not only an obligation on the States but also 
within the competence of the States to enforce.” 
 
Haryana Brewery Ltd.: 
9.11 In Government of Haryana vs. Haryana Brewery Ltd., 
(2002) (“Haryana Brewery Ltd.”), the controversy 
related to levy of excise duty on beer brewed by the respondent 
therein. Rule 35 of the Punjab Brewery Rules, 1956 and Section 
32 of the Punjab Excise Act, 1914 were considered. It was 
observed by this Court that the said Rule was only an enabling 
provision which would help the Excise Authorities in calculating 

 Etc. what would be the quantity of beer manufactured and fit for 
human consumption on which excise duty could be imposed. 
The said Rule was declared valid and it did not require any 
reading down as had been done by the High Court. It was 
observed that the tax was on the end product and not on the raw 
material. Rule 35 indicated that in order to determine what was 
the quantity of beer manufactured which was fit for human 
consumption, after all the processes were completed, one had to 
see what was the quantity of raw materials which were utilised 
for the manufacture of beer and then allowance for wastage of 
seven per cent had to be made and thereafter the quantity of beer 
manufactured was determined. That the figure taken for the 
purpose of calculating the excise duty was only on the end 
product, namely the beer produced, and not the quantity of the 
raw material used in manufacture of beer, during which loss of 
some quantity as wastage would have occurred and there could 
not be a deduction of any sum or proportion as wastage from the 
quantity of end product in order to arrive at that quantity. In 
such a case, the question of determining any allowance of seven 
per cent for wastage did not arise. Therefore, the Excise 

 Etc. 
 
Authorities could levy excise duty only on the beer after it had 
been manufactured and the levy was on the quantity 
manufactured. How this quantity had to be arrived was to be 
determined according to Section 32 read with Rule 35 of the 
aforementioned Act and Rules. Hence, Rule 35 was sustained as 
valid and it did not require any reading down. 
Industrial Corporation (P) Ltd.: 
9.12 In the State of Bihar vs. Industrial Corporation (P) 
Ltd., (2003) (“Industrial Corporation (P) Ltd.”), 
the respondent companies were engaged in the manufacture of 
rectified spirit from molasses allotted to them by the Controller 
of Molasses in terms of the Bihar Molasses (Control) Act, 1947 
and they had been granted licences under various provisions of 
the Bihar and Orissa Excise Act, 1915. It was found that certain 
quantity of rectified spirit had to be produced but instead there 
was a shortfall and therefore, notice was issued and penalty was 
imposed on the premise that the respondents therein had 
diverted the molasses towards manufacturing either country 
liquor or liquor which was fit for human consumption. Assailing 
the same, writ petitions were filed before the High Court which 

 Etc. had allowed the said writ petitions. Therefore, the State had 
appealed before this Court. 
9.13 This Court noted that molasses is a by-product of sugar 
and mainly used as raw material for manufacture of spirit, 
including alcohol for human consumption. The respondents in 
the said case were engaged in the manufacture of rectified spirit 
from molasses and penalty was imposed owing to a loss of 
revenue by reason of loss of wastage of molasses while carrying 
on manufacture of such rectified spirit. One of the contentions 
raised was that the State has power to impose duty only on the 
spirit which is for human consumption and the respondents 
therein had not carried out any activities in relation to 
manufacture of potable liquor from the molasses. It was observed 
that the judgment in Modi Distillery applied to the said case 
and therefore, no penal duty could be imposed on rectified spirit. 
Reliance placed on Bihar Distillery was not gone into inasmuch 
as it was observed that it was unnecessary to go into the question 
of the correctness of the observations made in Bihar Distillery. 
However, the observations of the High Court therein were that in 
view of the judgment of this Court in Synthetics and Chemicals 

 Etc. 
 
(7J), the State had no legislative competence even in relation to 
potable liquor, (which is fit for human consumption), was not 
correct. 
Vam Organic II: 
9.14 In Vam Organic II, a notification dated 13.01.1990 
whereby licence fee of 15 paise per litre was sought to be imposed 
on the quantity of specially denatured spirit (STS) obtained from 
distilleries in the State of Uttar Pradesh under Rule 3(a) of the 
UP Licences for the Possession of Denatured Spirit and Specially 
Denatured Spirit Rules, 1976 was assailed before the Allahabad 
High Court. The writ petitions were allowed, and the State had 
filed appeals before this Court. Section 3 (13) of the UP Excise 
Act, 1910 (for short, “1910 Act”) had defined the word 
“intoxicant” as meaning “any liquor or intoxicating drug”. The 
word “liquor” in turn was defined in Section 3(11) as meaning 
“intoxicating liquors and includes spirits of wine, spirit, wine, 
tari, pachwai, beer and all liquid consisting of or containing 
alcohol, also any substance which the State Government may by 
notification declare to be liquor for the purposes of the Act.” In 
paragraph 6 of the judgment, it was observed that “industrial 

 Etc. alcohol” is not liquor nor is it potable as such. However, it may 
be utilized to produce a kind of liquor if it is denatured. 
“Denatured” in Section 3(9) of the Act was defined to mean 
“rendered unfit for human consumption in such manner as may 
be prescribed by the State Government by notification in this 
behalf”. Thus, the State Act equated “industrial alcohol” to non-
potable alcohol and not fit for human consumption. To ensure 
the denaturation of “industrial alcohol” under Section 41 of the 
1910 Act, Rules were made in the year 1976. It was contended 
by the appellant State that the word “industry” has been 
construed by the Constitution Bench of this Court in ITC Ltd. vs. Agricultural Produce Market Committee, (2002) (“ITC Ltd.”) to mean only manufacture and production. 
Therefore, the State was competent under Entry 33 - List III to 
regulate the products of an industry which was declared to be a 
controlled industry under Entry 52 - List I. Since there was no 
Central legislation occupying the field, the State law must be held 
to be valid. 
9.14.1 
Referring to Synthetics and Chemicals (7J), it was 
observed that since the coming into force of the IDRA on 

 Etc. 
 
08.05.1952, 
the 
State 
Legislatures 
are 
constitutionally 
incompetent to levy tax on “industrial alcohol”. This principle 
was reiterated in Modi Distillery wherein it was held that the 
State’s power to levy excise duty was limited to alcoholic liquors 
for human consumption which means, that liquor which, as it 
is, is consumable in the sense that it is capable of being taken 
by human beings as such as a beverage or drink. Therefore, even 
if ethyl alcohol (95 per cent) could be used as a raw material or 
input, after processing and substantial dilution, in the 
production of whisky, gin, country liquor etc. nevertheless, it was 
not “intoxicating liquors” which expression meant only that 
liquor which was consumable by human beings as it was. 
Therefore, the State could not legislate on “industrial alcohol” 
despite the fact that such “industrial alcohol” has the potential 
to be used to manufacture alcoholic liquors for human 
consumption. 
9.14.2 
Ultimately, in paragraph 43 of the judgment, it was 
pithily observed as under: 
“43. Considering the various authorities cited, we are of 
the view that the State Government is competent to levy 
fee for the purpose of ensuring that industrial alcohol is 

 Etc. not surreptitiously converted into potable alcohol so that 
the State is deprived of revenue on the sale of such 
potable alcohol and the public is protected from 
consuming such illicit liquor. But this power stops with 
the denaturation of the industrial alcohol. Denatured 
spirit has been held in Vam Organics I to be outside the 
seisin of the State Legislature. Assuming that denatured 
spirit may by whatever process be renatured (a 
proposition 
which 
is 
seriously 
disputed 
by 
the 
respondents) and then converted into potable liquor, 
this would not give the State the power to regulate it. 
Even according to the demarcation of the fields of 
legislative competence as envisaged in Bihar Distillery 
industrial alcohol for industrial purposes falls within the 
exclusive control of the Union and according to Bihar 
Distillery “denatured rectified spirit, of course, is wholly 
and exclusively industrial alcohol” (SCC p. 742, para 
23).” 
 
Analysis of Judicial Dicta: 
10. I shall now analyse the judgments of this Court on the 
points in controversy. 
10.1 In Indian Mica, the question which came up was whether 
the fee levied under Rule 111 of the Bihar and Orissa Excise 
Rules framed under Section 90 of the Bihar and Orissa Excise 
Act, 1915 on denatured spirit used and possessed by the 
appellants therein had sufficient quid pro quo for the levy. This 
Court struck down the levy as being unjustified and excessive as 

 Etc. there was no co-relationship between the levy and the services 
rendered. 
10.2 In Southern Pharmaceuticals and Chemicals vs. 
State 
of 
Kerala, 
AIR 

SC 

(“Southern 
Pharmaceuticals”), being aggrieved by the dismissal of their 
writ petitions and upholding the constitutional validity of Section 
12-A and other sections of the Kerala Abkari Act, and Rules 13 
and 16 of the Kerala Rectified Spirit Rules, 1972, the 
manufacturers of medicinal and toilet preparations containing 
alcohol had filed the appeal before this Court questioning the 
legislative competence of State to enact a law relating to 
medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol under Entry 
8 - List II. Repelling the said contention in light of the scheme of 
legislation and its history, it was observed that impugned Act was 
relatable to Entry 8 - List II. Reference was also made to the 
judgment of this Court in FN Balsara and it was held that the 
main purpose of the impugned Act was to consolidate the law 
relating to manufacture, sale and possession of “intoxicating 
liquors” which squarely fell under Entry 8 - List II, while the main 
object of the Central Act was to provide for the levy and collection 

 Etc. of duties of excise on medicinal and toilet preparations 
containing alcohol falling under Entry 84 - List I. According to 
this Court when the framework of the two enactments was 
examined, it was apparent that the Central and the State 
legislations operated in two different and distinct fields. It was 
held that in the matter of making rules or detailed provisions to 
achieve the object and purpose of a legislation, there may be 
some provisions seemingly overlapping or encroaching upon the 
forbidden field, but that does not warrant the striking down of 
the impugned Act as ultra vires the State Legislature. 
10.3 In Synthetics and Chemicals (7J), the question for 
consideration was whether different legislations and rules in 
respect of “industrial alcohol” enacted by the States were valid. 
In my view, this Court was clear about the concept of “industrial 
alcohol” and “intoxicating liquors” and therefore, the State 
Legislatures’ competence to levy excise duty on “industrial 
alcohol” was considered as the seminal issue. In that context, 
the scope and ambit of Entry 8 - List II was also considered. It is 
in the context of the taxing power of the States, i.e., to levy excise 

 Etc. duty on “industrial alcohol” and/or impost(s) such as vend fees 
which was the point of controversy. 
In the above backdrop, the question was crystallised to 
whether the expression “intoxicating liquors” in Entry 8 - List II 
is confined to potable liquor or includes all liquors. It was 
observed that the expression “alcoholic liquors for human 
consumption” used by the framers of the Constitution in Entry 
51 – List II and Entry 84 – List I meant that liquor which is 
consumed by human beings directly as a beverage or as a drink. 
It was observed that alcoholic liquor or “intoxicating liquors” 
must be understood as common people would understand it and 
not what certain alcoholic products are capable of being 
transformed or converted into. That when excise duty was being 
levied under Entry 84 - List I, it did not include alcoholic liquors 
for human consumption but included denatured spirit which is 
“industrial alcohol”. It was observed that merely because the 
denatured spirit could be treated with water and transformed 
into alcoholic liquors into human consumption which did not 
involve a process of manufacture, the States would not have the 

 Etc. legislative competence to levy excise duty under Entry 51 - List 
II. 
10.4 Subsequently, in Synthetics and Chemicals (2J), it was 
clarified that the question which arose for consideration before 
the seven-Judge Bench was with regard to the validity of “vend 
fee and other fees” charged by the States. The two-Judge Bench 
clarified that the seven-Judge Bench had answered the question 
whether, “intoxicating liquors” in Entry 8 - List II was confined to 
only potable liquor or other liquors also and it was held that it 
included only potable liquor and not “industrial alcohol”. 
However, it was clarified that the State has the power to levy taxes 
on sale or purchase of goods under Entry 54 - List II and therefore 
paragraph 86 of the seven-Judge Bench in Synthetics and 
Chemicals (7J) was clarified in those terms. It was observed that 
in paragraph 86 by an accident (due to an inadvertence) the 
prohibition of sales tax being levied by the States on the 
“industrial alcohol” was adverted to without there being a 
discussion on that aspect of the matter and, therefore, to that 
extent the dictum of the seven-Judge Bench in Synthetics and 
Chemicals (7J) was per incuriam. It was further clarified that the 

 Etc. seven-Judge Bench was only concerned with the question 
whether the State Legislature could levy vend fee or excise duty 
on “industrial alcohol” and that the said question was answered 
in the negative by holding that “industrial alcohol” being unfit for 
human consumption, the State Legislature was incompetent to 
levy any duty of excise under Entry 51 - List II. 
10.5 In the above context, it was also observed that alcohol can 
be divided into two categories, namely, potable and non-potable 
alcohol. That alcohol which is potable is “intoxicating liquors” for 
human consumption directly as a beverage and comes within the 
scope and ambit of Entry 8 - List II and the State Legislature has 
the power to regulate such “intoxicating liquors” by making 
relevant laws. However, non-potable liquor or “industrial 
alcohol” as it is popularly called, can be diluted and consumed 
as a beverage, and the State has an obligation and powers to 
regulate and ensure that there is no such abuse having regard to 
Article 47 of the Constitution being a Directive Principle of State 
Policy. Hence, under Entry 8 - List II, the State can make laws 
for prevention of production, possession, sale etc. of non-potable 
alcohol as “intoxicating liquors”. Such regulation would be intra 

 Etc. vires Entry 8 - List II and would not be in conflict with any other 
Entry in List I, II or List III. This would also be in line with Article 
47 of the Constitution. 
10.6 The aforesaid view was affirmed in Bileshwar Khand 
Udyog by holding that clarity was brought about in respect of 
“industrial alcohol” in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) and the 
competency of the State to frame any legislation to levy any tax 
or duty on “industrial alcohol” was excluded. However, under 
Entry 33 - List III, there was power vested in the State insofar as 
“industrial alcohol” was concerned as the said product was a 
product of a scheduled industry, namely, Item 26 of the First 
Schedule of the IDRA which was enacted pursuant to Entry 52 - 
List I. This is subject to the intention of the Parliament to occupy 
the field as per the provisions of the IDRA, in particular, under 
Section 18G of the said Act. Gujchem Distillers also followed the 
aforesaid judgment. Khoday Distilleries also emphasised the 
fact that the State has the power to completely prohibit the 
manufacture, sale, possession, distribution and consumption of 
potable liquor as a beverage but the State cannot prohibit trade 
and business in medicinal and toilet preparations containing 

 Etc. liquor or alcohol. In the same way, the State cannot prohibit 
trade or business in “industrial alcohol” which is not used as a 
beverage but used legitimately for industrial purposes. It was 
held that restrictions imposed by the States on trade or business 
in “industrial alcohol” or in medicinal and toilet preparations 
containing liquor or alcohol could be for the purpose of 
preventing their abuse or diversion for use as or in beverages. 
10.7 In Shree Krishna Gyanoday Sugar Ltd. it was 
categorically observed that the excise authorities under the 
concerned State Act could supervise the working of the distilleries 
which had composite licences to manufacture not only denatured 
spirit and other spirits for industrial use but also potable spirit 
or country liquor in order to prevent alteration of denatured spirit 
and make it fit for human consumption. Therefore, at the 
distilleries of the licencees, supervision had to be provided as it 
was a regulatory measure. In this context also, it was clarified 
that the denatured spirit is a spirit which is not fit for human 
consumption and non-potable, and was also called as “other 
commercial spirits” under the rules in question, as they are used 
for industrial purposes or any other purpose other than human 

 Etc. consumption as a beverage. This was opposed to potable liquor 
which is fit for human consumption. It was finally observed that 
in respect of such distilleries having composite licencees, the 
State will have to provide the cost of supervisors and the same 
could not be foisted on such distilleries. 
10.8 Jeevan Reddy, J., in Bihar Distillery, also held that 
insofar as “intoxicating liquors or potable liquors” are concerned, 
they fall in the exclusive province of the State. However, alcohol 
can be used for the industrial purposes even without denaturing 
it. Significantly, it was held that Entry 8 - List II uses the 
expression “intoxicating liquors” which signifies “liquor for 
human consumption”. The absence of the words “for human 
consumption” in Entry 8 – List II is irrelevant as the word 
“intoxicating” signifies human consumption, i.e., as a beverage 
and all aspects of its production, manufacture, possession, 
transport, sale and purchase of “intoxicating liquors” are covered 
under the said Entry. Also the accidental error in para 85 of the 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) was explained to say that all 
potable liquor shall be governed by Entry 8 - List II which is 
within the exclusive domain of the State. Further, Entry 8 - List 

 Etc. 
 
II is outside the purview of Entry 24 - List II and the Union cannot 
take control of “intoxicating liquors” by making a declaration in 
terms of Entry 52 - List I. It was further observed that 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) mainly dealt with “industrial 
alcohol”, i.e., denatured rectified spirit. 
10.9 In Bihar Distillery, this Court further observed that the 
States have the power to legislate under Entry 33(a) – List III 
provided the field is not occupied by the Union. That there was 
a clear line of demarcation at the stage of removal or clearance of 
the product, i.e., if the clearance is for “industrial” purpose, the 
duties of excise and all other control is with the Union but if the 
removal or clearance is for obtaining or manufacturing “potable 
liquor”, the levy of duty and other control is with the State. It 
was observed that there was a need for joint control and 
supervision of the process of manufacture of rectified liquor and 
its use and disposal for ensuring that “industrial alcohol” was not 
misused by diverting it for potable purpose and consequently 
certain concrete observations were made in the said judgment 
which is of a binding nature. 

 Etc. 

10.10 The challenge to the notification issued by the excise 
commissioner, Uttar Pradesh dated 18.05.1990 was a subject 
matter of controversy in Vam Organic I, in the context of 
legislative competence of the State of Uttar Pradesh to impose tax 
or levy on “industrial alcohol”, ethyl alcohol and rectified spirit. 
It was observed that the expression “industrial alcohol” is not 
used in any of the three Lists of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution. Referring to Synthetics and Chemicals (7J), this 
Court observed that the judgment in the aforesaid case proceeded 
to consider that rectified spirit was the ingredient for 
“intoxicating 
liquors” 
or 
alcoholic 
liquors 
for 
human 
consumption. The same was referred to as “industrial alcohol” in 
respect of which the State has no power whatsoever under 
Entries 8 and 51 – List II, while the States have the exclusive 
competence to legislate on “intoxicating liquors” or “alcoholic 
liquors for human consumption” but if any alcoholic preparation 
is diverted for human consumption, the States would have the 
power to legislate under Entry 8 - List II. 

 Etc. 
 
10.11 Again, Jeevan Reddy, J. speaking for the Court in Bihar 
Distillery noted that in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) a 
distinction was drawn between rectified spirit meant exclusively 
for industries (“industrial alcohol”) and rectified spirit exclusively 
used for obtaining potable alcohol. The said judgment did not 
deal with rectified spirit which could be converted to potable 
alcohol as such. That insofar as the first category was concerned, 
it was under the exclusive control of the Union and the second 
category was under the control of the State at all stages including 
the establishment of the distillery. 
10.12 
In Vam Organic II, the history of the legislations on 
“intoxicating liquors” as well the earlier judgments of this Court 
were considered and it was observed that the State Legislatures 
are constitutionally not competent to levy tax on “industrial 
alcohol” since the coming into force of the IDRA on 08.05.1952. 
It was opined that Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) continued to 
hold the field and therefore, the States’ power was limited to 
regulation of non-potable alcohol for the limited purpose of 
preventing its use as alcoholic liquors. 

 Etc. 
 
Further Analysis: 
11. The survey of the aforesaid decisions of this Court and their 
analysis clearly indicate the golden thread of continuity in all of 
them, i.e., this Court has been clear on what is meant by the 
expression “industrial alcohol” as simplified to refer to all alcohol 
which is “not fit for human consumption as a beverage or non-
potable alcohol”. By contrast, the use of the expression “potable 
alcohol” refers to “intoxicating liquors” used for human 
consumption as a beverage or as a drink. However, in paragraph 
85 of Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) the expression “both 
potable and” is an inadvertent insertion inasmuch as there was 
no reason to state that licences to manufacture potable alcohol 
was vested in the Central Government. Therefore, to that extent 
the judgment in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) calls for a 
clarification. Apart from that the following points would emerge 
from paragraph 85: 

That, on insertion of Item 26 of the First Schedule to IDRA, 
the control of “Fermentation Industries” has vested 
exclusively in the Union. 

 Etc. 
 
(ii) Therefore, even the States cannot themselves manufacture 
“industrial alcohol” without the permission of the Central 
Government. 
(iii) “Industrial alcohol” cannot be amenable to States’ claim to 
possession of exclusive privilege and the States can neither 
rely on Entry 8 – List II nor Entry 33 – List III as a basis for 
such claim. 
(iv) The States cannot claim that under Entry 33 – List III, it can 
regulate “industrial alcohol” as a product of the scheduled 
industry as the Union under Section 18G of the IDRA has 
evinced a clear intention to occupy the whole field. The 
doctrine of occupied field under Article 254 has been applied 
in the said case which shall be adverted to later. 
(v) Any exercise of power by the States under Entry 8 – List II is 
not an exercise of power under Entry 33 – List III. 
11.1 The aforesaid judgments state that insofar as “intoxicating 
liquors” or potable liquors are concerned, Entry 8 - List II is the 
regulatory Entry while Entry 51 - List II is the taxation Entry 
which provides for imposition of excise duty on potable liquor also 

 Etc. called alcoholic liquors for human consumption. Conversely, 
insofar as “industrial alcohol” is concerned, the control of the said 
industry is vested with the Union owing to Section 2 of the IDRA 
read with the other provisions of the said Act, which enactment 
has been made by virtue of Entry 52 - List I. That the Union has 
taken under its control “Fermentation Industries” as per Item 26 
of the First Schedule to the IDRA which has been enacted by the 
Parliament in relation to Entry 52 - List I excluding “intoxicating 
liquors”. “Fermentation Industries” relates to various products 
manufactured, processed, etc. as a result of fermentation 
process. Such products of fermentation are broadly classified as 
“industrial alcohol” (non-potable alcohol) and “intoxicating 
liquors” (potable alcohol). This classification is for the purpose of 
identifying the nature of the product, its use in the industry and 
consequently, dividing the subject of the legislation between the 
Parliament and the State Legislature. 
11.2 The aforesaid decisions also indicate that merely because 
“industrial alcohol” or non-potable alcohol such as rectified spirit 
can be converted into “intoxicating liquors” or alcohol fit for 
human consumption as a beverage (potable alcohol), that would 

 Etc. not empower the State Legislature to tax or impose any levy on 
such “industrial alcohol”. However, since the expression 
“intoxicating liquors” in Entry 8 - List II deals specifically with 
alcohol used as a beverage and meant for human consumption, 
it would be within the scope and ambit of the said Entry for the 
State Legislature to regulate any abuse or conversion of 
“industrial alcohol” as a beverage, which is, in fact, harmful when 
consumed. Therefore, having regard to Article 47 of the 
Constitution, a State Legislature can even prohibit manufacture 
of “intoxicating liquors” in a State as one of the objects of which 
would be to negate the conversion or abuse of “industrial alcohol” 
as alcohol fit for human consumption. 
11.3 The judgment of this Court in Synthetics and Chemicals 
(7J), was also clear about the controversy before it, namely, the 
competence of the Uttar Pradesh State Legislature to impose 
vend-fee on “industrial alcohol” when the same is a product of 
“Fermentation Industries” and, therefore, under the control of the 
Union. 

 Etc. 
 
11.4 However, the sum and substance of the controversy has to 
be answered by this Court on the premise that, despite there 
being clarity in the minds of the authorities under the States as 
well as the Centre, repeated imposition of imposts in the form of 
tax or excise duties etc., have brought several cases before this 
Court for adjudication. Ultimately, those who are in the business 
of “industrial alcohol” or “intoxicating liquors”, namely, non-
potable and potable liquor respectively are clear about the nature 
of their business and the products that they are dealing with. 
Hence, I feel that it is incumbent for this Court to enhance the 
clarity and not create a further legal regime which would cause 
confusion and legal uncertainty in the economy. 
Meaning of “intoxicating liquors”: 
12. Before embarking on an enquiry in this Reference to 
understand the scope of the expression “intoxicating liquors” as 
it appears in Entry 8 – List II, it would be useful to highlight that 
this Court has relied on pre-constitutional legislations and the 
Constitution of India while interpreting the scope of the 
expression “intoxicating liquors”. 

 Etc. 
 
12.1 At the outset, I may refer to Cooley’s “Constitutional 
Limitations” [2nd ed. Boston: Little, Brown & Company, p.58], 
wherein it is explained as follows: 
“In interpreting clauses we must presume that words 
have been employed in their natural and ordinary 
meaning. Says Marshall, Ch. J.: “The framers of the 
Constitution, and the people who adopted it, must be 
understood to have employed words in their natural 
sense, and to have understood what they meant.” This 
is but saying that no forced or unnatural construction is 
to be put upon their language; and it seems so obvious 
a truism that one expects to see it universally accepted 
without question; but the attempt is so often made by 
interested subtlety and ingenious refinement to induce 
the courts to force from these instruments a meaning 
which their framers never held, that it frequently 
becomes necessary to re-declare this fundamental 
maxim.” 
(underlining by me) 

Therefore, one task before this Court is to ascertain to what 
extent “intoxicating liquors” had acquired a natural and ordinary 
meaning at the time of the Constitution coming into force. 
12.2 I may note another cardinal rule of interpretation 
explained by Sir Maurice Gwyer C.J., of the Federal Court of 
India in In Re: the Central Provinces and Berar Act No. XIV 

 Etc. of 1938, 1939 1 FCR 80, while discussing the principles of 
interpretation of a constitutional provision as under: 
"I conceive that a broad and liberal spirit should inspire 
those whose duty it is to interpret it; but I do not imply 
by this that they are free to stretch or pervert the 
language of the enactment in the interests of any legal 
or constitutional theory, or even for the purpose of 
supplying omissions or of correcting supposed errors. A 
Federal Court will not strengthen, but only derogate 
from, its position, if it seeks to do anything but declare 
the law; but it may rightly reflect that a Constitution of 
a Government is a living and organic thing, which of all 
instruments has the greatest claim to be construed ut 
res magis valeat quam pereat." 
 
12.3 The learned Chief Justice Dr. Chandrachud, in his 
opinion has conducted an extensive inquiry into identification of 
legislative meaning of the phrase and its legislative history, but 
found that no conclusive answer can be reached on the legal 
import of “intoxicating liquors”. With due respect, I view that 
such an enquiry needs to give due primacy to the ordinary and 
natural meaning of words and also test their connotations in 
colloquial use by the Constitution makers so as to give it a 
constitutional flavour. 

 Etc. 
 
A Historical Perspective: 
12.4 A historical enquiry would show that “intoxicating liquors” 
was first used in Entry 31 – List II in the Government of India 
Act, 1935. This was a departure from the legislative head in 
Devolution Rules framed under the Government of India Act, 
1919 insofar as the Entry therein was “alcoholic liquor”. The 
revisions in List II of Government of India Act, 1935 were partly 
the product of a Joint Select Committee chaired by Lord 
Linlithgow. Later, the word “liquors” was also qualified by the 
word “intoxicating”. 
12.5 I may briefly refer to the following remarks of Brewer, J. in South Carolina vs. United States, (1905) 199 US 437 
(“South Carolina”): 
"To determine the extent of the grants of power, we must, 
therefore, place ourselves in the position of the men who 
framed and adopted the Constitution, and inquire what 
they must have understood to be the meaning and scope 
of those grants." 
 
12.6 In this backdrop, it is useful to draw sustenance from 
certain contemporaneous legislations and Hansard records that 
go to show that the phrase “intoxicating liquors” was used in the 
context of consumption. On 30.04.1889, the House of Commons 

 Etc. on a motion moved by Mr. S. Smith to discuss how the fiscal 
system of the Government of India led to the establishment of 
spirit distilleries, liquor and opium shops in a large number of 
places where till recently (from the date of question) they never 
existed 
had 
several 
references 
to 
“intoxicating 
liquors” 
exclusively in the context of consumption. On 29.06.1904, Mr. 
Herbert Roberts, a person interested in temperance asked the 
Secretary of State for India whether he was aware that the 
number of ‘shops open for the sale of “intoxicating liquors” and 
drugs in India rose from 97,910 in 1901–02 to 99,497 in 1902–
03’ and whether he was in a position to explain the reasons for 
this increase in the number of shops opened and the consequent 
increase in consumption. Most interestingly, on 13.07.1937, in 
a sitting of the House of Lords, Lord Clwyd (formerly Mr. Herbert 
Roberts) asked the Secretary of State for India the following 
question: 
“To ask His Majesty's Government what was the amount 
in pounds sterling of the net Excise revenue of India for 
the years 1933–1934, 1934–1935 and 1935–1936 
respectively; what was the recorded consumption of 
country spirits in 1935–1936 in Bengal, Madras, 
Bombay, Sind, Bihar and Orissa, the United Provinces, 
the Punjab, the North-West Frontier Province, the 

 Etc. 
 
Central Provinces and Berar, Assam and Burma 
respectively; what was the number of shops licensed 
for the sale of intoxicating liquor, the net amount of 
Excise revenue, and the cost of Excise administration in 
each Province in 1930–1931 and 1935–1936; and what 
was the percentage of Excise revenue compared with the 
total revenue accruing to the Provincial Governments in 
each case for the year 1935–1936.” 
 
12.7 This enquiry reflects that “intoxicating liquors” has not 
only been a term of common parlance but was also used in 
administration for assessment and regulation of consumption of 
spirits in provinces in pre-independence India from the point of 
view of collection of revenue. 
Constituent Assembly Debates: 
12.8 I might also take persuasive strength from the use of the 
expression “intoxicating liquors” in Constituent Assembly 
Debates in the context of Article 47. Sri B.G. Kher speaking on 
the ruin caused by the consumption of alcohol noted the use of 
“intoxicating liquors” and drugs as a vice. 
12.9 The aforesaid discussion points to the fact that there was 
a consumption-oriented meaning attached to “intoxicating 
liquors” that was used for legal and administrative purposes. To 

 Etc. ascertain the breadth of the phrase “intoxicating liquors” as it 
was used by the draftsmen of the Constitution and the 
Government of India Act, 1935 one cannot be bound by only the 
definitions provided in legislative enactments, or lack thereof. 
12.10 The Constitution of India clearly employs three distinct 
expressions relevant to the present controversy: 
(a) Entry 51 - List II refers to duties on ‘alcoholic liquors for 
human consumption’; 
(b) Article 47 uses the words “consumption of ‘intoxicating 
drinks’”; and 
(c) Entry 8 – List II uses the words in question – “intoxicating 
liquors” 
12.11 I may observe that the expression “alcoholic liquors for 
human consumption” as it appears in Entry 51 – List II and 
intoxicating drinks as it appears in Article 47 have been 
categorically used in the context of human consumption as a 
beverage, as rightly observed by the learned Chief Justice in his 
opinion. Herein, I might note that appellants have sought to 
contend that the expression “intoxicating liquors” as it appears 

 Etc. in Entry 8 – List II has no explicit neighboring context which 
would indicate that it is restricted to mean only potable liquor. 
12.12 
The first interpretive question therefore is, whether 
the absence of the context of consumption expands “intoxicating 
liquors” to also include “industrial alcohol”. In my opinion, the 
words “intoxicating liquors” itself explains that Entry 8 – List II 
does not seek to travel beyond “intoxicating liquors” meant for 
human consumption i.e., potable alcohol. This was also the view 
of Jeevan Reddy, J. in Bihar Distillery. 
12.13 
Another distinguishing consideration is the use of 
“intoxicating” as an adjective to liquor i.e., as a qualifier whereas 
elsewhere in the Constitution the word “alcoholic” accompanies 
the word liquor. Learned Chief Justice has carefully found 
following three inferences which are summarized as under: 
a) 
Ingredient vs. Effect: “Alcoholic liquor” defines the scope of 
the provision based on the ingredient, that is, alcohol 
whereas “intoxicating liquors” defines the scope based on 
effect i.e. intoxication. Therefore, liquor which is not 

 Etc. colloquially considered alcoholic liquor may be covered by the 
phrase “intoxicating liquors”. b) 
Broader intent: ‘Intoxicate’ means either the ability of 
someone to lose control of their behavior or poison. Thus, the 
purpose of substituting the adjective which indicates the 
impact with the ingredient seems to have enhanced the scope 
of the Entry to cover all liquor which has an impact on health; 
and 
c) 
Public interest purpose: There is a discernible public 
interest in covering the entire stage from production to sale 
of “intoxicating liquors”. Additionally, Entry 31 – List II in the 
Government of India Act, 1935 also regulated narcotic drugs 
and opium along with “intoxicating liquors”. However, 
references to them were deleted to prevent overlapping with 
entries in the Concurrent List. In substance, the inference 
that is drawn is that all – alcohol, narcotic drugs and opium 
– are products which can be noxiously used because they are 
also used as raw materials in the production of other 
products. 

 Etc. 
 
12.14 
 What prima facie appears is that the “intoxication” 
effect is a sine qua non for the legislative competence of States on 
any liquors potentially coming within the scope of Entry 8 – List 
II. In the absence of an “intoxicating” effect from liquors, a State 
Legislature cannot legislate on the subject. However, in my view, 
what is required to be seen is the nature of the product which 
leads to such an intoxicating effect upon human consumption of 
the same. Here, the expression consumption must be explained. 
It is not all kinds of human consumption, direct or indirect, 
which is the determining factor. It is only direct consumption i.e. as an ingestion by the act of drinking as a beverage or a drink. 
An indirect consumption by use of alcoholic liquors as a raw 
material for any other product, industrial, medicinal or a toilet 
item cannot be included as part of Entry 8 – List II. Secondly, 
merely because there can be a potential misuse of “industrial 
alcohol”, for example, by converting rectified spirit (“industrial 
alcohol”) as a beverage which has an intoxicating effect, Entry 8 
– List II cannot be stretched to include such “industrial alcohol”. 
The prevention of abuse of “industrial alcohol” as a beverage is 
also covered under Entry 8 – List II. Thus, what is carved out of 

 Etc. 
 
“Fermentation Industries” in Entry 24 – List II is only 
“intoxicating liquors” used as beverage and thus, for direct 
human consumption the said subject is placed in Entry 8 – List 
II. This would imply that the rest of “Fermentation Industries” 
would be within the scope and ambit of Entry 24 – List II which 
is subject to Entry 52 – List I and is a scheduled industry as per 
Section 2 read with Item 26 of First Schedule of IDRA. 
12.15 
One must also be cognizant of the fact that Entry 8 – 
List II concerns itself with “intoxicating liquors” even from a 
historical perspective. Constitutional framers were not engaged 
in a theoretical task of demarcating legislative fields but in their 
utmost wisdom and pragmatism distributed legislate fields 
between Parliament and State Legislatures that would continue 
to determine the governance of the nation. One must note that a 
construction of Entry 8 – List II should not potentially give the 
States the legislative competence to legislate on “industrial 
alcohol” which is a scheduled industry under IDRA. That Entry 
8 – List II which deals with “intoxicating liquors” cannot also 
subsume industries for manufacture of “industrial alcohol”, etc. 

 Etc. 
 
12.16 
Therefore, in deciding on “intoxicating liquors”, the 
contours of interpretation must be concerned only with the very 
nature of the product of “intoxicating liquors” rather than the 
entire industry concerning alcohol. Entry 8 – List II provides the 
legislative competence to States to regulate production, 
manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale of only 
“intoxicating liquors”. It must follow from this that what is being 
produced or manufactured or possessed or transported or 
purchased or sold must actually be “intoxicating liquors” and not 
any other alcoholic product. 
12.17 
Halsbury’s Laws of England (Fourth Edition), Volume 
26 defines the meaning of “intoxicating liquors” as discussed in 
the context of the distinction between wholesale and retail trade. 
It is stated that “Dealing wholesale” means “the sale at any one 
time to any one person of not less than two gallons or one case 
of spirits, wine or made-wine, or not less than four and a half 
gallons or two cases of beer”. “Selling by retail” means “the sale 
at any one time to any one person of not more than two gallons 
or one case of spirits, wine or made-wine or not more than four 

 Etc. and a half gallons or two cases of beer or cider”. The following 
definitions are apposite: 

“Spirits” is defined to mean spirits of any description and 
includes all liquors mixed with spirits and all mixtures, 
compounds and preparations made with spirits, but does 
not include methylated spirits: Customs and Excise Act, 
1952. 
(ii) “Wine” 
means 
liquor 
obtained 
from 
the 
alcoholic 
fermentation of fresh grapes or the must of fresh grapes, 
whether or not it is fortified with spirits or flavoured with 
aromatic extracts. 
(iii) “Made-wine” means any liquor obtained from the alcoholic 
fermentation of any substance or by mixing a liquor so 
obtained or derived from a liquor so obtained with any other 
liquor or substance, but does not include wine, beer, black 
beer, spirits or cider. This definition replaced an earlier one 
in different terms of “British wine”. 
(iv) The definition of “beer” includes ale, porter, stout and any 
other description of beer and any other liquor which is made 
or sold as a description of beer or as a substitute for beer 

 Etc. which on analysis of a sample at any time is found to be of a 
strength exceeding two degrees of proof, but does not include 
liquor made elsewhere than upon the licenced premises of a 
brewer for sale which on analysis of a sample at any time is 
found to be of an original gravity not exceeding 1,016 
degrees and to be of a strength not exceeding two degrees of 
proof: Customs and Excise Act, 1952. 
(v) “Intoxicating liquors” means spirits, wine, beer, cider and 
any fermented, distilled or spiritous liquor but (apart from 
cider) does not include any liquor for the sale of which by 
wholesale no excise licence is required: Licensing Act, 1964. 
(vi) “Cider” means cider or perry of a strength less than 8.7 per 
cent of alcohol by volume at 20 degrees Centigrade obtained 
from the fermentation of apple or pear juice without the 
addition at any time of any alcoholic liquor or liquor or 
substance which communicates colour or flavour other than 
such as the Commissioner of Customs and Excise may allow 
as appearing to them to be necessary to make cider or perry: Customs and Excise Act, 1952. 

 Etc. 
 
(vii) “Intoxicating liquors other than spirits” includes beer, wine, 
made-wine and cider. 
12.18 
It may also be useful to outline some undisputed 
elements of “industrial alcohol”. It is an undisputed position that 
“industrial alcohol” is not meant to be consumed as a human 
beverage. In other words, it is not produced or manufactured to 
be meant for direct human consumption as a beverage. However, 
only when misused, as an intoxicating substance after some 
treatment, howsoever limited, “industrial alcohol” certainly could 
cause the “intoxicating” effect on direct human consumption. 
12.19 
Two 
distinguished 
interpretations 
have 
been 
contended before us. In effect, the respondents contend that 
“intoxicating liquors” must be so constructed that it includes 
only “liquors which are meant to intoxicate” as is., the 
appellants contend that it is a cardinal rule of interpretation that 
legislative Entries be given the widest possible construction and 
therefore Entry 8 – List II should be read as “liquors which can 
intoxicate even when mischievously used”. The effect of the 
appellants’ construction is that Entry 8 – List II will give States 

 Etc. the legislative field on “industrial alcohol”, which by design is not 
sought to be intoxicating but rather could intoxicate because of 
its misuse. 
12.20 
Before proceeding further, I may first note a notable 
feature of the phraseology of Entry 8 – List II of the Constitution 
of India and Entry 40 – List II, as Entry 8 appeared in the Draft 
Constitution. Neither in the Constitution nor in the Draft 
Constitution was there any other Entry in List II that used an 
adjective as a qualifier. Whether use of the word “intoxicating” 
enlarges or limits the scope of “liquors” is something that needs 
to be answered. Herein, “intoxicating” is an adjective that is 
adjoined to “liquors” and explains an effect that is caused. In this 
regard, learned Solicitor General contended that “intoxicating” 
has been used to expand beyond the limits of “alcoholic liquors” 
because States have an interest in regulating other “intoxicating 
liquors” such as bhang. It needs no labour that an “intoxicating” 
effect can be said to be caused only upon actual consumption by 
human beings. Unlike potable alcohol, “industrial alcohol” by its 
design, intent and purpose is neither sought to be consumed and 
cause an intoxicating effect nor is it produced keeping in mind 

 Etc. its intoxicating effect on human beings. If we were to read 
“industrial alcohol” as “intoxicating liquors” which even though 
by design is neither supposed to be consumed nor have an effect 
on health but has the constituents that could be “intoxicating” 
when misused, it would enable a cumbersome interpretational 
plane. 
12.21 
It is useful to allude to the sine qua non of Entry 8 – 
List II i.e. the intoxicating effect. In my view, the sine qua non of 
Entry 8 – List II i.e. the “intoxicating” effect of liquor has to be 
read as (i) an effect, and (ii) an intended effect of the industry and 
its products. One might argue that even “industrial alcohol” due 
to its very constituents could cause an intoxicating effect, when 
mischievously consumed, albeit with dire consequences. 
However, such an argument ignores that the fundamental nature 
of “industrial alcohol” is that it is non-potable i.e. when put to its 
actual use, neither is it intended to be consumed by human 
beings as a beverage nor, as a corollary, is sought to cause an 
“intoxicating” effect on human beings. “Industrial alcohol” can be 
said to cause an “intoxicating” effect only when it is 
mischievously directed away from its actual purpose and use and 

 Etc. towards human consumption. To accept such a rationale for 
interpreting Entry 8 – List II would lead to an anomalous 
situation wherein the marginal mischievous use of “industrial 
alcohol” would bring in the whole industry of “industrial alcohol” 
to Entry 8 – List II and take it out of Entry 24 – List II viz. 
“industrial alcohol” which is not always meant to intoxicate a 
human 
being 
but 
could 
only 
sometimes 
when 
used 
mischievously or abused would wholly become a legislative field 
for States to legislate. It is to avoid such an abuse that States 
have the powers to prevent by suitable legislative and 
administrative measures, as has been held in the aforesaid 
decisions of this Court. 
12.22 
Viewed from another perspective, the exception 
(mischievous use) cannot lead to governing of the norm (original 
intended use) through such construction of Entry 8 – List II. Put 
into practice, this would translate into legislative regulation of 
production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and 
sale of the entire industry and product of “industrial alcohol” 
only because of its possible misuse or mischievous use. This 
reading would be tantamount to attaching to the constitutional 

 Etc. intent an absurdity i.e. the part governing the whole or in other 
words, bringing within the ambit of Entry 8 – List II something 
which is an exception as a main aspect of the Entry. A careful 
revisit pertinent at this point would be to paragraph 86 of 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J), wherein it was held that States 
continue to have legislative competence to ensure that non-
potable alcohol is not misdirected to potable alcohol. That is 
different from saying that States have the right to regulate 
“industrial alcohol” or non-potable alcohol. A power to legislate 
as to the principal matter specifically mentioned in the Entry also 
includes within its expanse, legislation touching incidental and 
ancillary matters. However, ancillary matters by a backdoor 
cannot be included within the Entry, beyond what is covered as 
the principal. Herein, the ancillary matter being prevention of 
mischievous use of “industrial alcohol” would be within Entry 8 
– List II but “industrial alcohol” as such would not be included. 
Hence, the analysis of the relevant Entries in the three Lists 
must be in the backdrop of the aforesaid discussion. 

 Etc. 
 
Analysis of relevant Entries in the three Lists: 
13. While analysing Entry 52 – List I which deals with 
industries, the control of which by the Union is declared by 
Parliament by law to be expedient in public interest, it would be 
useful to refer to Entries 7 and 54 – List I. What is common in all 
these three Entries is that there is a declaration made by the 
Parliament. Entries 7, 52 and 54 – List I read as under: 
“7. Industries declared by Parliament by law to be 
necessary for the purpose of defence or for the 
prosecution of war. xxx 
52. Industries, the control of which by the Union is 
declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the 
public interest. xxx 
54. Regulation of mines and mineral development to the 
extent to which such regulation and development under 
the control of the Union is declared by Parliament by law 
to be expedient in the public interest.” 
 
13.1 What is common between Entry 52 – List I and Entry 54 
– List I is the fact that control of industries or regulation and 
development of mines and mineral development respectively is to 
the degree or extent under the control of the Union which is 
expressed by a declaration made by Parliament by law to be 

 Etc. expedient in the public interest. Thus, under Entry 52 – List I, 
the intent to control an industry: (i) by the Union; (ii) by a 
declaration by Parliament by law; and (iii) which law is expedient 
in the public interest are the key phrases to be taken note of. 
Thus, if there is a declaration by Parliament by law (such as 
IDRA) to control any of the industries by the Union, such as 
“Fermentation Industries” which is expedient in the public 
interest then, to the extent of such control, the industries would 
be covered under Entry 52 – List I. This is also evident on a 
reading of Entry 24 – List II which also deals with the field of 
legislation being “industries” subject to the provision of Entries 
7 and 52 – List I. As already noted above, Entry 7 – List I pertains 
to industries declared by Parliament by law to be necessary for 
the purpose of defence or for the prosecution of war. Entry 52 – 
List I deals with “industries”, the control of which by the Union 
is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public 
interest. 
13.2 In Ishwari Khetan, the facts were that the Governor of 
Uttar Pradesh promulgated an Ordinance on 03.07.1972, styled 
as U.P. Sugar Undertaking (Acquisition) Ordinance, 1971, with a 

 Etc. view to transferring and vesting sugar undertakings set out in 
the Schedule to the Ordinance in the U.P. State Sugar 
Corporation Limited, a Government Company within the 
meaning of Section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956. 
Subsequently, the Ordinance was repealed and replaced by an 
Act. The Schedule to the Act enumerated twelve sugar 
undertakings which stood transferred to and vested in the 
Corporation w.e.f. 03.07.1971, the date on which the Ordinance 
was issued. Writ Petitions were filed before the Allahabad High 
Court challenging the constitutional validity of the Ordinance as 
well as the Act on various grounds. The Division Bench of the 
High Court had repelled the contentions advanced on behalf of 
the petitioners therein and upheld the constitutional validity of 
the Act. Before this Court, the main thrust of the attack was that 
the U.P. Legislature lacked legislative competence to enact the 
impugned Act. This was because under Entry 52 – List I the 
Parliament had made the requisite declaration in Section 2 of the 
IDRA and in view of Item 25 of the First Schedule to the Act i.e. sugar, being a declared industry therein, that industry was 
excluded from Entry 24 - List II. Hence U.P. State Legislature was 

 Etc. denuded of all legislative power to legislate in respect of sugar 
industry and the impugned legislation was void on account of 
legislative incompetence. 
13.2.1 
D.A. Desai, J. for himself and on behalf of V.R. 
Krishna Iyer and S. Murtaza Fazal Ali, JJ. wrote for the majority. 
This Court analysed the relevant Entries keeping in view the 
legislative perspective and historical background through which 
Entries 7 and 52 – List I, Entry 24 - List II and Entry 33 - List III, 
inter alia, had passed through. Considering Entry 52 – List I and 
Entry 24 - List II, it was observed that “industry” as a head of 
legislation is to be found in Entry 24 - List II with the limitation 
that it is subject to Entries 7 and 52 - List I. The difference in the 
language in which Entries 7 and 52 - List I is couched has a 
bearing on the interpretation of Entry 52 - List I. The subject 
“industry” being enumerated in List II, the State Legislature has 
power to legislate in respect to it and keeping aside the words 
“subject to the provision of Entries 7 and 52 of List I”, the State 
Legislature alone can legislate in respect of the legislative head 
“industry”. Ipso facto Parliament would have no power to legislate 
in respect of industry as a legislative head. Under Entry 52 - List 

 Etc. 
 
I, unless and until a declaration is made by Parliament by law to 
assume control over specified industries, the embargo on the 
power of Parliament to legislate in respect of industry would not 
be lifted. The declaration has to be made by Parliament by law to 
assume control over specified industry in public interest. Thus, 
the extent of control would be known by the declaration so made 
by law. This would necessarily depend upon the legislation 
enacted spelling out the degree of control assumed which is a 
pre-requisite for assuming control over a specified industry. As a 
result to that extent, the State Legislature would be denuded of 
its powers to legislate under Entry 24 - List II. It was contended 
that the industry in respect of which control is assumed for the 
purpose of their development and regulation have been set out 
in the First Schedule and in the manner provided in the statute 
i.e. IDRA which also provides the limit of control to the extent 
mentioned in the said Act. It was contended that Section 2 has 
to be read along with the Act and not read de hors the Act. This 
would mean the provision of the Act would make the control 
concrete and specific and the manner in which exercise has to 
be laid down and not some abstract control. Thus, the control 

 Etc. has to be concrete and the mode and method of its exercise must 
be regulated by law. That under the IDRA, Sections 3 to 30 set 
out various modes and methodology, power and procedure to 
effectuate the control which the Union acquired by virtue of the 
declaration contained in Section 2 of the IDRA. On these 
contentions, it was observed that absence of the words “to the 
extent herein provided” in Section 2 of the IDRA would not lead 
to the conclusion that the control assumed was to be something 
in abstract, total and unfettered and not as per the provisions of 
the IDRA. It was thus held that to the extent Union acquired 
control by virtue of declaration in Section 2 of the IDRA as 
amended from time to time, the power of the State Legislature 
under Entry 24 - List II to enact any legislation in respect of 
declared industry so as to encroach upon the field of control 
occupied by IDRA would be taken away. 
13.2.2 
In this regard, reliance was placed on Baijnath Kedia 
vs. State of Bihar, AIR 1970 SC 1436 (“Baijnath Kedia”). 
Thus to the extent the provision of the IDRA occupies the field, 
the State Legislature stands denuded of its power to legislate in 
respect of such declared industry. Examining the provision of the 

 Etc. 
 
IDRA, it was held that in pith and substance, the impugned Act 
was one for acquisition of scheduled undertakings to the 
corporation, which would in no way come in conflict with any of 
the provision of the IDRA or would not trench upon any control 
exercise by the Union under the various provisions of the IDRA. 
That the IDRA is not concerned with the ownership of industrial 
undertaking in declared industry except the control over the 
management of the undertaking by the owner. Thus the 
legislative power of the State under Entry 24 - List II is eroded 
only to the extent control is assumed by the Union pursuant to 
a declaration made by the Parliament in respect of a declared 
industry as spelt out by the legislative enactment and the field 
occupied by such enactment is the measure of erosion. Subject 
to such erosion, on the remainder the State Legislature will have 
power to legislate in respect of a declared industry without in any 
way trenching upon the occupied field. It was held that State 
Legislature which is otherwise competent to deal with industry 
under Entry 24 – List II can deal with that industry in exercise 
of other powers enabling it to legislate under different heads set 
out in Lists II and III and this power cannot be denied to a State. 

 Etc. 
 
The second limb of the submission therein is not related to the 
present controversy and need not be adverted to. It was finally 
observed that the impugned Act was not intended to take over 
management or control of any industrial undertaking by the 
State Government as in pith and substance, it was enacted to 
acquire the scheduled undertakings in terms of Entry 42 – List 
III. 
13.2.3 
In Ishwari Khetan, Pathak, J. (as he then was) for 
himself and for Koshal, J. (minority view) observed that while 
they broadly agreed with the final conclusion, on several points, 
reached by Desai, J. in his judgment, they preferred to refrain 
from expressing any opinion on the question whether the 
declaration made by Parliament in Section 2 of the IDRA in 
respect of the industries specified in the First Schedule to that 
Act can be regarded as limited to removing from the scope of 
Entry 24 - List II only so much of the legislative field as is covered 
by the subject matter and content of that Act or it can be 
regarded as effecting the removal from that Entry of the entire 
legislative field embracing all matters pertaining to the industries 
specified in the declaration. It was further opined that the 

 Etc. observations made by this Court in Hingir-Rampur Coal Co., 
Ltd. vs. The State of Orissa, AIR 1961 SC 459 (“Hingir-
Rampur”); State of Orissa vs. M.A. Tulloch and Co., AIR 1964 
SC 1284 (“M.A. Tulloch”); Baijnath Kedia vs. State of Bihar, 
AIR 1970 SC 1436 (“Baijnath Kedia”); and State of Haryana. vs. Chanan Mal, AIR 1976 SC 1654 (“Chanan Mal”), would 
not be of assistance in this behalf. In each of those cases, the 
declaration made by Parliament in the concerned enactment 
limited the control of the regulation of the mines and the 
development of minerals to the extent provided in the enactment. 
Whether the terms in which the declaration has been made in 
Section 2 of the IDRA, a declaration not expressly limiting control 
of the specific industries to the extent provided by the Act, can 
be construed as being so limited was a matter which, they 
thought, should be dealt with in some more appropriate case. 
That the range of considerations encompassed within the field of 
enquiry to which the point was amenable had not been 
sufficiently covered before the Court. “This was for the good 
reason and, hence, the provocation was limited.” Therefore, the 
controversy could be adequately answered on the ground that 

 Etc. the legislation impugned therein fell within Entry 42 - List III and 
would not be related to Entry 52 - List I or Entry 24 - List II. 
13.2.4 
Therefore, there was a reluctance to enter upon an 
examination of the mutually competing claims of Entry 52 - List 
I and Entry 24 - List II — Entries which deal with “industries”. 
Consequently, the appeals were dismissed. 
13.3 When the expression “subject to” is used in an Entry in 
List II it would imply that the said Entry is subordinate to the 
respective Entries in List I and has to be read along with the 
relevant Entry in List I. Thus, on a conjoint reading of Entry 24 
– List II with Entry 52 – List I, it is apparent that Entry 24 – List 
II is subject to Entry 52 – List I. The expression “subject to” in 
the Entries in List II has been a subject matter of interpretation 
in several decisions and is of legal import. 
13.3.1 As per Black’s Law Dictionary, 5th Edition, Pg.1278, 
“subject to” means “liable, subordinate, subservient, inferior, 
obedient to, governed or affected by.” 
13.3.2 The relevant judgments of this Court on the point are 
discussed as under: 

 Etc. a) In Hingir Rampur Coal Company vs. State of Orissa, 
(1961) (“Hingir Rampur”), while interpreting 
the import of the expression “subject to” in Entry 23 – List II 
and the interplay of that Entry with Entry 54 – List I, this 
Court observed as undisputed the position in law that, once 
a Central Act containing a declaration by Parliament 
covering the field is passed as required by Entry 54 – List I, 
the State Legislature had no legislative competence to enact 
a legislation on the subject that has already been occupied 
by a Central legislation – not for reason of repugnancy but 
rather competence at the very inception. b) In Gujarat University vs. Shri Krishna Ranganath 
Mudholkar, AIR 1963 SC 703 (“Shri Krishna”), this Court 
was tasked with interpreting Entry 11 - List II, which, 
although stands omitted now, earlier read as ‘Education 
including universities, subject to the provisions of Entries 63, 
64, 65 and 66 of List I and Entry 25 of List III’. Therein, it 
was held that use of the expression “subject to” in Entry 11 
- List II clearly indicated that legislation in respect of 
excluded matters cannot be made by the State Legislature. 

 Etc. 
 
By the Constitution (Forty-Second Amendment), 1976, Entry 
11 – List II was omitted, as noted above, and Entry 25 – List 
III was substituted as, ‘Education, including technical 
education, medical education and universities, subject to the 
provisions of Entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I; vocational 
and technical training of labour.’ In this context, this Court 
in Baharul Islam vs. The Indian Medical Association, 
 (“Baharul Islam”), while referring 
to Modern Dental College & Research Centre vs. State of 
Madhya Pradesh, (2016) (“Modern Dental 
College”), explained that where one Entry is made ‘subject 
to’ another Entry, it means that out of the scope of the former 
Entry a field of legislation covered by the latter Entry has 
been reserved to be specially dealt with by the appropriate 
Legislature. c) Similarly, 
while 
interpreting 
the 
significance 
of 
a 
constitutional provision being subject to another in The 
South India Corporation (P) Ltd. vs. The Secretary, 
Board of Revenue Trivandrum, AIR 1964 SC 207 (“South 
India Corporation”), this Court observed that the 

 Etc. expression “subject to” conveys the idea of a provision 
yielding place to another provision or other provisions to 
which it is made subject. d) Helpful reference may also be made to the import of “subject 
to” in legislative uses. In Ashok Leyland Ltd. vs. State of 
Tamil Nadu, (2004), (“Ashok Leyland Ltd.”) this 
Court held that “subject to” is an expression whereby a 
limitation is expressed. 
13.4 Having noted as above, it is also crucial to examine the 
interplay between Entry 52 – List I, Entry 24 – List II and Entry 
8 – List II. Entry 24 – List I is a regulatory Entry which provides 
State Legislatures with the competence to legislate on 
“industries” subject to Entry 7 – List I and Entry 52 – List I. In 
effect, Entry 52 – List I enables the Union to take an industry out 
of the legislative competence of States and bring it within Entry 
52 – List I. In the instant cases, the primary question is whether 
there is any overlap between Entry 52 – List I and Entry 8 – List 
II. In other words, is there any conflict between the exclusive 
competence of State Legislatures under Entry 8 – List II and the 

 Etc. regulation of industries the control of which by the Union is 
declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public 
interest under Entry 52 – List I? 
13.4.1 
It is a settled law that the meaning of “industries” in 
Entry 52 – List I and Entry 24 – List II is coextensive. Therefore, 
what is out of Entry 24 – List II will also not be within Entry 52 
– List I. In that context, it has been contended before us that 
Entry 8 – List II is a unique Entry as it is not limited to only the 
product of “intoxicating liquors” but also takes within its sweep 
the “industry” of “intoxicating liquors”. It was also submitted that 
Entry 8 – List II unlike Entry 24 – List II is not subject to Entries 
in List – I and therefore the industry of “intoxicating liquors” is 
the exclusive domain of State Legislatures. The import of such a 
position is that if Entry 8 – List II is held to be both an industry-
based and product-based Entry, the Entry would empower 
States to legislate on both the product of “intoxicating liquors” 
and production of the product as well. Furthermore, as Entry 8 
– List II is not subject to Entry 52 – List I, the industry of 
“intoxicating liquors” will be out of Entry 24 – List II, and 
therefore, coextensively under Entry 52 – List I the Union would 

 Etc. not have the legislative competence to legislate on what lies 
exclusively within Entry 8 – List II. 
13.4.2 
 Learned Chief Justice Dr. Chandrachud in his 
proposed judgment has observed that the Seventh Schedule 
differentiates between the industry and product of industry and, 
even further, Entry 8 – List II is special because such a 
distinction made in the general Entries is not adopted in Entry 8 
– List II. As rightly pointed out, it is the potential overlap between 
Entry 52 – List I and Entry 8 – List II which must be resolved 
herein. 
13.4.3 
 In this regard, reference to the dictum of this Court 
in 
Calcutta 
Gas 
Company 
is 
apposite, 
wherein 
the 
interpretation between Entries 24 and 25 – List II in relation to 
Entry 52 – List I was considered. It was observed that Entry 24 – 
List II in its widest amplitude takes in all industries, including 
that of “gas and gas-works”. So does Entry 25 – List II which 
comprehends gas industry. There is, therefore, an apparent 
conflict between the two Entries and they overlap with each 
other. It was observed that in such a contingency the doctrine of 

 Etc. harmonious construction must be invoked. While Entry 24 – List 
II covers a very wide field, that is, the field of entire industry being 
within the legislative competence of the State, Entry 25 – List II 
dealing with “gas and gas-works”, can be confined to a specific 
industry, that is, the “gas industry”. This was possibly because 
only one or two States are concerned with “gas industry” and it 
was not considered to be of an all-India importance and 
therefore, was carved out of Entry 24 – List II and given a 
separate Entry as Entry 25 – List II, as otherwise if a declaration 
by law was made by Parliament within the meaning of Entry 7 or 
Entry 52 - List I, gas and “gas industries” would be taken out of 
the legislative power of States. Therefore, by the doctrine of 
harmonious construction, “gas and gas works” were found to be 
within the exclusive field allotted to the States and outside the 
legislative field of Parliament. It was further observed that the 
expression "industry" in Entry 52 - List I bears the same meaning 
as that in Entry 24 - List II, with the result that the said 
expression in Entry 52 - List I also does not take in the industry 
of “gas and gas works”. If so, it followed that the IDRA, in so far 

 Etc. as it purported to deal with the “gas industry” is beyond the 
legislative competence of Parliament. 
13.4.4 
Keeping the aforesaid dictum in mind, it must be 
observed that Entry 8 – List II being a special Entry prevails over 
the general Entry 24 – List II. Therefore, while Entry 52 – List 
and Entry 8 – List II overlap on the aspect of “industry” of 
“intoxicating liquors”, Entry 52 – List I cannot takeover the 
“industry” of “intoxicating liquors”. 
13.5 Therefore, the next question is whether Entry 8 – List II 
which deals with “intoxicating liquors”, that is to say, the 
production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and 
sale of “intoxicating liquors” is restricted to only alcoholic liquors 
for human consumption i.e., potable alcohol or it would also 
extend to non-potable alcohol or “industrial alcohol”. In other 
words, if “industrial alcohol” is read within the meaning of Entry 
24 – List II then, whether, on account of the declaration made by 
the Parliament in Section 2 of the IDRA in terms of Entry 52 – 
List I it would be excluded from Entry 24 – List II and included 
under Entry 52 – List I as per the provisions of the IDRA. In other 

 Etc. words, the question is whether Entry 8 – List II which deals with 
“intoxicating liquors” would take within its scope and ambit 
“industrial alcohol”? 
 
One of the ways of answering these questions would be to 
compare Entry 84 – List I as it stood prior to 16.09.2016 with 
Entry 51 – List II although both are taxation Entries. Entry 84 – 
List I dealt with duties of excise on tobacco and other goods 
manufactured or produced in India except – (a) alcoholic liquors 
for human consumption; (b) opium, Indian hemp and other 
narcotic drugs and narcotics, but including medicinal and toilet 
preparations containing alcohol or any substance included in 
sub-paragraph (b) of this Entry. Entry 51 – List II talks of duties 
of excise on the goods manufactured or produced in the State 
and countervailing duties at the same or lower rates on similar 
goods manufactured or produced elsewhere in India, namely, - 
(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption; (b) opium, Indian 
hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, but not including 
medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any 
substance included in sub-paragraph (b) of this Entry. Both are 
taxation entries. 

 Etc. 
 
13.6 On a comparative reading of the said two Entries, what is 
evident is that excise duty on goods manufactured as per Entry 
84 – List I excludes duty of excise on alcoholic liquors for human 
consumption. This is subject to the further exception that, if, any 
medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any 
substance included in sub-paragraph (b) of the said Entry, 
namely, opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and 
narcotics, then, the excise duty is leviable as per Entry 84 – List 
I by the Union or Central Government. Conversely, under Entry 
51 – List II, goods manufactured or produced in the State would 
be subject to excise duty such as on – a) alcoholic liquors for 
human consumption; b) opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic 
drugs and narcotics, but does not include medicinal and toilet 
preparations containing alcohol or any substance included in 
sub-paragraph (b) of the said Entry. In other words, alcoholic 
liquors not meant for human consumption and medicinal and 
toilet preparations containing alcohol or any substance such as 
opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics 
would be subject to excise duty leviable under Entry 84 – List I 
by the Central Government. Insofar as alcoholic liquors for 

 Etc. human consumption is concerned, the States have the power to 
levy excise duty. 
13.7 Therefore, in my view, the framers of the Constitution 
bifurcated alcoholic liquors for human consumption as distinct 
from alcohol used for medicinal and toilet preparations or any 
other liquor including “industrial liquor” on which excise duty is 
leviable under Entry 84 – List I. What is the purpose of excluding 
levy of excise duty under Entry 84 – List I on alcoholic liquors for 
human consumption and including the same under Entry 51 – 
List II and thereby giving the powers to the State Legislature to 
levy excise duty on such alcoholic liquors? The intent of the 
framers of the Constitution was to categorize alcoholic liquors 
into following two categories and accordingly divide the 
legislative powers between Parliament and State Legislature: 

alcoholic liquors for human consumption (potable 
alcoholic liquors); and 

alcoholic liquors not for human consumption such as 
“industrial alcohol” (non-potable alcoholic liquors). 

 Etc. 
 
At this stage itself, it is made clear that if alcoholic liquor, 
which is manufactured for the purpose of using the same as a 
raw material in the manufacture or production of any other 
“industrial product” and is subject to a process, would not come 
within the scope and ambit of “alcoholic liquors for human 
consumption”. As noted, the said product is also known as 
“industrial alcohol”. Such “alcoholic liquors” or “industrial 
alcohol” are not used directly for human consumption as a 
beverage. On the other hand, it would be an abuse of such 
“industrial alcohol”, if consumed as a beverage. Merely because 
it can be subjected to a process and mischievous human 
consumption is possible, does that make “industrial alcohol” 
“alcoholic liquors for human consumption” within the meaning 
of Entry 84 – List I and Entry 51 – List II and also “intoxicating 
liquors” within the scope and ambit of Entry 8 – List II? 
13.8 A person or an entity which is not engaged in the 
manufacture of alcoholic liquors for human consumption as a 
beverage is not authorised to manufacture “industrial alcohol” 
and subject it to a process and sell it as alcoholic liquors for 
human consumption. The same is prohibited and has to be dealt 

 Etc. with having regard to the scope and ambit of Entry 8 – List II. On 
the other hand, it is only “intoxicating liquors” which is directly 
for human consumption as a beverage and the production, 
manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale of such 
“intoxicating liquors”, as per Entry 8 – List II, which is within the 
competence of State Legislature i.e. for the purpose of regulation 
of such “intoxicating liquors” which would also entail levy of an 
excise duty on such “intoxicating liquors” as per Entry 51 – List 
II as alcoholic liquor for human consumption. Therefore, on 
“intoxicating liquors” which is alcoholic liquors directly for 
human consumption as a beverage, excise duty is levied by the 
State Legislature and regulated under Entry 8 – List II. Also, 
under Entry 84 – List I, the Parliament has no power to levy any 
such excise duty on such “intoxicating liquors” meant for human 
consumption as a beverage as it is an expressly excluded item. 
In other words, alcoholic liquors for human consumption is thus 
directly relatable to “intoxicating liquors” and the expression 
“intoxicating liquors” in Entry 8 – List II means alcoholic liquors 
directly for human consumption as a beverage. Thus, no other 
alcoholic liquors can be regulated as per Entry 8 – List II except 

 Etc. to ensure that there is no abuse/misuse of “industrial alcohol” 
being treated for human consumption by subjecting it to a 
particular process; nor can any excise duty be levied on such 
liquor by the State Legislature. 
Hence, any “intoxicating liquors” would mean alcoholic 
liquors 
for 
human 
consumption 
which 
is 
produced, 
manufactured, possessed, transported, purchased or sold and 
can be regulated under Entry 8 – List II by the State Legislature 
but alcoholic liquors which are not for human consumption as a 
beverage would not come within the scope of the expression 
“intoxicating liquors”, such as “industrial alcohol” which would 
in turn be regulated by Entry 24 – List II which Entry is subject 
to Entry 52 – List I and can be controlled by the Union 
exclusively. Thus, “industrial alcohol” and medicinal and toilet 
preparations which contain alcohol can be taxed as per Entry 84 
– List I by the Central Government in the form of central excise 
duty. 
13.9 Merely because “industrial alcohol” by a process can be 
converted to alcohol for human consumption as a beverage does 
not entitle the State Legislature to tax or regulate “industrial 

 Etc. alcohol”. On the other hand, the States as per Entry 8 – List II 
have the power to regulate “intoxicating liquors” which is for 
human consumption as a beverage and in that regard have the 
power to prohibit “industrial alcohol” being converted to alcohol 
for human consumption as a beverage. This is in order to protect 
the health of citizens which is a Directive Principle of State Policy 
under Article 47 of the Constitution and in order to prohibit 
unauthorised use/misuse of “industrial alcohol” produced in the 
State from being converted and sold as “intoxicating liquors” 
meant for human consumption as a beverage. 
13.10 
This interpretation would become clearer on a reading 
of Entry 33(a) – List III which deals with, inter alia, trade and 
commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of the 
products of any industry where the control of such industry by 
the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the 
public interest, and also includes imported goods of the same 
kind as such products. Therefore, if products of any industry 
where the control of such industry by the Union has been 
declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in public interest 
are manufactured in India or imported into India, then as per 

 Etc. 
 
Entry 33(a) – List III, on the production, supply and distribution 
of and trade and commerce of such industrial products, the State 
Legislature would not have any exclusive power to pass a law 
under Entries 26 and 27 – List II as they are subject to Entry 
33(a) – List III. In other words, in view of the passing of the IDRA, 
under Entry 52 – List I and the inclusion of, inter alia, products 
of “Fermentation Industries” such as “industrial alcohol” in Item 
26 of the First Schedule of the IDRA, the State Legislatures would 
be subject to the powers of the Parliament to pass a law in the 
matter of production, supply, distribution, trade and commerce 
of such industrial product. 
13.11 
Therefore, if the control of any industry has been 
declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public 
interest, then in such a case, in the matter of production, supply 
and distribution of products of such industry, Entry 27 – List II 
would be subject to Entry 33(a) – List III. Thus, the subject 
production, supply and distribution of goods found in Entry 27 
– List II as well as in Entry 33(a) – List III regarding any product 
of an industry has a nexus with Entry 52 – List I. 

 Etc. 
 
13.12 
Further, Entry 24 – List II which deals with industries, 
is itself subject to Entry 52 – List I. Therefore, if any industry is 
mentioned in the First Schedule of the IDRA which is a legislation 
passed by the Parliament by virtue of Entry 52 – List I, a reading 
of the same conjointly with Entry 33(a) – List III would mean that 
particular industry which has been mentioned in the First 
Schedule of IDRA would be under the control of the Union. 
However, as far as the products of such industry are concerned, 
Entry 33(a) – List III deals with the aspect of production and 
supply and distribution as well as trade and commerce. Thus, if 
any particular industry is not mentioned or is deleted from the 
First Schedule of IDRA, then automatically Entry 33(a) – List III 
would not apply to such industrial products and the subject 
would squarely fall within the scope and ambit of Entry 24 – List 
II and Entry 27 – List II. 
14. There is another way of looking at the Entries under 
consideration. As already noted, Entry 24 - List II which deals 
with the subject “industries”, enables legislative competence to 
the State Legislature to enact laws on the said subject. Therefore, 
at a first glance the subject “industries” is a State subject. 

 Etc. 
 
However, Entry 24 - List II is subject to Entries 7 and 52 - List I 
which have been discussed above. In particular, Entry 52 - List 
I deals with “industries”, the control of which is taken over by the 
Union by a declaration made by the Parliament by law as it is 
expedient in public interest. In respect of “such industries”, as 
covered within the scope and ambit of Entry 52 - List I, it would 
imply that under Entry 33(a) - List III, insofar as the products of 
any such industry are concerned where the control of such 
industry by the Union is declared by the Parliament by law to be 
expedient in public interest and import of goods of the same kind 
as such products have to be read in consonance with the scheme 
of the Entries. It would mean that if any legislation has been 
made by the Parliament, such as the IDRA and an industry is 
named in the First Schedule thereof such as “Fermentation 
Industries” in the instant cases, the State Legislation would be 
subject to the Parliamentary legislation. The said Entry is in the 
Concurrent List and the Parliament as well as the State 
Legislature have the competence to pass such laws. Then, the 
question that would arise, is whether, there would be 

 Etc. repugnancy between the laws made by Parliament and laws 
made by a State Legislature and if so, how could it be resolved. 
14.1 In this regard, Section 18G which is a part of Chapter IIIB 
of the IDRA could be considered. The said Section states that the 
Central Government, so far as it appears to be necessary or 
expedient for securing the equitable distribution and availability 
at fair prices of any article or class of articles relatable to any 
scheduled industry, i.e. any of the industries specified in the 
First Schedule of IDRA may, notwithstanding anything contained 
in any other provision of the IDRA by notified order, provide for 
regulating the supply and distribution thereof and trade and 
commerce therein. This provision deals particularly with regard 
to regulation of supply and distribution, trade and commerce of 
any article relatable to scheduled industry. Sub-section (2) of 
Section 18G states that without prejudice to the generality of the 
powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 18G, a notified 
order made may provide for various aspects. Sub-section (4) of 
Section 18G states that no order made in exercise of any power 
conferred by this section shall be called in question in any court. 

 Etc. 
 
14.2 One of the contentions raised in this batch of cases is with 
regard to whether the Central Government has to, in fact, issue 
a notified order with regard to regulating the supply and 
distribution and trade and commerce of any article or class of 
articles relatable to any scheduled industry so as to indicate that 
the State Legislature cannot pass any legislation under Entry 
33(a) - List III. In my considered view, the fact that an industry 
is a scheduled industry under the IDRA would imply that at any 
time the Central Government is empowered to issue a notified 
order providing for regulating the supply and distribution and 
trade and commerce of the products of such a scheduled 
industry. But in the absence of there being an issuance of a 
notified order as such can the State Legislature be denuded of 
their powers to pass any law under Entry 33(a) - List III? 
14.3 Having regard to the emerging situation in the economy in 
the matter of supply and distribution and trade and commerce 
of any article or class of articles relatable to any scheduled 
industry, the Central Government may issue a notified order for 
the purpose of regulating the same so as to secure its equitable 

 Etc. distribution and availability at fair prices of the products of such 
industry. 
14.4 A situation may suddenly arise making it necessary or 
expedient to issue a notified order under Section 18G of the 
IDRA. One cannot envisage the emerging circumstances in an 
economy such as the Indian economy where the need for 
issuance of such a notified order would arise. It could be for 
instance to curb hoarding and black marketeering of a particular 
article of a scheduled industry in order to stifle price rise. It could 
be for ensuring a minimum or maximum price for any article 
related to a scheduled industry which is a raw material or 
ancillary input for a product/article of another scheduled or non-
scheduled 
industry. 
Sudden 
rise 
in 
prices 
of 
commodities/articles relatable to any scheduled industry due to 
natural disasters, floods, famines, financial emergency or other 
such reasons could necessitate issuance of a notified order under 
Section 18G of the IDRA. Of recent occurrence is the Covid-19 
pandemic which would have necessitated issuance of notified 
orders on certain articles related to scheduled industries. The 
field of legislation must therefore be left open for the Central 

 Etc. 
 
Government to act by issuance of a notified order as and when 
thought necessary or expedient to secure and achieve the objects 
stated in the said provision. 
14.5 But, can it be held that in the absence of any such notified 
order issued by the Central Government, the States could pass 
laws under Entry 33(a) - List III? Would it lead to a legal 
confusion and an overlapping and contradiction? This is because 
if it is held that in the absence of there being a notified order 
actually issued by the Central Government under Section 18G of 
the IDRA, the States are empowered to pass laws under Entry 
33(a) - List III and such laws are in fact made under the aforesaid 
Entries by the States and the Central Government subsequently 
decides to issue a notified order under Section 18G of the IDRA, 
the question would be, what would be the fate of the laws made 
by the States if they overlap with the notified order issued under 
Section 18G of the IDRA? Obviously, the control of any industry 
being taken over by the Union under the provisions of the IDRA 
would imply that the Central Government is empowered to issue 
a notified order in terms of Section 18G of the said Act as and 
when it is necessary or expedient to secure the equitable 

 Etc. distribution and availability at a fair price of any article related 
to any scheduled industry. In such a case, the notified order 
being issued under Section 18G of the IDRA, would have an 
overriding effect on the States’ laws if any made under Entry 
33(a) – List III in regard to trade and commerce, supply and 
distribution of such articles or products of the scheduled 
industry which are covered under the notified order and the 
same would no longer be applicable wherever there is a conflict 
in the laws. 
14.6 A law made by the State Legislature under any Entry of 
List III or Concurrent List is no doubt subject to Article 254 of 
the Constitution. However, Entry 33(a) - List III is in a way 
unique inasmuch as the said Entry would have to be read in the 
context of Entry 52 - List I which relates to the IDRA which is 
enacted by Parliament under the said Entry and therefore, inter 
alia, to Section 18G of the IDRA. When Entry 52 - List I and any 
law such as IDRA empowers the Union or Central Government 
to take certain steps under the provisions of the said Act, it would 
imply that the State Legislature is, per se, denuded of its powers 
to make any law under Entry 33(a) - List III. Applying the above 

 Etc. interpretation, when once the Central Government has the 
powers under Section 18G of the IDRA in the matter of regulating 
supply and distribution and trade and commerce of any article 
of a scheduled industry so as to secure the equitable distribution 
and availability at fair price, the field/contours as covered under 
Section 18 of IDRA is occupied by the Parliament and, 
consequently by the Central Government to issue a notified order 
as and when the necessity arises. 
14.7 The reason for holding so is because List III which is the 
Concurrent List is governed by Article 254 of the Constitution 
which deals with inconsistency between laws made by 
Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of the States. The 
same is expressed as the doctrine of repugnancy. Clause (1) of 
Article 254 states that – 

if any provision of a law made by the Legislature of a 
State is repugnant to any provision of a law made by 
Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact, or 
(ii) to any provision of an existing law with respect to one of 
the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List, 

 Etc. then, subject to clause (2) thereof, the law made by 
Parliament, whether passed before or after the law made 
by the Legislature of such State, or, as the case may be, 
the existing law, shall prevail and the law made by the 
Legislature of the State shall, to the extent of the 
repugnancy, be void. 
Under Article 13(3)(a), law includes any ordinance, order, 
bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having in 
the territory of India the force of law. 
14.8 Clause (2) of Article 254 is an exception to clause (1). It 
states that where a law made by the Legislature of a State with 
respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List 
contains any provision repugnant to the provisions of an earlier 
law made by Parliament or an existing law with respect to that 
matter, then, the law so made by the Legislature of such State 
shall, if it has been reserved for the consideration of the President 
and has received his assent, prevail in that State. The proviso 
states that nothing in clause (2) of Article 254 would prevent 
Parliament from enacting at any time any law with respect to the 

 Etc. same matter including a law adding to, amending, varying or 
repealing the law so made by the Legislature of the State. 
14.9 What is of significance under the second portion of Article 
254(1) is that the law has to be passed by the Parliament either 
before or after the law made by the Legislature of such a State, 
secondly, such a law must be with respect to one of the matters 
enumerated in the Concurrent List. The above is a case of actual 
repugnancy. There can also be a case of what can be called 
potential repugnancy, which is also expressed as the doctrine of 
occupied field which shall be discussed at this stage in the 
context of the observations made in Synthetics and Chemicals 
(7J). 
Entry 33(a) – List III vs. Entry 52 - List I: Observations in 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J): 
15. Article 246 of the Constitution deals with the division of 
legislatives subjects between the Parliament and the Legislatures 
of the States. Both sub-clauses (1) and (2) begin with a non-
obstante clause while sub-clause (3) begins with a “subject to” 
clause. On a holistic reading of Article 246, it emerges that the 
Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any 

 Etc. of the matters enumerated in List I and it also has the power to 
make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List 
III or the Concurrent List (vide clause (2) of Article 246). The non-
obstante clauses in clauses (1) and (2) of Article 246 in my view, 
are significant inasmuch as they envisage parliamentary 
supremacy over laws made by the State Legislature even in 
respect of a subject enumerated in List II as clause (3) of Article 
246 is subject to clauses (1) and (2) of Article 246. This is despite 
the State Legislatures having exclusive competence over the 
subjects mentioned in List II. However, the said position would 
apply only when there is a conflict between a State Law and a 
Union Law which is irreconcilable or cannot be interpreted 
harmoniously. 
15.1 The Parliament as well as the Legislature of any State have 
also concurrent powers to make laws in respect of any of the 
matters enumerated in List III. This is notwithstanding anything 
in clause (3) of Article 246 but is subject to clause (1) thereof. 
This would imply that any law made by the Legislature of a State 
in List III or the Concurrent List is subject to a law made by 
Parliament in List I. This also has a bearing on first part of the 

 Etc. clause (1) of Article 254. Therefore, in my view, the doctrine of 
parliamentary supremacy is writ large in Articles 246 and 254 
both in the manner of arrangement of the subjects in the three 
Lists as well as the extent to which the State Legislatures have 
competence with regard to the subjects assigned to them 
particularly in List III or the Concurrent List. 
15.2 In this case, we have to consider Entry 33(a) – List III in 
light of Entry 52 - List I and the observations made by this Court 
in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J). Entry 33(a) – List III is in 
the Concurrent List and it speaks of trade and commerce in, and 
production, supply and distribution of the products of any 
industry where the control of such industry by the Union is 
declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public 
interest, and imported goods of the same kind as such products. 
A dissection of this Entry would indicate that insofar as products 
of any industry which is a scheduled industry in terms of a law 
made by Parliament by virtue of Entry 52 – List I viz. where the 
control of such scheduled industry has been assumed by the 
Union (insofar as trade and commerce in, and production, supply 
and distribution of the products of such industry), both the 

 Etc. 
 
Union as well as the States have concurrent powers to enact 
laws. It must be remembered that Entry 33(a) – List III is a field 
of legislation and therefore, deals with the concurrent legislative 
competence of both the Union as well as the State Legislature. 
An enactment under such an Entry by the State is subject to the 
application of the principle of repugnancy as envisaged in Article 
254 of the Constitution discussed above. 
15.3 One cannot lose sight of the fact that the IDRA has been 
enacted by Parliament taking control of certain industries such 
as the “Fermentation Industries”, which is the subject matter of 
controversy in the present cases, on the strength of Entry 52 – 
List I. The degree of control envisaged under the various 
provisions of the IDRA have been detailed in the various 
provisions of the said Act. Section 18G was inserted to IDRA 
w.e.f. 01.10.1953. The said Section in the IDRA is also a 
provision which has been inserted pursuant to Entry 52 - List I. 
The said Section empowers the Central Government to issue a 
notified order for securing the equitable distribution and 
availability at fair prices of any article or class of articles relatable 
to any scheduled industry. The expression “notified order” is 

 Etc. defined in Section 3(e) of the IDRA to mean the issuance of a 
notification in the official gazette. 
15.4 It is necessary to note that Entry 33(a) – List III will apply 
only when a law such as IDRA has been enacted pursuant to 
Entry 52 – List I, which has enabled the Union to take control of 
certain industries such as “Fermentation Industries”. While 
Entry 33(a) – List III is a field of legislation which deals with trade 
and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution 
of, inter alia, the products of the scheduled industry under IDRA, 
Section 18G thereof deals with securing equitable distribution 
and availability at fair prices of any article or class of articles 
relatable to any scheduled industry. The Explanation to Section 
18G states that the expression “article or class of articles” 
relatable to any scheduled industry includes any article or class 
of articles imported into India which is of the same nature or 
description as the article or class of articles manufactured or 
produced in the scheduled industry. An article manufactured or 
produced in the scheduled industry is nothing but a product of 
a scheduled industry. Therefore, the expression “the products of 
any scheduled industry” comes within the scope and ambit of the 

 Etc. expression “article or class of articles” relatable to any scheduled 
industry. Thus, Section 18G which pertains to a scheduled 
industry is also relatable to Entry 33(a) – List III though it is a 
part of IDRA which is a Parliamentary law enacted on the basis 
of Entry 52 – List I. 
15.5 The question that would then arise is, whether, by the 
mere insertion of Section 18G to the IDRA with effect from 
01.10.1953, the State Legislatures have been denuded of their 
legislative competence in the matter of regulation of supply and 
distribution and trade and commerce of products of any 
scheduled industry. The conundrum which has arisen in this 
case is on account of the observation in paragraph 85 of 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J), which, inter alia, reads as 
under: 
“85. … The State cannot claim that under Entry 33 of 
List III, it can regulate industrial alcohol as a product of 
the scheduled industry, because the Union, under 
Section 18-G of the IDR Act, has evinced clear intention 
to occupy the whole field.…” 
 
The aforesaid observations mean that by the very insertion 
of Section 18G to the IDRA, there is a denudation of the State’s 

 Etc. legislative competence vis-à-vis Entry 33(a) – List III with respect 
to a product of a scheduled industry which in the instant cases 
is the “Fermentation Industries”. 
15.6 The aforesaid observation which has led to a reference to 
this nine-Judge Bench has to be considered in light of Entry 52 
– List I, Entry 33(a) – List III and Section 18G of the IDRA. As 
already stated, it is pursuant to Entry 52 – List I that the IDRA 
has been enacted by the Parliament declaring the taking of 
control of industries mentioned in the First Schedule to the said 
Act called a scheduled industry. Entry 33(a) – List III deals with 
trade and commerce in, and production, supply and distribution 
of the products of any industry where the control of such 
industry by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be 
expedient in the public interest and imported goods of the same 
kind as such products i.e. with reference to a scheduled 
industry. The nexus between Entry 33(a) – List III and Entry 52 
– List I is with regard to the Union taking control of certain 
industries such as “Fermentation Industries” in the instant cases 
by a declaration made by Parliament by law. Section 2 of the 
IDRA has made such a declaration and hence, it is in respect of 

 Etc. the products of any industry whose control has been taken by 
the law i.e. IDRA, pursuant to Entry 52 – List I that Entry 33(a) 
– List III gives the legislative competence to both the Parliament 
as well as the State Legislatures. 
15.7 As already noted, the IDRA is enacted by Parliament under 
Entry 52 – List I taking control of, inter alia, “Fermentation 
Industries” as noted in Item 26 of the First Schedule to the said 
Act. Section 18G deals with any article or class of articles 
relatable 
to 
any 
scheduled 
industry 
i.e. 
“Fermentation 
Industries” in the instant cases. The Explanation to Section 18G 
states that the expression “article or class of articles” relatable to 
any scheduled industry i.e. “Fermentation Industries” herein 
includes any article or class of articles imported into India which 
is of the same nature or description as the article or class of 
articles, manufactured or produced in the scheduled 
industry. The explanation is inclusive and not an exhaustive 
one. For immediate reference Item 26 of the First Schedule of the 
IDRA pursuant to the 2016 amendment is extracted as under: 

 Etc. 
 
“26. The fermentation industries (other than potable 
alcohol): 
(i) Alcohol 
(ii) other products of fermentation industries.” 
 
The said Item 26 was added w.e.f. 08.05.1952 even prior to 
the insertion of Section 18G to the IDRA which is w.e.f. 
01.10.1953. However, w.e.f. 14.05.2016, Item 26 has been 
amended to clarify that “Fermentation Industries” refers to 
industries others than potable alcohol. This is for the reason that 
“intoxicating liquors” in Entry 8 – List II is equated to only potable 
alcohol and rest of the industry of the “Fermentation Industries” 
other than potable alcohol is a scheduled industry. 
15.8 Once an industry is a scheduled industry under the 
provisions of IDRA, in the context of Section 18G the Central 
Government may notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other provision of IDRA by a notified order provide for regulating 
the supply and distribution thereof and trade and commerce 
therein of a product of scheduled industry. A notified order may 
also provide - 

 Etc. 
 
(a) for the purpose of controlling the prices at which any 
such article or class of articles may be bought or sold 
for; 
(b) for regulating the licences, permits or otherwise the 
distribution, 
transport, 
disposal, 
acquisition, 
possession, use or consumption of any such article or 
class thereof; 
(c) for prohibiting the withholding from sale of any such 
article or class thereof ordinarily kept for sale; 
(d) for requiring any person manufacturing, producing or 
holding in stock any such article or class thereof to sell 
the whole or part of the articles so manufactured or 
produced during a specified period or to sell the whole 
or a part of the articles so held in stock to such person 
or class of persons in such circumstances as may be 
specified in the order; 
(e) for regulating or prohibiting any class of commercial or 
financial transactions relating to such article or class 
thereof which in the opinion of the authority making the 

 Etc. order are, or if unregulated are likely to be, detrimental 
to public interest; 

for requiring persons engaged in the distribution and 
trade and commerce in any such article or class thereof 
to mark the articles exposed or intended for sale with the 
sale price or to exhibit at some easily accessible place on 
the premises the price-lists of articles held for sale and 
also to similarly exhibit on the first day of every month, 
or at such other time as may be prescribed, a statement 
of the total quantities of any such articles in stock; 
(g) for collecting any information or statistics with a view to 
regulating or prohibiting any of the aforesaid matters; 
and 
(h) for any incidental or supplementary matters, including, 
in particular, the grant or issue of licences, permits or 
other documents and the charging of fees therefor. 
15.9 Sub-section (4) of Section 18G provides that no order 
made in exercise of any power conferred under Section 18G shall 
be called in question in any court. Thus, a notified order may be 
issued by the Central Government bearing in mind the situations 

 Etc. and conditions which may arise in the Indian economy 
pertaining to a particular scheduled industry. 
Article 254, Repugnancy and Doctrine of Occupied Field: 
16. There is also a further angle to the matter in the context of 
concurrent powers of Parliament and State Legislatures vis-à-vis 
Entry 33(a) – List III and Article 254 of the Constitution. Nicholas 
in his Australian Constitution, 2nd Edition, page 303, refers to 
three tests of inconsistency or repugnancy: 
(i) There may inconsistency in the actual terms of the 
competing statutes; 
(ii) Though there may be no direct conflict, a State law may 
be inoperative because the commonwealth law; or 
commonwealth court is intended to be a complete 
exhaustive Code; and 
(iii) Even in the absence of intention, a conflict may arise 
when both State and commonwealth seek to exercise 
their powers over the same subject matter.” 
16.1 In Tika Ramji, this Court accepted the above three rules 
evolved by Nicholas, among others, as a useful guide to test the 

 Etc. question of repugnancy. The same was also quoted by this Court 
in M/s. Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. vs. State of Bihar, AIR 
1983 SC 1019 (“Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd.”). In the said 
case, it was observed that the question of repugnancy between a 
law made by Parliament and a law made by the State Legislature 
arises only in case both the legislations occupy the same field 
with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent 
List and there is direct conflict between the two laws. It is only 
when both these requirements are fulfilled that the State law will, 
to the extent of repugnancy, become void. Article 254(1) has no 
application to cases of repugnancy due to overlapping found 
between List II on the one hand and Lists I and III on the other. 
If such overlapping exists in any particular case, the State law 
would be ultra vires because of non-obstante clause in Article 
246(1) read with the opening words “subject” in Article 246(3). 
In such a case, the State law will fail not because of repugnance 
to the Union law but due to want of legislative competence. 
Thus, the question of repugnancy arises only when both the 
Legislatures are competent to legislate in the same field, that is, 
with respect to one of the matters mentioned in the Concurrent 

 Etc. 
 
List. Hence, Article 254(1) cannot apply unless both the Union 
and the State laws relate to a subject specified in the Concurrent 
List and they occupy the same field. 
16.2 Thus, Article 254 of the Constitution applies the doctrine 
of repugnancy in the context of the legislative subjects which are 
enumerated in List III or the Concurrent List. While applying the 
principles of repugnancy under Article 254, a sine qua non is to 
identify the conflict between the laws made by the Parliament 
and the laws made by the State Legislature. The conflict between 
the said laws is the basis for the application of Article 254. The 
conflict could be direct when both the laws cannot operate 
together or it could be indirect when the State law entrenches 
upon a Parliamentary or Central law. But when laws made by 
the Parliament or the State Legislature can be implemented 
without there being any conflict, the principle of repugnancy 
would not apply inasmuch as there would be no contrary results 
owing to the applicability of both sets of laws. In other words, 
there cannot be a situation where obeying the State laws would 
result in disobeying the Parliamentary laws. Thus, when laws are 
made under an Entry in List III or the Concurrent List by both 

 Etc. the Parliament as well as by the State Legislature, the Court 
must first ascertain whether the two sets of laws can operate 
harmoniously, if not, whether harmonious interpretation could 
be given to the said laws so as to avoid a conflict between the 
two. It is only when there is a conflict between the two sets of 
laws inasmuch as the State laws would be abridging the 
Parliamentary law, in such a case, the doctrine of Parliamentary 
supremacy would apply i.e. when a harmonious interpretation is 
not possible. Even if the two laws overlap, if they are 
complimentary to each other, in such a case, there would be no 
application of the principle of Parliamentary supremacy. Thus, 
when there is absolute inconsistency between the two sets of 
laws, and they are not reconcilable then, the principle of 
Parliamentary supremacy would apply in the context of 
repugnancy. 
16.3 The next question that would arise is, whether, the 
principle of repugnancy in Article 254 of the Constitution could 
have a wider ramification inasmuch as even in the absence of 
there being two sets of laws which have been made by the 
Parliament and by the State Legislature but owing to the nature 

 Etc. of the law that the Parliament has made, the State Legislature is 
incompetent in making a law on the same subject. In other 
words, whether a law enacted by the Parliament can prevent a 
law being made by the State Legislature on the same subject on 
the premise that the field has been occupied by the 
Parliamentary law. This is expressed in what is known as the 
doctrine of occupied field. By this, it would mean that the law 
enacted by the Parliament has occupied the field in its entirety 
and consequently, the States have no legislative competence to 
make a law on the very same aspect. In other words, if a law is 
made by the Parliament, does it occupy the entire field so as to 
reduce or negate the legislative competence of the State 
Legislature to make a similar law? How does one determine 
whether the legislative field has been occupied? Firstly, there 
must be a Parliamentary law in place with an intention to occupy 
the field. Secondly, the contours of the field must be determined. 
Consequently, the State Legislature would be prevented from 
making the law in terms of what has been determined by the 
Parliament to occupy the field. Thus, the intention to occupy the 
field must be explicit and clear and discernible with the result 

 Etc. that the State Legislature would have a reduced field or the 
legislative competence would be one of total prohibition to make 
a similar law. For instance, whether the Parliamentary law 
intends to put in place a complete and exhaustive regulatory 
scheme, as a result of which the State Legislature is denuded of 
its powers to make any State regulation in the field as a whole. 
This intention would have to be discerned on a reading of the 
statute as a whole and the particular provisions which should 
emanate such an intention. Thus, there must be a clear intention 
to occupy the field by a Parliamentary legislation. Further, the 
extent of the field sought to be occupied must be clearly 
demarcated. In other words, whether the Parliament has evinced 
to exclude the State Legislature from making a law on a similar 
subject by virtue of an Entry in List III? 
16.4 In order to answer this question, the provisions of the Act 
made by the Parliament have to be examined threadbare in order 
to ascertain a clear intention of the Parliament to occupy the field 
so as to negate the Legislature of the States to have the 
competence to make a similar law. Thus, while a direct conflict 
of a Parliamentary law and a State law could be resolved on the 

 Etc. touchstone of a harmonious interpretation of the two laws (vide 
second part of article 254(1)), a potential conflict between a 
Parliamentary law which has been enacted and a potential or 
future law by a State Legislature is avoided on the touchstone of 
the doctrine of occupied field. 
16.5 While applying the occupied field doctrine, Courts must 
delicately balance the legislative competence of the Parliament 
and the State Legislatures in making laws on a particular subject 
under the Concurrent List and apply the doctrine of occupied 
field only having regard to the intention of the Parliament to 
occupy the field and the Parliament defining the contours of the 
field sought to be occupied by a comparative and coherent 
reading of the other Entries in List I and List II, having bearing 
on the concerned Entry in List III of the Constitution. Such 
balancing need to be done by Courts in order to ascertain 
whether despite legislative competence being provided to the 
State Legislatures under a particular Entry in the Concurrent 
List but owing to what has been stated in any law made under 
Entry in List I (Union List) having a bearing on an Entry in the 
Concurrent List being made subject to any Entry in the Union 

 Etc. 
 
List, would result in the State Legislatures being denuded of 
legislative competence to make laws on a similar subject under 
an Entry in List III such as Entry 33(a) – List III which is under 
consideration. 
16.6 The application of the doctrine of occupied field is a 
technique adopted by the constitutional courts in order to ensure 
that there is no potential conflict that could arise between the 
State laws and the existing Parliamentary law having regard to 
the nature of the legislative powers, their importance in the 
socio-economic sphere of governance in the country and such 
other considerations. 
16.7 Applying the aforesaid principles to the cases at hand, the 
question is whether by virtue of insertion of Section 18G to the 
IDRA, the legislative competence of the State Legislatures under 
Entry 33(a) – List III vis-à-vis products of the scheduled industry 
namely, “Fermentation Industries” would be governed within the 
scope and ambit of Section 18G of the IDRA and consequently, 
the State Legislatures would have no competence to make a law 
in regard to the products of a scheduled industry in respect of 

 Etc. which Section 18G applies. This is by bearing in mind the twin 
tests referred to above namely, the intention of the Parliament to 
occupy the field and the demarcation of the areas in which the 
field is sought to be occupied. In other words, in the instant case, 
whether Item 26 which speaks of “Fermentation Industries” to 
include “industrial alcohol” or non-potable alcohol as a product 
of such industry which has been taken control of by the Union 
under the provisions of IDRA (and which is excluded from the 
scope and ambit of Entry 8 – List II), falls within the scope and 
ambit of a scheduled industry, and thereby Section 18G would 
apply the aspects referred to above. 
16.8 The answer is in the affirmative for the following reasons: 
firstly, insofar as the potable or “intoxicating liquors” is 
concerned, the legislative field is exclusively with the State 
Legislature. However, in respect of the scheduled industry which 
is “Fermentation Industries” (which does not take within its 
scope and ambit potable alcohol) vide Item 26 of the First 
Schedule, all other types of alcohol including “industrial alcohol” 
can be regulated only by the Parliamentary law and the Central 
Government. Any other interpretation would imply that even in 

 Etc. the face of Section 18G being incorporated into the IDRA and in 
the absence of any notified order being issued, the States 
Legislatures and the State Governments would have the 
legislative competence to make laws on what is the subject 
matter of Section 18G of IDRA under Entry 33(a) – List III. Then, 
each State could make its own law on the said subject matter 
covered under Section 18G of IDRA pertaining to a scheduled 
industry. If in respect of the products of a scheduled industry, 
the States make laws and there are a variety of laws made by the 
individual States which are in force in respect of the subject 
under Section 18G of IDRA then when a notified order is issued, 
the Central Government’s notified order would apply if there is a 
direct conflict between the State laws or legal regime in place and 
the notified order that is issued. This would result in a legal 
quagmire vis-à-vis a scheduled industry. It cannot then be said 
that it is necessary to ascertain whether there is a direct conflict 
between the State law and the notified order made by the Central 
Government at every instance such an order is issued and if 
there is such a direct conflict then, the Parliamentary law would 
apply on the strength of Article 254 of the Constitution. Such a 

 Etc. legal confusion and conundrum would not be conducive to a 
scheduled industry such as “Fermentation Industries” dealing 
with “industrial alcohol” which is a commodity of critical and 
significant importance in the Indian economy. 
16.9 Sub-section (4) of Section 18G also states that no order in 
exercise of power conferred by the Section shall be called in 
question in any court. Thus, the question of repugnancy between 
an existing State law and the notified order of the Central 
Government cannot be raised before a court of law. Then, 
whether both the State law as well as the notified order can be 
simultaneously obeyed. If not, what would be the remedy. Sub-
section (4) of Section 18G also indicates that the Parliament has 
intended to occupy the field as demarcated under Section 18G. 
Such an interpretation has to be given in order to avoid a legal 
uncertainty and quandary in the economy in the context of 
Section 18G of the IDRA. 
16.10 Thus, the question, whether, under Entry 33(a) – List III, 
the States have been denuded of their powers by virtue of 
insertion of Section 18G to the IDRA, i.e., Section 18G having 

 Etc. occupied the field to the extent of control as above mentioned 
and the States would not have the competence to pass any law 
relating to Entry 33(a) – List III, in my view, has to be answered 
in the affirmative. This is because Section 18G has been inserted 
by Parliament to the IDRA which is an enactment made pursuant 
to Entry 52 – List I. Entry 52 – List I speaks of the Union by 
declaration made by Parliament by law taking control of such 
scheduled industry (Section 2 of the IDRA) such as the 
“Fermentation Industries” herein. The industries which are 
controlled of by the Union are specified in the First Schedule to 
the IDRA. “Fermentation Industries” is a scheduled industry. 
Therefore, the Union has taken control of “Fermentation 
Industries”. For the sake of clarification, in the year 2016 an 
amendment was made to expressly exclude potable alcohol from 
“Fermentation Industries” and it includes only non-potable 
alcohol such as “industrial alcohol”. The detailed discussion 
made above is in regard to only “industrial alcohol” being non-
potable alcohol. “Intoxicating liquors” being potable alcohol is not 
within the scheduled industry. Therefore, the said products of 
“Fermentation Industries” which have been taken control of by 

 Etc. the Union by virtue of insertion of the Section 18G of the IDRA 
would come within the scope and ambit of the said Section. 
16.11 
In this context, by way of analogy, it would be of 
relevance to refer to my dissenting opinion dated 25.07.2024 in 
Mineral Area Development Authority Etc. vs. M/s. Steel 
Authority of India & Others (Civil Appeal Nos.4056-4064 of 
1999) (“Mineral Area Development Authority”) wherein the 
interpretation of Entry 50 – List II vis-à-vis Entry 54 – List I came 
up for consideration and it was observed by me that even a 
taxation Entry i.e. Entry 50 – List II was subject to the limitation 
imposed by Parliament by law relating to mineral development in 
terms of the Entry 54 – List I. Thus, the doctrine of parliamentary 
supremacy in the context of an Entry in List II (State List) with 
an Entry in List I (Union List) was considered. For immediate 
reference the following passage from said opinion could be 
extracted: 
“8.6 
 However, what is pertinent to be considered in 
this case is, Entry 50 - List II in juxtaposition with Entry 
54 - List I. As already noted, Entry 50 - List II is a 
taxation Entry which empowers a State Legislature to 
impose tax on mineral rights. However, this power of the 
State Government is not an absolute power inasmuch as 
Entry 50 - List II itself states that the power of the State 

 Etc. 
 
Legislature to impose tax on mineral right is “subject to 
any limitations imposed by Parliament by law relating to 
mineral development”. In other words, if there is any 
limitation imposed by the Parliament by law relating to 
mineral development then that would have an impact on 
the legislative competence of the State Legislature to 
impose a tax on mineral rights. The key expressions of 
Entry 50 - List II are “taxes on mineral rights” and 
“subject to any limitations imposed by the Parliament by 
any law on mineral development”. Thus, the Parliament 
can impose any limitation on the State’s right to impose 
a tax on mineral rights by way of a law relating to 
mineral development. Thus, while Entry 50 - List II 
speaks of taxes on mineral rights and is a taxation Entry 
empowering States to impose taxes on mineral rights, 
the same is not unbridled or absolute but is subject to 
any limitation to be imposed by Parliament by law 
relating to mineral development. In other words, if 
Parliament intends to regulate mineral development in 
the country, it can do so by a law made as per Entry 54 
- List I and to that extent the taxation Entry in Entry 50 
- List II could be limited and the State’s right to impose 
a tax on mineral rights by a law would be affected. Thus, 
a taxation Entry in Entry 50 - List II can be affected by 
Entry 54 - List I in the interest of mineral development 
by Parliament imposing a limitation on the State’s right 
to tax mineral rights. In other words, if the Union has by 
a law taken control of, inter alia, mineral development 
with the Parliament passing a law, then the State’s 
power to impose any tax on mineral rights would, to that 
extent, be denuded, if the Parliamentary or Central law 
creates a limitation to impose such a tax, if it relates to 
mineral development. It is in the above backdrop that 
the controversy must be considered. 
8.7 
 Exercise of mineral rights have to be consistent 
with mineral development in the country, which would 
embrace, inter alia, uniformity in mineral development 
throughout the country having regard to several factors 
which would otherwise come in the way of such 

 Etc. development. Hence, the framers of the Constitution 
introduced Entry 50 - List I enabling a limitation being 
imposed on Entry 50 - List II although that is a taxation 
Entry giving powers to the States to impose taxes on 
mineral rights. It is subject to any limitation imposed by 
Parliament under Entry 54 - List I. 
8.8 
 The golden thread which runs through Entry 54 
- List I and Entry 23 - List II is that the Entries deal with 
regulation of mines and mineral development. Thus, any 
aspect of regulation of mines and mineral development 
taken under the control of the Union by a declaration 
made by the Parliament by a law, denudes the State 
Legislature of its legislative competence to pass any law 
to that extent. If a Parliamentary law such as MMDR Act, 
1957 is enacted and deals with certain aspects of 
mineral development, to that extent the State Legislature 
would be denuded of its competence to pass any law on 
the said aspect. The legislative competence vested with 
the State Legislature is, therefore, not an absolute one 
but is subject to a Parliamentary law enacted as per 
Entry 54 - List I dealing with mineral development. 
 
In the circumstance, the aforesaid observations made in 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) are in consonance with the 
constitutional framework of Article 246 read with the Entries in 
Lists I and III and the doctrine of occupied field applies in the 
context of Section 18G of IDRA enacted under Entry 52 – List I 
and Entry 33(a) – List III. 
17. One of the contentions raised was that so long as the 
notified order has not been issued by the Central Government 

 Etc. which triggers the exercise of powers under Section 18G of the 
IDRA, the States would have the legislative competence to pass 
laws under Entry 33(a) – List III. In my view, the issuance of a 
notified order under Section 18G is only a ministerial act to be 
performed and to be complied with by the Central Government 
by a publication in the official gazette. The object of publication 
of a notified order in the official gazette is to inform the world at 
large about the contents of the said order. This could happen at 
any point of time having regard to the situations and conditions 
which emerge in the Indian economy with regard to a product of 
a scheduled industry which is also described as an article or 
class of articles relatable to any scheduled industry under 
Section 18G of IDRA. Thus, when the field is occupied by Section 
18G of the IDRA which is an enactment made pursuant to Entry 
52 – List I and the State Legislatures are denuded of legislative 
competence for passing any law under Entry 33(a) – List III in 
respect of a product of a scheduled industry which is read within 
the definition of article or class of articles relatable to any 
scheduled industry as per the Explanation to Section 18G, the 
issuance of a notified order pales into insignificance in the 

 Etc. context of repugnancy. The issuance of a notified order has 
relevance only for the purpose of intimation of action being taken 
on any particular article or class of article of a scheduled 
industry by the Central Government in an occupied field. 
17.1 As far as the controversy whether “Fermentation 
Industries” being under the control of the Union could enable the 
State Legislature to pass a law by virtue of Entry 33 (a) - List III 
of the Constitution, in the context of a product of “Fermentation 
Industries” and in the context of Section 18G of the IDRA, there 
has been a cleavage of opinion of this Court in the aforesaid 
judgments. While in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J), it was held 
that mere insertion of Section 18G into the statute of the IDRA, 
would imply that the field has been occupied by the Union and, 
therefore, the State has no jurisdiction to exercise its powers 
under the said Entry and therefore, has been denuded of all its 
powers, the subsequent decisions in Bihar Distillery etc., have 
opined that the said position may not be correct. In other words, 
unless action is taken under Section 18G of the IDRA by the 
actual issuance of a notified order and if such a notified order is 
repugnant to an existing State legislation or action being initiated 

 Etc. thereto, the question of repugnancy would arise. The judgment 
of this Court in Tika Ramji has been referred to and how far the 
said judgment would have an application in the present 
controversy is a matter to be analysed. 
17.2 In Tika Ramji, the vires of the Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane 
(Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Act, 1953 (hereinafter 
referred to as “UP Act”) was assailed by the petitioners therein. It 
was contented that the State of Uttar Pradesh had no power to 
enact the said Act as the same was with respect to the subject of 
industries, the control of which by the Union was declared by 
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest within 
the meaning of Entry 52 – List I and was, therefore, within the 
exclusive province of Parliament. It was further contended that 
the Act was ultra vires the powers of the State Legislature and 
was a colorable exercise of legislative power by the State. It was 
further contended that it was repugnant to the IDRA and the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (Act 10 of 1955) also a Central 
Act. That in the event of this Court were to hold that the 
impugned Act was within the legislative competence of the State 
Legislature, it was void by reason of such repugnancy. It was also 

 Etc. contended that the impugned Act stood repealed to the extent 
that it had been repealed by Section 16 of Act 10 of 1955 and by 
clause (7) of the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1955, made in 
exercise of the powers conferred by Section 3 of Act 10 of 1955 
(a Central Act). 
17.3 It was observed that even if it was assumed that sugarcane 
was an article or class of articles relatable to the sugar industry 
within the meaning of Section 18G of the IDRA, since no order 
was issued by the Central Government in exercise of the powers 
vested in it under that section, no question of repugnancy could 
ever arise because repugnancy must exist in fact and not depend 
merely on a possibility. The possibility of an order under Section 
18G being issued by the Central Government would not be 
enough. The existence of such an order would be an essential 
prerequisite before any repugnancy could ever arise. 
17.4 Without going into the other aspects of the case, in my 
view, this Court was not right in holding that since no order was 
issued by the Central Government under Section 18G of the 
IDRA, the legislative field was open to both the Central as well as 

 Etc. the State Governments to take action. That portion of the 
judgment in Tika Ramji in my view is not correct. 
17.5 The judgments of this Court including that of the 
Constitution Bench in Tika Ramji; Indian Aluminium 
company Limited vs. Karnataka Electricity Board, (1992) (“Indian Aluminium company”); Shree Krishna 
Gyanoday Sugar Ltd.; Belsund Sugar Co. Ltd. vs. State of 
Bihar, (1999) (“Belsund Sugar Co. Ltd.”) and SIEL 
Ltd. vs. Union of India, (1998) (“SIEL Ltd.”) have 
lost sight of the fact that when a notified order is issued under 
Section 18G of the IDRA it is pursuant to a Central enactment 
made by virtue of Entry 52 – List I and it is not an exercise of 
power under Entry 33(a) – List III. When once Section 18G has 
been inserted to the IDRA in respect of a scheduled industry, the 
control being taken over by the Union in respect of the very same 
scheduled industry, legislative competence cannot remain with 
the State Legislature also under Entry 33(a) – List III in respect 
of the aspects or field covered under Section 18G of IDRA which 
is a Parliamentary enactment. 

 Etc. 
 
18. There is another angle to the matter. Article 254 in the 
normal course would apply when there is a direct conflict 
between the laws made by the Parliament and the State 
Legislature under an Entry in the Concurrent List. But in the 
instant case, it can also be held that the conflict is not between 
a law or an action taken by the Parliament or the Central 
Government under Entry 33(a) – List III versus a State law that 
could be made or action taken under the very same Entry. Here, 
the conflict arises between action that could be taken by the 
Central Government under Section 18G of IDRA made by virtue 
of Entry 52 – List I as opposed to a State law or action which 
could be made under Entry 33(a) – List III. In such case, the 
doctrine of repugnancy would arise as per the first part of Article 
254(1) between Entry 52 – List I and Entry 33(a) – List III and not 
in respect of the second part of Article 254(1). Thus, when the 
Central Government seeks to exercise power in respect of a 
scheduled industry under Section 18G of the IDRA it is pursuant 
to the said Act being made under Entry 52 – List I. Hence, any 
action to be taken by the Central Government under Section 18G 

 Etc. is not really an action that would be taken under Entry 33(a) – 
List III. 
18.1 On this aspect, reference must be made to judgment of 
this Court in State of Kerala vs. Mar Appraem Kuri Company 
Limited, (2012) (“Mar Appraem Kuri Company”). 
The Constitution Bench of this Court speaking through Kapadia, 
C.J., considered the question - when does repugnancy arise in 
the context of whether Kerala Chitties Act 23 of 1975 becoming 
repugnant to the (Central) Chit Funds Act 40 of 1982 under 
Article 254(1) upon making of the Central Act (i.e. 19.08.1982 
when the President gave his assent) or whether the Kerala 
Chitties Act 23 of 1975 would become repugnant to the Central 
Act as and when the notification under Section 1(3) of the Central 
Act bringing the Central Act into force in the State of Kerala is 
issued. In other words, the question raised was whether making 
of the law or its commencement brings about repugnancy or 
inconsistency as envisaged in Article 254(1) of the Constitution. 
In this context, reference was made to Deep Chand vs. State of 
UP, AIR 1959 SC 648 (“Deep Chand”) and it was observed as 
under: 

 Etc. 
 
“30. That, in Deep Chand v. State of U.P., three 
principles were laid down as indicative of repugnancy 
between a State law and a Central law, which have to be 
borne in mind by the State Legislature whenever it seeks 
to enact a law under any entry in the Concurrent List. 
Thus, where there is a Central law which intends to 
override a State law or where there is a Central law 
intending to occupy the field hitherto occupied by the 
State law or where the Central law collides with the State 
law in actual terms, then the State Legislature would 
have to take into account the possibility of repugnancy 
within the meaning of Article 254 of the Constitution. In 
this connection, it was submitted that Tests 1 and 2 
enumerated in Deep Chand do not require the Central 
law to be actually brought into force for repugnancy 
between two competing legislations to arise in the 
context of Article 254 of the Constitution.” 
 
18.2 In paragraph 40, it was observed that the expression 
“subject to” in clauses (2) and (3) of Article 246 denotes 
supremacy of Parliament and the same is extracted as under: 
“40. However, the principle of federal supremacy in 
Article 246(1) cannot be resorted to unless there is an 
“irreconcilable” conflict between the entries in the Union 
and State Lists. The said conflict has to be a “real” 
conflict. The non obstante clause in Article 246(1) 
operates only if reconciliation is impossible. As stated, 
the parliamentary legislation has supremacy as provided 
in Articles 246(1) and (2). This is of relevance when the 
field of legislation is in the Concurrent List. The Union 
and the State Legislatures have concurrent power with 
respect to the subjects enumerated in List III. [See Article 
246(2).] Hence, the State Legislature has full power to 

 Etc. legislate regarding subjects in the Concurrent List, 
subject to Article 254(2) i.e. provided the provisions of 
the State Act do not come in conflict with those of the 
Central Act on the subject. [See Amalgamated 
Electricity 
Co. 

Ltd. v. 
Municipal 
Committee, Ajmer [AIR 1969 SC 227: (1969) ].] Thus, the expression “subject to” in clauses (2) 
and (3) of Article 246 denotes supremacy of Parliament.” 
 
18.3 In paragraph 43, it was observed as under: 
“43. Our Constitution gives supremacy to Parliament in 
the matter of making of the laws or legislating with 
respect to matters delineated in the three Lists. The 
principle of supremacy of Parliament, the distribution of 
legislative 
powers, 
the 
principle 
of 
exhaustive 
enumeration of matters in the three Lists are all to be 
seen in the context of making of laws and not in the 
context of commencement of the laws.” 
 
18.4 Dealing with the question of repugnancy and the ways in 
which it would arise between Parliamentary legislation and 
States’ legislation, it was observed in paragraph 47 as under: 
“47. The question of repugnancy between parliamentary 
legislation and State legislation arises in two ways. First, 
where the legislations, though enacted with respect to 
matters in their allotted spheres, overlap and conflict. 
Second, where the two legislations are with respect to 
matters in the Concurrent List and there is a conflict. In 
both the situations, the parliamentary legislation will 
predominate, in the first, by virtue of non obstante 
clause in Article 246(1); in the second, by reason of 
Article 254(1).” 

 Etc. 
 
18.5 Ultimately, in paragraph 61, it was stated as under: 
“61. The entire above discussion on Articles 245, 246, 
250, 251 is only to indicate that the word “made” has to 
be read in the context of the law-making process and, if 
so read, it is clear that to test repugnancy one has to go 
by the making of law and not by its commencement.” 
 
18.6 On the facts of the said case, this Court held that on the 
enactment of the (Central) Chit Funds Act, 1982 on 19.08.1982, 
intending to occupy the entire field of chits under Entry 7 - List 
III, the State Legislature was denuded of its power to enact the 
Kerala Finance Act 7 of 2002. 
18.7 Thus, when the State of Kerala intended to amend the 
State Act in 2002, it was bound to keep in mind the fact that 
there is already a Central law on the same subject made by 
Parliament in 1982, though not in force in Kerala, whereunder 
there is a pro tanto repeal of the State Act. Therefore, the State 
Legislature ought to have followed the procedure in Article 254(2) 
and ought to have obtained the assent of the President. 
18.8 Ultimately, in paragraph 78, issue was summed up as 
under: 
“78. To sum up, Articles 246(1), (2) and 254(1) provide 
that to the extent to which a State law is in conflict with 

 Etc. or repugnant to the Central law, which Parliament is 
competent to make, the Central law shall prevail and the 
State law shall be void to the extent of its repugnancy. 
This general rule of repugnancy is subject to Article 
254(2) which inter alia provides that if a law made by a 
State Legislature in respect of matters in the Concurrent 
List is reserved for consideration by the President and 
receives his/her assent, then the State law shall prevail 
in that State over an existing law or a law made by 
Parliament, notwithstanding its repugnancy.” 
 
19. Further reference could also be made to the Food Safety 
and Standards Act, 2006 (“FSSA, 2006”) which has been enacted 
pursuant to Entry 52 – List I where the Parliament by a 
declaration made under Section 2 of the said Act has declared 
that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union should 
take under its control the food industry. Consequently, clause 
(b) of Entry 33 – List III which speaks of food stuffs, including 
edible oils seeds, and oils would be impacted on account of the 
FSSA, 2006 and the declaration made therein pursuant to Entry 
52 – List I to the extent of the control under the said Act. 
20. The reason for the aforesaid view would have to be also 
considered from the point of view of the fact that when an 
“industry” is taken control of by the Union by specifying it in the 

 Etc. 
 
First Schedule of the IDRA, it becomes a scheduled industry and 
to the extent of control envisaged as per the Schedule and as per 
the provisions of IDRA. It is only those industries which are 
critical and of vital significance to the Indian economy which are 
taken control of by the Union and one such industry is 
“Fermentation Industries”, which inter alia comprises of 
“industrial alcohol” both as a product and as a raw material for 
other industries. 
21. Conversely, if any industry is not a scheduled industry 
and does not come within the scope and ambit of First Schedule 
of the IDRA, in such an event, not only Entry 24 - List II but also 
Entries 26 and 27 - List II would fully operate. Then, Entries 26 
and 27 - List II would not be subject to the restriction under 
Entry 33(a) - List III nor to Entry 52 - List I. The States would 
have the liberty to pass laws with regard to trade and commerce, 
production supply and distribution of goods of any industry 
under Entries 26 and/or 27 - List II without there being any 
restriction in terms of Entry 33(a) - List III. In other words, 
insofar as a non-scheduled industry is concerned, Entry 33(a) - 
List III would not at all apply and Entries 26 and/or 27 - List II 

 Etc. would apply in the matter of production, supply and distribution 
of goods or trade and commerce of the products of any industry 
or any other specific Entry in List II, as the case may be. 
22. In the above context, the intention of the Constitution 
makers in the matter of division of legislative subjects between 
the Parliament and the States have to be clearly understood. In 
order to achieve consistency of dividing the subjects of legislation 
not only within the particular Lists, namely, the Union List, State 
List and Concurrent List but also, inter se, between the three 
Lists so as to have a clarity in the matter of the Parliament or the 
State Legislature having competence to make laws, the 
prescription under Article 246 and the mandate thereof would 
give a clue regarding interpretation of the Entries in the three 
Lists. To reiterate, Articles 246 (1) and (2) of the Constitution 
begins with a non-obstante clause and Article 24(3) begins with 
a “subject to” clause. On a conspectus reading of aforesaid 
clauses of Article 246, it is evident that the Legislature of a State 
has the power to make laws with respect to any matter 
enumerated in List III, i.e., Concurrent List, subject to List I 
which deals with Parliament’s exclusive powers to make laws in 

 Etc. respect of any matter enumerated in List I. Therefore, a subject 
placed in List III, i.e., the Concurrent List can also be subject to 
the exclusive power of Parliament to make laws with respect to 
any matter enumerated in List I (vide first part of Article 254(1)). 
Thus, the intention of the Constitution makers was to preserve 
parliamentary supremacy while at the same time maintaining a 
federal balance in the matter of distribution of the fields of 
legislation vis-à-vis various Entries in the three Lists. This is also 
evident on a reading of Article 246(3) which deals with the 
exclusive powers to make laws by State Legislatures in respect of 
matters enumerated in List II being subject to clauses (1) and (2) 
of Article 246, i.e., subject to the Union List and the Concurrent 
List is in a case of conflict of laws which is irreconcilable. 
23. Any other view would result in a situation wherein the 
State Legislatures on the strength of Entry 33(a) – List III would 
have their own legislations on the premise that there is no 
notified order issued by the Central Government in respect of the 
scheduled industry under Section 18G of the IDRA, and if 
subsequently in respect of a product of a scheduled industry, the 
Central Government is to issue a notification under Section 18G 

 Etc. of the IDRA, the laws that are in operation in the various States 
would become repugnant if there is a direct conflict between the 
said State laws with the notified order issued by the Central 
Government under Section 18G of the IDRA. This would result 
in a legal quagmire and uncertainty leading to confusion. 
Therefore, for this reason also States cannot have legislative 
competence to pass laws or take any action in respect of any 
product of a scheduled industry from the moment Section 18G 
has been inserted to the IDRA which has been enacted pursuant 
to Entry 52 – List I. As a result, time of insertion of Section 18G 
to the IDRA, the intention of the Union is to occupy the field 
insofar as an article or articles of scheduled industry is 
concerned which will also include a product of a scheduled 
industry. Consequently, the States are denuded of their powers 
to pass any law insofar as the said subject-matter is concerned. 
24. In State of W.B. vs. Union of India, AIR 1963 SC 1241 
(“State of W.B.”), this Court on a comparative analysis of List I 
in Seventh Schedule to the Constitution with the Seventh 
Schedule to the 1935 Act noted that the powers of the Union have 
been enlarged particularly in the field of economic unity and that 

 Etc. this was done as it was felt that there should be centralised 
control and administration in certain fields of common interest if 
rapid economic and industrial progress had to be achieved by the 
nation. Reference in this regard was also made, inter alia, to the 
transfer of new Entry 33 – List III in the Constitution from List II 
of the 1935 Act. It was observed that the result of ensuring such 
economic unity was a departure from any traditional pattern of 
federation and a conscious decision for the common good. 
Furthermore, in identifying deviations from traditional features 
of federations, this Court noted a notable feature that is true of 
the Indian constitutional framework: 
“26. … (c) Distribution of powers between the Union and 
the regional units each in its sphere coordinate and 
independent of the other. The basis of such distribution 
of power is that in matters of national importance in 
which a uniform policy is desirable in the interest of the 
units, authority is entrusted to the Union, and matters 
of local concern remain with the States. …” 
 
Importance of “Industrial Alcohol” to the Indian Economy: 
25. It is necessary to note the importance of “industrial 
alcohol” in the Indian economy. “Industrial alcohol” is important 
to the Indian economy for it is used in at least two sectors: i) as 

 Etc. a key feedstock for production of various chemicals in the 
chemicals industry; and ii) as liquid fuel to be blended with 
petrol. 
25.1 As regards the chemical industry, the XIIth five-year plan 
(2012-2017) of the Planning Commission (“PC Report”) notes that 
“alcohol-based chemical industry occupies an important place in 
the Indian chemical industry and is a key contributor to the 
growth of the sector”. It also notes that several alcohol-based 
chemicals are made using “industrial alcohol” and are used as 
building blocks for various downstream industries such as 
“synthetic fibres and synthetic yarn, drugs and pharmaceuticals, 
agrochemicals, personal care products, dyestuffs, pigments, 
flavours & fragrances etc.” Further, the PC Report notes that 
alcohol based chemical industry “contributes to green chemistry” 
as chemicals are manufactured using ethanol instead of being 
manufactured through the petro-chemical route. It also notes 
that they contribute to foreign exchange reserves. 
25.2 As regards blending of ethanol with petrol, the 
contribution of Ethanol Blended with Petrol (EBP) programme of 

 Etc. the Government of India appears significant. In this programme, 
fuel-grade ethanol is blended with petrol and is sold by Oil 
Marketing Companies (OMCs) for use as a fuel in automobiles. 
In response to an Unstarred Question No.2764 answered on 20th 
December, 2023, the Minister of State for Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food & Public Distribution had answered that: 
i) 
The Government of India has been implementing EBP 
programme and has fixed the target of 20% blending of 
ethanol with petrol by 2025; 
ii) 
The supply of ethanol to OMCs has increased by more than 
13 times from 38 crore litres in ESY 2013-13 to 502 crore 
litres in ESY 2022-23; 
iii) To achieve the target of 20% blending by 2025, about 1016 
crore litres of ethanol would be required and for this, about 
1700 crore litres of ethanol producing capacity is required. 
25.3 Further, a report of the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas, Government of India titled “Ethanol Growth Story” 
suggests that the EBP programme has at least three benefits: 
first, it raises income of farmers which is evident from the 
observation that OMCs have paid sugar mills nearly Rs.81,796 

 Etc. crore for ethanol supplies up to 2022. Second, it reduces import 
bills and improves India’s energy security. The report suggests 
that the cumulative foreign exchange impact is estimated to be 
over Rs.53,894 crore between 2014 and 2022. Third, it lowers 
CO2 emissions and promotes a cleaner environment. The report 
estimates that Greenhouse gas emissions were reduced by 318.2 
lac tonnes due to the EBP programme between 2014 and 2022. 
26. Thus, insofar as “Fermentation Industries” (other than 
potable alcohol) is concerned, both alcohol and other products of 
“Fermentation Industries” being a scheduled industry under the 
IDRA passed under Entry 52 – List I it would clearly be within 
the scope of Union legislation. It is clarified that as far as the 
concept of “intoxicating liquors” versus “industrial alcohol” is 
concerned, it is clear that Entry 33(a) – List III does not deal with 
“intoxicating liquors” which is a State subject under Entry 8 – 
List II. “Fermentation Industries” is a controlled industry and is 
a scheduled industry under the IDRA. It has been clarified by the 
2016 Amendment that Item 26 dealing with “Fermentation 
Industries” does not include potable alcohol. Therefore, insofar 
as “intoxicating liquors” which is “potable liquors” is concerned, 

 Etc. only the State Legislatures have the legal competence to enact 
laws concerning the said subject. Therefore, other types of liquor 
(i.e. excluding 
“intoxicating 
liquors”) 
comes 
within 
the 
nomenclature of “Fermentation Industries” which is a scheduled 
industry under IDRA. 
27. Since qua State Legislatures, Article 246(2) is also subject 
to Article 246(1), the legislation which could have been made 
under List III (Concurrent List) can also be subject to legislation 
made under Entry 52 – List I. This is expressly so having regard 
to Entry 33(a) – List III as any law regarding trade and commerce 
in, and the production, supply and distribution of the products 
of any industry where the control of such industry by the Union 
is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public 
interest, and imported goods of the same kind as such products, 
would be subject to a law made as per Entry 52 – List I i.e., IDRA. 
This is because a Parliamentary law which is made by virtue of 
an Entry under List I has supremacy over any other law in List 
II or List III when they are irreconcilable or when the doctrine of 
occupied field applies respectively. 

 Etc. 
 
28. In Mineral Area Development Authority, I have voiced 
similar concerns as in the present case in the following words: 
“36.3 The Government of India Act, 1935 was the first 
comprehensive blueprint for legislative division of power 
in India between federal, provincial and concurrent 
spheres which resolved residuary powers to rest with the 
Federal Government. Though there are apparent 
similarities between the Government of India Act, 1935 
and the Indian Constitution, yet factors, such as, 
regulation of economic competition and the development 
of 
twentieth 
century 
welfare 
States 
guided 
the 
constitutional blueprint for a model of federalism in 
which provincial initiative should not preclude national 
coordination, particularly, in the fields of socio-economic 
spheres. 
36.4 According to Tillin, “in the case of India, 
political economy considerations intersect with the 
accommodation of diversity in shaping the resulting 
forms of federalism”. The question of a desirable balance 
between Central and the State Governments has to be 
viewed in the context of the country continuing to 
confront the need to promote economic growth while 
upholding and expanding social rights. 
Sarkaria 
Commission 
Report 
on 
Centre-State 
Relations: 
37. 
 Resolved to study and reform the existing 
arrangements between the Union and the States in an 
evolving socio-economic scenario, the Ministry of Home 
Affairs vide Order dated 09.06.1983 constituted a 
Commission under the Chairmanship of Justice R.S. 
Sarkaria with Shri B. Sivaraman and Dr. S.R. Sen 
having due regard to the framework of the Constitution. 
At this stage, reference to Section 5, Chapter II – 
Legislative Relations of the Report of the Sarkaria 
Commission (“Sarkaria Commission Report”) may be of 
assistance: 

 Etc. 
 
“2.5.21 In every Constitutional system having 
two levels of government with demarcated 
jurisdiction, contents respecting power are 
inevitable. A law passed by a State legislature on 
a matter assigned to it under the Constitution 
though otherwise valid, may impinge upon the 
competence 
of 
the 
Union 
or 
vice 
versa. 
Simultaneous operation side-by-side of two 
inconsistent laws, each of equal validity, will be 
an absurdity. The rule of Federal Supremacy is a 
technique to avoid such absurdity, resolve 
conflicts and ensure harmony between the Union 
and State laws. This principle, therefore, is 
indispensable for the successful functioning of 
any federal or quasi-federal Constitution. It is 
indeed the kingpin of the federal; system. “Draw 
it out, the entire system falls to pieces” 
2.5.22 If the principles of Union Supremacy are 
excluded from Articles 246 and 254, it is not 
difficult to imagine its deleterious results. There 
will be every possibility of our two-tier political 
system being stultified by internecine strife, legal 
chaos and confusion caused by a host of 
conflicting laws, much to the bewilderment of the 
common citizen. Integrated legislative policy and 
uniformity on basic issues of common Union-
State concern will be stymied. The federal 
principle of unity in diversity will be very much a 
casualty. The extreme proposal that the power of 
Parliament to legislate on a Concurrent topic 
should be subject to the prior concurrence of the 
States, would, in effect, invert the principle of 
Union Supremacy and convert it into one of State 
Supremacy in the Concurrent sphere. The very 
object of putting certain matters in the Concurrent 
List is to enable the Union Legislature to ensure 
uniformity in laws on their main aspects 
throughout the country. The proposal in question 
will, in effect, frustrate that object. The State 

 Etc. 
 
Legislatures because of their territorially limited 
jurisdictions, 
are 
inherently 
incapable 
of 
ensuring such uniformity. It is only the Union, 
whose legislative jurisdiction extends throughout 
the territory of India, which can perform this pre-
eminent role. The argument that the States 
should have legislative paramountcy over the 
Union is basically unsound. It involves a negation 
of the elementary truth that the 'whole' is greater 
than the 'part'.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
As the paragraphs extracted above elucidate, the 
Commission was of the firm view that the principles of 
Union Supremacy cannot be undermined from Articles 
246 and 254. While the immediate paragraph is 
concerned with legislative actions taken under the List 
III - Concurrent List, they provide us a beneficial lens to 
both the importance of Union supremacy in matters that 
demand national uniformity and the Commission’s 
following discussion on “Mines and Minerals” in Chapter 
XIII.” 
 
29. Constitutional law is mainly concerned with the basic 
features or the framework of distribution of powers between the 
different organs of the State; between the Union and its units 
and between the State and the citizens. But there is something 
in a Constitution that is even more primordial than the structure 
and the features. These are the ideals on which the founding 
parents, in their wisdom and sagacity, built the entire edifice of 
the Constitution itself. It is all important that this edifice is not 

 Etc. dislodged while attempting to dynamically interpret the 
Constitution. These Constitutional ideals are irreducible and 
underpin the survival and success of constitutional order and a 
concordial society. Federalism is one such ideal where the 
Constitution defines a federal structure with a unitary spirit in 
Article 246 read with the three Lists of the Seventh Schedule of 
the Constitution. 
Conclusions on interplay of legislative Entries: 
30. In view of the aforesaid discussion, my conclusions on the 
interplay of the legislative Entries under consideration are as 
under: 
I. 
The field of legislation comprised in Entry 8 – List II is 
carved out of Entry 24 – List II. 
Thus, the subject relating to “intoxicating liquors”, that 
is to say, the production, manufacture, possession, 
transport, purchase and sale of “intoxicating liquors” 
being a specific subject is taken out of the general subject 
of “industries” under Entry 24 – List II. 
II. 
As a result, Entry 52 – List I or any law made under that 
Entry by the Parliament cannot intrude or trench upon 

 Etc. any law made by the State Legislatures under Entry 8 – 
List II. 
Thus, the Parliament cannot take under its control the 
subject pertaining to “intoxicating liquors” under any 
law, such as, IDRA made under Entry 52 – List I. 
Therefore, the 
subject “intoxicating liquors” falls 
exclusively within the domain of the State Legislatures 
which also have the obligation to prevent “industrial 
alcohol” being converted into “intoxicating liquors” as an 
abuse and, therefore, pass legislations or take State 
action in that regard having regard to Article 47 of the 
Constitution of India. 
III. 
Entry 33(a) – List III (Concurrent List) and any law made 
or to be made by the State Legislatures under the said 
Entry is subject to Parliamentary law made either under 
Entry 52 – List I or under Entry 33(a) – List III in terms 
of the first part and second part of Article 254(1) 
respectively. 
Thus, if any law has been made by the Parliament by 
virtue of Entry 52 – List I, such as, the IDRA and there is 

 Etc. an intention to occupy the field, the State law would be 
subject to the doctrine of occupied field. Thus, Section 
18G of the IDRA which has been made by virtue of Entry 
52 – List I thereof would prevail on the basis of the 
aforesaid doctrine. Consequently, it is held that issuance 
of a notified order under Section 18G of the IDRA is 
neither a sine qua non nor is it a condition precedent for 
the State Legislatures to restrain exercise of powers 
under Entry 33(a) – List III. In other words, the mere 
insertion of Section 18G to the IDRA implies that the 
Parliament has intended to occupy the field demarcated 
under the aforesaid provision. Also, a notified order 
when issued by the Central Government under Section 
18G of the IDRA cannot be questioned in any Court of 
law. This also indicates that the doctrine of occupied field 
applies to the said Section vis-à-vis a scheduled industry 
under the IDRA. 
IV. 
If the Parliament has made a law under Entry 52 – List I 
and intends to occupy the whole field then the State 
Legislatures are denuded of their powers and therefore, 

 Etc. they would lack legislative competence to enact a law 
under Entry 33(a) – List III. 
In the context of “industrial alcohol” and in terms of Item 
26 of the First Schedule of the IDRA i.e. “Fermentation 
Industries”, it is only the Central Government which has 
the powers to act under Section 18G of the said Act. So 
long as an industry is a scheduled industry under the 
IDRA and Section 18G of the said Act remains on the 
statute book, the State Legislatures are denuded of their 
powers to pass a legislation or to take any action in 
respect of the products of a scheduled industry under 
Entry 33(a) – List III. 
Effect of overruling Synthetics and Chemicals (7J): 
31. The judgment of this Court in Synthetics and Chemicals 
(7J) has held the field since 1989 for three and a half decades. 
The doubts which have arisen regarding the said judgment 
subsequently have led to the reference to a larger Bench. On re-
considering the judgment in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) in 
light of the arguments advanced before this nine-Judge bench 
and in the backdrop of the constitutional Entries in the three 

 Etc. 
 
Lists, I find that except for a clarification and deletion of the 
words “both potable and” in paragraph 84 of AIR version of the 
Report, the said judgment would not call for any intervention. 
The reasons for saying so can be stated as under: 
Firstly, the judgment has held the field for three 
and a half decades on certain concrete ideas pertaining 
to liquors as part of “Fermentation Industries”, which is 
a scheduled industry, and that part which is excluded 
from the aforesaid scheduled industry. This is based on 
the interplay of Entries in Lists I and II. 
The judgment in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) 
has crystallised the concepts of “intoxicating liquors” 
and “industrial alcohol” which are clearly distinguished 
in legislations of the State and in administration or 
governance for several decades on the basis of 
constitutional 
demarcation 
of 
legislative 
entries. 
Consequently, it held that “Fermentation Industries” is 
a controlled industry and I have now clarified that it does 

 Etc. not take within its ambit “intoxicating liquors” or potable 
alcohol. 
The judgment in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) 
correctly held on a conspectus reading of Entry 8 – List 
II, Entry 6 - List II and Article 47 that State Legislatures 
have the competence to ensure that “industrial alcohol” 
or non-potable alcohol is not diverted and misused as a 
substitute for potable alcohol. 
Secondly, the judgment has correctly considered 
the significance of insertion of Section 18G to the IDRA 
which is a Parliamentary Law made under Entry 52 – 
List I and the consequences that follow in light of the 
doctrine of occupied field in the context of “Fermentation 
Industries”, a scheduled industry, by bearing in mind 
the first part of Article 254(1) of the Constitution. 
Thirdly, the reasons assigned in Synthetics and 
Chemicals (7J) for invoking the doctrine of occupied 
field in the context of “Fermentation Industries” and in 
the context of Section 18G of the IDRA would equally 

 Etc. apply to all other scheduled industries under the said 
Act. Any interference with the said legal position would 
have a cascading effect on other scheduled industries 
thereby giving legislative competence in respect of all 
scheduled industries to the States under Entry 33(a) – 
List III. This would result in multiple States as well as 
the Union having powers to make laws which would lead 
to the scheduled industries under IDRA pale into 
insignificance. This would defeat the purpose of Entry 
52 – List I and the laws made thereunder; such as IDRA. 
Fourthly, the critical importance of scheduled 
industries in the Indian economy must not be lost sight 
of. The object and purpose of Entry 52 – List I and 
passing of laws on the strength of the said Entry by the 
Parliament taking over control of certain industries by a 
declaration made by law as expedient in the public 
interest, is a factor which cannot be lost sight of while 
answering the reference made to this Bench in the form 
of various questions raised. This aspect has been borne 

 Etc. in mind in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) while 
deciding the issues raised therein. 
Fifthly, if the judgment in Synthetics and 
Chemicals (7J) is overruled then all State legislatures 
can also make laws under Entry 33(a) – List III in respect 
of scheduled industries. This would result in IDRA made 
under Entry 52 – List I and Entry 52 – List I itself losing 
significance as the object and purpose of taking control 
of certain industries by insertion of the said industries 
as scheduled industries under the said Act would be 
defeated. 
Sixthly, if industries of critical importance to the 
Indian economy which are scheduled industries under 
the IDRA which are under the control of the Union by a 
declaration made by Parliament by law are allowed to be 
legislated upon by the State legislatures, the whole 
object of taking control of such industries by the Union 
for ensuring uniformity in their development and for 
ensuring the object and purpose of the IDRA would be 

 Etc. defeated. This would result in a haphazard development 
of such scheduled industries in the country. For 
instance, if “industrial alcohol” is read as coming within 
the scope and ambit of Entry 8 – List II then it would be 
excluded from the scheduled industry. Such a state of 
affairs would not be conducive to the economy as the 
scheduled industries such as “Fermentation Industries”, 
minus potable alcohol play a significant role in the 
Indian economy. 
Seventhly, the interpretation of the constitutional 
Entries and the provisions of the Constitution must be 
so made bearing in mind the intentions of the framers of 
the Constitution and the nature and structure of the 
Indian economy and the need for a uniform development 
throughout the country of certain industries which have 
been taken control of by the Union. This approach has 
been adopted in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J). 
Eighthly, the principle of federal balance must yield 
to the doctrine of Parliamentary supremacy in certain 

 Etc. areas such as when laws are made under Entry 52 or 
Entry 54 or Entry 7 – List I such as in the present cases. 
This is because of the unique manner in which Article 
246 of the Constitution is worded and the division of 
legislative subjects between the Parliament and the State 
legislatures, having regard to the unique federal 
structure in India with the balance tipping in favour of 
the Union in certain niche areas of legislation and 
governance. 
Ninthly, the Amendment Act, 2016 has brought 
much needed clarity on the issue and is the correct 
position of law compatible with the scheme of legislative 
competence as under our Constitution. I have already 
held that merely because “industrial alcohol” can be 
easily manufactured into or misused to become 
“intoxicating liquors” would not grant States the 
competence to wholly regulate “industrial alcohol”. State 
legislatures only have legislative competence over what 
is “intoxicating liquors” as a beverage. Therefore, the 
judgment in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) is good law 

 Etc. and was most correct in postulating that State 
legislatures will only have the competence to prevent 
misuse in interest of public health. 
For the aforesaid reasons, I am of the view that although 
the judgment in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) calls for only a 
clarification, it does not require any overruling. 
My answers to the questions formulated: 
32. Consequently, the questions formulated are accordingly 
answered as under: 
Ques.1. Does Section 2 of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951, have any impact on the field 
covered by Section 18G of the said Act or Entry 33(a) of 
List III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution? 
Ans.: 
Entry 33(a) – List III has to be read in the context of Entry 
52 – List I. IDRA is relatable to Entry 52 – List I. Section 
2 of the IDRA has a nexus and is connected with Section 
18G of the said Act. Therefore, Entry 33(a) – List III is 
impacted by Section 2 read with Section 18G of the IDRA. 

 Etc. 
 
Ques. 2. Does Section 18G of the aforesaid Act fall under Entry 
52 of List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, 
or is it covered by Entry 33(a) of List III thereof? 
Ans.: 
Section 18G of the IDRA is directly relatable to Entry 52 
– List I which has to be read in the context of Section 2 
of IDRA. The doctrine of occupied field applies and the 
legislative field under Entry 33(a) – List III is covered by 
the said provision on the basis of doctrine of occupied 
field under first part of Article 254 of the Constitution. 
 
Ques.3. In the absence of any notified order by the Central 
Government under Section 18G of the above Act, is the 
power of the State to legislate in respect of matters 
enumerated in Entry 33 of List III ousted? 
Ans.: 
Yes, even in the absence of any notified order by the 
Central Government under Section 18G of the IDRA, the 
power of the States to legislate in respect of matters 
enumerated in Entry 33(a) – List III is ousted on the basis 
of the doctrine of occupied field as aforestated. 

 Etc. 
 
On this aspect, the judgment of this Court in 
Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) is correct. 
 
Ques.4. Does the mere enactment of Section 18G of the above 
Act, give rise to a presumption that it was the intention 
of the Central Government to cover the entire field in 
respect of Entry 33(a) - List III so as to oust the States' 
competence to legislate in respect of matters relating 
thereto? 
Ans.: 
Yes, the mere enactment of section 18G of the IDRA gives 
rise to a presumption that it was the intention of the 
Parliament and Central Government to cover the entire 
field in respect of Entry 33(a) - List III so as to oust the 
States' competence to legislate in respect of matters 
relating thereto. 
Answer given to question (3) above is reiterated here. 
 
Ques.5. Does the mere presence of Section 18G of the above Act, 
oust the State's power to legislate in regard to matters 
falling under Entry 33(a) of List III? 

 Etc. 
 
Ans.: 
Yes, the mere presence of Section 18G of the IDRA would 
oust the State's power to legislate in regard to matters 
falling under Entry 33(a) - List III. The doctrine of 
occupied field applies. 
 
Ques.6. Does the interpretation given in Synthetics and 
Chemicals case, (1990) in respect of Section 
18G of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1951, correctly state the law regarding the States' power 
to regulate “industrial alcohol” as a product of the 
scheduled industry under Entry 33(a) of List III of the 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution in view of Clause 
(a) thereof? 
Ans.: Yes, the interpretation given in Synthetics and 
Chemicals case, (1990) in respect of Section 
18G of the IDRA correctly states the law. Even with 
regard to “industrial alcohol” as a product which falls 
within “Fermentation Industries” in respect of which the 
Union has assumed control, in the absence of a notified 
order, the competence of the State to act under Entry 33 
- List III is denuded. 

 Etc. 
 
My answers to the conclusions of learned Chief Justice: 
33. His Lordship, the Chief Justice of India has overruled the 
judgment in Synthetics and Chemicals (7J) and has come to 
the following conclusions and my answers to the same are in a 
tabular form as under: 
Point(s) 
Conclusions arrived at by 
Hon’ble the CJI 
My Conclusions 
a. 
Entry 8 of List II of the 
Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution is both an 
industry-based entry and 
a product-based entry. 
The words that follow the 
expression “that is to say” 
in the Entry are not 
exhaustive of its contents. 
It includes the regulation 
of everything from the raw 
materials 
to 
the 
consumption 
of 
‘intoxicating liquor’; 
In my view, Entry 8 – 
List 
II 
deals 
with 
“intoxicating 
liquors”. 
The misuse, diversion or 
abuse 
of 
“industrial 
alcohol” as “intoxicating 
liquors” 
can 
also 
be 
controlled 
and 
prevented under Entry 8 
– List II by the State 
Legislatures 
having 
regard to Article 47 of 
the Constitution. It is 
also made clear that the 
IDRA which has been 
enacted 
by 
the 
Parliament by virtue of 
Entry 52 – List I has 
taken 
control 
of 
“Fermentation 
Industries” 
as 
a 
scheduled 
industry. 
Such 
“Fermentation 
Industries” 
would 
exclude 
“intoxicating 
liquors”. 

 Etc. b. 
Parliament cannot occupy 
the field of the entire 
industry 
merely 
by 
issuing 
a 
declaration 
under Entry 52 of List I. 
The 
State 
Legislature’s 
competence under Entry 
24 of List II is denuded 
only to the extent of the 
field covered by the law of 
Parliament under Entry 
52 of List I; 
 
Parliament can occupy 
the field of the entire 
industry 
by 
merely 
issuing 
a 
declaration 
under Entry 52 – List I 
and 
the 
State 
Legislature’s 
competence under Entry 
24 – List II is denuded to 
the field of the entire 
industry and specifically 
to the extent of the field 
covered by the law of 
Parliament under Entry 
52 – List I. c. 
Parliament does not have 
the legislative competence 
to enact a law taking 
control of the industry of 
intoxicating liquor covered 
by Entry 8 of List II in 
exercise 
of 
the 
power 
under Article 246 read 
with Entry 52 of List I; 
 
I agree. d. 
The 
judgments 
of 
the 
Bombay High Court in FN 
Balsara 
v. 
State 
of 
Bombay 
(supra), 
this 
Court 
in 
FN 
Balsara 

and 
Southern 
Pharmaceuticals (supra) 
did not limit the meaning 
of 
the 
expression 
‘intoxicating liquor’ to its 
popular meaning, that is, 
alcoholic beverages that 
produce intoxication. All 
the 
three 
judgments 
interpreted the expression 
The 
context 
of 
the 
controversy 
must 
be 
borne in mind in the said 
cases. The aforesaid 
decisions in substance 
limited the meaning of 
the 
expression 
“intoxicating liquors” to 
its popular meaning i.e. 
“alcoholic 
beverages” 
that 
produce 
intoxication. Therefore, 
in 
the 
context 
of 
prohibition 
of 
“intoxicating liquor” as a 

 Etc. to cover alcohol that could 
be noxiously used to the 
detriment of health; 
 
beverage, 
there 
could 
not 
have 
been 
prohibition 
of 
production 
of 
alcohol 
used for medicinal and 
toilet preparation as well 
as “industrial alcohol” or 
non-potable alcohol. e. 
The 
expression 
‘intoxicating 
liquor’ 
in 
Entry 8 has not acquired 
a legislative meaning on 
an application of the test 
laid 
down 
in 
Ganon 
Dunkerley (supra); 
The 
expression 
“intoxicating liquor” in 
Entry 8 has acquired a 
legislative and judicial 
meaning 
over 
the 
decades 
as 
per 
the 
discussion above. f. 
The study of the evolution 
of the legislative entries on 
alcohol indicates that the 
use of the expressions 
“intoxicating liquor” and 
“alcoholic 
liquor 
for 
human consumption” in 
the Seventh Schedule was 
a matter well-thought of. 
It also indicates that the 
members 
of 
the 
Constituent 
Assembly 
were aware of use of the 
variants of alcohol as a 
raw 
material 
in 
the 
production 
of 
multiple 
products; 
 
The 
members 
of 
the 
Constituent 
Assembly 
were clear in what they 
envisaged 
within 
the 
scope and ambit of the 
expression “intoxicating 
liquors” in Entry 8 – List 
II. This is also evident 
from Item 26 of the First 
Schedule of the IDRA. 
“Intoxicating liquors” is 
only a segment of the 
“Fermentation 
Industries”, 
namely, 
potable alcohol. There 
was no intention on the 
part of the members of 
the 
Constituent 
Assembly to read within 
the 
expression 
“intoxicating 
liquors” 
non-potable 
or 
“industrial 
alcohol”. 
Further, in order to have 

 Etc. a consistency between 
what 
was 
envisaged 
under Entry 84 – List I 
and Entry 51 – List II in 
the context of alcoholic 
liquors 
for 
human 
consumption, the taxing 
Entry in List II which is 
within 
the 
legislative 
competence 
of 
the 
States 
follows 
the 
regulatory 
Entry 
in 
Entry 

– 
List 
II. 
Therefore, the use of the 
expression 
“industrial 
alcohol” or non-potable 
alcohol 
in 
Synthetics 
and Chemicals (7J) was 
only to crystallise all 
variants of alcohol which 
were non-potable and to 
distinguish 
the 
same 
from 
potable 
alcohol 
meant only for human 
consumption 
as 
a 
beverage. g. 
Entry 8 of List II is based 
on public interest. It seeks 
to enhance the scope of 
the entry beyond potable 
alcohol. This is inferable 
from the use of the phrase 
‘intoxicating’ and other 
accompanying words in 
the 
Entry. 
Alcohol 
is 
inherently 
a 
noxious 
substance that is prone to 
misuse affecting public 
health at large. Entry 8 
The entire controversy 
cannot be viewed from 
the point of view of 
alcohol being used as a 
raw material and final 
product such as hand 
sanitizer 
containing 
alcohol. The potential 
misuse of alcohol cannot 
be 
the 
basis 
for 
interpreting 
an 
Entry 
such as Entry 8 – List II. 
Ultimately, 
the 

 Etc. covers alcohol that could 
be used noxiously to the 
detriment 
of 
public 
health. 
This 
includes 
alcohol such as rectified 
spirit, ENA and denatured 
spirit which are used as 
raw 
materials 
in 
the 
production 
of 
potable 
alcohol 
and 
other 
products. However, it does 
not 
include 
the 
final 
product (such as a hand 
sanitiser) that contains 
alcohol since such an 
interpretation 
will 
substantially diminish the 
scope of multiple other 
legislative entries; 
“Fermentation 
Industries” have to be 
borne in mind which 
takes within its canvas 
only 
non-potable 
/“industrial 
alcohol”. 
The 
aspect 
of 
public 
health 
having 
a 
corelation to Entry 8 – 
List 
II 
dealing 
with 
“intoxicating liquor” and 
the misuse of alcohol 
cannot be a guide while 
interpreting the content 
of the said Entry and 
therefore, its scope and 
ambit being amplified 
beyond what it really 
envisages as a field of 
legislation for the States 
to legislate upon. h. 
The 
judgment 
in 
Synthetics (7J) (supra) is 
overruled in terms of this 
judgment; 
 
The 
judgment 
in 
Synthetics 
and 
Chemicals (7J) need not 
be overruled in relation 
to Section 18G of the 
IDRA and it continues to 
be 
good 
law 
in 
the 
context 
of 
what 
is 
comprised 
in 
the 
expression 
“industrial 
alcohol” 
and 
“intoxicating 
liquors” 
except what has been 
clarified above in Entry 8 
– List II. i. 
Item 

of 
the 
First 
Schedule to the IDRA 
must be read as excluding 
Item 26 of the First 
Schedule of the IDRA 
must be read excluding 

 Etc. the industry “intoxicating 
liquor”, as interpreted in 
this judgement; 
 
only what is contained in 
the 
expression 
“intoxicating liquors” as 
interpreted 
above 
in 
Entry 8 – List II. j. 
The correctness of the 
judgment in Tika Ramji 

on 
the 
interpretation 
of 
word 
‘industry’ as it occurs in 
the 
Legislative 
entries 
does 
not 
fall 
for 
determination 
in 
this 
reference; and 
In 
my 
opinion, 
Tika 
Ramji is held to be not 
good law insofar as the 
requirement of issuance 
of a notified order as a 
condition precedent for 
the field to be occupied, 
has 
been 
mandated 
therein. k. 
The 
issue 
of 
whether 
Section 18G of the IDRA 
covers the field under 
Entry 33(a) of List III does 
not arise for adjudication 
in view of the finding that 
denatured 
alcohol 
is 
covered by Entry 8 of List 
II.” 
Denatured 
alcohol 
belongs to the family of 
“industrial alcohol” and 
therefore, Section 18G 
of the IDRA has a bearing 
on 
the 
said 
product. 
Section 
18G 
occupies 
the field under Entry 
33(a) – List III and, 
thereby, only Parliament 
is competent to legislate 
on all articles or class of 
articles 
related 
to 
a 
scheduled industry i.e. 
“Fermentation 
Industries”. 

34. Reference is answered in the above terms. 
35. The Registry to place the matters before Hon’ble the Chief 
Justice of India for seeking orders for being listed before the 
appropriate Bench. 

 Etc. 
 
36. I must place on record my sincere appreciation to the 
learned Attorney General, learned Solicitor General and their 
teams, learned senior counsel appearing for the respective 
parties, learned instructing counsel and learned counsel for the 
respective parties for their valuable assistance to this Bench. 

………………………………J. 
 (B.V. NAGARATHNA) 
 
New Delhi; 
October 23, 2024.