IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

SUHAS CHAKMA 
 
 PETITIONER(s) 

VERSUS 
 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS. 

 RESPONDENT(s) 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
K.V. Viswanathan, J. 
Brief Facts: 
1. 
The present Writ Petition, under Article 32 of the Constitution of 
India, was filed primarily for issuance an appropriate Writ, Order or 
direction directing the respondents Union of India, States and the Union 
Territories to ensure that no prisoner is subjected to torture, cruel, 
inhumane and degrading treatment or punishment because of living in 
overcrowded and unhygienic conditions in jail. It also espouses the 
cause that all persons deprived of their liberty are entitled to be treated 
with humanity, and with respect for the inherent dignity and a prayer 

was made for creating a permanent mechanism to decongest the 
overcrowded prisons. 
2. 
When the Writ Petition came up for hearing on 22.04.2024, this 
Court appointed Shri Vijay Hansaria, learned Senior Advocate as 
Amicus Curiae. Thereafter, on 09.05.2024, Shri K. Parameshwar, 
learned Senior Advocate (as Amicus Curiae) and Ms. Rashmi 
Nandakumar, learned counsel for the National Legal Services 
Authority (NALSA) were requested to assist the Court alongside the 
already appointed Amicus Curiae. On that day Shri Vijay Hansaria, 
learned Amicus Curiae tendered to Court the format of a letter to be 
submitted by the Jail Visiting Lawyers (JVLs) regarding information 
to convicts on free legal aid. Ms. Rashmi Nandakumar, learned counsel 
was asked to take instructions from NALSA in this regard. Thereafter, 
in its order of 17.05.2024, broadly two issues were identified- one 
pertaining to Open Correctional Institutions and the other with regard 
to modalities for visitation by lawyers in jail so as to ensure free legal 
aid to the deserving prison inmates. On 17.05.2024, Ms. Rashmi 
Nandakumar, learned counsel informed the Court that the format of 
letter initially handed over by the learned Amicus has been slightly 

modified in consultation with NALSA and the said modified letter to 
be filled by the JVLs were taken on record and approved. 
3. 
By a note submitted by learned counsel - Ms. Rashmi 
Nandakumar on 15.07.2024, it was set out that the letter, as approved 
in the order of 17.05.2024, was circulated by the NALSA to all the State 
Legal Services Authorities (SLSAs) and a direction was issued to them 
to collate the data received by JVLs and compile the information as per 
the format prescribed by NALSA. Details of responses received till 
15th July, 2024 were also set out and directions were issued to other 
States to file their responses. When the matter was taken up on 
09.09.2024, a detailed note dated 06.09.2024 was placed on record by 
Ms. Rashmi Nandakumar, learned counsel on the aspect of access to 
free legal aid for the deserving prison inmates. This judgment deals 
with the aspect of access to free legal aid for prison inmates. The issue 
of “Open Correctional Institutions” will be heard and considered 
separately by the Court. 
4. 
We have heard Mr. Vijay Hansaria learned Amicus Curiate and 
Ms. Rashmi Nandakumar, learned counsel. We have considered the 
detailed note submitted by the NALSA. 

Constitutional Goal 
5. 
Article 39-A of the Directive Principles of State Policy which 
talks of equal justice and free legal aid reads as under: 
39-A. Equal justice and free legal aid.- 
The State shall secure that the operation of the legal system 
promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in 
particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or 
schemes or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities for 
securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of 
economic or other disabilities. 
 
Relevant Judicial Pronouncements 
6. 
This Court in Hussainara Khatoon and Others (IV) v. Home 
Secretary, State of Bihar, Patna (1980), held as under: 
“6. …. It is not uncommon to find that undertrial prisoners who 
are produced before the Magistrates are unaware of their right 
to obtain release on bail and on account of their poverty, they 
are unable to engage a lawyer who would apprise them of their 
right to apply for bail and help them to secure release on bail by 
making a proper application to the Magistrate in that behalf. 
Sometimes the Magistrates also refuse to release the undertrial 
prisoners produced before them on their personal bond but insist 
on monetary bail with sureties, which by reason of their poverty 
the undertrial prisoners are unable to furnish and which, 
therefore, effectively shuts out for them any possibility of 
release from pre-trial detention… 
We do not think it is possible to reach the benefits of the legal 
process to the poor, to protect them against injustice and to 
secure to them their constitutional and statutory rights unless 
there is a nation-wide legal service programme to provide free 
legal services to them. It is now well settled, as a result of the 
decision of this Court in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India 
[(1978) ] that when Article 21 provides that no 
person shall be deprived of his life or liberty except in 
accordance with the procedure established by law, it is not 

enough that there should be some semblance of procedure 
provided by law, but the procedure under which a person may 
be deprived of his life or liberty should be “reasonable, fair and 
just”. Now, a procedure which does not make available legal 
services to an accused person who is too poor to afford a lawyer 
and who would, therefore, have to go through the trial without 
legal assistance, cannot possibly be regarded as “reasonable, 
fair and just”. It is an essential ingredient of reasonable, fair and 
just procedure to a prisoner who is to seek his liberation through 
the court's process that he should have legal services available 
to him….. 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
Further, this Court in Khatri and Others (2) v. State of Bihar and 
Others, (1981), para 6, held as under: 
6. But even this right to free legal services would be illusory for 
an indigent accused unless the Magistrate or the Sessions Judge 
before whom he is produced informs him of such right. 
….It would make a mockery of legal aid if it were to be left to 
a poor ignorant and illiterate accused to ask for free legal 
services. Legal aid would become merely a paper promise and 
it would fail of its purpose. The Magistrate or the Sessions Judge 
before whom the accused appears must be held to be under an 
obligation to inform the accused that if he is unable to engage 
the services of a lawyer on account of poverty or indigence, he 
is entitled to obtain free legal services at the cost of the State. 
Unfortunately, the Judicial Magistrates failed to discharge this 
obligation in the case of the blinded prisoners and they merely 
stated that no legal representation was asked for by the blinded 
prisoners and hence none was provided. We would, therefore, 
direct the Magistrates and Sessions Judges in the country to 
inform every accused who appears before them and who is not 
represented by a lawyer on account of his poverty or indigence 
that he is entitled to free legal services at the cost of the State. 
Unless he is not willing to take advantage of the free legal 
services provided by the State, he must be provided legal 
representation at the cost of the State…..” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

7. 
This Court has held that free legal assistance for poor and indigent 
at the cost of the State is a fundamental right of a person under Article 
21 even if the person does not seek legal assistance on his own. In Suk 
Das v. Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh, (1986), this 
Court held as under.- 
“6. But the question is whether this fundamental right could 
lawfully be denied to the appellant if he did not apply for free 
legal aid. Is the exercise of this fundamental right conditioned 
upon the accused applying for free legal assistance so that if he 
does not make an application for free legal assistance the trial 
may lawfully proceed without adequate legal representation 
being afforded to him? Now it is common knowledge that about 
70 per cent of the people living in rural areas are illiterate and 
even more than that percentage of the people are not aware of 
the rights conferred upon them by law. Even literate people do 
not know what are their rights and entitlements under the law. 
It is this absence of legal awareness which is responsible for the 
deception, exploitation and deprivation of rights and benefits 
from which the poor suffer in this land. Their legal needs always 
stand to become crisis-oriented because their ignorance 
prevents them from anticipating legal troubles and approaching 
a lawyer for consultation and advice in time and their poverty 
magnifies the impact of the legal troubles and difficulties when 
they come. Moreover, because of their ignorance and illiteracy, 
they cannot become self-reliant: they cannot even help 
themselves. The law ceases to be their protector because they 
do not know that they are entitled to the protection of the law 
and they can avail of the legal service programme for putting an 
end to their exploitation and winning their rights…” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
8. 
In Madhav Hayawadanrao Hoskot v. State of Maharashtra, 
(1978), this Court, while holding that right to counsel for a 

prisoner is a fundamental right traceable to Article 21, held that 
procedural safeguards are the indispensable essence of liberty. This 
Court held as under:- 
“14. The other ingredient of fair procedure to a prisoner, who 
has to seek his liberation through the court process is lawyer's 
services. Judicial justice, with procedural intricacies, legal 
submissions and critical examination of evidence, leans upon 
professional expertise; and a failure of equal justice under the 
law is on the cards where such supportive skill is absent for one 
side. Our judicature, moulded by Anglo-American models and 
our judicial process, engineered by kindred legal technology, 
compel the collaboration of lawyer-power for steering the 
wheels of equal justice under the law. Free legal services to the 
needy is part of the English criminal justice system. And the 
American jurist, Prof. Vance of Yale, sounded sense for India 
too when he said: [ Justice and Reform, Earl Johnson, Jr. p. 11] 
 
“What does it profit a poor and ignorant man that he is 
equal to his strong antagonist before the law if there is no 
one to inform him what the law is? Or that the courts are 
open to him on the same terms as to all other persons when 
he has not the wherewithal to pay the admission fee?” 
 
xx xx xx 
 
25. If a prisoner sentenced to imprisonment, is virtually unable 
to exercise his constitutional and statutory right of appeal, 
inclusive of special leave to appeal, for want of legal assistance, 
there is implicit in the Court under Article 142, read with 
Articles 21 and 39-A of the Constitution, power to assign 
counsel for such imprisoned individual “for doing complete 
justice”. This is a necessary incident of the right of appeal 
conferred by the Code and allowed by Article 136 of the 
Constitution. The inference is inevitable that this is a State's 
duty and not Government's charity. Equally affirmative is the 
implication that while legal services must be free to the 
beneficiary, the lawyer himself has to be reasonably 
remunerated for his services….. 

26. In the present petition, the party, though preferred legal aid 
by the court, preferred to argue himself. Even so we uphold the 
right to counsel not in the permissive sense of Article 22(1) and 
its wider amplitude but in the peremptory sense of Article 21 
confined to prison situations. 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
9. 
In Sunil Batra (II) v. Delhi Administration., (1980) 
in Para 30 and 78(3), this Cout held as under.- 
“30. We, therefore, affirm that where the rights of a prisoner, 
either under the Constitution or under other law, are violated the 
writ power of the court can and should run to his rescue. There 
is a warrant for this vigil. The court process casts the convict 
into the prison system and the deprivation of his freedom is not 
a blind penitentiary affliction but a belighted institutionalisation 
geared to a social good. The court has a continuing 
responsibility to ensure that the constitutional purpose of the 
deprivation is not defeated by the prison administration…. 
 
78(3). Lawyers nominated by the District Magistrate, Sessions 
Judge, High Court and the Supreme Court will be given all 
facilities for interviews, visits and confidential communication 
with prisoners subject to discipline and security considerations. 
This has roots in the visitatorial and supervisory judicial role. 
The lawyers so designated shall be bound to make periodical 
visits and record and report to the concerned court results which 
have relevance to legal grievances.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
The Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 
10. To give effect to the constitutional goal under Article 39-A, the 
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 was enacted. As the preamble to 
the Act sets out, the Act was to constitute legal services authorities to 
provide free and competent legal services to the weaker sections of 

society, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied 
to any citizen by reason of any economic or other disabilities. Under 
Section 3 of the Act, the National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) 
is constituted. Under Section 4, the functions of the NALSA are set out 
and the relevant ones for the purpose of the present issue are (a) (b) (c) 
and (i). They are extracted herein below. 
“4. Functions of the Central Authority.— 
The Central Authority shall perform all or any of the following 
functions, namely: 
(a) lay down policies and principles for making legal services 
available under the provisions of this Act; 
(b) frame the most effective and economical schemes for the 
purpose of making legal services available under the provisions 
of this Act; 
(c) utilise the funds at its disposal and make appropriate 
allocations of funds to the State Authorities and District 
Authorities; 
(i) monitor and evaluate implementation of the legal aid 
programmes at periodic intervals and provide for independent 
evaluation of programmes and schemes implemented in whole 
or in part by funds provided under this Act;” 
 
Section 6 and 9 deal with the constitution of State Legal Services 
Authority and the District Legal Services Authority respectively. 
Section 12 of the Act is a significant provision. Section 12, inter alia, 
sets out that every person in custody who has to file or defend a case 
shall be entitled to legal services under the Act. Section 13 mandates 
that persons who satisfy all or any of the criteria specified in Section 

12 shall be entitled to receive legal services provided that the concerned 
authority is satisfied that such persons have a prima facie case to 
prosecute or to defend. Section 14 speaks of grants by Central 
Government and Section 15 speaks of the National Legal Aid Fund and 
the application thereof. In exercise of its power NALSA has been 
periodically laying down the policies and principles for making legal 
services available under the provisions of the Act and framing schemes 
and providing for utilization of funds. 
NALSA-Standard Operating Procedures on Access to Legal Aid 
Services to Prisoners and Functioning of the Prison Legal Aid 
Clinics - 2022 
11. As the note submitted by the learned counsel indicate, furtherance 
of this function NALSA has formulated the SOP on access to legal aid 
services to prisoners and functioning of the Prison Legal Aid Clinics 
(PLACs) (hereinafter referred to as NALSA SOP-2022). The NALSA 
SOP-2022 deals with (i) The setting up and functioning of the PLACs 
(ii) The purpose behind establishing the PLACs (iii) The Roles and 
responsibilities of different legal aid functionaries attached with the 
PLACs (iv) The monitoring of PLACs by DLSAs. (v) The process of 

application for legal aid and role of PLACs in facilitating appointment 
of legal aid lawyer (vi) The PLACs role in providing legal aid services 
and legal assistance to the vulnerable groups in prisons; (vii) The 
PLACs role in providing legal information to prisoners and their 
families; (viii) The PLACs role in imparting legal knowledge to 
prisoners about their rights and their grievance redressal mechanism; 
and (ix) The PLACs role in giving legal assistance for filing Jail 
Appeals before the High Courts and the Supreme Court by the convicts 
in prison. 
12. As set out in the note, the NALSA SOP-2022 enumerates the 
following functions of the PLACs:- 
“a. to ensure at all times that no prisoner is without legal 
representation at any stage of the criminal proceedings and to 
generate awareness about the same; 
b. to bridge the information gap between the prisoner and the 
Court; 
c. to facilitate communication between the prisoner and the 
lawyer, whether legal aid or private; 
d. to ensure that no person is illegally or unnecessarily detained; 
e. to ensure special needs of vulnerable groups (women, young 
offenders, mentally-ill, foreign nationals, persons from other 
states, etc.); in prisons are addressed; 
f. to collaborate with local authorities, universities, academic 
institutions and civil society organizations to further strengthen 
legal aid services for prisoners; 

g. to act as a One Stop Centre (OSC) to raise the grievances of 
the prisoners and direct the grievances to appropriate authorities 
through DLSA; and 
h. to undertake the implementation of the NALSA and SLSA 
campaigns for prisoners or any other work assigned to fulfil its 
mandate of providing legal aid services and assistance to the 
prisoners.” 
 
13. NALSA SOP-2022 also deals with the duties of the JVLs and the 
Paralegal Volunteers (PLVs). The duties of the JVLs, as set out in the 
note, are as follows:- 
“a) To identify cases eligible for release under the mandate of 
the Undertrial Review Committee (UTRC); 
b) To interact with inmates identified by the paralegal 
volunteers and provide legal advice; 
c) To draft applications and petitions for parole/juvenility/bail 
etc. for the undertrials and convicts present in the clinic; 
d) To ensure filling of legal aid application form for those who 
need legal aid lawyers and submit the same to the legal services 
authority, without any delay; 
e) To conduct legal awareness camps inside prisons including 
apprising new entrants to prison about the free legal services 
provided by Tehsil Legal Services Committee (TSLC) or Sub-
Divisional Legal Services Committee (SDLSC), District Legal 
Services Authority (DLSA), High Court Legal Services 
Committee (HCLSC) and Supreme Court Legal Services 
Committee (SCLSC); 
f) To regularly inform the inmates about the status of their cases; 
g) To communicate to the defense lawyer any pertinent 
information that an inmate has requested to be shared with 
his/her lawyer; 
h) To also represent the inmates in courts in some cases, if 
appointed by the Legal Service Institution but not otherwise; 
i) To prioritize and focus on personal interactions with the 
inmates in the PLAC during the visit and then document and 
prepare the petitions; 
j) To assist the UTRC by coordinating with the inmates and the 
courts on cases eligible for release; 

k) To follow the directions given under NALSA SOP for 
representing persons in custody; 
1) To bring into notice of DLSA about the concern of inmates 
in respect of conditions in jail; 
m) Updating information on digital platform of legal aid and 
legal aid e-prison.” 
 
The duties of the PLVs are as under: 
“a) To establish/ manage Legal Aid Clinics inside prisons, as 
prescribed; 
b) To take steps towards identification of prison inmates who 
are in need of legal assistance. This would involve reaching out 
to all prisoners whether beneficiary of legal aid or not, 
especially the new entrants; 
c) To seek permission from the prison authorities to visit the 
wards/enclosures of prisoners to ascertain that no one remains 
unrepresented; 
d) To fill out the legal aid application form and promptly send 
it to the concerned DLSA/TLSC & also ensure that the prisoners 
interact with the Jail Visiting Lawyer on his next visit to prison; 
e) To coordinate and assist the Jail Visiting Lawyers in 
providing legal advice and aid; 
f) To give updates on the proceedings in a case to the inmates; 
g) To counsel inmates and explain any legal provision 
pertaining to their case. Where there are doubts, then refer the 
case to the Jail Visiting Lawyer; 
h) To receive legal aid lawyer appointment letters, replies from 
legal service institutions and other authorities, maintain record 
and give copies to the concerned prisoner; 
i) To submit reports to the DLSA about the Undertrial Review 
Committee on cases eligible under section 436/436A Cr.P.C.; 
j) To keep track of non-production of any inmate in the Court 
as per the date given and inform the Secretary, DLSA/SDLSC 
or TLCS; 
k) To assist the prison inmate in filing any complaint or 
grievances relating to their stay in prison; and 
l) To send reminders/letters to the corresponding Legal Services 
Authority to seek information regarding status of case, name 
and contact details of the assigned legal aid lawyer.” 

14. Under Para 15 of the NALSA SOP-2022, the procedure for 
ensuring smooth filing of petitions of the convicts in High Courts and 
the Supreme Court has been outlined as follows: 
“a) As soon as the order rejecting bail or an order of conviction 
is pronounced by the Court (Magistrate Court, Sessions Court 
or High Court), a prisoner shall be informed by the PLAC 
regarding the right to bail/appeal/review/revision in the High 
Court/Supreme Court and the process of filing the same. b) Steps must be taken promptly through the PLAC to apply for 
appointment of lawyer by the High Court Legal Services 
Committee (HCLSC) or the Supreme Court Legal Services 
Committee (SCLSC), as the case may be. A record of such 
application must be made in designated register/database. c) Where copy of judgement is not available with the prisoner, 
the DLSA shall make available an extra copy of the judgement 
to the prisoner to enable filing of the petition/jail appeal. d) Upon receiving a request for legal assistance, the 
HCLSC/SCLSC must immediately appoint a lawyer to the case, 
details of whom must be duly intimated to the prisoner via the 
Prison Superintendent, as per prescribed formats provided in the 
NALSA's Handbook of Formats, 2020. e) Details of the lawyer appointed by the HCLSC/SCLSC must 
be duly noted in the register/database maintained at the PLAC. f) Regular interaction and communication between the counsel 
and the client/ convict must be ensured by SCLSC, HCLSC, 
DLSA and SLSA in order to update the beneficiary as to the 
progress of the case. Where the prisoners complain of lack of 
interaction with lawyer assigned by HCLSC/SCLSC, the DLSA 
shall intimate the same to the HCLSC/SCLSC at the earliest. g) The PLV shall provide updates to the prisoner on progress in 
his/her case. Information may be sourced directly from the 
HCLSC/SCLSC or through the relevant Court websites. h) DLSA may undertake to jointly conduct camps with 
HCLSC/SCLSC to apprise prisoners of the various remedies in 
law for bail/appeal/review/revision as well as writ remedies.” 
 
NALSA has also adopted methods to strengthen the monitoring of 
PLACs and to review their functioning. 
Statistical Data 
15. NALSA has stated that as per the information received from the 
SLSAs, there are a total of 1265 Jails (including sub jails and women 
jails), 1256 PLACs and 6663 Jail Visiting Lawyers. As of 2023-24, 
NALSA has interacted with 4,56,798 inmates and provided legal 
assistance to 3,24,867 inmates. Further, as of June, 2024, 880 appeals 
of convicts have been filed in the Sessions Courts, 1,593 appeals in the 
High Courts and as on date (that is up to 04.09.2024), 1309 convicts 
have been able to file special leave petitions in this Court. 
Legal Aid Defense Counsel System 
16. A pioneering measure adopted by NALSA since the year 2021-
22 is the introduction of the Legal Aid Defense Counsel System with a 
view to strengthen and professionalize legal services delivered. At 
present, as per the report, around 611 of the 703 districts in the country 
have the Legal Aid Defense Counsel System in place. Just as there is a 

prosecuting office for the prosecution, this is an institutionalized 
method of providing defense counsel assistance in legal aid matters. 
The Legal Aid Defense Counsel System includes dedicated, full-time 
experienced lawyers to represent the accused. The lawyers exclusively 
deal with criminal legal aid cases ensuring effective and efficient 
representation, timely and effective client consultations, effective 
monitoring of legal aid cases, professional management of legal aid 
work in criminal matters and enhance responsiveness to the litigant. 
The modified Legal Aid Defense Counsel System Scheme of 2022 
provides for the selection process of the Legal Aid Defense Counsels 
(LADCs), the number of human resources to be engaged, the 
infrastructural requirements, essential qualifications and the role of 
legal services institutions. The objective of the scheme is to (a) Provide 
qualitative and competent legal services in criminal matters to all 
eligible persons (b) To manage and implement legal aid system in a 
professional manner in criminal matters. As of 31.03.2024, the 
following are the statistics with regard to the number of Chief Legal 
Aid Counsels, number of Deputy Chief Legal Aid Counsels and the 
number of Assistant Legal Aid Counsels. 

“Till 31.03.2024, Office of LADC was set up in 611 districts 
across India. 
 
Category of LADC 
Human 
Resource 
No. of Chief Legal Aid Counsels 

No. of Deputy Chief Legal Aid 
Counsels 

No. of Assistant Legal Aid Counsels 

Total No. of Legal Aid Defence 
Counsels 

Special Campaign for Prisoners 
17. The report indicates that NALSA has time and again undertaken 
special campaigns for prisoners to ensure timely access after 
recognizing the unique challenges faced by the convicts in accessing 
justice. The objectives of the Campaign are to 
(a) Secure appellate rights of the convicts; 
(b) Ensuring that incarceration does not go beyond the period of their 
imprisonment or after remission; 
(c) To secure parole/furlough and remission rights of the convicts. To 
fully ensure the appellate rights of the convicts, NALSA with the 
assistance of the DLSA, collects data of each of the convicts from (i) 

Jail authorities (ii) Courts (iii) High Court Legal Services Committee 
(iv) Supreme Court Legal Services Committee. 
Steps are taken to ensure the communication of the status of the appeal 
filed and the next date of hearing; follow up with regard to the filing of 
appeals by the legal aid committee and the assigned counsel. 
18. After collection of data, the following categorization is made: 
“• Convicts who are not willing to file appeals/SLPs. 
• Convicts who have already filed appeals/SLPs 
through private lawyers. 
• Convicts who have not at all filed appeals/SLPs but 
want to file appeal/SLPs through Legal Services 
Institutions. 
• Convicts who have sought legal aid for filing 
appeals/SLPs but their appeals/SLPs have not been filed 
due to lack of documents or other reasons. 
• Convicts whose appeals/SLPs have been filed through 
legal services authorities but they are not aware about 
the name of their lawyers and the status of their appeals. 
• Convicts who have moved bail applications through 
Legal Services Institutions (LSIs) but are not aware 
about the status of applications. 
• Convicts who want to get their matter processed for 
parole/furlough/remission etc. but are not aware of the 
processes, and require drafting of applications for it.” 

Awareness 
19. The most important task in any legal service is spreading of its 
awareness to the needy. The status report of NALSA indicates that 
convicts were made aware about the availability of free legal services, 
availability of the right to file Appeals/SLPs and the process of filing 
the same. This guarantees and effectuates Article 21 inasmuch as for 
the convict in custody too, who is virtually incommunicado with the 
outside world, is positively made aware about his rights in the nature 
of the existence of a right of appeal and the facility available for 
availing free legal services. This brings into full play Section 341 of the 
Bhartiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, which reads as under:- 
341. Legal aid to accused at State expense in certain cases.- 
(1) Where, in a trial or appeal before a Court, the accused is not 
represented by an advocate, and where it appears to the Court 
that the accused has not sufficient means to engage an advocate, 
the Court shall assign an advocate for his defence at the expense 
of the State. 
(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the State 
Government, make rules providing for— (a) the mode of 
selecting advocates for defence under sub-section (1); (b) the 
facilities to be allowed to such advocates by the Courts; (c) the 
fees payable to such advocates by the Government, and 
generally, for carrying out the purposes of sub-section (1). 
(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that, as 
from such date as may be specified in the notification, the 
provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply in relation to 

any class of trials before other Courts in the State as they apply 
in relation to trials before Courts of Session.” 
 
Compilation and Translation of Documents. 
20. NALSA report states that steps are being taken to ensure that 
necessary documents are collected along with the custody certificate 
and 
vakalatnama. 
Translation, 
interrogation 
through 
video 
conferencing and drafting of applications are also arranged by NALSA. 
21. We are satisfied that insofar as provision of legal services are 
concerned, NALSA with the effective coordination of the SLSAs and 
DLSAs and assisting agencies are rendering yeomen service to realize 
the constitutional goal of Article 39-A. They are also striving hard for 
the effective implementation of the provisions of the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987. 
SOP- For (Under Trial Review Committees (UTRCs). 
22. While NALSA SOP-2022 dealt with the provisions of legal aid 
services to the prisoners, NALSA has a separate Standard Operating 
Procedure for the smooth functioning of the Under Trial Review 
Committees (UTRCs). This is to ensure that prisoners covered under 
the following 14 categories, as directed by this Court, are released from 

jail without delay. The 14 categories of Undertrial Prisoners and the 
directions are as under:- 
“3.3.1 In case UTPs covered under Section 436A Cr.P.C.: 
UTRC may recommend to concerned trial court to take up the 
matter and consider him/her for release on bail if there are no 
special reasons to deny bail, with or without sureties. 
3.3.2 UTPs released on bail by the court, but have not been 
able to furnish sureties: 
The UTRC may recommend the trial court to examine the 
reason why the accused is not furnishing surety/ bail bonds and 
if he/she is unable to do so due to poverty, then the trial court 
may consider reducing the bail amount on the application of the 
lawyer under S.440, CrPC or release on personal bond. 
3.3.3 UTPs accused of compoundable offences: 
The UTRC may recommend to the trial court to consider if the 
offence can be compounded between the complainant and the 
accused as per law. 
3.3.4 UTPs eligible under Section 436 of Cr.P.C.: 
The UTRC may recommend to the trial court to consider 
releasing such an accused on personal bond in case he is unable 
to furnish bail bond within seven days of bail order. 
3.3.5 UTPs who may be covered under Section 3 of the 
Probation of Offenders Act, namely accused of offence 
under Sections 379, 380, 381, 404, 420 IPC or alleged to be 
an offence not more than 2 years imprisonment: 
The UTRC may recommend to the trial court to consider 
invoking of Probation of Offenders Act in fit cases as also plea 
bargaining in appropriate cases. 
3.3.6 Convicts who have undergone their sentence or are 
entitled to release because of remission granted to them: 
The UTRC may examine the reason for non-release of the 
convict and the Officer in-charge of prison may be 
recommended to look into the matter so that the convict is 
released as soon as possible. 

3.3.7 UTPs become eligible to be released on bail under 
Section 167(2)(a)(i) & (ii) of the Code read with Section 36A 
of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 
1985 (where persons accused of Section 19 or Section 24 or 
Section 27A or for offences involving commercial quantity) 
and where investigation is not completed in 60/90/180 days: 
The UTRC may recommend to the trial court to consider release 
of the accused in cases where chargesheet is not submitted 
within the statutory time frame. 
3.3.8 UTPs who are imprisoned for offences which carry a 
maximum punishment of 2 years: 
The UTRC may recommend to the trial court to consider 
releasing of the UTP on bail in such cases. 
3.3.9 UTPs who are detained under Chapter VIII of the 
Cr.P.C. i.e. under Sections 107, 108, 109 and 151 of Cr.P.C.: 
The Executive Magistrate/ District Magistrate court may be 
recommended to release/discharge such persons with or without 
conditions or to make an order reducing the amount of the 
security or the number of sureties or the time for which security 
has been required. 
3.3.10 UTPs who are sick or infirm and require specialized 
medical treatment: 
The UTRC may examine the medical condition of the inmate 
and if it is found that the inmate is very sick and specialized 
treatment is essential for survival, then the UTRC may 
recommend the trial court to consider granting bail on medical 
ground, as provided under S.437, CrPC, even for temporary 
period. 
3.3.11 UTPs women offenders: 
Women under trial prisoners who are not accused of serious 
offences may be considered for release on bail under S.437, 
CrPC, especially they are first time offenders by the concerned 
trial courts. The UTRC may also recommend suitable measures 
under the directions of the Hon'ble Court in R. D. Upadhyay vs 
State of A.P. & Ors. (AIR 2006 SC 1946). 

3.3.12 UTPs who are first time offenders between the ages 
19 and 21 years and in custody for the offence punishable 
with less than 7 years of imprisonment and have suffered at 
least 1/4th of the maximum sentence possible: 
The UTRC may request the trial court to consider granting bail 
to such young offenders. If the person is found guilty in the 
course of trial, benefit of S.3 or S.4 of the Probation of 
Offenders Act, 1958, may be given to the accused. 
3.3.13 UTPs who are of unsound mind and must be dealt 
with Chapter XXV of the Code: 
UTRC may recommend the trial court to take appropriate steps 
in accordance with Chapter XXV of the Code and provide 
adequate treatment to such inmates. 
3.3.14 UTPs eligible for release under Section 437(6) of 
Cr.P.C., wherein in a case triable by a Magistrate, the trial 
of a person accused of any non-bailable offence has not been 
concluded within a period of 60 days from the first date 
fixed for taking evidence in the case: 
UTRC may request the trial court to consider granting bail to 
such UTPs under Section 437(6) of Cr.P.C. 
 
23. The Under Trial Review Committee meetings have resulted in the 
recommendation for release of 3,13,888 prisoners and the actual release 
of 1,52,570 prisoners across India. Acknowledging that there could be 
unintended lapses in the identification of prisoners, NALSA has taken 
corrective steps. NALSA also acknowledges the huge gap between the 
total number of persons identified and number of persons 
recommended for release and further the difference in the number of 
inmates recommended for release and the number of bail applications 

filed on their behalf. NALSA acknowledges that there has been 
continued detention of persons even when they are eligible for statutory 
bail under Sections 436A, 436, 167(2) CrPC, the continued detention 
of persons with mental illness despite statutory safeguards; the 
continued arrest and detention of persons under offences carrying less 
than 7 years punishment despite the directives of this Court. Limited 
use of liberal bail provisions for women and sick or infirm persons are 
some of the reasons, according to NALSA, for large number of persons 
continuing to remain behind bars. 
Pre-Litigation Assistance 
24. One of the important areas where legal aid, was in the initial days 
found wanting was in the pre litigation arena. NALSA has risen to the 
occasion by introducing “Early Access to Justice at Pre-Arrest, Arrest 
and Remand Stage Framework”, under which all DLSAs upon 
receiving the intimation of request of the suspect/arrestee to have free 
legal assistance during interrogation, shall inform the deputed lawyer 
as per the duty roster. The assigned lawyer is to then to go to the 
concerned Police Station to provide legal assistance to such persons. 
Specific duties have been cast on legal aid lawyers to challenge the 

arrests made in violation of the statutory framework or binding 
precedents; to move bail application expeditiously and keep the client 
informed about their status. More importantly, the legal aid lawyers 
have been asked to move applications, wherever necessary, for 
modification of bail conditions such as suretyship amount. 
25. In a recent case, this Court in Girish Gandhi vs. State of UP, 
 had the following to say on how excessive 
bail conditions virtually defeats the bail:- 
23. From time immemorial, the principle has been that the excessive 
bail is no bail. To grant bail and thereafter to impose excessive and 
onerous conditions, is to take away with the left hand, what is given 
with the right. As to what is excessive will depend on the facts and 
circumstances of each case. In the present case, the petitioner is 
experiencing a genuine difficulty in finding multiple sureties. 
Sureties are essential to ensure the presence of the accused, released 
on bail. At the same time, where the court is faced with the situation 
where the accused enlarged on bail is unable to find sureties, as 
ordered, in multiple cases, there is also a need to balance the 
requirement of furnishing the sureties with his or her fundamental 
rights under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. An order which 
would protect the person's fundamental right under Article 21 and at 
the same time guarantee the presence, would be reasonable and 
proportionate. As to what such an order should be, will again depend 
on the facts and circumstances of each case. 24. In Satender Kumar 
Antil v. Central Bureau of Investigation (2022), this Court 
held that “imposing a condition which is impossible of compliance 
would be defeating the very object of release.” 
 
26. NALSA Lawyers step in to obtain translated copies of documents 
wherever necessary; ensure that in case of a foreign national, the 

concerned High Commission is informed and also make submissions if 
the suspect/arrestee appears to be a child/juvenile. Statistics reveal that 
as of June, 2024, 17,894 suspects have been given legal assistance at 
the pre arrest stage at the Police Station. Of them, 7,466 were not 
arrested. It is set out that 13,747 accused were provided assistance at 
the Police Station before producing them in Courts, 94,875 at the 
remand stage, 37,929 bail applications were filed at the remand stage 
in which 20182 accused were granted bail. While we commend 
NALSA for the steps taken, we also direct that they continue to keep 
up the momentum and plug the gaps, if any, which they themselves 
have fairly identified and placed before the Court. 
E-Prison Module/ E-kiosks in Prisons 
27. NALSA has also stated that E-Prison Module for effective 
monitoring of cases has been implemented and under the modified E-
Prison Module data regarding orders granting bail, the status of 
implementation of orders granting bail and orders of acquittal are 
uploaded. Similarly, NALSA has prepared a module called “Inmates 
Information Access to Relatives” - whereby the inmates and/or their 
relatives are able to access details relating to the prisoners. The prisoner 

and the nominated relatives can access the details through E-Kiosks 
installed inside the jails. Through these E-Kiosks, the prisoner/relatives 
can check the next hearing date, remission period, parole and furlough 
application status etc. 
28. In an order passed as a chamber judge (one of us), Viswanathan 
K.V. J. in Sanjit Saha vs. State of West Bengal, 2023 INSC 1085 made 
the following suggestion so that the data from prison is available on a 
click of a button to courts including this Court. The said Para is 
extracted hereinbelow. 
“30. The long-term option would be in the digital era to 
evolve a mechanism whereby, the Jail authorities are vested 
with an obligation to upload on a customised web portal, 
the surrender and custody particulars of the convicts with 
the corresponding numbers of the Criminal Appeals/Special 
Leave Petitions. This will ensure that on a click of a button, 
all up to date information are available for the Court.” 
 
29. NALSA, SLSAs and DLSAs can all help the prison authorities 
and the Courts by acting as a bridge in ensuring that the data is fed and 
made available to the Court. 

Steps taken pursuant to the order of this Court on 09.05.2024 and 
17.05.2024 
30. Acting on the communication of NALSA and based on the 
convict information sheet received from the JVLs, SLSAs have sent 
their first quarterly report to NALSA. The following tables have been 
placed by NALSA in the report dated 06.09.2024. 
The data regarding the legal services provided to prisoners at 
these PLACs over the years is as under: 
Years 
2019-20 
2020-21 
2021-22 
2022-23 
2023-24 
No. of Prison Legal Services 
Clinics 

No. of inmates interacted 
with 

No. of inmates provided legal 
assistance 

The data regarding the legal services provided to convicts for 
filing appeals is as under: 
Years 
No. of convicts whose 
appeals were filed in 
the Session’s Court 
Number of convicts whose 
papers/applications 
were 
sent to the High Courts by 
DLSA’s for filing appeals 
Number of convicts 
on 
whose 
behalf 
SLPs 
were 
filed 
through SCLSC (all 
SLPs) 

880 (from 01.01.2024 
till 31.08.2024) 
1593 (from 01.01.2024 till 
31.08.2024) 

(from 
01.01.2024 
till 
04.09.2024) 

The State-wise breakup of total convicts and convicts who filed appeals 
are as follows. Mr. Vijay Hansaria, learned Amicus Curiae has made 
the analysis and after adding two columns to the chart filed by NALSA, 
has placed the following before us:- 
State 
Total 
Convicts 
Appeals 
Appeals not 
filed 
Percent of 
appeals not 
filed 
Andhra 
Pradesh 

19% 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 

90% 
Assam 

7% 
Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 

Daman Diu 

Chhattisgarh 

8% 
Goa 

2% 
Jammu and 
Kashmir 

10% 
Jharkhand 

10% 
Kerala 

11% 
Lakshadweep 

Manipur 

53% 
Meghalaya 

51% 
Rajasthan 

3% 
Pondicherry 

91% 
Punjab 

18% 
Telangana 

18% 
Uttarakhand 

1% 
West Bengal 

36% 
Chandigarh 

8% 
Gujarat 

29% 
Himachal 

24% 

Madhya 
Pradesh 

4% 
Tripura 

25% 
Uttar Pradesh 

8% 
Karnataka 

33% 
Mizoram 

46% 
Maharashtra 

33% 
Ladakh 

25% 
Bihar 

8% 
Orissa 

5% 
Tamil Nadu 

22% 
Nagaland 

67% 
Haryana 

18% 
Sikkim 
NA 
NA 

Total 
71,252 
62,136 
9,044 

It has also been mentioned that insofar as the Union Territory of Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli is concerned, there was only one sub-jail where all 
the prisoners were undertrials. The convicts of the Union Territory have 
been sent to the Central Jail of nearby districts in Gujarat. Insofar as the 
Union Territory of Daman and Diu was concerned, the figure was Nil. 
In the Union Territory of Lakshadweep, no convict was lodged in its 
jail as all convicts are transferred to a jail in Kerala, post-conviction. In 
Sikkim, the data is still awaited. 
31. The learned Amicus has also drawn the attention of this Court to 
the judgment of Justice Ajay Bhanot of the Allahabad High Court in 

Ramu v. State of U.P., 2024 SCC OnLine All 4618. Learned Amicus 
prays that the appeal of the 870 convicts who had expressed their 
willingness to file appeals, as recorded in the order of 15.07.2024, be 
filed within 4 weeks, if not already filed, and an updated status report 
be filed by NALSA giving details of the convicts who have consented 
to file the appeals through legal aid. Apart from the above, learned 
Amicus had also prayed for a direction that the judgment in Ramu 
(Supra) be made applicable to all States throughout the country. 
Reasons given by convicts for not filing appeals 
32. NALSA in its report of 06.09.2024 has opined that the convicts 
who have not preferred an appeal had adduced the following reasons:- 
“i. Convicts were not interested in preferring an appeal 
as they were satisfied with the current judgment and 
order on sentence; 
ii. Convicts had served a substantial part of their 
sentence; 
iii. Convicts' appeal was rejected by the High Court and 
hence, they didn't want to file an appeal before the 
Supreme Court; 

iv. Convicts lacked the financial resources to prefer an 
appeal; 
v. Convicts wanted to consult their families before 
deciding whether or not to prefer an appeal; 
vi. Convicts wanted to engage a private counsel; 
vii. Convicts had a fear of enhancement of sentence in 
the Appellate proceedings; 
viii. Convicts had originally pleaded guilty to the 
offence and were hence, not inclined to prefer an 
appeal; 
ix. Convicts had multiple cases pending against them; 
Χ. Convicts were not willing to state any specific reason 
for not preferring an appeal; and 
xi. Convicts had been recently convicted.” 
NALSA has stated that regular interaction is on with the convicts who 
have not preferred the appeals and they have been informed of the 
availability of free legal aid and the convicts falling in the categories 
(i), (x), (xi) are regularly interacting with the JVLs about their rights. 
The DLSAs are also conducting monthly inspections of the PLACs. 
Periodical reports of the DLSAs are to be submitted to the SLSAs, and 
the SLSAs are periodically sending reports to NALSA. The concern 

of Mr. Vijay Hansaria, learned Amicus Curie, is duly addressed by 
NALSA. 
AS WAS SAID:- “LEGAL AID TO POOR SHOULD NOT BE 
POOR LEGAL AID”. 
33. This Court in Ramanand andlal Bharti v. State of U.P., 2022 
SCC Online SC 1396, while discussing the quality of legal aid, in para 
120, held as under: 
 
“120. It is by far now well-settled for a legal proposition that it 
is the duty of the court to see and ensure that an accused put on 
a criminal trial is effectively represented by a defence counsel, 
and in the event on account of indigence, poverty or illiteracy 
or any other disabling factor, he is not able to engage a counsel 
of his choice, it becomes the duty of the court to provide him 
appropriate and meaningful legal aid at the State expense. What 
is meant by the duty of the State to ensure a fair defence to an 
accused is not the employment of a defence counsel for 
namesake. It has to be the provision of a counsel who defends 
the accused diligently to the best of his abilities. While the 
quality of the defence or the caliber of the counsel would not 
militate against the guarantee to a fair trial sanctioned by 
Articles 21 and 22 resply of the Constitution, a threshold level 
of competence and due diligence in the discharge of his duties 
as a defence counsel would certainly be the constitutional 
guaranteed expectation. The presence of counsel on record 
means effective, genuine and faithful presence and not a mere 
farcical, sham or a virtual presence that is illusory, if not 
fraudulent.” 

Directions: - 
34. In view of the above, we dispose of the matter by issuing the 
following directions:- 
i. 
While commending the work already done by NALSA, the 
SLSAs and the DLSAs, we have no reason to doubt that the Legal 
Services Authorities at different levels will continue to work with 
the same momentum to achieve the constitutional objectives and 
objectives of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987. ii. 
NALSA in cooperation with the SLSAs and the DLSAs will 
ensure that the SOP on Access to Legal Aid Services to prisoners 
and functioning of PLACs are operated efficiently in practice. 
NALSA will periodically update and improve the measures 
prescribed under the SOP-2022 so as to address any of the 
inadequacies that may emerge while operating the same at the 
field level. iii. 
The Legal Services Authorities at different levels will adopt 
methods to strengthen the monitoring of PLACs and to review 
their functioning periodically. iv. 
The Legal Services Authorities will periodically update the 
statistical data and after analysing the results take steps to address 
the shortcomings that may come to light. v. 
The Legal Services Authorities, at all levels, should ensure that 
the Legal Aid Defence Counsel System, which is a pioneering 
measure, functions to its full potential. In this regard, periodic 
inspection and audit of the work of the Legal Aid Defence 
Counsels should be carried out. Steps should also be taken to 
improve the service conditions of the personnel working in the 
Legal Aid Defence Counsel system, whenever it is felt necessary 
and appropriate. vi. 
For the success of the functioning of the legal aid mechanism, 
awareness is the key. A robust mechanism should be put in place 
and periodically updated to ensure that the various beneficial 
schemes promoted by the Legal Services Authorities reaches the 
nook and corner of the nation and particularly, to those whose 
grievances it has set out to address. Adequate literature including 
in the local languages in the States and appropriate promotional 

methods should be launched so that the consumers of justice to 
whom the schemes are intended can make best use of the same. vii. 
In this regard, inter alia, the following measures to create 
awareness could be undertaken through the length and breadth of 
the nation to spread the message of the availability of legal aid: 
 
(a) In public places like police stations, post offices, bus stands, 
railway stations etc. boards in prominent places be displayed 
furnishing the address for contact and the phone numbers of the 
nearest legal aid office. This should be done in the local language 
and in English. 
 
(b) Promotional campaigns in the local language be undertaken 
through Radio/All India Radio/Doordarshan. This will be in 
addition to the promotional measures undertaken through the 
digitalization process – like hosting of websites and prominent 
mention thereon on the landing page of the legal services 
authority wherever permissible. 
 
(c) To create complete awareness about the existence of legal aid 
schemes, promotional campaigns may include such other creative 

measures including organization of street corner plays (nukkad 
natak) in rural areas so that the poor rural masses comprehend the 
facility available to them through the legal aid scheme. These 
should be undertaken without dislocating the normal life of 
citizens. Further, these measures will not only create awareness 
about legal aid to the accused but will also create awareness for 
the victims and for those whose civil rights have been infringed. viii. 
The Legal Services Authorities will periodically review and 
update SOP-2022 for the Undertrial Review Committee [UTRC]. ix. 
The huge gap between total number of persons identified by the 
UTRC and the number of persons recommended for release 
should be looked into and adequate corrective measures be taken. 
Similarly, 
the 
difference 
between 
the 
number 
of 
prisoners/inmates recommended for release and the number of 
bail applications filed should be particularly looked into by 
NALSA/SLSAs/DLSAs and adequate corrective measures taken. x. 
The “Early Access to Justice at Pre-arrest, Arrest and Remand 
Stage Framework” established by NALSA for pre-litigation 

assistance should be diligently pursued and the work undertaken 
under the framework be periodically reviewed. xi. 
Interaction by the Legal Service Authorities at different levels 
with convicts who had not preferred appeals should be 
periodically undertaken and the convicts be informed of their 
right to free legal aid. xii. 
Periodic interaction should be held with Jail Visiting Lawyers 
(JVLs) and Para Legal Volunteers (PLVs). This is to ensure 
updation of their knowledge so that the system functions 
efficiently as a whole. xiii. 
Steps for continuing education of lawyers involved in pre-
litigation assistance and those associated with the Legal Aid 
Defence Counsel set-up should be provided by Legal Services 
Authorities. Apart from this, it should also be ensured that 
adequate law books and access to online libraries are available to 
lawyers engaged at the pre-litigation assistance stage and those 
involved with the Legal Defence Counsel set-up. xiv. 
Periodic reports should be submitted by the DLSAs to the SLSAs 
and the SLSAs to the NALSA, if not already done. NALSA 

should digitise the whole process whereby at the central level 
NALSA can, on the click of a button, get details of the updates 
done by SLSAs and DLSAs on regular basis. xv. 
The Union of India and the State Governments shall continue to 
extend their cooperation and assistance to the Legal Services 
Authorities at different levels for the effective implementation of 
the measures taken by them. xvi. 
We direct the Registry to forward a copy of this judgment to all 
the High Courts in the country. The High Courts may consider the 
feasibility of issuing a practice direction to the effect that all 
courts including the High Court while furnishing the copy of the 
judgment of conviction/dismissal/reversal of acquittal/dismissal 
of bail applications, may append a coversheet to the judgment 
informing the convict about the availability of free legal aid 
facilities for pursuing higher remedies. The coversheet may set 
out the contact address and phone number of the legal aid 
committee attached to the court for seeking appropriate guidance. 
Similar information may be made available in the notices issued 
to the respondents by the concerned courts in appeals against 

acquittal. The High Courts may on their webpage carry 
information about the legal aid facilities available in the State. 
35. We place on record our appreciation for the assistance rendered 
by Mr. Vijay Hansaria, learned Amicus Curiae. 
36. We also place on record our appreciation for Ms. Rashmi 
Nandakumar, learned counsel for her effective presentation of the case 
before this Court and for filing detailed written submissions with the 
relevant data. We grant liberty to NALSA to move appropriate 
applications in this matter in case any further directions are required in 
furtherance of the goals and objectives set out hereinabove. 
 
……… 

 [B.R. GAVAI] 

……… 

 [K. V. VISWANATHAN] 
New Delhi; 
23rd October, 2024.