IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

( SLP(C) No 25369 of 2024) 
 
International Seaport Dredging Pvt Ltd... Appellant 
 
Versus 
Kamarajar Port Limited...Respondent 

JUDGMENT 
 
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The appeal arises from an interim order dated 9 September 2024 of a Single 
Judge of the High Court of Judicature at Madras in A No 4236 of 2024 in Arb OP 
(Com Div) No 335 of 2024. 
3. 
The respondent issued a Letter of Award for executing Capital Dredging Phase-III 
at Kamarajar Port to the appellant for an approximate sum of Rs 274 crores. On 
12 August 2015, the parties entered into a contract for the following work to be 
conducted by the appellant: 
a. 
Capital dredging of Container Berth and Multi Cargo Berths and their 
approaches; 

b. 
Capital dredging of Coal Berth 3 & Coal Berth 4 and their approaches; 
c. 
Removal of onshore boulders and transportation to the designated area; 
d. 
Removal of offshore boulders and transportation to the designated area; 
e. 
Removal of offshore identified debris/wrecks; and 
f. 
Environmental monitoring. 
4. 
These tasks were to be completed on or before 11 April 2017. Thereafter, 
disputes arose between the parties. The appellant invoked the arbitration 
agreement. The arbitral proceedings commenced and the three-member arbitral 
tribunal made an award on 7 March 2024 directing the respondent to: 
a. 
Pay the appellant a sum of Rs 21,07,66,621 towards the claims that were 
allowed in its favour; 
b. 
Pay the appellant interest on the amount awarded at the rate of nine per cent 
per annum from 15 November 2017 until the date of the award if the payment 
was made within three months, and, if not, at the rate of twelve per cent per 
annum from the date of the award till the date of payment; and 
c. 
Pay the appellant Rs 3,20,86,405 by way of costs. 

5. 
Both parties filed applications under Section 33 of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act 19961 for correction of the award and for additional arbitral awards. The 
arbitral tribunal dismissed the application filed by the respondent. It allowed the 
application filed by the appellant only to the extent of increasing the costs awarded 
to it by Rs 12,00,000 to reflect the fees paid to the arbitral tribunal subsequent to 
the parties filing their memo of costs. 
6. 
The respondent challenged the arbitral award under Section 34 of the Arbitration 
Act and moved an application for stay of execution. The High Court, by its 
impugned judgment and order dated 9 September 2024, granted a stay on the 
execution of the award conditional on the respondent furnishing a bank guarantee 
in the sum of Rs 21,07,66,621 within a period of eight weeks. 
7. 
The judgment of the High Court has been assailed by the original claimant of the 
arbitral proceeding (i.e., the appellant in this case) whose contention is that since 
the award operates as a money decree under Section 36 of the Arbitration Act, the 
High Court was not justified in directing merely the furnishing of a bank guarantee 
in relation to the principal amount. The appellant contends that the respondent 
ought to have instead been directed to deposit the amount awarded to it as a 
condition for the grant of a stay on the execution of the award. 
8. 
Mr Shyam Divan, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, has urged 
that: (i) A body of precedent has emerged from this Court in terms of which the 
sanctity of arbitration must be preserved by requiring the deposit of the amount 
 
1 “Arbitration Act” 

awarded as a condition for the stay on the enforcement of the award; (ii) The 
amended provisions of the Arbitration Act require that while considering an 
application for stay of an award for the payment of money, due regard has to be 
had to the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure 19082; and (iii) The award of 
Rs 21,07,66,621 covered ten claims of which three were awarded in full and seven 
in part. The High Court while ordering a stay, has essentially furnished only two 
reasons. The first reason pertains to the question of cess, while the only other 
reason is that the respondent is not “a fly by operator”. 
9. 
Mr C A Sundaram, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, submits 
that: (i) The amended provisions of the statute incorporate provisions of the CPC 
in regard to ordering a stay of an award which contains provisions for the payment 
of money; (ii) Under Order XLI Rule 5 of the CPC, the requirement is for furnishing 
of security and the deposit of money should not, therefore, be regarded as a 
default option; (iii) The High Court had due regard to the fact that the respondent is 
a statutory body and correctly held that security should be furnished in the form of 
a bank guarantee; (iv) As such the impugned judgment should not be interfered 
with under Article 136 of the Constitution; and (v) The body of precedents which 
Mr Divan relied on pertains to appeals under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act. 
10. Section 36(2) of the Arbitration Act indicates that where an application to set aside 
an arbitral award has been filed under Section 34, the filing of such an application 
shall not, by itself, render that award unenforceable, unless the Court grants a stay 
 
2 “CPC” 

on the enforcement of the arbitral award in terms of sub-section (3). The provision 
indicates that a separate application must be made for this purpose. Sub-section 
(3) of Section 36 stipulates that where such an application has been filed, the 
Court may, subject to such conditions as it may deem fit, grant stay of the 
operation of the award for reasons to be recorded in writing. Following the 
amendments brought about by the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act 
2015, the first proviso to sub-section (3) stipulates that the Court shall, while 
considering an application for grant of stay in the case of an arbitral award for 
payment of money, have due regard to the provisions related to the grant of stay 
of a money decree under the CPC. The second proviso provides for a situation in 
which the Court may grant unconditional stay. Section 36(3) and its provisos are 
reproduced below: 
“36. Enforcement – 
… 
(3) Upon filing of an application under sub-section (2) 
for stay of the operation of the arbitral award, the Court 
may, subject to such conditions as it may deem fit, 
grant stay of the operation of such award for reasons 
to be recorded in writing: 
Provided that the Court shall, while considering 
the application for grant of stay in the case of an 
arbitral award for payment of money, have due 
regard to the provisions for grant of stay of a 
money decree under the provisions of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908). 
Provided further that where the Court is satisfied that a 
Prima facie case is made out that, – 

the arbitration agreement or contract which is 
the basis of the award; or 

the making of the award, 
was induced or effected by fraud or corruption, it shall 
stay the award unconditionally pending disposal of the 
challenge under section 34 to the award. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
clarified that the above proviso shall apply to all court 
cases or in relation to arbitral 
proceedings, irrespective of whether the arbitral or 
court proceedings were commenced prior to or after 
the commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2015 (3 of 2016).” 
(emphasis supplied) 
11. In the present case, there is an arbitral award to the tune of approximately Rs 21 
crores in favour of the appellant. The High Court, while issuing a direction for 
furnishing of a bank guarantee, dealt with only one of the claims which was 
awarded by the arbitral tribunal, namely, that which pertained to the refund of the 
cess under the Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess Act 1996.3 
In this regard, the High Court observed that the Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioner, by its order dated 6 November 2019, held that the Cess Act was 
not applicable to the appellant which was therefore not required to pay cess under 
that statute. It noted that the arbitral tribunal had, however, rendered an award in 
which it directed the respondent to pay the appellant this amount, which had 
already been paid by the respondent to the appellant. It held that while the 
substance of the claims of the parties could only be determined in the proceedings 
under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act, it was prima facie satisfied that the arbitral 
 
3 “Cess Act” 

tribunal had erred in not considering the claim of the respondent. Apart from 
discussing this claim, which was in the amount of approximately Rs 3 crores, the 
High Court did not address the other claims of the appellant which were allowed 
by the arbitral tribunal. The amount awarded in relation to the remaining claims is 
approximately Rs 18 crore. 
12. The High Court granted a stay on the operation of the award subject to the 
respondent furnishing a bank guarantee for the principal amount awarded to the 
appellant, i.e. Rs 21,07,66,621. It held that it was not inclined to issue orders in 
relation to the interest and the costs awarded to the appellant because “the 
petitioner is not a fly-by operator and is a statutory undertaking.” The law qua 
arbitration proceedings, in our view, cannot be any different merely because of the 
status of the respondent as a statutory undertaking. 
13. In this regard, it is necessary to advert to a decision of a two-Judge Bench of this 
Court in Pam Developments Private Limited v State of West Bengal4 where it 
was observed: 
 
“20. In our view, in the present context, the phrase 
used is “having regard to” the provisions of CPC and not 
“in accordance with” the provisions of CPC. In the latter 
case, it would have been mandatory, but in the form as 
mentioned in Rule 36(3) of the Arbitration Act, it would 
only be directory or as a guiding factor. Mere reference 
to CPC in the said Section 36 cannot be construed in 
such a manner that it takes away the power conferred in 
the main statute (i.e. the Arbitration Act) itself. It is to be 
taken as a general guideline, which will not make the 
main provision of the Arbitration Act inapplicable. The 
 
4(2019) 

provisions of CPC are to be followed as a guidance, 
whereas the provisions of the Arbitration Act are 
essentially to be first applied. Since, the Arbitration Act 
is a self-contained Act, the provisions of CPC will apply 
only insofar as the same are not inconsistent with the 
spirit and provisions of the Arbitration Act.” 
14. The Court also observed: 
“26. Arbitration proceedings are essentially alternate 
dispute 
redressal 
system 
meant 
for 
early/quick 
resolution of disputes and in case a money decree — 
award as passed by the arbitrator against the 
Government is allowed to be automatically stayed, the 
very purpose of quick resolution of dispute through 
arbitration would be defeated as the decree-holder 
would be fully deprived of the fruits of the award on 
mere filing of objection under Section 34 of the 
Arbitration Act. The Arbitration Act is a special Act which 
provides for quick resolution of disputes between the 
parties and Section 18 of the Act makes it clear that 
the parties shall be treated with equality. Once the 
Act mandates so, there cannot be any special 
treatment given to the Government as a party. As 
such, under the scheme of the Arbitration Act, no 
distinction is made nor any differential treatment is 
to be given to the Government, while considering an 
application for grant of stay of a money decree in 
proceedings under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. 
As we have already mentioned above, the reference to 
CPC in Section 36 of the Arbitration Act is only to guide 
the court as to what conditions can be imposed, and the 
same have to be consistent with the provisions of the 
Arbitration Act. 
… 
28. Section 36 of the Arbitration Act also does not 
provide for any special treatment to the Government 
while dealing with grant of stay in an application under 
proceedings of Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. 
Keeping the aforesaid in consideration and also the 
provisions of Section 18 providing for equal treatment of 
parties, it would, in our view, make it clear that there is 
no exceptional treatment to be given to the 
Government while considering the application for 

stay under Section 36 filed by the Government in 
proceedings under Section 34 of the Arbitration 
Act.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
15. Bearing in mind the above principles, we are of the view that the High Court was in 
error in not even prima facie considering the fact that apart from the issue of cess, 
there was an arbitral award in favour of the appellant in regard to other claims as 
well. Further, the High Court ought not to have based its decision on the condition 
for the grant of stay on the status of the respondent as a statutory authority. The 
Arbitration Act is a self-contained code – it does not distinguish between 
governmental and private entities. Hence, the decision of the Court cannot be 
influenced by the position of the party before it and whether it is a fly-by-night 
operator. Moreover, an assessment as to whether a party is reliable or trustworthy 
is subjective. Many private entities, too, may rely on the size of their undertaking, 
its success, public image, or other factors to argue that they are not fly-by-night 
operators. In the absence of any provision of law in this regard, it would be 
inappropriate for courts to apply this standard while adjudicating the conditions 
upon which a stay of an award may be granted. Similarly, the form of security 
required to be furnished should not depend on whether a party is a statutory or 
other governmental body or a private entity. Governmental entities must be treated 
in a similar fashion to private parties insofar as proceedings under the Arbitration 
Act are concerned, except where otherwise indicated by law. This is because the 
parties have entered into commercial transactions with full awareness of the 
implications of compliance and non-compliance with the concerned contracts and 

the consequences which will visit them in law. Hence, the argument that the High 
Court was correct in directing the respondent to furnish bank guarantees in 
relation to the amount awarded because it is a statutory body is rejected. 
16. In Toyo Engineering Corpn. v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd.,5 this Court reiterated the 
same principle in the following terms: 
“3. This Court repeatedly having held that Order XLI 
Rule 5 principles are to be followed in these cases, we 
find that largely because public corporations are 
involved, discretion continues to be exercised not on 
principles under Order XLI Rule 5 but only because 
large amounts exist and that Government Corporations 
have to pay these amounts under Arbitral Awards. 
Both these considerations are irrelevant, as has been 
pointed out by us earlier.” 
17. Under Order XLI Rule 5 of the CPC, the Court has the power to direct full or part 
deposit and/or the furnishing of security in respect of the decretal amount. Bearing 
in mind the principles which must guide the Court, we are of the view that the 
order of the High Court requires modification. In modification of the direction of the 
High Court in the impugned judgment dated 9 September 2024, we direct that: 

The respondent shall deposit an amount quantified at 75% of the decretal 
amount, inclusive of interest, on or before 30 November 2024 before the 
High Court; and 

Conditional on the deposit of the aforesaid amount within the period 
stipulated above, there shall be a stay on the enforcement of the arbitral 
award. 

18. The impugned judgment of the High Court shall stand modified in the above terms. 
The appeal is allowed accordingly. 
19. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 
 
…..…..…...…...……………….…...CJI. 
 [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 

……..…..…...…...……………….… 
 [J B Pardiwala] 

……..…..…...…...……………….… 
 [Manoj Misra] 

New Delhi; 
October 24, 2024 
-S-