IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

N. THAJUDEEN 

VERSUS 

TAMIL NADU KHADI AND VILLAGE 
INDUSTRIES BOARD 

JUDGMENT 

PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
Ms. T. Archana, learned counsel for the appellant and 
Mr. Vipin Kumar Jai, learned counsel for the respondent 
were heard at length. 
2. 
The plaintiff-respondent, Tamil Nadu Khadi and Village 
Industries Board, instituted a suit for declaration of its title 
over the suit property measuring about 3750 square feet 
comprising in Survey No. 16/1 situated in Kotlambakkam 

Panchayat, District Cuddalore and for recovery of its 
possession. The said suit was filed on the basis of a registered 
gift deed dated 05.03.1983 allegedly executed by the 
defendant-appellant which was said to have been accepted 
by the plaintiff-respondent. 
3. 
The suit was dismissed by the Trial Court vide Judgment and 
order dated 23.08.1994 primarily on the ground that the 
alleged gift deed was not valid as it was never accepted and 
acted upon. Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision, the plaintiff-
respondent preferred an appeal before the District Judge 
which was allowed vide Judgment and order dated 
05.08.1997. The appellate Court reversed the judgment and 
order of the court of first instance and decreed the suit. The 
second appeal filed by the defendant-appellant was 
dismissed on 11.01.2011 by the High Court. In decreeing the 
suit, the gift was held to be valid with a finding that it was 
acted upon and accepted and as such in the absence of any 
clause in the gift deed authorizing revocation, it could not 
have been revoked as alleged vide revocation deed dated 
17.08.1987. 

4. 
The delay of 207 days in filing the Special Leave Petition was 
condoned and the leave to appeal was granted vide order 
dated 05.08.2013. Thus, the civil appeal has come up for 
consideration before us. 
5. 
The moot question which arises for our consideration in this 
appeal is whether the registered gift deed dated 05.03.1983 
was duly acted upon and accepted and is a valid document 
which continue to exist despite its revocation on 17.08.1987 
as the donor had not reserved the right to revoke the same. 
6. 
The registered gift deed dated 05.03.1983 is Exhibit A-1. It 
has been executed by the defendant-appellant. A perusal of 
the gift deed reveals that the donor has gifted the suit 
property in favour of the plaintiff-respondent for the 
purposes of manufacturing of Khadi Lungi and Khadi Yarn 
etc., with the condition that the plaintiff-respondent shall not 
transfer the suit property for its own self-interest. The gift 
deed stipulates that neither the donor nor his legal heirs have 
any right or interest or will continue to have any right or 
interest in the suit property from the time and date of the gift 
deed. The gift deed further states that the gift is with full 

consent of the donor and that from the date of the gift itself, 
the plaintiff-respondent accepts the suit property for the use 
as aforesaid. 
7. 
A simple and complete reading of the aforesaid gift deed 
would reveal that the gift is absolute with no right reserved 
for its revocation in any contingency. The only purpose 
stipulated therein is that the property gifted shall be used for 
manufacturing Khadi Lungi and Khadi Yarn etc. 
8. 
It is worth noting that the gift deed itself states that from the 
date of the gift deed the suit property is accepted by the 
plaintiff-respondent for the purpose of manufacturing Khadi 
Lungi and Khadi Yarn etc., which duly proves that the gift 
was accepted. It was also acted upon as pursuant thereof the 
plaintiff-respondent had applied for mutation to the revenue 
authorities. In addition to the above, the plaintiff-respondent 
issued a memo on 16.09.1983, Exhibit A-4 which also proves 
that the possession of the suit property was taken over and 
that it proceeded to raise construction thereon. 
9. 
Exhibits A-2 to A-4 prove that the possession of the suit 
property was taken over by the plaintiff-respondent on the 

date of the gift itself which is sufficient evidence that the gift 
was acted upon and accepted by the plaintiff-respondent. 
The plaintiff-respondent, pursuant to the aforesaid gift deed 
and its acceptance has even applied to the revenue 
authorities for the mutation of its name which further 
fortifies the fact that the gift was duly accepted. 
10. Considering the above, in view of the findings recorded by the 
first appellate Court and the High Court that the gift deed 
was duly acted upon and accepted by the plaintiff-
respondent, the conclusion is that the said gift deed cannot 
be held to be invalid for want of acceptance. Thus, on the 
basis of the aforesaid gift deed, the plaintiff-respondent 
acquired absolute right and title over the suit property. 
11. Now the question arises as to whether the aforesaid gift deed 
has been validly revoked vide revocation deed dated 
17.08.1987, and if so, what would be its impact upon the 
rights of the plaintiff-respondent in respect of the suit 
property. 
12. No doubt, the gift validly made can be suspended or revoked 
under certain contingencies but ordinarily it cannot be 

revoked, more particularly when no such right is reserved 
under the gift deed. In this connection, a reference may be 
made to the provisions of Section 126 of the Transfer of 
Property Act, 18821 which provides that a gift cannot be 
revoked except for certain contingencies enumerated therein. 
13. It is important to reproduce Section 126 of the Act, which 
reads as follows: 
“126. When gift may be suspended or revoked.- 
 
The donor and donee may agree that on the 
happening of any specified event which does not 
depend on the will of the donor a gift shall be 
suspended or revoked; but a gift which the parties 
agree shall be revocable wholly or in part, at the 
mere will of the donor, is void wholly or in part, as 
the case may be. 
 
A gift may also be revoked in any of the cases 
(save want or failure of consideration) in which, if 
it were a contract, it might be rescinded. 
 
Save as aforesaid, a gift cannot be revoked. 
 
Nothing contained in this section shall be 
deemed to affect the rights of transferees for 
consideration without notice.” 

1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’ 

14. Section 126 of the Act is drafted in a peculiar way in the sense 
that it contains the exceptions to the substantive law first 
and then the substantive law. The substantive law as is 
carved out from the simple reading of the aforesaid provision 
is that a gift cannot be revoked except in the cases mentioned 
earlier. The said exceptions are three in number; the first part 
provides that the donor and donee may agree for the 
suspension or revocation of the gift deed on the happening of 
any specified event which does not depend on the will of the 
donor. Secondly, a gift which is revocable wholly or in part 
with the agreement of the parties, at the mere will of the 
donor is void wholly or in part as the case may be. Thirdly, a 
gift may be revoked if it were in the nature of a contract which 
could be rescinded. 
15. In simpler words, ordinarily a gift deed cannot be revoked 
except for the three contingencies mentioned above. The first 
is where the donor and the donee agree for its revocation on 
the happening of any specified event. In the gift deed, there 
is no such indication that the donor and donee have agreed 
for the revocation of the gift deed for any reason much less 

on the happening of any specified event. Therefore, the first 
exception permitting revocation of the gift deed is not 
attracted in the case at hand. Secondly, a gift deed would be 
void wholly or in part, if the parties agree that it shall be 
revocable wholly or in part at the mere will of the donor. In 
the present case, there is no agreement between the parties 
for the revocation of the gift deed wholly or in part or at the 
mere will of the donor. Therefore, the aforesaid condition 
permitting revocation or holding such a gift deed to be void 
does not apply. Thirdly, a gift is liable to be revoked in a case 
where it is in the nature of a contract which could be 
rescinded. The gift under consideration is not in the form of 
a contract and the contract, if any, is not liable to be 
rescinded. Thus, none of the exceptions permitting 
revocation of the gift deed stands attracted in the present 
case. Thus, leading to the only conclusion that the gift deed, 
which was validly made, could not have been revoked in any 
manner. Accordingly, revocation deed dated 17.08.1987 is 
void ab initio and is of no consequence which has to be 
ignored. 

16. The non-utilisation of the suit property for manufacturing 
Khadi Lungi and Khadi Yarns etc., the purpose set out in the 
gift deed, and keeping the same as vacant may be a 
disobedience of the object of the gift but that by itself would 
not attract the power to revoke the gift deed. There is no 
stipulation in the gift deed that if the suit property is not so 
utilised, the gift would stand revoked or would be revoked at 
the discretion of the donor. 
17. In the end, we come to another limb of the argument that the 
suit as filed by the plaintiff-respondent is hit by limitation 
and as such the first appellate court and the High Court 
manifestly erred in decreeing the same. 
18. In context with the point of limitation, the court of first 
instance has formulated issue no. 4 which reads as under: 
“Whether the suit is barred by limitation?” 
19. Admittedly, the present suit for declaration and recovery of 
possession of the suit property was filed by the plaintiff-
respondent on 25.09.1991. The court of first instance held 
that as the same was not filed within three years from the 

date of revocation of the gift deed, i.e., 17.08.1987 (Exhibit 
B-2), the suit is barred by limitation. 
20. Once it is held that the gift deed was validly executed 
resulting in the absolute transfer of title in favour of the 
plaintiff-respondent, the same is not liable to be revoked, and 
as such the revocation deed is meaningless especially for the 
purposes of calculating the period of limitation for instituting 
the suit. 
21. The limitation for a suit for declaration is provided under Part 
III of the Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963. It is governed 
by Articles 56-58 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act. Under 
all the aforesaid three Articles, the limitation for a suit for 
declaration is three years. The limitation provided under 
Articles 56 and 57 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act is in 
respect to declaration regarding forgery of an instrument 
issued or registered and validity of the adoption deed. Article 
58 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act prescribes the 
limitation for decree of declaration of any other kind and 
therefore, the suit for declaration of title would essentially fall 
under Article 58 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act and the 

limitation would be three years from the date when the right 
to sue first accrues. 
22. In the case at hand, the suit is not simply for the declaration 
of title rather it is for a further relief for recovery of 
possession. It is to be noted that when in a suit for 
declaration of title, a further relief is claimed in addition to 
mere declaration, the relief of declaration would only be an 
ancillary one and for the purposes of limitation, it would be 
governed by the relief that has been additionally claimed. The 
further relief claimed in the suit is for recovery of possession 
based upon title and as such its limitation would be 12 years 
in terms of Article 65 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act. 
23. In C. Mohammad Yunus vs. Syed Unnissa And Ors2 it has 
been laid down that in a suit for declaration with a further 
relief, the limitation would be governed by the Article 
governing the suit for such further relief. In fact, a suit for a 
declaration of title to immovable property would not be 
barred so long as the right to such a property continues and 
 
 SC 808 

subsists. When such right continues to subsist, the relief for 
declaration would be a continuing right and there would be 
no limitation for such a suit. The principle is that the suit for 
a declaration for a right cannot be held to be barred so long 
as Right to Property subsist. 
24. Even otherwise, though the limitation for filing a suit for 
declaration of title is three years as per Article 58 of the 
Schedule to the Limitation Act but for recovery of possession 
based upon title, the limitation is 12 years from the date the 
possession of the defendant becomes adverse in terms of 
Article 65 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act. Therefore, 
suit for the relief of possession was not actually barred and 
as such the court of first instance could not have dismissed 
the entire suit as barred by time. 
25. No other point was raised and argued before us. 
26. Thus, in the totality of the facts and circumstances of the 
case, we do not find any error or illegality on part of the first 
appellate court and the High Court in decreeing the suit of 
the plaintiff-respondent. 

27. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed as devoid of merit. 
28. Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of....………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL)...……………………………….. J. 
(UJJAL BHUYAN)