IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 9739-40 OF 2011 
 
NISAR AHMAD & ORS. 

 APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
SAMI ULLAH (DEAD) THROUGH LRS. & ANR. RESPONDENT(S) 
 
WITH 
CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO. 194 OF 2022 

JUDGMENT 
 
UJJAL BHUYAN, J. 

Heard learned counsel for the parties. 
2. 
 
The two appeals by special leave are directed against the 
judgment and order dated 05.01.2009 passed by a Division Bench 
of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Civil Misc. Writ 
Petition No. 6635 of 1974 (Nisar Ahmad and Ors. Vs. Deputy 
Director of Consolidation, Sultanpur and Ors.) and in Writ Petition 
No.18 of 1975 (Sami Ullah and Anr. Vs. Nisar Ahmed and Ors.). By 
the aforesaid judgment and order dated 05.01.2009, Civil Misc. was dismissed and Writ Petition 
No.18 of 1975 has been allowed. 

3. 
 
By order dated 27.04.2009, this Court had issued notice 
on the special leave petition as well as on the prayer for interim 
relief. Subsequently, by order dated 15.01.2010, both the parties 
were directed to maintain status quo prevailing as on 15.01.2010. 
Thereafter, by order dated 03.11.2011, leave was granted directing 
the status quo order to be continued in the meantime. 
4. 
 
At the outset, it may be useful to make a brief reference 
to the relevant facts. Zahoor Ahmed, son of Abdul Shakoor, father 
of the appellants, had moved the Consolidation Officer, Sultanpur 
under Section 9(2) of the Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings 
Act, 1953 (briefly ‘the 1953 Act’ hereinafter) raising a dispute as to 
Khata Nos. 99 and 100 of village Bhati Jarouli of Miranpur, District 
Sultanpur, U.P., recorded in the name of respondent Sami Ullah 
and others. Zahoor Ahmed claimed co-tenancy in both the Khatas 
to the extent of half share. Since the dispute could not be 
reconciled, he approached the Consolidation Officer. After notice 
and hearing, the Consolidation Officer passed an order dated 
06.12.1972 directing that the name of Zahoor Ahmed be entered 
as a co-tenant in Khata No. 99 and accordingly partition be made. 
The shares of Sami Ullah and another (respondents herein) were 
determined to the extent of 1/4 each. However, the claim of Zahoor 

Ahmed of co-tenancy qua Khata No. 100 was rejected. Accordingly, 
direction was issued to intimate the parties and to correct the 
areas of the land in respect of the parties so determined by the 
Consolidation Officer. 
5. 
 
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order dated 06.12.1972, 
respondents Sami Ullah and others filed appeals before the 
Assistant Settlement Officer under Section 11(1) of the 1953 Act. 
Similarly, Zahoor Ahmed also filed an appeal under Section 11(1) 
of the 1953 Act against the said order dated 06.12.1972 rejecting 
his claim qua Khata No. 100. By order dated 25.04.1973, the 
appellate authority i.e. the Assistant Settlement Officer, Sultanpur 
dismissed all the appeals. In other words, order of the 
Consolidation Officer dated 06.12.1972 was upheld. 
6. 
 
Thereafter, respondents Sami Ullah and others filed a 
revision application before the Deputy Director of Consolidation, 
Gorakhpur (‘Deputy Director’, hereinafter). Likewise, the legal 
heirs of Zahoor Ahmed, Nisar Ahmed and others (‘appellants’ 
herein) also filed revision before the Deputy Director against 
rejection of their appeal. By the order dated 20.09.1974, the 
Deputy Director opined that Zahoor Ahmed was not entitled to get 
share in the above Khatas and accordingly the order of the 

Consolidation Officer as affirmed by the Assistant Settlement 
Officer i.e. the appellate authority was modified. Deputy Director 
while dismissing the revision of Zahoor Ahmed, Nisar Ahmed and 
others allowed the revision of the respondent Sami Ullah and 
others. 
7. 
 
Appellants thereafter preferred Civil Misc. Writ Petition 
No. 6635 of 1974 before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad 
(briefly ‘the High Court’ hereinafter). By the judgment and order 
dated 05.01.2009, the High Court held that Deputy Director was 
not justified in importing principles of Hindu law while 
determining the share of the parties who were admittedly 
Mohammedans. Accordingly, the High Court held that the 
appellants have 1/12 share jointly in the plots comprised in Khata 
Nos. 98 and 99 excluding plot Nos. 35, 37, 111 and 112 which 
exclusively belongs to the respondents Sami Ullah and his brother 
Badlu, sons of Abdul Ghafoor. Accordingly, Civil Misc. Writ Petition 
No. 6635 of 1974 was dismissed and 
was allowed. 
8. 
 
It is this judgment and order dated 05.01.2009 which 
came to be assailed in the related special leave petitions and upon 
leave being granted, the present civil appeals came to be registered. 

9. 
 
While learned counsel for the appellants has contended 
that the High Court was not justified in upholding the order passed 
by the Deputy Director in revision thereby adversely affecting the 
rights of the parties, learned counsel for the respondents on the 
other hand supports the impugned order. He submits that the 
order of the High Court is a well-reasoned and balanced order and 
therefore should not be disturbed. 
10. 
Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties 
have received the due consideration of the Court. 
11. 
Zahoor Ahmed, the predecessor in interest of the 
appellants, had approached the Consolidation Officer under 
Section 9(2) of the 1953 Act raising a dispute regarding Khata Nos. 
99 and 100. It may be mentioned that the Khata No. 99 was 
recorded in the name of Sami Ullah and Badlu (the respondents) 
whereas Khata No. 100 was recorded in the name of Sami Ullah 
alone. Zahoor Ahmed claimed co-tenancy in both the Khatas to the 
extent of 1/2 share. He also claimed half share in Khata No. 100. 
Since the dispute could not be reconciled, the same was raised 
before the Consolidation Officer. 
11.1. 
According to Zahoor Ahmed, the land in question were 
acquired by Mohammad and Abdul Ghafoor, father of Allah Bux, 

jointly for the benefit of the entire family. Thus, they were in joint 
occupation of the land. At the time of death of Allah Bux, Ghafoor 
was the ‘karta’ of the family and all the sons of Allah Bux remained 
in joint occupation. Zahoor Ahmed claimed that he was in joint 
occupation of the land in question, paying land revenue to the 
extent of his share. Thus, he claimed half share in the land in 
question by way of pedigree. 
11.2. 
According to the respondents, their father had acquired 
the lands covered by Khata No. 98 through lease; their father had 
five shares in the said land and one share belonged to Mohammad 
who died in 1942. Though he was survived by his daughter, as per 
family custom, she did not have any share in the lands in question. 
Respondents claimed one share in this land as well. Thus, 
according to the respondents, they had 11/12 share in Khata No. 
98 and 1/12 share belonged to Zahoor. 
11.3. 
In so far Khata No. 99 is concerned, according to the 
respondents, these lands were acquired by their father and 
devolved upon them on the death of their father. They challenged 
the claim of Zahoor to such land on the ground that Zahoor had 
made a dastbardari in their favour in the year 1948. Plot Nos. 45, 
57, 111 and 112 were claimed by the respondents as having been 

acquired by their father Ghafoor. They, however, admitted half 
share claim of Zahoor Ahmed in respect of Khata No. 99 while 
denying the claim to the remaining extent of half. Plot No. 115 of 
Khata No. 100 was wholly claimed by the respondents denying the 
claim of Zahoor to the extent of half share in the said land. 
11.4. 
Consolidation Officer upon consideration of the 
pleadings of the parties in dispute had framed the following issues: 

Whether respondents were entitled to 11/12 share 
 
of Khata No. 98? 
(ii) Whether Zahoor Ahmed was entitled to half share 
of Khata No. 98? 
(iii) What was the share of the parties in respect of 
Khata No. 98? 

Whether Zahoor Ahmed was co-tenant of Khata 
No. 99 as claimed? 

Whether the respondents were recorded as the 
sole owner of the land covered by Khata No. 99? 

Whether 
Sami 
Ullah 
and 
Badlu 
i.e. the 
respondents were entitled to 11/12 share in 
respect of plot Nos. 31, 94, 95, 96, 97 and 99 etc. as claimed? 
(vii) Whether plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112 were the 
sole sirdari of the respondents as claimed? 

(viii) What were the share of the parties qua Khata No. 

99? 
(ix) Whether Zahoor was co-tenant of plot No. 115 of 
Khata No. 100 as claimed? 
(x) Whether the respondents were the sole owner of the 
land of Khata No. 100? 
(xi) What were the shares of the parties qua Khata No. 
100? 
 
11.5. 
After noting that it was an admitted position that 
neither the daughter in the family nor their sons got any share in 
the lands belonging to the family, Consolidation Officer observed 
that the appellants and the respondents were recorded as co-
tenant of the land in Khata No. 98. Respondents also admitted the 
share of the appellants in plot Nos. 94, 95, 96, 99, 100 etc. to the 
extent of 1/12. Thus, according to the Consolidation Officer, in 
view of the admission made by the respondents, Zahoor Ahmed 
was the co-tenant and that the dispute was only regarding his 
share. Further, the Consolidation Officer remarked that the onus 
was on the respondent to prove that they were entitled to 11/12 
share of the land. Consolidation Officer also noticed that there was 
a lease deed of 1922 but what was to be seen was whether the 
lands were acquired jointly. 

11.6. 
After discussing the evidence and the materials on 
record, the Consolidation Officer vide the order dated 06.12.1972 
held that Zahoor Ahmed was in occupation of the plots of land 
bearing Nos. 95, 96, 97, 99, 100 and 107 and as many as five plots 
being 99, 100, 107 etc. were being cultivated by Zahoor. The 
Khasra for the relevant years indicated that Zahoor was all along 
in occupation of the above lands; his name was recorded over an 
area of 3 bighas 10 biswas of lands and he also paid land revenue 
in respect of which large number of revenue receipts were on 
record. Thus, the Consolidation Officer concluded that the lands 
were acquired jointly when Zahoor Ahmed was a minor and his 
share would be half of the land. Therefore, he was entitled to half 
share in Khata Nos. 98 and 99. In so far plot No. 115 of Khata No. 
100 is concerned, it was held that the same remained the exclusive 
property of the respondents. The Consolidation Officer declared 
that Zahoor Ahmed being the co-tenant of Khata No. 99 was 
entitled to half share thereof. Accordingly, it was ordered that the 
name of Zahoor Ahmed be entered as a co-tenant in Khata No. 99 
and partition be made in Khata Nos. 98 and 99 in the following 
manner: 

Zahoor 
 
- 
1/2 

Sami Ullah 
- 
1/4 

(iii) Badlu 
 
- 
1/4 
 
12. 
Against 
the 
aforesaid 
order 
dated 
06.12.1972, 
altogether three appeals were filed before the appellate authority 
i.e. Assistant Settlement Officer- one by Zahoor Ahmed and the 
other two by the respondents. The appeals were filed under Section 
11(1) of the 1953 Act. 
12.1. 
By the common judgment and order dated 25.4.1973, 
the appellate authority i.e. Assistant Settlement Officer, Sultanpur 
dismissed all the three appeals. While dismissing the appeals, the 
appellate authority noted that in the basic year, Khata No.98 was 
recorded in the name of Sami Ullah and Badlu and also in the 
name of Zahoor Ahmed. Khata Nos.99 and 100 were recorded in 
the name of Sami Ullah and Badlu. Zahoor Ahmed filed objection 
under Section 9 of the 1953 Act contending that in Khata No.99 
his name should be recorded. He claimed 1/2 share in Khata 
Nos.98 and 99 contending that Satai was the common ancestor of 
both the parties and that he had acquired the disputed land from 
the joint family. According to him, Allah Bux and Mohammad were 
the sons of Satai. Abdul Ghafoor was the elder son of Allah Bux 
and became the ‘karta’ of the joint family. After the death of Allah 
Bux, Abdul Ghafoor, Abdul Shakoor and Mohd. Ismail, being sons 

of Allah Bux, came into possession of the disputed land jointly. 
Mohd. Ismail died issueless. The disputed land was recorded in the 
name of Sami Ullah and Badlu being the sons of Abdul Ghafoor as 
‘karta’ of joint family. 
12.2. 
Zahoor stated that at the time of death of his father, he 
was a minor and lived with Abdul Ghafoor. Abdul Ghafoor and 
Abdul Shakoor had 1/2 share in the disputed land. Accordingly, 
both the parties were in possession of the disputed land. 
12.3. 
Sami Ullah and Badlu objected to the claim of Zahoor 
and contended that the land in Khata No.99 was acquired by Abdul 
Ghafoor. Sami Ullah and Badlu admitted 1/12 share in the 
disputed land and denied share of Zahoor in plot No.115 of Khata 
No.100. 
12.4. 
The primary authority i.e. the Consolidation Officer on 
the basis of the materials of record and the evidence adduced 
decided the share of Zahoor in Khata Nos. 98 and 99 at 1/2 and 
dismissed the objection of Zahoor qua plot No. 115 of Khata No. 
100. Therefore, Zahoor filed Appeal No. 43 in respect of plot No. 
115 of Khata No.100. Sami Ullah and Badlu filed Appeal Nos. 50 
and 51 against the decision of the Consolidation Officer declaring 

1/2 share in the disputed land of Khata Nos. 98 and 99 as 
belonging to Zahoor. 
12.5. 
The appellate authority was of the view that plot No.35 
was recorded only in the name of Allah Bux. Zahoor had 
relinquished in favour of Sami Ullah on 30.06.1948. Zahoor also 
relinquished the share of Ismail. Sami Ullah had filed the patta for 
the first time before the Consolidation Officer on 07.05.1992. In 
the settlement exercise, some disputed land was acquired by Allah 
Bux and Mohammed jointly. Plot Nos.111 and 112 were recorded 
in the name of Abdul Ghafoor. The appellate authority noted the 
submission made on behalf of Zahoor that he was in possession of 
the disputed land in Khata Nos.98 and 99 and paying land revenue 
and took the view that the disputed land was in possession of the 
joint family. When Shakoor, father of Zahoor, had died Zahoor was 
a minor. Thereafter, father of Sami Ullah brought up Ghafoor and 
Ghafoor lived as a member of the joint family. Though the name of 
Ghafoor was not recorded, Sami Ullah admitted 11/12 share of 
Zahoor. According to the appellate authority, Zahoor was in 
continuous possession over the disputed land. The revenue 
receipts indicated that he was in possession of 1/2 share thereof 
and paying the revenue in respect of the said land. As regards plot 

No. 115 of Khata No. 100, the appellate authority concurred with 
the view of the primary authority. Therefore, the appellate 
authority i.e. the Assistant Settlement Officer upheld the order of 
the Consolidation Officer and dismissed all the appeals. 
13. 
Two revision petitions were filed under Section 48 of the 
1953 Act, Revision No. 3302 was filed by the respondents and 
Revision No. 3312 was filed by the appellants, against the 
judgment and order dated 25.04.1973 passed by the Assistant 
Settlement Officer in appeal. 
13.1. 
The revisional authority i.e. the Deputy Director of 
Consolidation noted that according to Zahoor, the disputed land 
was joint family property and as such, his share in it was 1/2. 
Khata No. 98 was recorded in the name of Sami Ullah and Badlu 
on the one hand and Zahoor on the other hand whereas Khata No. 
99 was recorded only in the name of Sami Ullah and Badlu. 
Consolidation Officer had allowed the name of Zahoor Ahmed to 
be in half of Khata No. 98 and Khata No. 99; however, dismissed 
the claim of Zahoor Ahmed in respect of plot No. 115 of Khata No. 
100. Against the aforesaid decision, appeal was filed but the same 
was dismissed. It was thereafter that the revision came to be filed 
by Zahoor Ahmed. 

13.2. 
On the other hand, Sami Ullah claimed that Zahoor had 
1/12 share in Khata No. 98 as well as in Khata No. 99 and none 
in respect of plot No. 115 of Khata No. 100. His objection was 
allowed in respect of plot No. 115 of Khata No. 100 but was 
dismissed in respect of the other two Khatas. Therefore, he also 
filed appeals before the Assistant Settlement Officer which were 
however dismissed. Thereafter, the related revision petition came 
to be filed claiming 5/6th share in Khata No. 98 and exclusively 
claimed Khata No. 99 for himself and Badlu. 
13.3. 
During the revision proceedings, Zahoor Ahmed died 
and he was substituted by his legal heirs (sons) Nisar Ahmed, 
Irshan Ahmed and Ishtiyag Ahmed. The revisional authority 
considered the claim of Sami Ullah. Zahoor Ahmed had disputed 
1/12th share in Khata No. 98 because in the year 1922, the 
disputed land was taken on lease by Abdul Ghafoor: 5/6th share 
from Mohammad Ismail and 1/6th share from the zamindar. 
Mohammad Ismail died in the year 1942. After his death, his 1/6th 
share got devolved in 1/12th share, viz, in plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 
and 112. It was noted that Khata No. 99 was recorded in the name 
of Sami Ullah and Badlu. The revisional authority noted on the 
basis of the evidence adduced that Shakoor had expired in the year 

1930. Thereafter, the name of Zahoor was recorded as a member 
of the joint family in Khata No. 98. From the materials on record, 
the revisional authority noticed that Zahoor was in possession and 
paying rent in respect of the disputed land. However, the revisional 
authority accepted the contention of Sami Ullah that Zahoor had 
relinquished his share in respect of plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112 
by way of relinquishment deed of the year 1948. Deputy Director 
i.e. the revisional authority noted that relinquishment was by way 
of a relinquishment deed and that Zahoor had admitted his 
signature on it. Therefore, there was no reason to disbelieve the 
contention of Sami Ullah because in the year 1948, Zahoor had 
relinquished his share in plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112. Further, 
possession of Zahoor Ahmed was also not recorded. Thus Zahoor 
Ahmed was held to be not entitled to any share in so far the said 
plots were concerned. The lower authorities had ignored the 
relinquishment deed which vitiated their respective orders. On the 
basis of the relinquishment deed, the Deputy Director allowed the 
revision of Sami Ullah in respect of plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112. 
As regards claim of Zahoor in respect of plot No. 115 of Khata No. 
100, the Deputy Director was not convinced about the said claim. 
That being the position, the revisional authority upheld the view 

taken by the lower authorities and dismissed the revision of Zahoor 
Ahmed. 
14. 
Assailing the above order of the revisional authority, 
appellants preferred 
whereas respondents preferred before 
the High Court. High Court heard both the writ petitions together 
as the two writ petitions arose out of the same consolidation 
proceedings in respect of Khata Nos. 98, 99 and 100 in village 
Bhati Jarouli, Sultanpur. 
14.1. 
High Court traced the pedigree of the parties. Satai was 
the common ancestor and he had two sons, namely, Allah Bux and 
Mohammad. Mohammad died issueless in the year 1942. Allah 
Bux had three sons i.e. Abdul Ghafoor who died in 1946, Abdul 
Shakoor who died in 1930 and Mohammad Ismail who died 
issueless in 1935. High Court pointed out that the dispute was 
between the two branches of Abdul Ghafoor and Abdul Shakoor. 
Petitioners of i.e. the 
appellants represented the branch of Abdul Shakoor. The 
contesting respondents of the said writ petition i.e. respondents 
herein represented the branch of Abdul Ghafoor. In the basic year, 
the entries were recorded in the following manner: 

Khata No. 98 was recorded in the names of the 
respondents Sami Ullah and Badlu as well as in 
the name of Zahoor Ahmed (father of the 
appellants). 

Khata No. 99 was recorded in the names of Sami 
 
Ullah and Badlu (the respondents). 

Khata No. 100 was exclusively recorded in the 
name of Sami Ullah (respondent No. 1). 
14.2. 
Zahoor Ahmed, father of the appellants, had filed 
objection before the Consolidation Officer claiming co-tenancy 
rights in Khata Nos. 98 and 99 to the extent of half share. He also 
claimed one half share in plot No. 115 of Khata No. 100. 
14.3. 
According to Zahoor Ahmed (father of the appellants), 
the disputed Khatas were acquired jointly by the common 
ancestor. After the death of Satai and Allah Bux, the name of Abdul 
Ghafoor was recorded since he had attained majority by that time 
and Abdul Shakoor was still a minor. Abdul Ghafoor was ‘karta’ of 
the family and he looked after Abdul Shakoor and Mohammad 
Ismail. After the death of Abdul Ghafoor, in view of the settlement 
arrived at between the legal heirs of Abdul Ghafoor and Zahoor 

Ahmed, the parties were in cultivatory possession of their 
respective shares in the disputed Khatas. 
14.4. 
On the other hand, Sami Ullah and Badlu (respondents) 
had contended that Khata No. 98 was taken on patta by Abdul 
Ghafoor and Mohammad. In the said patta, share of Abdul Ghafoor 
was mentioned as 5/6 and that of Mohammad 1/6. After the death 
of Mohammad, his share devolved in equal proportion upon Abdul 
Ghafoor and Abdul Shakoor. Therefore, the appellants who 
represents the branch of Abdul Shakoor got only 1/12 share. 
14.5. 
The case of the contesting objectors (the respondents) 
with regard to plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112 comprising Khata No. 
99 was that these plots were their exclusive property in view of the 
registered relinquishment deed dated 30.06.1948 (which was 
registered on 07.07.1948 and executed by the father of the 
appellant Zahoor Ahmed) in favour of the respondents. They 
contended that the said Khata was neither recorded in the name 
of Zahoor Ahmed nor was he in possession thereof. Respondents 
were the exclusive owners of plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112 of 
Khata No. 99. 
14.6. 
After tracing the trajectory of the orders passed by the 
Consolidation Officer, appellate authority i.e. the Assistant 

Settlement Officer and the revisional authority i.e. the Deputy 
Director of Consolidation, the High Court noted that the Deputy 
Director vide the order dated 20.09.1974 had confirmed the orders 
of the lower authorities with respect to plot No. 115 of Khata No. 
100 but had partly allowed the revision of the respondents with 
respect to plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112 of Khata No. 99 as well 
as of Khata No. 98. 
14.7. 
High Court vide the impugned judgment and order 
dated 05.01.2009 held that execution of the relinquishment deed 
in respect of the four plots of land i.e. plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 
112 of Khata No. 99 was not denied by Zahoor Ahmed. It was a 
registered document and thus carried the presumption of 
genuineness. High Court further noted that the appellants had not 
questioned the genuineness and correctness of the relinquishment 
deed at any stage of the litigation. Zahoor Ahmed was very much 
alive when the consolidation operation had commenced in the 
village. Though he filed objections and had the full opportunity to 
dispute the relinquishment deed, he did not do so. There was no 
evidence on record to show that execution of the relinquishment 
deed was ever disputed by Zahoor Ahmed. On the contrary, the 
stand of Zahoor Ahmed all along was that after the death of his 

father, he was brought up by his uncle Abdul Ghafoor; after 
attaining the age of majority, he might have executed the said 
relinquishment deed. In the writ proceedings, appellants had 
contended that they did not admit the genuineness and the 
binding nature of the relinquishment deed. But such contentions 
were rejected by the High Court on the ground that Zahoor Ahmed 
during his entire lifetime at no point of time had disputed the said 
relinquishment deed. Even otherwise also, the High Court found 
that said plots were exclusively recorded in the names of the 
respondents which would go to show that Abdul Shakoor had 
surrendered his right and title in favour of Abdul Ghafoor. In view 
of the above, High Court opined that the finding recorded by the 
Deputy Director of Consolidation in revision was justified and 
called for no interference. 
14.8. 
As regards plot No. 115 of Khata No. 100, High Court 
noted that all the three authorities below had rejected the claim of 
the appellants holding that the said land belongs to the 
respondents exclusively. Learned counsel for the appellants also 
did not press the writ petition with regard to the said plot. That 
being the position, High Court found no merit in Civil Misc. Writ 
Petition No. 6635 of 1974 and the same was accordingly dismissed. 

14.9. 
In so far filed by the 
respondents is concerned, the challenge was to the finding of 
co-tenancy recorded by all the authorities below with respect to 
Khata Nos. 98 and 99 holding that Abdul Ghafoor had half share 
therein. Respondents (petitioners in ) 
placed reliance on a lease deed dated 07.05.1922 executed by 
Fateh Bahadur and Jagat Narayan Singh in favour of Abdul 
Ghafoor and Mohammad mentioning their respective shares: 
Abdul Ghafoor had 5/6 share and Mohammad had 1/6 share. On 
the death of Mohammad, his share devolved on Zahoor Ahmed to 
the extent of 1/12 share and the remaining 11/12 share devolved 
on the respondents. The said patta (lease) was rejected by the 
Consolidation Officer on the ground that at the relevant time, 
Zahoor Ahmed was a minor and that the lease had not seen the 
light of the day nor was it proved. In appeal, the appellate authority 
held that though the patta (lease) was executed by two persons, it 
was signed by only one person i.e. Fateh Bahadur. High Court 
considered the lease deed dated 07.05.1922 and noted that land 
was taken by two persons, viz, Abdul Ghafoor, son of Allah Bux 
and Mohammad, son of Satai. Abdul Shakoor, father of Zahoor 
Ahmed was very much alive in the year 1922. He had died some 
time in the year 1930. It was clear that the lease was taken jointly 

by Abdul Ghafoor and Mohammad and not as a joint family 
property by the two persons. That apart, the concept of joint family 
property prevalent amongst the Hindus was unknown to the 
Muslims. Abdul Ghafoor and Mohammad were the only lessees of 
the said land. High Court held that the lower authorities had 
misdirected themselves by considering acquisition of the said 
property by Abdul Ghafoor and Mohammad as joint acquisition on 
behalf of the entire family. The source of acquisition of the said 
property was the lease deed dated 07.05.1922 and in the revenue 
records, names of the respondents and of Zahoor Ahmed were 
recorded. The only dispute was with regard to the extent of their 
respective shares. The authorities below had proceeded to allot 1/2 
share to Zahoor Ahmed on the premise that it was a joint family 
property. According to the High Court, the said approach was not 
legally tenable. The revisional authority was also not justified in 
importing principles of Hindu law while determining the shares of 
the parties who were admittedly Mohammedans. Accordingly, it 
was held that appellants would get 1/12 share in the land 
comprised in the lease deed and not half (1/2) as was decided by 
the authorities below. 

14.10. 
In that view of the matter, High Court held that the 
appellants would have 1/12 share in the plots comprised in Khata 
Nos. 98 and 99 excluding plot Nos. 35, 37, 111 and 112 which 
exclusively belonged to the respondents. 
14.11. 
That being the position, was 
allowed. 
15. 
Thus, against the dismissal of Civil Misc Writ Petition 
No. 6635 of 1974 and partly allowing of Writ Petition No. 18 of 
1975, the related special leave petitions were filed. 
16. 
This being the factual scenario, let us now have a brief 
survey of the 1953 Act. The Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of 
Holdings Act, 1953 (already referred to as ‘the 1953 Act’) is an Act 
to provide for the consolidation of agricultural holdings in Uttar 
Pradesh for the development of agriculture. The statement of 
objects and reasons of the 1953 Act is as under: 
After the enforcement of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition 
and Land Reforms Act, 1950, there was naturally a 
pressing demand for the consolidation of holdings in 
the State. Since the complicated and numerous types 
of tenures, both proprietary and cultivatory, the 
greatest stumbling blocks in the way of successful 
consolidation of holdings, have been abolished it is an 
opportune time to start this work. The advantages of 

having in compact blocks all the land farmed by one 
family need only be briefly mentioned. Boundary lines 
should be reduced in “number and extent, saving land 
and diminishing boundary disputes, larger fields 
would be possible and time saved in making trips to 
the fields. Further, if land were all one piece barriers, 
such as fences, hedges or ditches could be erected to 
obtain privacy and prevent trespassing, thieving and 
gleening. The control of irrigation and drainage water 
would be easier; control of pests, insects and disease 
would also be less difficult. 
 
16.1. 
Thus, as per the statement of objects and reasons, after 
the enforcement of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms 
Act, 1950, there arose the need for consolidation of holdings in the 
State. It was felt that the advantages of having compact blocks of 
all the lands farmed by one family was too well known. Boundary 
lines would be reduced in number thereby not only saving the 
lands but also reducing boundary disputes. This would also lead 
to larger fields with attendant advantages. It could be barricaded 
properly to prevent trespassing and ensure proper irrigation and 
pest control. 

17. 
Raison d’etre of the Act was examined by this Court in 
Attar Singh Vs. State of U.P.1. This Court observed that the object 
of the 1953 Act is to allot a compact area in lieu of scattered plots 
to tenure-holders so that large scale cultivation would be possible 
with all its attendant advantages thus leading to reduction of 
boundary lines. In the process lot of land would be saved resulting 
in lesser number of boundary disputes. While reducing the 
movement of the farmers from one plot to another, consolidation 
would enure to the benefit of the farmers in erecting fences etc. around a compact area to prevent trespassing and thieving. It 
would also become easier to control irrigation and drainage besides 
reducing the number of disputes over water. That apart, pest 
control etc. would become easier as the farmers would have 
compact areas for cultivation. This Court observed that such 
advantages resulting from consolidation of holdings are intended 
to encourage the development of agriculture leading to more 
production of foodgrains, so essential for the community. 
18. 
Making a comparison of the 1953 Act with the U.P. 
Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 (U.P. Act No. 1 
of 1951), a Single Bench of the Allahabad High Court in Mool 
 
 SC 564 

Chandra Vs. Deputy Director of Consolidation2, observed that U.P. 
Act No. 1 of 1951 was enacted to provide for abolition of the 
zamindari system involving intermediaries between the tillers of 
the soil and the State and for acquisition of the right, title and 
interest over the land by the tillers and also to reform the law 
relating to land tenure consequent upon such abolition and 
acquisition. On the other hand, the primary object of the 1953 Act 
is consolidation of agricultural holdings for the development of 
agriculture. It was in this backdrop that Allahabad High Court 
observed that the 1953 Act has only a limited role to play and that 
is only with regard to consolidation of agricultural holdings to 
facilitate better quality of agriculture. Thus, the 1953 Act does not 
deal with the grant of substantive rights to the tenure-holders. 
While substantive rights are governed by the provisions contained 
in U.P. Act No. 1 of 1951, the 1953 Act is only procedural with 
regard to consolidation of holdings. 
19. 
Section 3 of the 1953 Act contains the definitions of 
various words and expressions used in the said Act. As per Section 
3(1A), chak means the parcel of land allotted to a tenure-holder on 
consolidation. Consolidation has been defined in Section 3(2) to 

 2007 SCC OnLine All 2196 

mean re-arrangement of holdings in a unit amongst several 
tenure-holders in such a way as to make their respective holdings 
more compact. Section 3(2A) defines consolidation area to mean 
the area in respect of which notification under Section 4 has been 
issued. Section 3(4C) defines holding to mean a parcel or parcels 
of land held under one tenure by a tenure-holder singly or jointly 
with other tenure-holders. Land has been defined in Section 3(5) 
to mean land held or occupied for purposes connected with 
agriculture, horticulture and animal husbandry, including 
pisciculture and poultry farming. Rectangulation as defined in 
Section 3(8A) means the process of dividing the area of a unit into 
rectangles and parts of rectangles of convenient size with a view to 
regulating the allotment of chaks during consolidation. Tenure-
holder has been defined in Section 3(11) to mean a bhumidhar 
either with transferrable rights or with non-transferrable rights. 
Unit has been defined in Section 3(11A) to mean a village or part 
thereof or two or more villages or parts thereof for which a single 
scheme of consolidation is to be framed. 
19.1. 
Section 4 deals with declaration and notification 
regarding consolidation. As per sub-Section 1(a), the State 
Government, where it is of opinion that a district or part thereof 

may be brought under consolidation operations, may make a 
declaration to that effect to be published in the official gazette 
whereupon it shall be lawful for any empowered officer or authority 
to enter upon the declared land and carry out survey etc. Thus, 
consolidation proceedings start in a district or part thereof with 
the issuance of notification under Section 4 which besides being 
published in the official gazette is also to be published as a public 
notice at convenient places of the district or part thereof. 
19.2. 
The consequences which would ensue following 
publication of notification under Section 4 are enumerated in 
Section 5(2). Amongst the various consequences, it is important to 
note that once a declaration is notified, every proceeding for 
correction of records and every suit or proceedings in respect of 
declaration of rights or interest in any land lying in the area or for 
declaration or adjudication of any other right at any stage of the 
proceedings would stand abated. Ofcourse, such abatement would 
have to be preceded by notice and hearing. That apart, such 
abatement would be without prejudice to the rights of the persons 
affected to agitate the rights or interest in dispute in the said suits 
or proceedings before the appropriate consolidation authorities 
under and in accordance with the 1953 Act. 

19.3. 
While Section 7 deals with revision of village map, 
Section 8 speaks about revision of the field book etc upon such 
revision of village map. Section 8A provides for preparation of 
statement of principles to be followed in carrying out the 
consolidation operations. Section 9 on the other hand provides for 
issue of extracts from records and statements and publications of 
records mentioned in Sections 8 and 8A and the issue of notices 
for inviting objections under sub-section (1) thereof. Sub-section 
(2) empowers the noticee to file objections within the prescribed 
period disputing the correctness or nature of the entries in the 
records or in the extracts furnished therefrom or in the statement 
of principles or the need for partition. Section 9A deals with 
disposal of cases relating to claims to land and partition of joint 
holdings. Section 9B provides for disposal of objections on the 
basis of the statement of principles. 
19.4. 
Any party to a proceeding under Section 9 and who is 
aggrieved by an order of the Assistant Consolidation Officer or the 
Consolidation Officer, as the case may be, may prefer an appeal 
before the Settlement Officer, Consolidation, within the period 
prescribed under Section 11. The appellate authority after 
providing due opportunity of hearing to the parties shall pass 

appropriate order in appeal which shall be final. Sub-Section (2) of 
Section 11 makes a declaration that the Settlement Officer, 
Consolidation, hearing an appeal under sub-Section (1) shall be 
deemed to be a court of competent jurisdiction. 
19.5. 
While the appellate order is final, the Director of 
Consolidation has been conferred the power of revision and 
reference under Section 48. He can exercise the powers under 
Section 48 either on a reference or suo moto. The said power is to 
be exercised by the Director of Consolidation to satisfy himself as 
to the regularity of the proceedings or as to the correctness, legality 
or propriety of any order (other than an interlocutory order) passed 
by the subordinate authorities. 
20. 
This is broadly the scheme of the Act. 
21. 
Before we analyse the impugned judgment and order of 
the High Court, it will be useful to have the pedigree of the parties 
in the form of a chart which is as under: 
Satai 

Allah Bux 

 Mohammad 

Abdul Ghafoor 
 Shakoor 
Mohd. Ismail 

 Zahoor 
Sami Ullah Badlu 
 
22. 
As can be seen from the chart above, the dispute is 
between the legal heirs of Shakoor i.e. the appellants and the legal 
heirs of Ghafoor i.e. the respondents. High Court has duly 
considered the claim of the appellants as well as of the respondents 
and has taken the view that in so far claim of the appellants to plot 
Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112 of Khata No. 99 and plot No. 115 of Khata 
No. 100 are concerned, Zahoor Ahmed himself had relinquished 
those lands in favour of the respondents. Relinquishment deed is 
a registered one and was never questioned by Zahoor Ahmed 
during his lifetime. In that view of the matter, the High Court 
concurred with the finding recorded by the revisional authority 
and rightly dismissed 
filed by the appellants. 
23. 
In so far is concerned, the 
same was filed by the respondents, being aggrieved by the 
declaration made by the consolidation authorities that appellant 
would get half (1/2) share in the plots comprised in Khata Nos. 98 
and 99 excluding plot Nos. 35, 57, 111 and 112 which exclusively 
belonged to the respondents. High Court took the view that 

consolidation authorities had erroneously proceeded to allot half 
(1/2) share to Zahoor Ahmed on the premise that the land was a 
joint family property. High Court held that the authorities were not 
justified in importing principles of Hindu law while determining 
the share of the parties who were admittedly Mohammedans. 
Thus, the High Court held as follows: 
I have given careful consideration to the three 
orders of the authorities. I also perused copy of the 
lease deed dated 07.05.1922. A bare perusal of the 
said lease deed dated 07.05.1922 clearly shows that 
the said lease deed was taken by two persons, namely, 
Abdul Ghafoor, son of Allah Bux, and Mohammad, son 
of Satai. Abdul Shakoor, father of Zahoor Ahmed 
(Objector) was very much alive in the year 1922. He, 
according to the finding of the Deputy Director of 
Consolidation, died some time in the year 1930. It 
shows that the lease was taken jointly by Abdul 
Ghafoor, son of Allah Bux, and Mohammad, son of 
Satai. The said lease was not taken as joint family 
property by these persons. The concept of joint family 
property which is prevalent amongst the Hindus is not 
known amongst the Muslims. Abdul Ghafoor, son of 
Allah Bux, and Mohammad, son of Satai, were the only 
lessees and no other person. The authorities below 
misdirected themselves by considering the said 
acquisition of the property by Abdul Ghafoor and 
Mohammad as joint acquisition for the family. 

So far as the validity of the lease in question is 
concerned, the same cannot be disputed by the 
contesting respondents Nos. 4 to 7 (petitioners of writ 
petition No. 6635 of 1974). It is not their case that the 
property was acquired by Abdul Ghafoor and 
Mohammad in any other manner. It is also not their 
case nor established by them that the said property 
was acquired by Satai, the common ancestor, or by 
Abdul Ghafoor, father of Zahoor Ahmad, in any other 
manner. Source of acquisition of the said property is 
the lease deed in question dated 07.05.1922. In the 
revenue records in the basic year, names of Sami Ullah 
and Badlu (respondents Nos. 4 and 5) of the connected 
writ petition and of Zahoor Ahmad are recorded. Only 
dispute is with regard to the extent of their respective 
shares therein. The authorities below have proceeded 
to allot 1/2 share to Zahoor Ahemed on the basis that 
it was a joint property of the family. The said approach, 
in my considered opinion, is not legally tenable. The 
lease in question was acted upon and was accepted as 
is evident from the extract of khatauni (record of 
rights) of the third settlement, Annexure-2 to writ 
petition No. 18 of 1975. The Deputy Director of 
Consolidation was not justified in importing principles 
of Hindu law while determining the shares of the 
parties. In a nut shell, the petitioners of writ petition 
No. 6635 of 1974 will get 1/12 share in the land 
comprised in the said lease deed and not 1/2 as was 
wrongly held by consolidation authorities. 

In view of the above discussions, it is held that 
the petitioners of have 
1/12 share jointly in the plots comprised in khata Nos. 
98 and 99 excluding plot Nos. 35, 37, 111 and 112 
which exclusively belongs to Sami Ullah and his 
brother Badlu, sons of Abdul Ghafoor. 
24. 
We do not find any error or infirmity in the view taken 
by the High Court. The decision rendered by the High Court is on 
a bundle of facts agitated and counter agitated by both the parties. 
It is a factual determination by the High Court based on the 
evidence on record. We do not find any perversity in the approach 
of the High Court or any error apparent on the face of record to 
warrant further scrutiny by this Court. 
25. 
That being the position, we are of the view that there is 
no merit in the two civil appeals which are accordingly dismissed. 
However, there shall be no order as to costs. 
26. 
In view of the judgment passed in C.A.Nos.9739-
9740/2011, the Contempt Petition stands closed. 
 
………………………………J. 
[ABHAY S. OKA].……………………………J. 
 [UJJAL BHUYAN]