IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

SAPNA NEGI 

 …PETITIONER(S) 
VERSUS 
CHAMAN SINGH AND ANOTHER 
 
JUDGMENT 
Aravind Kumar, J. 
 
1. 
The Petitioner-wife is seeking for transfer of the proceedings in 
HMA No.428 of 2023 titled “Sh. Chaman Singh Vs. Smt. Sapna Negi and 
another” pending before the court of the Principal Judge, Family Courts, 
Roorkee, Uttarakhand to the Family Court, Patiala House Courts, New 
Delhi. 
 
2. 
We have heard the arguments of Shri Gaurav Prakash Pathak 
appearing for petitioner and Shri Nagarkatti Kartik Uday appearing for 
respondents. The marriage between the petitioner and respondent came to 
be solemnised on 12.05.2013 and a daughter, Ms. xxx was born on 
18.05.2016. 

3. 
 The respondent-husband filed a petition under Section 13(1)(i-a) of 
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 for grant of decree of divorce alleging that 
petitioner had breached the trust and she was already in relationship with the 
second respondent and despite advice given to her to return to the 
matrimonial home, she has continued to neglect the family and had failed to 
discharge her marital obligations. It is also alleged that petitioner-wife 
having secured a job as a teacher in July, 2022, had completely neglected 
Respondent-husband. Whereas petitioner-wife contended that on account of 
the first respondent-husband having neglected the petitioner and her 
daughter and having failed to take care of them, she was left with no other 
option but to return to her parental home and she has been residing there 
from 2019. 
 
4. 
 This Court in order to explore the possibility of the parties arriving 
at a settlement had referred the matter to the Supreme Court Mediation 
Centre and report dated 24.07.2024 received from the mediation centre 
would disclose that mediation had failed. It is pertinent to note at this 
juncture itself, this Court on 28.08.2024 has recorded that relationship 
between the petitioner and the first respondent had irretrievably broken 
down. It is in this background, the matter came to be referred to mediation, 
which did not fructify into settlement and parties present before the Court 
have also fairly admitted that the marriage has irretrievably broken down. 

5. 
In the factual scenario explained herein above we are of the 
considered view that the exercise of the power under Article 142(1) of the 
Constitution of India is warranted in the facts and circumstances of the case 
and also to do complete justice between the parties particularly in the 
background of this Court having noted herein above that marriage between 
the petitioner and the first respondent has completely failed and the parties 
had not cohabitated from 2019 till date and there being no possibility that the 
parties will cohabitate in future. Hence, continuation of the legal relationship 
would be unjustified and would not subserve the interest of the parties. Under 
similar circumstances, this Court in Shilpa Sailesh v. Varun Sreenivasan1, 
has held that this Court can depart from the procedure as well as the 
substantive laws, as long as the decision is exercised based on considerations 
of fundamental, general and specific public policy. It is also held that in 
exercise of power under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, this 
Court has the discretion to dissolve the marriage on the ground of its 
irretrievable breakdown, and this discretionary power is to be exercised to 
do ‘complete justice’ to the parties, when this Court is satisfied that the facts 
established show that the marriage has completely failed and there is no 
possibility that the parties will cohabit together, and continuation of the 
formal legal relationship is unjustified. 

6. 
Hence, we are of the view that continuation of the proceedings before 
the Trial Court could only be an ordeal which both the parties will have to 
undergo and we are of the considered view that marriage between the 
petitioner and respondent having irretrievably broken down, exercise of 
power by this Court under Article 142 of Constitution of India is called for 
in the facts and circumstances obtained and also keeping in mind that 
petitioner and first respondent are quite young namely 32 years and 38 years 
respectively and have future ahead of them. It is also undisputed that 
daughter Ms. xxx born out of this wedlock is aged about 8 years and has been 
residing with the petitioner-wife from the year 2019. There was a settlement 
agreement entered into between the parties on 22.03.2023 whereunder it is 
agreed that the daughter would be residing with the petitioner and will be 
taken care of by the petitioner herself. Under the said agreement, a sum of 
Rs 7,00,000/- has been deposited in the name of minor daughter Ms. xxx in 
a fixed deposit with UCO Bank, Sabhawala Branch by the first respondent-
husband which is not disputed by the petitioner, though the said settlement 
is seriously disputed by the petitioner on the ground that she is not a 
signatory. Having regard to the fact that petitioner is also gainfully employed 
in a Government school and earning a reasonable income and keeping in 
mind the financial capability of the first respondent-husband to take care of 
the interest of the daughter, we are of the considered view that ends of the 
justice would meet if the first respondent is directed to pay a permanent 

alimony of Rs.13,00,000/- in addition to the amount of Rs. 7,00,000/- 
already deposited in a fixed deposit, as it would take care of the financial 
interest of the minor daughter. Thus, by securing the interest of the minor 
daughter of the petitioner and first respondent, the petition HMA No.428 of 
2023 titled “Sh. Chaman Singh Vs. Smt. Sapna Negi and another” pending 
before the court of the Principal Judge, Family Courts, Roorkee, Uttarakhand 
can be disposed of by granting a decree of divorce of the marriage that was 
solemnised between petitioner and first respondent on 12.05.2013 by 
allowing the said petition. Hence, the marriage solemnised on 12.05.2013 
between the petitioner and first respondent-husband stands dissolved by 
granting a decree of divorce in exercise of the power vested under Article 
142(1) of the Constitution of India. Petition stands disposed of accordingly. 
Pending interlocutory application(s), if any, stand consigned to records. 
 
……………………………….J. 
(B.R. Gavai).………………………………J. 
(Aravind Kumar).………………………………J. 
(K.V. Viswanathan) 
New Delhi 
October 24, 2024