IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
Writ Petition (C) 708 of 2024 

Sonal Gupta & Ors. 

 …Petitioners 
Versus 
 
Registrar General, Rajashtan High Court Jodhpur & Anr. 
…Respondents 
With 
W.P.(C) No(s). 706/2024 
With 
W.P.(C) No(s). 711/2024 
With 
Diary No(s). 48927/2024 
With 
Diary No(s). 48993/2024 
And With 
W.P.(C) No(s). 709/2024 

JUDGMENT 
 
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J 
 
1. A hundred and nine Petitioners have invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under 
Article 32 of the Constitution. The Petitioners are candidates who appeared for 
the main examination of the Rajasthan Civil Judge Cadre 2024 which was 
conducted on 31 August 2024 and 1 September 2024. Their grievance is that 
they have been awarded marks arbitrarily in the subjective exam paper, namely, 
the Language Paper – II (English Essay) which has led to them falling below 
the cut off marks for the interview round. A petition for special leave is also 
preferred against an order of the High Court of Rajasthan dated 19 October 
2024 dismissing a Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution on identical 
issues in light of these proceedings having commenced before this Court. The 
Petitioners seek the quashing of the results of the main exams and re-
evaluation of the answer sheets by an expert committee. Since the issues are 
identical, the petitions are being disposed of together. 
Factual Background 
 
2. The Rajasthan Judicial Services Rules 20101 stipulate that recruitment to the 
posts of Civil Judges shall be made directly on the basis of a competitive 
examination.2 The scheme of the selection process takes place in three stages, 
namely, (i) the preliminary examination; (ii) the main examination; and (iii) the 
 
1 ‘RJS Rules’. 
2 Rule 16, RJS Rules. interview round.3 The scheme of the written examination is provided in 
Schedule IV of the RJS Rules. The High Court of Rajasthan issued an 
Advertisement numbered RHC/Exam Cell/RJS/CJC/2024/783 which notified 
the Civil Judge Cadre 2024 examination to fill two hundred and twenty-two 
vacancies. 
 
3. The Petitioners qualified at the preliminary examination which was conducted 
on 23 June 2024. The main examination was divided into four parts, namely, (i) 
Law Paper – I (Civil); (ii) Law Paper – II (Criminal); (iii) Language Paper – I 
(Hindi Essay); and (iv) Language Paper – II (English Essay). The law papers 
were to be marked out of one hundred each and the language papers were to 
be marked out of fifty each. Three questions were required to be answered in 
the English Essay. For all candidates, the first question was assessed by a 
District Judge level officer while the second question and the third question 
respectively were directed to be assessed by distinct sets of English Professors 
working in a Government College to ensure the fairness of the process. 
 
4. The RJS Rules stipulate that the minimum cut off marks in law papers for 
qualifying for the viva voce shall be 35% for the unreserved category and 30% 
for the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe categories. Candidates must 
have an aggregate of 40% (35% for SC/ST candidates) to be eligible for the 
interview. No minimum marks are stipulated for language papers. 
 
3 Rule 20, RJS Rules. 

5. The Petitioners appeared for the examination on 31 August 2024 and 1 
September 2024. The results were declared on 1 October 2024. Six hundred 
and thirty-eight candidates qualified for the interview stage of the recruitment 
process. When the Petitioners received their score cards on 4 October 2024, 
they noticed that their marks in the Language Paper-II (English Essay) were 
fatally low – ranging between zero and fifteen out of fifty marks. Aggrieved by 
the award of low marks in the English Essay, the Petitioners moved this Court 
for re-evaluation of the answer papers by an expert committee and setting aside 
of the results which were notified on 4 October 2024. 
 
6. The question which arises for consideration is whether there is any arbitrary 
variation in the marks obtained by candidates in the language examination 
which may affect the integrity of the overall results of the examination. 
 
7. The Petitioners argued that there are serious discrepancies in the marks 
awarded to candidates for the English Essay examination. They submit as 
follows: 
a. In the absence of minimum qualifying marks for the language papers, the 
marking has been skewed. Candidates who have otherwise qualified in 
the law papers have been awarded unreasonably low marks in the 
English essay paper; 
b. Candidates who have attempted the paper have also been awarded zero 
marks. Since the paper is subjective in nature, the award of no marks is 
inexplicable; 

c. The limited space in the Question Paper-cum-Answer Booklet hindered 
the ability of candidates to answer appropriately; and 
d. Over fourteen thousand answer sheets were checked by a limited 
number of examiners within a span of one month between the date of 
examination and the declaration of results. 
Procedural history 
 
8. To address the issues which have arisen in this case, the Court issued notice 
on 18 October 2024 and directed the answer sheets in the English essay of 
those candidates who have been awarded below fifteen marks to be produced 
before the Court. Mr Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General placed a note on record 
indicating that of the 3534 candidates who appeared in the English Essay 
examination, 3384 or 95.76% of the candidates have secured between zero 
and fifteen marks. We found it necessary to scan and analyse the data to 
inspect whether arbitrary variations are discernible. 
9. Accordingly, on 21 October 2024 this Court directed that a tabulated statement 
be placed before the Court indicating the marks which were secured in the Law 
Paper-I (Civil) and Law Paper-II (Criminal) respectively by those candidates 
who appeared in the English medium, who secured between zero and fifteen 
marks in the English Essay and who have not qualified for the interview stage. 
The trunks containing the record were directed to be kept in the custody of the 
Secretary General of this Court. Pursuant to our directions, the High Court of 
Rajasthan has produced a tabulated sheet running into seventy-three pages. 

Analysis 
 
10. In Sanjay Singh v. UP Public Services Commission4 this court opined that a 
degree of variation may occur when a large number of candidates are evaluated 
through an examination by a number of evaluators. However, the likelihood of 
discrepancy arises when a wide variation can be made out from the results. In 
Pranav Verma v. High Court of P&H,5 this Court has held that the likelihood 
of discrepancy is reduced where the evaluation process is uniform. The Court 
held as follows: 
“14. … We are of the view that evaluation done by 
multiple evaluators i.e. one evaluator examining and 
marking one question in all the marksheets, ensures 
uniformity and prevents chance grading. Every 
candidate's answers are marked on same parameters 
by the same examiner. There can possibly be no other 
better method to ensure uniformity in evaluation. … 
 
15. The marking criteria and evaluation method was 
strict but it was so for everyone. This was maybe for 
the reason that one evaluator checked one answer in 
each script and in this manner the entire lot of scripts 
were marked. The Evaluators failed to keep a 
pragmatic view that source of recruitment was likely to 
be the same in a fresh attempt also and that candidates 
had only 8.5 minutes to answer each question and time 
constraint did not allow them to give their best of 
performance. Even those candidates who covered all 
aspects briefly were not awarded proper marks. Unlike 
the hypothetical illustration given in Sanjay Singh case, 
it was not a case where some candidates were 
subjected to strict marking and others had an 
advantage of lenient marking, so as to draw an 
inference 
that 
the 
evaluation 
method 
was 
discriminatory or arbitrary.” 

4 (2007). 
5 (2020). 

11. In Prashant Ramesh Chakkarwar v. UPSC,6 this Court has held that in the 
absence of any evidence that meritorious candidates have been deprived of 
their marks deliberately, the Court cannot interfere. This Court held that merely 
because candidates who cleared the preliminary exam did not further clear the 
main exam is no ground to infer fault on part of the examining authority. 
 
12. In the present case the first question was assessed by a District Judge level 
officer while the second question and the third question respectively were 
directed to be assessed by distinct sets of English teachers working in a 
Government College to ensure the fairness of the process. The Petitioners have 
not demonstrated any marked difference in the strictness of evaluation which 
was undergone by the candidates who have qualified for the interview. Absent 
any significant variation, the process of marking itself is not suspect. The 
question which remains is whether lower marks were deliberately awarded in 
the English essay exam. 
 
13. In the interest of justice and fairness, we have perused the answer sheets which 
have been placed for the scrutiny of the Court by officers of the High Court of 
Rajasthan who were present before this Court on 25 October 2024. Based on 
the nature of the answers in the English Essay, we have no doubt that there is 
no substance, even prima facie, in the allegations that there was a deliberate 
low marking in the English Essay paper. The records of the answer sheet were 
 
6 (2013). directed to be placed before this Court. The answer sheets were duly perused 
and remained in the safe keeping of the Secretary General of this Court. 
 
14. Based on the tabulated position which has been disclosed before the Court, we 
find no statistical discrepancy that would warrant the intervention of this Court 
under Article 32 of the Constitution. The marking of the essay does not suffer 
from an infirmity that would cast doubt on the overall assessment of the English 
Essay answer sheets. The petitions, therefore, fail to qualify the parameters 
followed by this Court in a consistent line of precedent.7 
Conclusion 
 
15. We, therefore, decline to entertain these petitions. The Petitions shall 
accordingly stand dismissed. If any candidate has an individual grievance, save 
and except for the issue which has been concluded by this order, liberty is 
granted to move the High Court of Rajasthan in the exercise of its jurisdiction 
under Article 226 of the Constitution. 
 
16. The Secretary General may now hand over the trunks containing the graded 
answer sheets of the English Essay to the team from the High Court of 
Rajasthan who has produced the files. 

7 Sanjay Singh v. UP Public Services Commission, (2007); Prashant R Chakrawar v. UPSC, 
(2013); Sujasha Mukherji v. High Court of Calcutta, (2015); CPIL v. High 
Court of Delhi, (2017); and Pavan Verma v. High Court of P&H, (2020). 

17. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 

…..…..…...…...……………….…...CJI. 
 [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 

……..…..…...…...……………….… 
 [J B Pardiwala] 

……..…..…...…...……………….… 
 [Manoj Misra] 

New Delhi; 
October 24, 2024 
-S-