IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

NEERAJ SUD AND ANR. 

VERSUS 

JASWINDER SINGH (MINOR) AND ANR. with 

JASWINDER SINGH (MINOR) AND ANR. 

VERSUS 

NEERAJ SUD AND ANR 

JUDGMENT 

PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
Heard learned counsel for the parties. 
2. 
Both the above appeals arise out of the common 
judgment and order dated 24.08.2011 passed by National 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission1, New Delhi 
deciding 
First 
Appeal 
No.245/2005 
filed 
by 
the 
complainants against Dr. Neeraj Sud and the Post 
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘NCDRC’ 

Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research2, 
Chandigarh. 
3. 
The complaint of the complainants i.e. Complaint Case 
No.29/1998 regarding medical negligence against Dr. 
Neeraj Sud and the PGI was dismissed by the State 
Commission vide judgment and order dated 27.05.2005. 
Aggrieved by the above decision, the complainants 
preferred appeal before the NCDRC. After remand in the 
first round, the matter again came up before the NCDRC 
wherein the present impugned order has been passed 
and the complaint has been partly allowed. The judgment 
and order of the State Commission dismissing the 
complaint has been set aside holding that Dr. Neeraj Sud 
and the PGI are jointly and severely liable for payment of 
compensation of Rs.3,00,000/- and Rs.50,000/- as costs 
with 6% interest from the date of the complaint for the 
negligence in treatment. 
4. 
Dr. Neeraj Sud and the PGI together have filed Civil 
Appeal No.272 of 2012 aggrieved by the finding of NCDRC 
which states that they had not taken due care in the 
 
2 Hereinafter referred to as ‘PGI’ 

treatment and as such are liable for payment of the 
compensation and cost as aforesaid. 
5. 
The other appeal i.e. has 
been filed by the complainants. The complainants in the 
appeal have not claimed any enhancement though upon 
a reading of the contents, it is implicit that they are not 
satisfied with the compensation awarded and that the 
same is inadequate. The main prayer in appeal is only to 
grant the special leave to petition against the judgment of 
the NCDRC but with no other prayer. The relief claimed 
in the appeal by the complainants has been drafted in a 
very casual and improper manner with no sense of 
responsibility. We deprecate the manner in which this 
appeal has been filed, but in the ends of justice, proceed 
to consider it on merits along with the tagged appeal. 
6. 
The complainants are father and son. The son was a 
minor aged about 6 years when he was diagnosed of 
congenital disorder in his left eye (also known as ‘PTOSIS’ 
or ‘drooping eyelid’) for which a minor surgery was 
performed on 26.06.1996 by Dr. Neeraj Sud at PGI. The 
complainant alleges that there was no other defect in the 

eyes of the son and both eyes had normal 6/9 equal 
vision and the physical deformity diagnosed (PTOSIS, 
drooping eyelid) could have been cured by a minor 
operation which required lifting of the left eyelid a little to 
make it of the same size as the right eye but the said 
surgery was done in a most negligent manner. Instead of 
any improvement the condition of the eye further 
deteriorated post-surgery. 
7. 
The complainants, thus through the complaint made to 
the 
State 
Commission 
claimed 
compensation 
of 
Rs.15,00,000/- for the sufferings due to negligence of the 
doctor and a further sum of Rs.4,55,000/- towards the 
cost of the treatment, loss of studies etc. In defence, Dr. 
Neeraj Sud and the PGI admitted that the surgery was 
performed on 26.06.1996 by Dr. Neeraj Sud who is a 
qualified post-graduate in ophthalmology. He had three 
years of experience in eye surgeries including surgery of 
PTOSIS. During the period 1994-1996 when Dr. Neeraj 
Sud was a Senior Resident at PGI, he was associated with 
about 74 PTOSIS operations. The complainant was given 
proper treatment with due care during operation and that 

the correction and reoccurrence of PTOSIS is a common 
complication of congenital ptosis which could have been 
set right by repeat surgery. The patient was not examined 
by Dr. Neeraj Sud after January, 1997 as he was taken 
for treatment to Guru Nanak Eye Centre, Delhi and Dr. 
Daljit Singh Hospital, Amritsar. 
8. 
The complainants have not adduced any evidence to 
establish any negligence in the performance of surgery or 
treatment on part of Dr. Neeraj Sud or the PGI. They 
mainly relied upon the medical records of the PGI which 
were obtained and considered by the State Commission. 
9. 
The State Commission, upon examination of the records, 
concluded that the complainants failed to establish any 
negligence or carelessness on part of the doctor in 
treating one of the complainants and that the doctor had 
not adopted any unacceptable medical practice which 
may have caused damage to the patient. Dr. Neeraj Sud 
was 
a 
duly 
qualified 
doctor 
possessing 
requisite 
professional skill and competence to perform the surgery. 
Therefore, neither Dr. Neeraj Sud nor the PGI can be held 
responsible for any negligence in the treatment. 

10. The aforesaid findings of the State Commission have been 
partly reversed by the NCDRC only on the basis of the re-
examination of the record of the PGI which showed that 
the patient before operation had proper 6/9 vision in 
both the eyes and was suffering from a moderate PTOSIS 
with no history of double vision. However, post-surgery, 
the condition of PTOSIS deteriorated from moderate to 
severe and the vision of the patient also fell down from 
6/9 in both eyes to 6/18. The patient also suffered from 
double vision post-surgery. Thus, the NCDRC held that 
the doctor was apparently negligent in not giving proper 
treatment and was also careless in not performing the 
repeat surgery. 
11. Deterioration of the condition of the patient post-surgery 
is not necessarily indicative or suggestive of the fact that 
the surgery performed or the treatment given to the 
patient was not proper or inappropriate or that there was 
some negligence in administering the same. In case of 
surgery or such treatment it is not necessary that in 
every case the condition of the patient would improve and 
the surgery is successful to the satisfaction of the patient. 

It is very much possible that in some rare cases 
complications of such nature arise but that by itself does 
not establish any actionable negligence on part of the 
medical expert. 
12. The NCDRC itself acknowledged that Dr. Neeraj Sud had 
the necessary professional qualification and expertise to 
treat the patient but it has granted compensation only for 
the reason that he did not bring the requisite skill and 
care in the treatment of the patient. 
13. The said finding is based on no evidence insofar as the 
complainants have not adduced any evidence to prove 
any negligence on part of the doctor rather have relied 
upon the medical records produced by the PGI. The said 
records 
merely 
demonstrate 
that 
post-surgery 
the 
condition of the patient had not improved but has 
deteriorated which as stated earlier may not be indicative 
of the negligence in the treatment of the patient. 
14. It is well recognized that actionable negligence in context 
of medical profession involves three constituents (i) duty 
to exercise due care; (ii) breach of duty and (iii) 
consequential damage. However, a simple lack of care, an 

error of judgment or an accident is not sufficient proof of 
negligence on part of the medical professional so long as 
the doctor follows the acceptable practice of the medical 
profession in discharge of his duties. He cannot be held 
liable for negligence merely because a better alternative 
treatment or course of treatment was available or that 
more skilled doctors were there who could have 
administered better treatment. 
15. A medical professional may be held liable for negligence 
only when he is not possessed with the requisite 
qualification or skill or when he fails to exercise 
reasonable skill which he possesses in giving the 
treatment. None of the above two essential conditions for 
establishing negligence stand satisfied in the case at 
hand as no evidence was brought on record to prove that 
Dr. Neeraj Sud had not exercised due diligence, care or 
skill which he possessed in operating the patient and 
giving treatment to him. 
16. When 
reasonable 
care, 
expected 
of 
the 
medical 
professional, is extended or rendered to the patient 
unless contrary is proved, it would not be a case for 

actionable negligence. In a celebrated and very often cited 
decision in Bolam v. Friern Hospital Management 
Committee (Queen’s Bench Division)3, it was observed 
that a doctor is not negligent if he is acting in accordance 
with the acceptable norms of practice unless there is 
evidence of a medical body of skilled persons in the field 
opining that the accepted principles/procedure were not 
followed. The test so laid down popularly came to be 
known as Bolam’s test and stands approved by the 
Supreme Court in Jacob Mathews v. State of Punjab 
and Another4. If we apply the same in the present case, 
we would find that Dr. Neeraj Sood was a competent and 
a skilled doctor possessing requisite qualification to 
perform PTOSIS surgery and to administer the requisite 
treatment and that he had followed the accepted mode of 
practice in performing the surgery and that there was no 
material to establish any overt act or omission to prove 
negligence on his part. As stated earlier, no evidence was 
adduced to prove that he had not exercised sufficient 
 
3 English Law (1957) 1 WLR 582 
4 2005(6) SCC 1 

care or has failed to exercise due skill in performing the 
surgery. 
17. In Jacob Mathews (supra) this Court held that a 
professional may be held liable for negligence if he is not 
possessed of the requisite skill which he supposes to 
have or has failed to exercise the same with reasonable 
competence. The complainant has not adduced any 
evidence to establish that Dr. Neeraj Sud or the PGI were 
guilty of not exercising the expertise or the skill 
possessed by them, so as to hold them liable for 
negligence. No evidence was produced of any expert body 
in the medical field to prove that requisite skill possessed 
by Dr. Neeraj Sood was not exercised by him in discharge 
of his duties. 
18. In other words, simply for the reason that the patient has 
not responded favourably to the surgery or the treatment 
administered by a doctor or that the surgery has failed, 
the doctor cannot be held liable for medical negligence 
straightway by applying the doctrine of Res Ipsa Loquitor 
unless it is established by evidence that the doctor failed 

to exercise the due skill possessed by him in discharging 
of his duties. 
19. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we are 
of the opinion that the NCDRC ought not to have 
interfered with the findings and the impugned judgment 
and order of the State Commission so as to hold the 
doctor of the PGI negligent and to award compensation. 
20. Accordingly, the judgment and order dated 24.08.2011 of 
the NCDRC is hereby set aside and that of the State 
Commission is restored. Since the complainants have 
failed to prove any negligence on part of the doctor or the 
PGI, they are not entitled to any compensation as such, 
no question arises for its enhancement. 
21. Accordingly, is allowed and 
 is dismissed....………………………….. J. 
(PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)...……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL) 
NEW DELHI; 
OCTOBER 25, 2024