IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 4402 OF 2024 
( SLP(Crl.) No(s). 10773 of 2024) 

RAMRATAN & ANR.. 

VERSUS 

THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH ….RESPONDENT(S) 

WITH 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S).4403 OF 2024 
( SLP(Crl.) No(s). 14993 of 2024) 
 Diary No. 40532/2024 

JUDGMENT 
Mehta, J. 
 
1. 
Leave Granted. 
2. 
This appeal arises from an order dated 25th July, 20241 
passed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Indore Bench2 in 
Miscellaneous. Vide the 
impugned order, the High Court granted bail to the appellants, 
 
1 Hereinafter being referred to as ‘Impugned Order’ 
2 Hereinafter being referred to as ‘High Court’ 

subject to certain conditions, including the removal of a wall at 
their expense and also directed the State of Madhya Pradesh to 
hand over the possession of the disputed property to the 
complainant3(objector before the High Court). 
3. 
The brief facts relevant and essential for the adjudication of 
the present appeal are as follows. 
4. 
An FIR4 was lodged on 22nd April, 2024 for the offences 
punishable under Sections 294, 323, 506, 447, 147, 148, and 
Section 458 of the Indian Penal Code, 18605 at Police Station Road, 
Ratlam, Madhya Pradesh. The complainant alleged that the 
appellants, along with others, had forcefully entered into his 
property after breaking a wall and assaulted his family members. 
In pursuance of the same, the appellants were arrested on 27th 
April, 2024. The appellant's First Bail Application6 was dismissed 
as withdrawn vide order dated 29th May, 2024, with liberty to 
renew the prayer after the chargesheet was filed. The chargesheet 
was filed against the appellants on 20th June, 2024 under Sections 
294, 323, 506, 447, 147, 148, 458, 149 and Section 326 IPC. 
 
3 Mr. Ghanshyam Lashkari 
4 FIR No. 539 of 2024 
5 Hereinafter being referred to as the ‘IPC’ 
6 M.Cr.C. No. 22301 of 2024 

Thereafter, the appellants preferred a Second Bail Application7, 
which came to be allowed vide the impugned order with 
the following observations: 
“5.Prayer is vehemently opposed by the counsel for the 
objector and it is submitted that as per the complainant’s 
information, they have still not received the keys of the 
disputed property and even otherwise, since the accused 
persons have already sealed the gates by constructing a 
wall, and the entry in the aforesaid house is from the 
premises of the accused persons only, hence, the 
complainant would not be able to enter into the premises. 
6. Counsel for the State, on the other hand, has submitted 
that as per information received, the disputed property is of 
the government only, and the keys are lying with the 
Collector, Ratlam. However, it is also submitted that the 
keys were handed over to the SHO of the concerned Police 
station by the Mahant of Ramsuchi Sampradayas. 
7. Be that as it may, this Court is of the considered opinion 
that since the applicants are already in jail since 27.04 2024 
and they have already handed over the possession of the 
property to the concerned police station. In such 
circumstances, respondent/State is directed to remove 
the wall in front of the gates facing the road at the 
expense of the applicants, and its keys be also handed 
over to the complainant positively within a period of 15 
days. Needless to say that the accused persons shall not 
interfere in the possession of the registered owner of 
the property, which is in the name of the complainant 
Ghanshyam Lashkari, and shall also bear the expenses 
of clearing the main gates of the house facing the road.” 
8. In view of the aforesaid, without commenting on the 
merits of the case, the application filed by the applicants is 
hereby allowed. The applicants are directed to be released 
on bail upon furnishing a personal bond in the sum of 
Rs.50,000/-(Rupees Fifty Thousand) each with separate 
solvent surety of the like amount to the satisfaction of the 
trial Court for their regular appearance before the trial 
Court during trial with a condition that they shall remain 
present before the court concerned during trial and shall 
 
7 M.Cr.C. No. 27154 of 2024 

also 
abide 
by 
the 
conditions 
enumerated 
under 
Section437(3) Criminal Procedure Code,1973. ” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
5. 
The appellants have filed the present appeal challenging the 
onerous conditions imposed by the High Court while granting the 
bail to them vide the impugned order. 
6. 
Learned counsel representing the appellants submitted that 
the conditions imposed by the High Court are excessive and 
beyond the scope of bail proceedings. 
7. 
It was submitted that the High Court exceeded its jurisdiction 
under Section 437(3) and Section 439 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 19738 by imposing onerous conditions that goes beyond 
ensuring the presence of the accused during investigation and 
trial. 
8. 
It was further submitted that the High Court's order to hand 
over the keys of the disputed property to the complainant has 
prejudiced the ongoing Civil Suit9 between the State of Madhya 
Pradesh and the complainant, his wife, and Mahant Pushpraj 
 
8 Hereinafter being referred to as the ‘CrPC’ 
9 RCSA No. 2019 of 2024, for declaration and permanent injunction against the complainant 
[Ghanshyam Lashkari], his wife [Durga Lashkari] and Mahant Pushparaj seeking cancellation 
of a deed dated 21.07.2011. titled “Government of Madhya Pradesh through Collector, 
Ratlam, Madhya Pradesh v. Mrs. Durga Lashkari and Ors.”. 
9. 
Learned standing counsel for the State of Madhya Pradesh 
affirmed that a Civil Suit10 is pending between the State and the 
complainant, his wife, and Mahant Pushpraj in which the State 
has sought a declaration of title and permanent injunction. As per 
the learned counsel for the State, while deciding the bail 
application, the High Court ought not to have ventured into the 
civil dispute inter se between the parties, as the order to deliver the 
possession 
of 
the 
property 
to 
the 
complainant(who 
is 
the defendant in the pending suit for title declaration), is bound to 
have prejudicial consequences on the civil rights of the parties. 
10. Mr. Puneet Jain, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf 
of the complainant vehemently and fervently opposed the 
submissions advanced by the appellant's counsel. He urged that 
looking at the fact that the appellants had forcibly broken into the 
premises of the complainant being the registered owner of the 
property and caused injuries to him and his family members, the 
High Court was fully justified in imposing the conditions as set out 
 
10 Supra, Note 9 

in the impugned order, while extending indulgence of bail to the 
appellants. 
11. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. The issue 
that requires our attention is as to whether the High Court 
exceeded the jurisdiction conferred upon it by Section 439 CrPC 
by imposing onerous and unreasonable conditions unrelated to 
the grant of bail, to be specific, the direction for removal of the wall 
at the expense of the appellants and handing over possession of 
the disputed property to the complainant. 
12. The fundamental purpose of bail is to ensure the accused's 
presence during the investigation and trial. Any conditions 
imposed must be reasonable and directly related to this objective. 
This Court in “Parvez Noordin Lokhandwalla v. State of 
Maharastra and Another11” observed that though the competent 
court is empowered to exercise its discretion to impose “any 
condition” for the grant of bail under Sections 437(3) and 439(1)(a) 
CrPC, the discretion of the court has to be guided by the need to 
facilitate the administration of justice, secure the presence of the 
accused and ensure that the liberty of the accused is not misused 
 
11 (2020) 

to impede the investigation, overawe the witnesses or obstruct the 
course of justice. The relevant observations are extracted herein 
below: 
“14. The language of Section 437(3) CrPC which uses the 
expression “any condition … otherwise in the interest of 
justice” has been construed in several decisions of this 
Court. Though the competent court is empowered to 
exercise its discretion to impose “any condition” for the 
grant of bail under Sections 437(3) and 439(1)(a) CrPC, 
the discretion of the court has to be guided by the need 
to facilitate the administration of justice, secure the 
presence of the accused and ensure that the liberty of 
the accused is not misused to impede the investigation, 
overawe the witnesses or obstruct the course of justice. 
Several decisions of this Court have dwelt on the nature of 
the conditions which can legitimately be imposed both in 
the context of bail and anticipatory bail.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
13. In Sumit Mehta v. State (NCT of Delhi)12, this Court 
discussed the scope of the discretion of the Court to impose “any 
condition” on the grant of bail and observed in the following terms:- 
“15. The words “any condition” used in the provision 
should not be regarded as conferring absolute power on a 
court of law to impose any condition that it chooses to 
impose. Any condition has to be interpreted as a 
reasonable condition acceptable in the facts permissible 
in the circumstance and effective in the pragmatic 
sense and should not defeat the order of grant of bail. 
We are of the view that the present facts and circumstances 
of the case do not warrant such extreme condition to be 
imposed.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

12 (2013) 

14. This Court in Dilip Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh and 
Another13, laid down the factors to be taken into consideration 
while deciding the application for bail and observed: 
“4. It is well settled by a plethora of decisions of this Court 
that criminal proceedings are not for realisation of disputed 
dues. It is open to a court to grant or refuse the prayer for 
anticipatory bail, depending on the facts and circumstances 
of the particular case. The factors to be taken into 
consideration, while considering an application for bail 
are the nature of accusation and the severity of the 
punishment in the case of conviction and the nature of 
the 
materials 
relied 
upon 
by 
the 
prosecution; 
reasonable 
apprehension 
of 
tampering 
with 
the 
witnesses or apprehension of threat to the complainant 
or the witnesses; reasonable possibility of securing the 
presence of the accused at the time of trial or the 
likelihood of his abscondence; character, behaviour and 
standing of the accused; and the circumstances which 
are peculiar or the accused and larger interest of the 
public or the State and similar other considerations. A 
criminal 
court, 
exercising 
jurisdiction 
to 
grant 
bail/anticipatory bail, is not expected to act as a recovery 
agent to realise the dues of the complainant, and that too, 
without any trial.” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
15. In Mahesh Chandra v. State of U.P. and Others14, this 
Court observed that while deciding a bail application, it is not the 
jurisdiction of the Court to decide civil disputes as between the 
parties. The relevant part is extracted hereinbelow: 
“3. As a condition for grant of anticipatory bail, the High 
Court has recorded the undertaking of the petitioners to pay 
to the victim daughter-in-law a sum of Rs 2000 per month 
and failure to do so would result in vacation of the order 
 
13 (2021) 
14 (2006) 

granting bail. We notice that the applicants before the High 
Court were the jeth and jethani of the victim. We fail to 
understand how they can be made liable to deposit Rs 2000 
per month for the maintenance of the victim. Moreover, 
while deciding a bail application, it is not the 
jurisdiction of the court to decide civil disputes as 
between the parties. We, therefore, remit the matter to the 
High Court to consider the bail application afresh on merit 
and to pass an appropriate order without imposing any 
condition of the nature imposed by the impugned order. 
(Emphasis supplied) 
16. This Court has consistently emphasised that the Court's 
discretion in imposing conditions must be guided by the need to 
facilitate the administration of justice, secure the accused's 
presence, and prevent the misuse of liberty to impede the 
investigation or obstruct justice. 
17. Having gone through the impugned order, particularly the 
observations made by the High Court in paragraphs 5, 6, and 715, 
we find that while the Second Bail application of the appellants 
was under consideration, it was the police who took possession of 
the keys of the immovable property under an alleged voluntary 
application filed by the Mahant of Ram Suchi Sampradaya. We 
believe that this action by the police to take possession of 
immovable 
property 
reflects 
total 
lawlessness. 
Under 
no 
circumstances, can the police be allowed to interfere with the 
 
15 Supra, Para 4 

possession of immovable property, as such action does not bear 
sanction by any provision of law. 
18. Therefore, we conclude that the High Court has clearly 
exceeded its jurisdiction in para 7 of the impugned order by 
imposing the conditions of demolishing the wall at the expense of 
the appellants and handing over the possession of the disputed 
property to the complainant. 
19. In this case, the conditions imposed clearly tantamount to 
deprivation of civil rights, rather than measures to ensure the 
accused's presence during trial. Therefore, the conditions imposed 
by the High Court in the highlighted extract of paragraph 716 of the 
impugned order, are hereby set aside. 
20. We further make it clear that none of the observations made 
in the order dated 25th July, 2024, or this order shall prejudice the 
rights of the parties in the pending civil suit17. 
21. The appellants shall continue to remain on bail upon 
furnishing a personal bond in the sum of Rs. 50,000/- each, with 
one surety of the like amount, to the satisfaction of the trial Court. 
 
16 Supra, Para 4 
17 Supra, Note 9 

22. The other conditions imposed by the High Court shall remain 
in force. 
23. The appeal is allowed in these terms. No costs. 
24. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

25. Permission to file special leave petition is granted. 
26. Leave granted. 
27. The appeal is allowed in terms of the judgment passed in. 
28. Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

 (C.T. RAVIKUMAR).………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
 
New Delhi; 
October 25, 2024