IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

NABHA POWER LIMITED & ANR. 
 …Appellant (s) 
 
Versus 
 
PUNJAB STATE POWER 
COROPORATION LIMITED & ANR....Respondent(s) 

JUDGMENT 

K.V. Viswanathan, J. 
 
1. 
The present appeal arises from the judgment dated 30.06.2014 
of the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity (for short the “APTEL”) in 
Appeal No. 29 of 2013. By the said judgement, the APTEL 
dismissed the appeal of the appellant and confirmed the order dated 
12.11.2012 of the Punjab State Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(for short the “State Commission”), insofar as issue no. 1 discussed 
therein was concerned. That issue concerned the aspect of Mega 

Power Policy and the effect of the Press Release of 01.10.2009. We 
are only concerned with the said issue in this Appeal. 
FACTS OF THE CASE: - 
A) Customs Notification No. 21/2002 dated 01.03.2002. 
2. 
To appreciate the issues involved, certain background facts 
need to be set out. Goods imported for setting up a Mega Power 
Project had, under a notification issued under Section 25 of the 
Customs Act dated 01.03.2002, been granted certain exemptions 
from customs duty. It will be useful to set out the relevant part of the 
01.03.2002 notification. 
“Exemption and effective rates of basic and additional duty 
for specified goods of Chapters 1 to 99. - In exercise of the 
powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 25 of the 
Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) and in supersession of the 
notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Finance (Department 
of Revenue), No. 17 /2001- Customs, dated the 1st March, 2001 
[G.S.R. 116(E), dated the 1st March, 2001], the Central 
Government, being satisfied that it is necessary in the public 
interest so to do, hereby exempts the goods of the description 
specified in column (3) of the Table below or column (3) of the 
said Table read with the relevant List appended hereto, as the 
case may be, and falling within the Chapter, heading or sub-
heading of the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 
(51 of 1975) as are specified in the corresponding entry in 
column (2) of the said Table, when imported into India, - 

(a) from so much of the duty of customs leviable thereon under 
the said First Schedule as is in excess of the amount calculated 
at the rate specified in the corresponding entry in column (4) of 
the said Table; 
(b) from so much of the additional duty leviable thereon under 
sub-section (1) of section 3 of the said Customs Tariff Act, as 
is in excess of the rate specified in the corresponding entry in 
column (5) of the said Table, 
Subject to any of the conditions, specified in the Annexure to 
this notification, the condition No. of which is mentioned in the 
corresponding entry in column (6) of the said Table: 
S.No. Chapter or 
Heading 
No. or sub-
heading 
No. 
Description of 
goods 
Standard 
rate 
Additional 
duty rate 
Condition 
no. 

98.01 
Goods required 
for setting up of 
any 
Mega 
Power 
Project 
specified in List 
42, 
if 
such 
Mega 
Power 
Project is – 

an 
inter-
State 
thermal 
power plant of a 
capacity 
of 
1000 MW or 
more; or 

an 
inter-
State 
hydel 
power plant of a 
capacity of 500 
MW or more, as 
Nil 
Nil 

certified by an 
officer 
not 
below the rank 
of 
a 
Joint 
Secretary to the 
Government of 
India 
in 
the 
Ministry 
of 
Power 
 
86. (a) If an officer not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to 
the Government of India in the Ministry of Power certifies that- 
(i) the power purchasing State has constituted the Regulatory 
Commission with full powers to fix tariffs; · 
(ii) the power purchasing State undertakes, in principle, to 
privatise distribution in all cities, in that State, each of which 
has a population of more than one million, within a period to be 
fixed by the Ministry of Power; and 
(iii) the power purchasing State has agreed to provide recourse 
to that State’s share of Central Plan allocations and other 
devolutions towards discharge of any outstanding payment in 
respect of purchase of power; 
(b) In the case of imports by a Central Public Sector 
Undertaking, the quantity, total value, description and 
specifications of the imported goods are certified by the 
Chairman and Managing Director of the said Central Public 
Sector Undertaking; and 
(c) In the case of imports by a Private Sector Project, the 
quantity, total value, description and specifications of the 
imported goods are certified by the Chief Executive Officer of 
such project.” 
 
B) 
Mega Power Policy of 2006 
3. 
On 10.06.2009, when competitive bidding was initiated by the 
respondent, what was in vogue was the Mega Power Policy, 2006. If 

a thermal plant was covered as a Mega Power Project under the Mega 
Power Policy of 2006, it was entitled to the benefit of certain 
exemptions under the customs notification dated 01.03.2002 
extracted hereinabove. 
4. The Mega Power Policy, 2006 prescribed the following 
conditions to be fulfilled by the developer for grant of mega power 
status:- 
“MEGA POWER PROJECTS: REVISED POLICY 
GUIDELINES 
The following conditions are required to be fulfilled by the 
developer for grant of mega project status:- 
(a) an inter-state thermal power plant of a capacity of 700 MW 
or more, located in the States of Jammu and Kashmir, Sikkim, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Nagaland and Tripura; or 
(b) an inter-state thermal power plant of a capacity of 1000 MW 
or more, located in States other than those specified in clause 
(a) above; or 
(c) an inter-state hydel power plant of a capacity of 350 MW or 
more, located in the States of Jammu and Kashmir, Sikkim, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Nagaland and Tripura; or 
(d) an inter-state hydel power plant of a capacity of 500 MW or 
more, located in States other than those specified in clause (a) 
above. 
Fiscal concessions/benefits available to the Mega Power 
Projects 
Zero Customs Duty: In terms of the notification of the 
Government of India in the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) No.21/2002-Customs dated 1st March, 2002 read 

together with No.49/2006-Customs dated 26th May, 2006, the 
import of capital equipment would be free of customs duty for 
these projects. 
Deemed Export Benefits: Under Chapter 8(f) of the Foreign 
Trade Policy, Deemed Export Benefits is available to domestic 
bidders for projects both under public and private sector on 
following the stipulations prescribed therein. 
Pre-conditions for availing the benefits: Goods required for 
setting up of any mega power project, qualify for the above 
fiscal benefits after it is certified by an officer not below the 
rank of a Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India in the Ministry of 
Power that- 
(i) the power purchasing States have constituted the Regulatory 
Commissions with full powers to fix tariffs; 
(ii) the power purchasing States undertakes, in principle, to 
privatize distribution in all cities, in that State, each of which 
has a population of more than one million, within a period to be 
fixed by the Ministry of Power. 
Price preference to domestic PSUs bidders: In order to ensure 
that domestic bidders are not adversely affected, price 
preference of 15% would be given for the projects under public 
sector. The domestic bidders would be allowed to quote in US 
Dollars or any other foreign currency of their choice. 
Income Tax benefits: In addition, the income-tax holiday 
regime as per Section 80-IA of the Income Tax Act 1961 can 
also be availed.” 
 
What is important is the phrase “Inter-State Thermal Power Plant” 
employed in the policy. 
C) Request For Proposal 
5. 
It was when this legal regime was in force that on 
10.06.2009, the erstwhile Punjab State Electricity Board [now 

after unbundling-the distribution being known as Punjab State 
Power Corporation Limited (PSPCL)] through its then wholly 
owned subsidiary and a special purpose vehicle, appellant no. 1-
Nabha Power Limited issued a Request For Proposal (RFP). The 
RFP was for selection of developers through tariff-based bidding 
process under Section 63 of the Electricity Act 2003, for 
procurement of power on long-term basis from the power station 
to be set up at village Nalash, near Rajpura, District Patiala, 
Punjab. This was as per the Guidelines for Determination of 
Tariff by Bidding Process for Procurement of Power by 
Distribution Licencees issued by the Ministry of Power, 
Government of India. In terms of RFP, the bidders were required 
to quote the Capacity Charge (i.e. capital cost component) and 
Station Heat Rate (i.e. amount of heat required by the plant to 
generate one unit of electrical energy/efficiency of the plant) to 
convert the heat energy for the project and based on these 
components, a levelized tariff for each bidder was to be worked 
out. The bidder with the lowest levelized tariff was to be selected 
for the development of the project. 

6. The term- “Successful Bidder or Selected Bidder” was to mean 
that the bidder selected pursuant to the RFP to set up the project and 
supply electrical output therefrom to the Procurer through the Seller 
as per the terms of the power purchase agreement (PPA) and other 
RFP project documents. Under Clause 2.7.2.1 and 2.7.2.2, the bidder 
was to make an independent enquiry and satisfy itself with respect to 
all the required information, inputs, conditions and circumstances 
and factors that may have any effect on the bid. Under the said 
clauses, it was deemed that while submitting the bid, the bidder was 
to have inspected and examined the site conditions, the laws and 
regulations in force. The bidder was to acknowledge that on being 
selected as the successful bidder and on acquisition of the special 
purpose vehicle (the seller) the seller shall not be relieved from any 
of its obligations under the RFP project documents nor shall the seller 
be entitled for any extension of time or financial compensation by 
reason of the unsuitability of the site. Clauses 2.7.2.1 and 2.7.2.2 read 
as under. 
“2.7.2.1 The Bidder shall make independent enquiry and 
satisfy itself with respect to all the required information, inputs, 
conditions and circumstances and factors that may have any 
effect on his Bid. While submitting the Bid the Bidder shall be 

deemed to have inspected and examined the site conditions 
(including but not limited to its surroundings, its geological 
condition, the adequacy of the road and rail links to the Site and 
the availability of adequate supplies of water), examined the 
laws and regulations in force in India, the transportation 
facilities available in India, the grid conditions, the conditions 
of roads, bridges, ports, etc. for unloading and/or transporting 
heavy pieces of material and has based fts design, equipment 
size and fixed its price taking into account all such relevant 
conditions and also the risks, contingencies and other 
circumstances which may influence or affect the supply of 
power. Accordingly, the Bidder acknowledges that, on being 
selected as Successful Bidder and on acquisition of the Seller, 
the Seller shall not be relieved from any of its obligations under 
the RFP Project Documents nor shall the Seller be entitled to 
any extension of time or financial compensation by reason of 
the unsuitability of the Site for whatever reason. 
 
2.7.2.2 In their own interest, the Bidders are requested to 
familiarize themselves with the Electricity Act, 2003, the 
Income Tax Act 1961, the Companies Act, 1956, the Customs 
Act, the Foreign Exchange Management Act, IEGC, the 
regulations framed by regulatory commissions and all other 
related acts, laws, rules and regulations prevalent in India. The 
Procurer/Authorised Representative shall not entertain any 
request for clarifications from the Bidders regarding the same. 
Non-awareness of these laws or such information shall not be a 
reason for the Bidder to request for extension of the Bid 
Deadline. The Bidder undertakes and agrees that before 
submission of its Bid all such factors, as generally brought out 
above, have been fully investigated and considered while 
submitting the Bid.” 

Press Release of 1.10.2009 
7. 
When the matter stood thus, a Press Release was issued by the 
Press Information Bureau, Government of India under the heading 
“Modification of Mega Power Policy”. It will be safer to extract the 

entire Press Release as this is the fulcrum on which the entire case of 
the appellant revolves. The Press Release with certain portions 
emphasized by us, is extracted hereinbelow: 
“PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
Press Release 
Thursday, October 01,2009 
Modification of Mega Power Policy 
The Union Cabinet today approved modifications in the 
existing mega power policy. This would encourage setting up 
of mega power plants to take advantage of economies of scale 
and improve their viability. It will simplify the procedure for 
grant of mega certificate and encourage capacity addition. It 
will also encourage technology transfer and indigenous 
manufacturing in the field of super critical power equipments. 
The mega Power Policy was introduced in November 1995 for 
providing impetus to development of large size power projects 
in the country and derive benefit from economies of scale. 
These guidelines were modified in 1998 and 2002 and was last 
amended in April 2006 to encourage power development in 
Jammu & Kashmir and the North Eastern region. 
In order to rationalize the Mega Power Policy and bring it in 
consonance with the National Electricity Policy 2005 and Tariff 
Policy 2006, the following modifications of the existing Mega 
Power Policy have been envisaged: 
(i) The existing condition of privatization of distribution by 
power purchasing states would be replaced by the condition 
that power purchasing states shall undertake to carry out 
distribution reforms as laid down by the Ministry of Power. 
(ii) The conditions requiring inter-state sale of power for 
getting mega power status would be removed. 
(iii) The present dispensation of 15% price preference available 
to the domestic bidders in case of cost plus projects of PSUs 

would continue. However, the price preference will not apply 
to tariff based competitively bid projects of PSUs. A Committee 
would be set up under the Planning Commission, with DHI, 
MoP and DoR as members which would suggest options and 
modalities to take care of the disadvantages suffered by the 
domestic industry related to power sector keeping all factors in 
view. 
(iv) The benefits of Mega Power Policy will also be extended 
to supercritical projects to be awarded through ICB with the 
mandatory condition of setting up indigenous manufacturing 
facility provided they meet the eligibility criteria. 
(v) The requirement of undertaking international competitive 
bidding (ICB) by the developers for procurement of equipment 
for mega power projects would not be mandatory, if the 
requisite quantum of power has been tied up through tariff 
based competitive bidding or the project has been awarded 
through tariff based competitive bidding. 
(vi) A basic custom duty of 2.5% only would be applicable on 
brown field expansion of existing mega projects. All other 
benefits under mega power policy available to Greenfield 
projects would also be available to expansion unit(s) 
(Brownfield projects) even if the total capacity of expansion 
unit(s) is less than the threshold qualifying capacity, provided 
the size of the unit(s) is not less than that provided in the earlier 
phase of the project granted mega power project certificate. All 
other conditions for grant to the mega power status shall remain 
the same. 
(vii) Mega Power Projects would be required to tie up power 
supply to the distribution companies/utilities through long term 
PPA(s) and may also sell power outside long term PPA(s) in 
accordance with the National Electricity Policy 2005 and Tariff 
Policy 2006, as amended from time to time, of Government of 
India.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

The Cabinet decision, as such, is not on record and admittedly what 
is available is the Press Release issued by the Press Information 
Bureau. 
8. The final bidding date was on 09.10.2009 and as per clause 13.1 
from the Format-1 Annexure-3 annexed to the RFP, 02.10.2009 was 
the cutoff date for consideration of change in law. Equally, under 
clause 2.5.3, 25.09.2009 was the last date for seeking clarification. 
Law is defined in Clause 1.1. 
D) 
BID RESULTS 
9. 
The second appellant L&T Power Development Limited 
emerged as the successful bidder and a Letter of Intent was issued on 
19.11.2009 and the L&T Power Development Limited acquired the 
first appellant. The appellant contends that on 02.10.2009, the second 
appellant had addressed a letter to Nabha (then owned by the 
respondent) requesting an extension of the bid deadline to enable 
them to go through the changes pursuant to the Press Release of 
01.10.2009 and ascertain the impact of the bid. It was followed up 
with a letter of 06.10.2009 setting out that the appellant had taken 
into consideration the benefits associated with the mega power status 

in evaluation of their project. According to the appellant, it was 
forced to withdraw the letter before submitting the bid. According to 
the respondent that letters were extraneous to the bid and were not 
entertained. 
E) 
Developments in December, 2009 
10. Certain rapid developments happened in December, 2009. On 
3rd December, 2009, the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Power addressed a letter to all the Principal Secretary/Secretary 
Energy of all the States/Union Territories under the subject 
“Distribution reforms under the modified Mega Power Policy”. It 
was set out in the letter that in order to further liberalize the Mega 
Power Policy as issued on 2nd August, 2006 and also remove such 
provisions which had lost relevance, Government has made 
modifications in the Mega Power Policy and the revised policy 
guideline was being issued separately. It set out that one of the 
decisions taken in this regard was that the existing condition of 
privatization of distribution by power purchasing States would be 
replaced by the condition that power purchasing States were to 
undertake to carry out distribution reforms as laid down by the 

Ministry of Power. The letter proceeded to State that in this regard 
the matter was examined in the Ministry of Power and a follow up 
meeting was held on 28th October, 2009 with the representatives of 
State Power Departments. It was set out that in the said meeting 
various measures for distribution reforms that could be taken up by 
the State Governments were discussed in detail and the letter 
annexed the summary of the minutes of the meeting of 28.10.2009. 
An undertaking was to be taken from the States in a prescribed format 
and the operative portion of the letter, which is crucial, is extracted 
hereinbelow: 
“Accordingly, in pursuance of the Cabinet decision dated 1st 
October 2009 on the modification to the Mega Power Policy, 
following four distribution reform measures hereby laid down 
by the Ministry of Power required to be undertaken by the states 
purchasing power from the mega power projects: 
a) Timely release of subsidy as per Section 65 of Electricity Act 
2003. b) Ensure that Discoms approach SERC for approval of annual 
revenue requirement/tariff determination in time according to 
the SERC regulations. c) Setting up special courts as provided in the Electricity Act 
2003 to tackle related cases. d) Ring fencing of SLDCs. 
An undertaking in the enclosed format (Annexure- II) may 
be given to the Ministry of Power. The said undertaking needs 
to be given at least, once and would be considered in all the 
cases where the concerned State Distribution Utility ties up 

procurement of power from a power project considered for 
grant of mega power state. 
Receipt of this communication may please be acknowledged 
and the undertaking in the enclosed format may be sent to this 
Ministry at the earliest to facilitate processing of the Mega 
Power Policy case(s).” 
 
F) 
Amendment to the Customs Notification dated 11.12.2009 
11. Thereafter, on 11.12.2009, an amendment to the customs 
notification no. 21 of 2002 dated 01.03.2002 was issued. The 
notification is extracted hereinbelow. 
“In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 
25 of the Customs Act 1962 (52 of 1962), the Central 
Government, on being satisfied that it is necessary in the public 
interest so to do, hereby makes the following further amendments 
in the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue) No. 21/2002-Customs, dated 
the 1st March, 2002, which was published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary vide number G.S.R. 118(E), dated the 1st March, 
2002, namely:- 
In the said notification, - 
A. in the Table, 
(i) against S.No. 400, for the entry in column (3), the following 
entry shall be substituted namely:- 
“Goods required for setting up of any Mega Power Project, so 
certified by an officer not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to 
the Government of India in the Ministry of Power, that is to say - 
(a) a thermal power plant of a capacity of 700 MW or more, 
located in the States of Jammu and Kashmir, Sikkim, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and 
Tripura: or 

(b) a thermal power plant of a capacity of 1000 MWor more, 
located in States other than those specified in clause (a) above; or 
(c) a hydel power plant of a capacity of 350MW or more, located 
in the States of Jammu and Kashmir, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura; or 
(d) a hydel power plant of a capacity of 500MW or more, located 
in States other than those specified in clause (c) above": 
(ii) after S.No. 400 and the entries relating thereto, the following 
S.No. and entries shall be inserted, namely:- 

400A. 980

Goods required for the 
expansion of any existing 
Mega Power Project so 
certified by an officer not 
below the rank of a Joint 
Secretary 
to 
the 
Government of India in the 
Ministry of Power. 
Explanation: 
for 
the 
purposes 
of 
this 
exemption, Mega Power 
project means a project as 
defined in S. No. 400 
above. 
2.5% Nil 86 
 
 B. in the Annexure, in Condition No. 86, for sub-clause (ii) of 
clause (a), the following shall be substituted namely: 
(ii) the power purchasing states shall undertake to carry out 
distribution reforms as laid down by Ministry of Power.” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 

12. It will be noticed that entry 400 from the notification of 2002 
was substituted and in the substituted clause there is no reference to 
the thermal plant being an inter-State thermal plant. 
Mega Power Policy of 14.12.2009 
13. Close on the heels, on 14.12.2009, the Government of India and 
the Ministry of Power issued an office memorandum under the 
subject “revised Mega Power Policy”, which reads as under:- 
“No. A-118/2003-IPC 
Government of India 
Ministry of Power 
Shram Shakti Bhavan, New Delhi 
Dated 14th December, 2009 
OFFICE MEMORANDUM 
Subject: Revised mega power project policy. 
 
Policy guidelines for setting up of mega power projects 
were last revised and issued vide this Ministry's letter of even 
number dated 2nd August, 2006. The Government of India has 
modified the Mega Power Policy to smoothen the Procedures 
further. The modified Mega Power Policy is as follows: 
(i) The power projects with the following threshold capacity shall 
be eligible for the benefit of mega power policy: 
(a) A thermal power plant of capacity 1000 MW or more; or 
(b) A thermal power plant of capacity of 700MW or more, located 
in the States of J & K, Sikkim, Arunachal· Pradesh, Assam, 
Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura; or 
(c) A hydel power plant of capacity of 500 MW or more; or 
(d) A hydel power plant of a capacity of 350 MW or more, located 
in the States of J&K, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura; 

(e) Government has decided to extend mega policy benefits to 
brownfield (expansion) projects also. In case of the brownfield 
(expansion) phase of the existing mega project, size of the 
expansion units would not be not less than that provided in the 
earlier phase of the project granted mega power project certificate. 
(ii) Mandatory condition of Inter-State sale of power for getting 
mega power status has been removed. 
(iii) Goods required for setting up a mega power project, would 
qualify for the fiscal benefits after it is certified by an officer not 
below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India in the 
Ministry of Power that (i) the power purchasing States have 
constituted the Regulatory Commissions with full powers to fix 
tariffs and (ii) power purchasing states shall undertake to carry out 
distribution reforms as laid down by Ministry of Power. 
(iv) Mega Power Projects would be required to tie up power 
supply to the distribution companies/utilities through long term 
PPA(s) in accordance with the National Electricity Policy 2005 
and Tariff Policy 2006, as amended from time to time, of 
Government of India. 
(v) There shall be no further requirement of ICB for procurement 
of equipment for mega projects if the requisite quantum of power 
has been tied up or the project has been awarded through tariff 
based competitive bidding as the requirements of ICB for the 
purpose of availing deemed export benefits under Chapter 8 of the 
Foreign Trade Policy would· be presumed to have been satisfied. 
In all other cases, ICB for equipments shall be mandatory. 
(vi) The present dispensation of 15% price preference available to 
the domestic bidders in case of cost-plus projects of PSUs would 
continue. However, the price preference will not apply to tariff 
based competitively bid projects of PSUs. 
3. This issues with the approval of Secretary (Power). 
 
 Sd/- 
(Puneet K Goel) 
 
To 
Principal Sectary/Secretary/ Energy of all States/UTs. 

Copy to: 
(i) Chairman, CEA, 
(ii) CMDs of all PSUs of MOP 
Copy for information to:- 
PS to MOP/PS to MOS(P) / PS to Secretary(P) Sr. PPS to 
AS(AK)/ PPS to AS(GBP)/ All Joint Secretaries/ Directors in the 
Ministry of Power, Dir (PIB), MOP. 
Copy also to Cabinet Secretariat, New Delhi 
Copy for putting on website of Ministry of Power to NIC, MOP. 
Sd/- 
(Puneet K Goel) 
Director (IPC)” 
(Emphasis Supplied) 
 
14. It will be noticed that the mandatory conditions of inter-State 
sale of power for getting mega power status was removed; it was 
decided that goods required for setting up a Mega Power Project 
would qualify for the fiscal benefits after it is certified by an officer 
not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India in 
the Ministry of Power that (i) the Power purchasing States have 
constituted the Regulatory Commissions with full powers to fix 
tariffs and (ii) Power purchasing States shall undertake to carry out 
distribution reforms as laid down by Ministry of Power apart from 
certain other conditions. 

Events Leading to the Dispute 
15. The appellant no. 1 Nabha Power Limited, which was now 
owned by appellant no. 2, entered into a Power Purchase Agreement 
on 18.01.2010 with the respondent PSPCL. 
16. According to the appellant, thereafter a series of correspondence 
ensued between appellant no. 1 and the respondent with regard to the 
issuance of Essentiality Certificate so that the customs authorities 
allow import at the concessional duty in terms of the amended entry 
400, in the Notification of 11.12.2009. The appellant has a case that 
apart from the other documents the respondent asked for an affidavit 
indemnifying the respondent against adverse consequences arising 
out of wrong claim of benefits by the appellant and also an affidavit 
stating that the benefits of mega power status granted to the appellant 
project will be passed on to the respondent as per clause 13.3 of the 
PPA. 
17. The appellant claims that while it furnished the other documents, 
with regard to the affidavit for passing on the benefits of the mega 
power status, it wrote to the respondent on 17.02.2011 stating that it 
had already factored in the benefits available in view of the Cabinet 

decision dated 01.10.2009 and thereafter there is no basis for 
submission of the affidavit as called for. 
18. The respondent replied by its letter of 04.03.2011 and insisted 
on the affidavit as sought for by setting out the following reasons: 
“(i) at the time of submission of bid, the Mega Policy 2006 
was in vogue and therefore, the Project could not have 
qualified as a MPP; 
(ii) the Mega Policy 2009 was notified on 14.12.2009, post 
submission of the bids and therefore, the benefits could have 
only accrued post such notification; 
(iii) the mega power status is granted to a project subject to 
(a) project getting certified as a MPP from an officer not 
below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Ministry of Power; 
(b) the power purchasing States having constituted the 
Regulatory Commissions with full power to fix tariffs; (c) 
power purchasing States undertaking to carry out 
distribution reforms as laid down by the Ministry of Power; 
(iv) the distribution reforms took place in Punjab in April, 
2010 and hence, the bidders could not have considered 
benefits available under the Mega Policy 2009 prior to the 
submission of the bid; and 
(v) in relation to the Project, the Petitioner No.1 had applied 
to the Ministry of Power for grant of mega power status to 
the Project on 11.05.2010 and the Ministry of Power had 
granted the said status vide its letter dated 30.07.2010.” 
 
19. Ultimately, after a lengthy exchange of correspondence with 
each party sticking to their respective position, the appellant no. 1 
submitted an undertaking in the specified format (the factum of the 

undertaking being under protest and without prejudice as claimed by 
the appellant is disputed by the respondent) in order to avoid further 
delay in the issuance of the Essentiality Certificate. The respondent 
replied by stating that the non-escalable capacity charge would stand 
reduced in terms of the Article 13 of PPA in proportion to the 
concession in custom duty on the consignment value of the imported 
goods. Ultimately, the appellant obtained the Essentiality Certificate 
on 16.06.2011. Similar affidavits were furnished for the further 
imports and the respondent granted Essentiality Certificate only on 
the condition that it would have the right to seek appropriate 
reduction in tariff on account of decrease in capital cost of the 
project. 
20. On 22.05.2012, the appellants filed a Petition bearing Petition 
no. 30 of 2012 before the Punjab State Electricity Regulatory 
Commission, Chandigarh under Section 86(1)(f) of the Electricity 
Act, 2003, contending that appellant no. 2 had considered and 
factored the benefits available to the project under the Mega Power 
Policy of 2009, on 09.10.2009 when they submitted the bid and had 
passed on such benefits to the respondent by way of the tariff it 

quoted. The appellant contended that no change in law occurred in 
view of the notification of 11.12.2009 and 14.12.2009 and whatever 
change was there, happened on 01.10.2009 itself with the press 
release of the Cabinet decision. The following prayers were made in 
the claim petition: 
“In light of the facts and circumstances as stated above, the 
Petitioners are respectfully praying before this Hon'ble 
Commission: 
 
(a) to declare that the Union Cabinet's decision dated 
01.10.2009 modifying the Mega Policy 2006 reported vide 
Press Information Bureau on the same date does not 
amount to 'Change in Law' under Article 13 of the PPA; 
 
(b) following the declaratory relief sought by the 
Petitioners, to hold that consequential relief as set out under 
Article 13.2 of the PPA has not triggered and no 
consequential benefits under Article 13 have to be passed 
on to the Respondent by the Petitioner under the PPA on 
account of Union Cabinet's decision to change the Mega 
Policy 2006 dated 01.10.2009; 
 
(c) in alternative, if reliefs sought under para (a) and (b) 
above are not granted, then to direct and allow that the 
Petitioners shall be entitled to claim 'Change in Law' 
against the Respondent's claim on the basis of withdrawal 
of fiscal benefits which were available to the Project under 
the FTP on the date of bidding on standalone basis, without 
considering Mega Policy, 2009; 
 
(d) award cost in favour of the Petitioners; 
 
(e) pass such other and further orders / directions as the 
Hon'ble Commission may deem appropriate in the facts and 
circumstances of the case.” 

Though the prayer are not happily worded, the issue raised with 
regard to the Mega Power Policy issue, as understood by both parties, 
is whether the legal regime was altered on 01.10.2009 or on 
11.12.2009 and 14.12.2009 respectively. 
21. The appellant’s claim before the Commission was founded on 
twin basis. The main relief was on the aspect of the Mega Power 
Policy, the contention of the appellant being that the legal regime was 
altered on 01.10.2009, with the Cabinet Decision, as noticed in the 
Press Release of 01.10.2009. The alternative plea was based on the 
Foreign Trade Policy (in short ‘FTP’) and the appellants contention 
was that in the alternative, the appellant was entitled to claim change 
in law against the respondent on the basis of withdrawal of fiscal 
benefits which were available to the project under the Foreign Trade 
Policy on the date of bidding, on a standalone basis without 
considering the Mega Power Policy of 2009. 
Order of the State Commission 
22. By its Order of 12.11.2012, the State Commission rejected both 
the prayers. The State Commission held that the mega power status 
was made available to a project only when the State in which the 

project is being setup had undertaken the reforms mentioned in the 
Ministry of Power’s letter dated 03.12.2009; that these reforms were 
undertaken by the Government of Punjab only on 16.04.2010 and 
intimated to the Central Government vide letter dated 30.04.2012; 
that the detailing in respect of the modified policy was not available 
in the press release dated 01.10.2009; that the same was covered only 
in the letter dated 03.12.2009 of the Ministry of Power addressed to 
the States and in the notification of the Ministry of Power dated 
14.12.2009. The Commission further held that the benefit of mega 
power status cannot be granted with effect from 01.10.2009 
considering the fact that it was only after a gazette notification that 
the public at large were informed of the decisions of the Government 
and which gazette notification was issued only in December, 2009. 
That the press release itself provided a disclaimer that though all 
efforts have been made to ensure the accuracy and the currency and 
the content of the website of the Press Information Bureau, the same 
should not be construed as a statement of law or used for any legal 
purpose. On the FTP issue, it was held that the benefits under the 
FTP were never available to the appellant and if identical benefits 

were indeed available to them under the FTP, there was no need for 
them to claim the same benefit under the modified Mega Power 
Policy. It was further held that even if it was assumed for the sake of 
argument that the FTP benefits were available before the cutoff date, 
they have forfeited their right to these benefits by claiming similar 
benefits under the new Mega Power Policy. 
Proceedings before APTEL 
23. After the Order of the State Commission, the appellant filed 
Appeal No. 29 of 2013 in the APTEL. The APTEL in the impugned 
judgment denied benefits under the Mega Power Policy and 
confirmed the order of the State Commission on the said issue. 
Insofar as the FTP aspect was concerned, the issue was remanded to 
the Commission. According to the APTEL, the State Commission in 
the order impugned before it had not analyzed the question as to 
whether the benefits under the FTP were available to the appellant as 
on the cutoff date of 02.10.2009 and whether the subsequent 
withdrawal by the Government of India would amount to change in 
law. 

24. Pursuant to the remand, the Commission revived petition No. 
30 of 2012 and issued notice for rehearing on the appellant’s 
alternative claim based on FTP. By its judgment of 16.12.2014, the 
Commission rejected the claim of the appellant based on the FTP by 
a majority order. 
25. Aggrieved by the same, the appellants filed Appeal No. 47 of 
2015 before APTEL. By a judgment of 04.07.2017, the APTEL 
dismissed the Appeal No. 47 of 2015 of the appellant. Against the 
said judgment of APTEL dated 04.07.2017, appellant has filed Civil 
Appeal No. 8694 of 2017. We have in this judgment not touched 
upon the issues in. 
26. Coming back to the order of the APTEL dated 30.06.2014, the 
APTEL while dismissing the appeal insofar as the first issue of the 
Mega Power Policy discussed therein was concerned held that the 
press release did not indicate the terms and conditions on which the 
Mega Power Status could be made available; that the press release 
cannot be construed as a statement of law in view of the disclaimer; 
that the notification dated 11.12.2009 modifying the customs duty 
and specifying the terms and conditions for Mega Power is what is 

law under the definition in the power purchase agreement and that 
the Mega Power Status was received only on 30.07.2010. Certain 
other findings have also been recorded which are not directly 
germane in view of the decision that we have ultimately taken in this 
Appeal. 
27. Aggrieved by the judgment of the APTEL on the issue of the 
Mega Power Policy, the appellants have filed. 
Contentions: 
28. In support of the appeal, we have heard Mr. C.S. Vaidyanathan, 
learned Senior Advocate and in opposition thereof we have heard Mr. 
M.G. Ramachandran, learned Senior Advocate for the respondent 
no.1. 
Submissions of the Appellant 
29. Learned Senior Counsel for the appellant contends that the effect 
of the Cabinet Decision must be seen with respect to the contours of 
the definition of law in the Power Purchase Agreement; that the 
definition includes “any order” of any Indian Government 
instrumentality and hence it cannot be said that the decision of the 

highest constitutionally entrusted body for formulating binding 
national policy is not law for the purpose of the PPA; that the 
appellant could not be expected to ignore the decision of the Cabinet 
dated 01.10.2009 announced through the press release being a 
prudent bidder/businessmen; that even the respondent concedes that 
the Cabinet Decision could lead to promissory estoppel against the 
Government; that clause 2.7.2.1 of the RFP deems that the bidders 
have factored in all “Required information/factors that may have any 
effect on the bid” and that the Cabinet Decision is at least an 
information/factor for bidding purposes. 
30. Learned senior counsel contended that the appellant factored in 
the fiscal benefits accruing from the Mega Policy in view of the 
Cabinet Decision of 01.10.2009; that the appellant informed PSPCL 
by way of letters dated 02.10.2009 and 06.10.2009 about the 
factoring in of the benefits; that the Mega Power Policy 2006 
amendments stood approved on 01.10.2009 and hence the same 
amounted to law; that the implementing actions that followed the 
Cabinet Decision also accord the same understanding as would be 
clear from the Ministry of Power letter dated 03.12.2009, the Minutes 

of meeting dated 28.10.2009 annexed to the letter dated 03.12.2009, 
the Memorandum dated 14.12.2009 and the fact that each department 
was bound to carry out the policy in pursuance of the Cabinet 
Decision dated 01.10.2009. 
31. Learned Senior Counsel further contended that to claim change 
in law (restitution), three essential ingredients are necessary namely 
(a) The event must be after the cutoff date (b) it must be an event 
stipulated in Article 13.1.1 (1 to 4) of the PPA and (c) it must result 
in change in cost of or revenue from the business of selling electricity 
under the PPA. 
32. Learned Senior Counsel contends that the respondent to claim 
relief under, ‘change in law’ must establish with documentary proof 
that consequent to change in law there has been a decrease in capital 
cost and since the appellant in its bid submitted on 09.10.2009 had 
factored in the benefit derived from the Cabinet Decision in relation 
to Mega projects, it received no economic benefit and there was no 
change in the cost or revenue from the business of selling electricity 
under the PPA in view of the issuance of the notification on 
11.12.2009. 

33. Learned senior counsel contended that there was no notice for 
change in law issued by the respondent under Article 13.3.2; no proof 
of reduction in capital cost and no issuance of supplementary bill. 
Further, learned senior counsel contended that no petition claiming 
change in law or any counter claim to the same effect was filed by 
the respondent and it was the appellant which approached the State 
Commission contending that the Cabinet Decision dated 01.10.2009 
is law as on the cutoff date and thus, there was no change in law event 
enuring to the advantage of the respondent. It is further contended 
for the appellant that the Mega Power Policy issued in 2006 was 
issued by way of an executive decision and that the present Cabinet 
Decision is also issued under Article 77 of the Constitution of India; 
that the requirement to place the Cabinet Decision before the 
President is only for information and on this aspect no Presidential 
assent is a prerequisite. Lastly, it is contended that as per Rule 50(13) 
of the Central Secretariat, Manual of Office Procedure, the Press 
Communique/Note 
is 
the 
approved 
formal 
procedure 
of 
communication. Learned senior counsel relied on a large number of 
precedents in support of his submissions. 

Submission of the Respondent 
34. While stoutly defending the orders of the fora below, learned 
senior counsel for the respondent contends that change in law for the 
purpose of customs duty insofar as the appellant is concerned was 
brought into force only on 11.12.2009 with the issuance of customs 
notification under Section 25 of the Customs Act 1962; that Section 
25(1) of the said Act provides for exemption from the payment of 
customs duty to be by notification; that Sub-Section 4 of Section 25 
inter alia provides that every notification unless otherwise provided 
shall come into force on the date of its issue by the Central 
Government for publication in the Official Gazette and that Cabinet 
Decision by itself cannot therefore effect such a change without a 
notification under Section 25 since if something is specified to be 
done in a particular manner it needs to be done in that manner and in 
no other. In view thereof, it was contended that it was the customs 
notification dated 11.12.2009 which brought into force the ‘change 
in law’. 
35. Learned senior counsel for the respondent contended that 
without prejudice to the above submissions, the Cabinet Decision 

dated 01.10.2009 was only the intent or proposal to implement 
something in future and not to give effect to something on 
01.10.2009 itself; the Cabinet Decision does not also provide that 
the benefits therefrom will be effective from 01.10.2009; that the 
Cabinet Decision/Press release by no means can be said to be a 
regulation, notification, Code, Rule, or order having a force of law as 
specified in the definition of the term “Law” in the PPA; that under 
the Rules of Business of the Central Government, the decision taken 
in the Cabinet ought to get implemented in the manner provided or 
under the relevant statute such as by Notification, Rule, Regulation 
or Code in the case of the plenary legislation, such as the Customs 
Act; in the absence of any plenary legislation, the manner of 
implementation is provided under Article 77 by the issuance of an 
authenticated instrument in the manner provided thereon; that the 
definition of the term “Law” in the PPA and the expression 
“Decision” is limited only with regard to the decision by the 
Appropriate Commission and not an Indian Governmental 
instrumentality. Learned senior counsel contends that there is no 
scope for the argument of the promissory estoppel in inter-partes 

disputes between the appellant and the respondent since the Union of 
India is not a party and the present proceeding is not a proceeding 
where a promise is sought to be enforced by a Court of law, against 
the promisor. 
36. The learned senior counsel contends that the appellant under 
Clauses 2.7.2.1 and 2.7.2.2 ought to have considered only the 
applicable law. It is further contended that the Cabinet Decision of 
01.10.2009 did not decide all the aspects of the distribution reforms 
to be undertaken by the concerned State Government to entitle the 
intra-state power projects in the State to be eligible for Mega Power 
benefits. To illustrate, it is contended that the Cabinet Decision stated 
that “Power Purchasing States” shall undertake to carry out 
distribution reforms as laid down by the Ministry of Power. Learned 
senior counsel contends that Ministry of Power laid down the 
conditions on 03.12.2009 including an undertaking to be given by the 
State Government to the Government of India as a pre-condition. In 
view of this, learned senior counsel contends that the Cabinet 
Decision was not in complete form and it was only after the 
conditions were laid down by the Ministry of Power on 03.12.2009 

that the notification dated 11.12.2009 and office memorandum of 
14.12.2009 was issued by the Central Government providing for 
exemption to Mega Power Projects specifically stating that “The 
Power Purchasing State shall undertake to carry out distribution 
reforms as laid down by the Ministry of Power”. Learned senior 
counsel contends that the Mega Power Policy was issued only on 
14.12.2009 with further additions. In view of the same, learned 
senior counsel for the respondents contend that there is no scope for 
interference with the concurrent judgments of the Courts below. 
Question for consideration: 
37. In the above background, the question that arises for 
consideration is: Whether the press release of 01.10.2009 
announcing the decision of the Union Cabinet about approval of 
certain modifications envisaged in the then existing mega power 
policy, is covered within the meaning of the expression “law as 
defined in Clause 1.1 of the RFP/PPA and if so did the extant legal 
regime as on 01.10.2009 undergo a change from the said date”? 

Analysis and reasons: 
38. The appellant’s case, as set out above, is that with the press 
release on 01.10.2009, a new legal regime commences and on that 
basis, it is contended that the appellant in its bid of 09.10.2009 
factored the altered position including the fiscal benefits due to 
customs duty exemptions. The respondent’s case is that the press 
release of 01.10.2009 only sets out the proposal for modification and 
the real modification happened on 11.12.2009 and 14.12.2009 
(preceded by the letter of 03.12.2009). According to them, since the 
change of law having happened on 11.12.2009/14.12.2009 the 
benefits that have accrued to the appellant ought to be passed on. This 
is the simple issue to be resolved. 
39. To answer this question, certain clauses from RFP needs to be 
set out. The RFP carried the format of the power purchase agreement 
as Format 1 Annexure 3. There is no dispute that the same clauses 
occurred in the power purchase agreement executed on 18.01.2010. 
Clause 1.1 defines law as under: 
“Law: means, in relation to this Agreement, all laws including 
Electricity Laws in force in India and any statute, ordinance, 
regulation, notification or code, rule, or any interpretation of any 
of them by an Indian Governmental Instrumentality and having 

force of law and shall further include all applicable rules, 
regulations, orders notifications by an Indian Governmental 
Instrumentality pursuant to or under any of them and shall include 
all rules, regulations, decisions and orders of the Appropriate 
Commission.” 
 
40. The relevant Clauses read as under:- 
 
“13 ARTICLE 1.3 Change in Law 
13.1 Definitions 
In this Article 13, the following terms shall have the following 
meanings. 
13.1.1 “ Change in Law” means the occurrence of any of the 
following events after the date, which is seven (7) days prior to 
the Bid Deadline; 
(i) the enactment, bringing into effect, adoption, promulgation, 
amendment, modification or repeal, of any law or (ii) a change 
in interpretation of any law by a competent court of law, 
tribunal or Indian Governmental instrumentality provided such 
Court of law, tribunal or Indian Governmental Instrumentality 
is final authority under law for such interpretation or (iii) 
change in any consents approvals or licenses available or 
obtained for the project, otherwise than for default of the seller, 
which results in any change in any cost of or revenue from the 
business of selling electricity by the seller to the procurer under 
the terms of this agreement or (iv) any change in the (a) declared 
price of land for the project or (b) the cost of implementation of 
the resettlement and rehabilitation package of the land for the 
project mentioned in the RFP or (c) the cost of implementing 
environmental management plan for the power station (d) 
deleted. but shall not include (i) any change in any withholding tax on 
income or dividends distributed to the shareholders of the 
Seller, or (ii) change in respect of UI Charges or frequency 
intervals by an Appropriate Commission. 

13.1.2 “Competent Court” means: 
The Supreme Court or any High Court, or any tribunal or any 
similar judicial or quasi-judicial body in India that has 
jurisdiction to adjudicate upon issues relating to the Project. 
 
13.2 Application and Principles for computing impact of 
Change in Law 
While determining the consequence of Change in Law under 
this Article 13, the Parties shall have due regard to the principle 
that the purpose of compensating the Party affected by such 
Change in Law, is to restore through Monthly Tariff payments, 
to the extent contemplated in this Article 13, the affected Party 
to the same economic position as if such Change in Law has not 
occurred. a) Construction Period 
As a result of any Change in Law, the impact of 
increase/decrease of Capital Cost of the Project in the Tariff 
shall be governed by the formula given below: 
For every cumulative increase/decrease of each Rupees 
16,50,00,000/- 
(Rupees Sixteen crore fifty lakhs) in the Capital Cost over the 
term of this Agreement, the increase/decrease in Non Escalable 
Capacity Charges shall be an amount equal to 0.267% 
(percentage zero point two six seven) of the Non Escalable 
Capacity Charges. Provided that the Seller provides to the 
Procurer documentary proof of such increase/decrease in 
Capital Cost for establishing the impact of such Change in Law. 
In case of Dispute, Article 17 shall apply: 
It is clarified that the above mentioned compensation shall be 
payable to either Party, only with effect from the date on which 
the total increase/decrease exceeds amount of Rupees 
16,50,00,000/- (Rupees Sixteen crore fifty lakhs). b) Operation Period 

As a result of Change in Law, the compensation for any 
increase/decrease in revenues or cost to the Seller shall be 
determined and effective from such date, as decided by the 
Appropriate Commission whose decision shall be final and 
binding on both the Parties, subject to rights of appeal provided 
under applicable Law. 
Provided that the above mentioned compensation shall be 
payable only if and for increase/decrease in revenues or cost to 
the Seller is in excess of an amount equivalent to 1% of the 
Letter of Credit in aggregate for a Contract Year. 
 
13.3 Notification of Change in Law 
 
13.3.1 If the Seller is affected by a Change in Law in accordance 
with Article 13.2 and wishes to claim a Change in Law under 
this Article, it shall give notice to the procurer of such Change 
in Law as soon as reasonably practicable after becoming aware 
of the same or should reasonably have known of the Change in 
Law. 
 
13.3.2 Notwithstanding Article 13.3.1, the Seller shall be 
obliged to serve a notice to the Procurer under this Article 
13.3.2 if it is beneficially affected by a Change in Law. Without 
prejudice to the factor of materiality or other provisions 
contained in this Agreement, the obligation to inform the 
Procurer contained herein shall be material. 
Provided that in case the Seller has not provided such notice, 
the Procurer shall have the right to issue such notice to the 
Seller. 
 
13.3.3 Any notice served pursuant to this Article 13.3.2 shall 
provide, amongst other things, precise details of: 
(a) the Change in Law; and 
(b) the effects on the Seller of the matters referred to in Article 
13.2. 

13.4. Tariff Adjustment Payment on account of Change in 
Law 
 
13.4.1 Subject to Article 13.2., the adjustment in Monthly Tariff 
Payment shall be effective from: 
(i) the date of adoption, promulgation, amendment, 
re-enactment or repeal of the Law or Change in Law; or 
(ii) the date of order/judgment of the Competent Court or 
tribunal of Indian Governmental Instrumentality, if the Change 
in Law is on account of a change in interpretation of Law. 
 
13.4.2 The payment for Changes in Law shall be through 
Supplementary Bill as mentioned in Article 11.8. However, in 
case of any change in Tariff by reason of Change in Law, as 
determined in accordance with this Agreement, the Monthly 
Invoice to be raised by the Seller after such change in Tariff 
shall appropriately reflect the changed Tariff.” 
 
41. The golden rule of interpretation is that the words of a contract 
should be construed in their grammatical and ordinary sense, except 
to the extent that some modification is necessary in order to avoid 
absurdity, inconsistency or repugnancy. (See para 5.01 Kim 
Lewison, The interpretation of Contracts, 3rd Edition). Similarly, 
any invocation of the business efficacy test as canvassed would arise 
only if the terms of the contract are not explicit and clear. The 
business efficacy test cannot contradict any express term of the 
contract and is invoked only if by a plain and literal interpretation of 
the term in the agreement or the contract, it is not possible to achieve 

the result or the consequence intended by the parties acting as 
prudent businessmen. [See Nabha Power Limited (NPL) vs. Punjab 
State Power Corporation Limited (PSPCL) and Another, (2018), (para 49) and Adani Power (Mundra) Limited vs. Gujarat 
Electricity Regulatory Commission and Others, (2019) 
(para 24). 
42. The law as defined in Clause 1.1 was validly promulgated vide 
the notification of 01.03.2002 and the policy document dated 
07.08.2006. The appellant seeks to contend that the press release of 
01.10.2009 announcing the Cabinet decision approving the modified 
Mega Power Policy as envisaged tantamounts to “law” as defined in 
Clause 1.1 of the Request For Proposal. The appellant contends that 
qua the Power Purchase Agreement (PPA), the press release of 
01.10.2009 would be an order and covered by the phrase “and shall 
include all applicable rules, regulations, orders, notifications by an 
Indian Governmental Instrumentality”. We are unable to accept this 
submission. First of all, the commonly understood meaning of the 
word “order” as defined in Black’s Law Dictionary is as follows:- 

“Order 
– 
A 
command, 
direction 
or 
instruction. 
See MANDATE (1) 2. a written direction or command 
delivered by a government official, esp. a court or judge.” 
 
43. The press release of 01.10.2009 certainly does not fulfil the 
meaning of the word “order” as understood in legal parlance. As 
explained earlier, the Press Release with all its future eventualities 
and conditionalities is only a proposal and it is only after the 
undertakings were agreed to be given by the State Government that 
a final shape was given in the form of a Section 25 customs 
notification on 11.12.2009 and by the policy document of 
14.12.2009. The press release announcing the cabinet approval of 
certain modifications envisaged in the existing Mega Power Policy 
is not law as defined in Clause 1.1 of the PPA. Further, the press 
release does not enact, adopt, promulgate, amend, modify or repeal 
any existing law or bring into effect any law. This aspect has been 
elaborated hereinbelow. Hence, the appellant’s would fail on the 
ground that the press release of 01.10.2009 is not law and as of 
01.10.2009, the continuing legal regime was as per the notification 
of 01.03.2002 issued under Section 25 of the Customs Act and the 
Mega Power Policy of 07.08.2006 and there was no alteration of that 

legal regime on 01.10.2009. The change in law occurred only on 
11.12.2009/14.12.2009, and the respondent no. 1 has rightly been 
held by the fora below to be entitled to the benefits, which ultimately 
will go to the consumers. 
44. The argument feebly advanced by the appellant that no notice 
of change of law was issued by the respondent under Clause 13.3.1 
and 13.3.2 does not impress us. The said clause expressly deals only 
with a seller having to issue the notice if it is beneficially affected by 
the change of law. In this case, PSPCL is the buyer. Further, post 
the change in law on 11.12.2009/14.12.2009 there is a change in cost 
with the reduction of customs duty which will enure to the benefit 
the appellant-seller and under 13.1.1. the benefit ought to be passed 
on to the respondent. 
45. The words of clause 13.1.1 read with the definition of law in 
Clause 1.1 are plain and clear. For a change in law to occur, the 
following events ought to have happened seven days prior to the bid 
deadline that is on 02.10.2009 in our case; (i) the enactment brining 
into effect, adoption, promulgation, amendment, modification or 
repeal of any law or (ii) a change in interpretation of any law by a 

competent court of law, Tribunal or Indian Governmental 
instrumentality provided such court of law, Tribunal or Indian 
Governmental instrumentality is the final authority under law for 
such interpretation or (iii) change in any consents, approvals or 
licences available or obtained for the project, otherwise than for 
default of the seller, which results in any change in any cost or 
revenue from the business of selling electricity by the seller to the 
procurer under the terms of this agreement or (iv) any change in the 
(a) declared price of land for the project or (b) the cost of 
implementation of the resettlement and rehabilitation package of the 
land for the project mentioned in RFP or (c) the cost of implementing 
environmental management plan for the power station but shall not 
include (i) any change in any withholding tax on income or dividends 
distributed to the shareholders of the Seller, or (ii) change in respect 
of UI Charges or frequency intervals by an Appropriate Commission. 
46. Considering the facts of the case and the arguments, we are 
very clear that the case of the parties is not based on any change in 
interpretation or change in consent, approval or licence so these sub 
clauses of the opening part of 13.1.1 is ruled out. Equally, the latter 

part dealing with price of land for the project and cost of 
implementation and rehabilitation package of land or cost of 
implementing environmental management plan is also not attracted. 
47. The question that remains is the applicability of sub clause (i) 
of clause 13.1.1 namely, when did the change in law happen? For 
13.1.1. (i) to be attracted there has to be an enactment, bringing into 
effect, adoption, promulgation, amendment, modification or repeal 
of any law. Further, if there was a change in law the question would 
be, did it result in any change in any cost or revenue from the 
business of selling electricity by the seller to the procurer under the 
terms of the agreement. 
48. It is important to keep in mind the definition of law which has 
been defined to mean in relation to this Agreement, all laws including 
Electricity Laws in force in India and any statute, ordinance, 
regulation, notification or code, rule or any interpretation of any of 
them by an Indian Governmental instrumentality and having force of 
law and shall further include all applicable rules, regulations, orders, 
notification by an Indian Governmental instrumentality pursuant to 
or under any of them and shall include all rules, regulations, 

decisions and orders of the Appropriate Commission. We are 
convinced that the words “shall include all rules, regulations, 
decisions and orders of the Appropriate Commission”, only refer to 
the rules, regulations, decisions and orders of the Appropriate 
Commission. 
49. It is important to bear in mind that ‘law’ is one thing and 
‘change in law’ is another, in the sense that the two are two different 
concepts. For the case in question, we need to understand what the 
extant law was on 01.10.2009 and then decide whether there was a 
legal regime alteration as defined under 13.1.1 on the said date. 
50. The law, as it stood prior to the press release of 01.10.2009 
insofar as the financial implications for the matter is concerned, was 
the notification under Section 25 of the Customs Act issued on 
01.03.2002 and entry 400 thereof, extracted in the earlier part of this 
judgment. That notification, subject to the conditions mentioned 
thereon in entry 400 granted exemption from customs duty for import 
of goods required for setting up of any Mega Power project if such 
Mega Power project was an inter-State power plant and if it fulfilled 
the other conditions mentioned in the notification. Section 25(1) of 

the Customs Act under which the notification is issued reads as 
under: 
“25. Power to grant exemption from duty.- (1) If the Central 
Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest 
so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt 
generally either absolutely or subject to such conditions (to be 
fulfilled before or after clearance), as may be specified in the 
notification goods of any specified description from the whole 
or any part of duty of customs leviable thereon.” 
 
51. It will be very clear that for an exemption under the Customs 
Act to operate thereon there has to be a notification issued in the 
manner provided by the Customs Act and duly published in the 
official gazette. It is so well settled that if a certain thing has to be 
done in a certain manner, it shall be done in that manner or not at all. 
[See Babu Verghese and Others vs. Bar Council of Kerala and 
Others, (1999), relying on Taylor vs. Taylor, (1875) 1 C 
h D 426 and Nazir Ahmad vs. King Emperor, AIR 1936 PC 253]. 
Further, Section 21 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 clearly 
prescribes as under:- 
“21. Power to issue, to include power to add to, amend, vary 
or rescind, notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws.—Where, 
by any Central Act or Regulation, a power to issue notifications, 
orders, rules, or bye-laws is conferred, then that power includes 
a power, exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like 

sanction and conditions (if any) to add to, amend, vary or rescind 
any notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws so issued.” 
(Emphasis Supplied) 
 
There was no duly constituted amendment notification as on 
01.10.2009. 
52. The exemption notification has to be read with the then extant 
policy of 07.08.2006 under which Mega Power Policy, to obtain a 
Mega Power Status, the plant had to be an inter-State power plant of 
the prescribed dimensions and if it were so, certain financial 
concessions/benefits were to be available to it under the policy 
document. Admittedly, that policy of 07.08.2006 was duly 
promulgated by the Government of India through Ministry of Power 
and there is no dispute on this score. 
53. What the appellant contends is that with the press release on 
01.10.2009 and they having received no positive response to the 
letters of 02.10.2009 and 06.10.2009 (since withdrawn), they in their 
bid of 09.10.2009 factored in the benefits that would be available in 
view of the Cabinet decision as announced in the press release of 
01.10.2009. According to the appellants, as such, when the 
notifications for amendment were issued on 11.12.2009 and when 

the policy document was amended on 14.12.2009, there was no 
change in law because the legal regime stood altered on 01.10.2009 
with the press release. Respondents contended that any clarification 
for the bid ought to have been sought before 25.09.2009 and 
independent of that they also contend that press release of 01.10.2009 
does not tantamount to law and that the change in law happened only 
on 11.12.2009/14.12.2009. 
54. The scenario that emerges is that there was a legal regime 
operating, which continued to have force since there was no repeal 
of the notification of 01.03.2002 or the supersession of the Mega 
Power Policy document of 07.08.2006 on 01.10.2009. The press 
release clearly mentioned as to what was envisaged and the 
conditions that were to be replaced and removed. 
55. In our considered opinion, the press release did not 
alter/amend/repeal the existing law as on 01.10.2009. It was at best 
the announcement of a proposal approved by the Cabinet which had 
to be given shape after fulfilment of the conditions mentioned 
therein. Some of the conditions were that the power purchasing 
States were to undertake to carry out distribution reforms as laid 

down by the Ministry of Power and admittedly in that regard there 
was a meeting held on 28.10.2009; an undertaking was sought from 
the States in the prescribed formats and the four distribution reform 
measures required to be undertaken were part of the undertaking. 
Those four measures are (a) timely release of subsidy as per Section 
65 of the Electricity Act, 2003 (b) Ensure that discoms will approach 
SERC 
for 
approval 
of 
annual 
revenue 
requirement/tariff 
determination in time according to SERC regulations (c) Setting up 
of Special Courts as provided in the Electricity Act, 2003 to tackle 
the related cases and (d) ring fencing of SLDCs. 
56. It was thereafter on 11.12.2009 in due compliance with the 
provisions of Section 25 of the Customs Act that the amendment 
notifications were issued which expressly specified the condition that 
the power purchasing States ought to have undertaken to carryout 
distribution reforms as laid out by the Ministry of Power. It is only 
with the promulgation of the 11.12.2009 notification that entry 400 
of the 01.03.2002 notification issued earlier in 2002 was substituted 
to cover goods required for setting up of any Mega Power Project (as 
now defined and set out in the notification of 11.12.2009 and 

elaborated in the policy document of 14.12.2009) did the ‘change in 
law’ happen. 
57. Could the appellant has assumed that the Press Release of 
01.10.2009 ordained a new legal regime? We think not and we hold 
accordingly. The press release is a summary of the Cabinet decision. 
Even the press release makes it clear that it was a proposal that was 
envisaged and which was to come into force in future. 
58. Certainty is the hallmark of law. It is one of its essential 
attributes. It is an integral component of the rule of law. What was 
certain on 01.10.2009 in the context of our case was only the 
prevalent customs notification of 01.03.2002 issued under section 25, 
duly notified and gazetted as well as the Mega Power Policy 
document admittedly promulgated on 07.08.2006. 
59. The press release summarizing the Cabinet decision and beset 
with several conditions created no vested rights on any party to the 
power purchase agreement vis-a-vis the other party on 01.10.2009. 
In fact, the press release itself contemplated certain contingencies. A 
right vests when all the facts have occurred which must by law occur 
in order for the person in question to have the right (see Salmond on 

Jurisprudence, Twelfth Edition P.J. Fitzgeral page 245). It is 
only when the right vests will there be a corelative duty on the other 
as far as nature of the right involved in the present case is concerned. 
60. Accepting the argument would also create tremendous 
uncertainties in the law. In the absence of any repeal of 01.03.2002 
notification and the 07.08.2006 Mega Power Policy, between 
01.10.2009 and 11.12.2009/14.12.2009 there will be two legal 
regime operating. 
61. Lord Bingham of Cornhill in his locus classicus ‘The Rule 
of Law’ rightly identifies as one of the facets of rule of law, the 
following – “the law must be accessible and so far as possible 
intelligible, clear and predictable.” The second and third reason given 
to support the principle makes for fascinating reading and are 
reproduced hereinbelow. 
“The second reason is rather similar, but not tied to the criminal 
law. If we are to claim the rights which the civil (that is, non-
criminal) law gives us, or to perform the obligations which it 
imposes on us, it is important to know what our rights or 
obligations are. Otherwise we cannot claim the rights or 
perform the obligations. It is not much use being entitled to, for 
example, a winter fuel allowance if you cannot reasonably 
easily discover your entitlement, and how you set about 
claiming it. Equally, you can only perform a duty to recycle 

different kinds of rubbish in different bags if you know what 
you are meant to do. 
 
The third reason is rather less obvious, but extremely 
compelling. It is that the successful conduct of trade, investment 
and business generally is promoted by a body of accessible legal 
rules governing commercial rights and obligations. No one 
would choose to do business, perhaps involving large sums of 
money, in a country where the parties' rights and obligations 
were vague or undecided. This was a point recognized by Lord 
Mansfield, generally regarded as the father of English 
commercial law, around 250 years ago when he said: The daily 
negotiations and property of merchants ought not to depend 
upon subtleties and niceties; but upon rules easily learned and 
easily retained, because they are the dictates of common sense, 
drawn from the truth of the case.”1 In the same vein he said: 'In 
all mercantile transactions the great object should be certainty: 
and therefore, it is of more consequence that a rule should be 
certain, than whether the rule is established one way or the 
other. 
Because 
speculators 
[meaning 
investors 
and 
businessmen] then know what ground to go upon.”2 
 
62. Explaining felicitously the said principle, O. Chinnappa Reddy, 
J. speaking for this Court in B.K. Srinivasan and Others vs. State of 
Karnataka and Others, (1987) ruled:- 
“15. There can be no doubt about the proposition that where a law, 
whether parliamentary or subordinate, demands compliance, those 
that are governed must be notified directly and reliably of the law 
and all changes and additions made to it by various processes. 
Whether law is viewed from the standpoint of the “conscientious 
good man” seeking to abide by the law or from the standpoint of 
Justice Holmes's “unconscientious bad man” seeking to avoid the 
law, law must be known, that is to say, it must be so made that it 
 
1 Hamilton vs. Mendes (1761) 3 Burr 1198, 1214 
2 Vallejo vs. Wheeler (1774) 1 Cowp 143, 153 

can be known. We know that delegated or subordinate legislation 
is all-pervasive and that there is hardly any field of activity where 
governance by delegated or subordinate legislative powers is not 
as important if not more important, than governance by parliamen-
tary legislation. But unlike parliamentary legislation which is pub-
licly made, delegated or subordinate legislation is often made un-
obtrusively in the chambers of a Minister, a Secretary to the Gov-
ernment or other official dignitary. It is, therefore, necessary that 
subordinate legislation, in order to take effect, must be published 
or promulgated in some suitable manner, whether such publication 
or promulgation is prescribed by the parent statute or not. It will 
then take effect from the date of such publication or promulgation. 
Where the parent statute prescribes the mode of publication or 
promulgation that mode must be followed.…” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
63. The appellant has relied upon RFP to contend that the Press 
release of 01.10.2009 could not have been ignored by them. We do 
not find merit in this submission. Those clauses in the RFP obligate 
the bidder to satisfy itself about the extant legal regime and those 
clauses cannot operate as a crutch to elevate the press release of 
01.10.2009 to the status of law under Clause 1.1. of the PPA. 
64. We have also found that the terms of the contract to be clear 
and hence there is no scope for applying any business efficacy test to 
interpret the contract as was sought to be contended for the appellant. 
65. One of the arguments advanced by the learned senior counsel 
for the appellants is based on the doctrine of promissory estoppel. 
The argument need not detain us since the respondent PSPCL which 

is the party to power purchase agreement is not the promisor, even if 
we assume the press release of 01.10.2009 as holding out the 
promise. The Union of India has not been arrayed in any duly 
constituted litigation to enforce the promise. The argument also 
belies the primary contention of the appellant since even according 
to their understanding, it was at best a promise by the Union of India 
and not any alteration of the law proprio vigore (by its own force). 
In any case, no steps have been taken to enforce the so-called promise 
and there is no order of any court of law enforcing the promise as on 
02.10.2009. The appellant contends that since the promise was duly 
complied with, there was no need to enforce the promise. This is 
also an argument which cuts at the root of appellants main 
submission. The notifications constituting change in law happened 
on 11.12.2009 and 14.12.2009 and hence there is no basis in the 
contention that on 01.10.2009 the old legal regime had given way. 
66. The judgments cited by learned Senior Counsel for the 
appellant also do not in any manner support the case of the appellant. 
In GMR Warora Energy Limited vs. Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission [CERC] and Others, (2023), this Court 

found that busy season surcharge, development surcharge, and port 
congestion surcharge were increased by circular/notifications issued 
by the Ministry of Railways by virtue of the powers vested in them 
which were enforceable commands proprio vigore. Similarly, the 
letters carrying the decisions of Coal India on the aspect of charges 
for linkage coal and the direction to use beneficiated coal were held 
to be statutory documents having the force of law. The press release 
of 01.10.2009 does not enjoy the same legal characteristics for the 
reasons already set out hereinabove. 
67. Equally, for the same reason, the judgment in Energy 
Watchdog vs. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission and 
Others, (2017) will also not help the appellant. The 
appellant’s main reliance has been on Lloyd Electric and 
Engineering Limited vs. State of Himachal Pradesh and Others, 
(2016). In Lloyd Electric (supra), the appellant therein 
was already enjoying the concessional rate in CST @ 1% up to 
31.03.2009. Not only this, after the Cabinet note, a policy decision 
was taken to extend the period of concession up to 31.03.2013 or till 
CST was phased out. The Department of Industries had issued a 

notification extending concessions from 01.04.2009 to 31.03.2013 or 
till the time CST is phased out. The dispute arose because the Excise 
and Taxation Department issued a notification of 18.06.2009 
granting benefit with immediate effect for the period ending 
31.03.2013. It was in that context that this Court held that the State 
Government cannot speak in two voices and gave effect to the 
notification of the Industries Department so as to maintain continuity 
in exemption from 01.04.2009 and set aside the judgment of the High 
Court which denied exemption from 01.04.2009 till 18.06.2009 
which was the date on which the Excise Department issued the 
notification. Unlike in Lloyd Electric (supra), in this case, there is 
only one voice of the government which has given the customs duty 
exemption for goods imported for use in thermal power plants, 
(without the requirement of the plant being an interstate power plant) 
with effect from 11.12.2009. The policy document also came on 
14.12.2009. The press release of 01.10.2009 could not have been the 
basis for the appellant to have assumed that the notification of 
01.03.2002 would stand amended and they would have the benefit 
from 01.10.2009 itself. 

68. In Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Limited and Another vs. 
Adani Power (Mundra) Limited and Another, (2023), 
this Court held that the communication of 19.06.2013 in that case 
effected a modification to the mutual Fuel Supply Agreement and by 
force of the communication, transfer of coal, which was not allowed 
till then, was allowed between power plants. This Court held that the 
communication reflected the decision of the Coal India Limited 
which was an instrumentality of the Government of India. The said 
case has no application to the facts of the present case. 
69. The judgment in Burn Standard Company Limited Vs. 
McDermott International INC and Anr., (1991) also 
does not advance the case of the appellant. That case dealt with 
permission granted to an individual entity and whether on the facts 
of that case there existed a valid permission by the Reserve Bank of 
India. The issue involved in the present case is vastly different and 
we find the judgment in Burn Standard (Supra) of no relevance to 
this case. 
70. The judgment closer to our facts is Maharashtra State 
Electricity Distribution Company Limited vs. Adani Power 

Maharashtra Limited and Others, (2023). In the said 
case, neither the decision of the Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs dated 06.02.2013 nor the Press Release of 21.06.2013 was 
considered as the relevant date for change in law and only 26.07.2013 
which was the date on which the Office Memorandum was issued 
providing further instructions regarding the implementation of the 
New Coal Distributional Policy [NCDP] was considered as the 
change in law event. Pursuant to the Office Memorandum of 
26.07.2013, the Ministry of Power issued a communication of 
31.07.2013 setting out the decision taken. This case clearly supports 
the case of the respondent that the press release of 01.10.2009 on the 
facts herein could not have been the basis for the appellant to assume 
that a new legal regime had commenced in with effect from that date. 
71. Though several judgments were cited, including Bachhittar 
Singh vs. The State of Punjab, [1962] Supp., to contend 
that the press release of 01.10.2009 was not an “order”, we do not 
propose to examine them as we are otherwise convinced for the 
reason set out above that the 01.10.2009 Press Release is not law 
under Clause 1.1. Equally, for that reason, we have not discussed the 

cases on Article 77 of the Constitution of India, dealing with 
authentication of orders. 
72. The State Commission while rejecting the contention of the 
appellant has rightly recorded the following operative findings:- 
“In view of the above findings, the Commission holds that 
since the Mega Power Status was granted to the Project under 
the Mega Power Policy by the Ministry of Power on 
30.07.2010 on the application dated 11.05.2010 filed by the 
respondent no.1, having become eligible on 16.04.2010, the 
benefits, if any, accruing thereunder to the Project would be 
applicable only from 30.07.2010 and not from any prior date, 
notwithstanding that the decision for granting the Mega Power 
Status was taken/announced on 01.10.2009 or the notifications 
in respect of the said decision of the Union Cabinet were 
issued by the concerned Ministries of the Government of India 
on 11.12.2009 and14.12.2009.” 
 
73. For the reasons set out hereinabove, we find no reason to 
interfere with the concurrent judgments of the courts below. The 
Civil Appeal is dismissed. No order as to costs. 
 
……….………………J. 
 
(B.R. Gavai).…...…………………J. 
 (Prashant Kumar Mishra).…...…………………J. 
 (K.V. Viswanathan) 
New Delhi; 
5th November, 2024.