SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Appeal No. of 2024 
( SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021) 

Subrata Choudhury antosh 
Choudhury & Ors. 
 
 …Appellant(s) 
Versus 
 
The State of Assam & Anr. 
 …Respondent(s) 

JUDGMENT 

C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J. 
 
Leave granted. 
1. 
An affirmative answer to the question of law raised 
before the High Court as to whether after the acceptance 
of a negative Final Report filed under Section 173 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, the 
‘Cr.P.C.’), upon considering the written objection/ 
protest petition and hearing complainant, a fresh 
complaint on the same set of facts is maintainable, by the 
High 
Court 
of 
Gauhati 
and 
the 
consequential 
confirmation of the order of the learned Additional 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

Sessions Judge, Cachar, Silchar in Criminal Revision 
Petition No.101/2012, as per judgment and order dated 
08.01.2021 in is 
under challenge in this appeal by special leave. As per 
the said judgment dated 08.01.2021, the High Court 
dismissed the revision petition and confirmed the order 
of the learned Additional Sessions Judge dated 
28.02.2013 in 
whereunder the order dated 12.07.2012 of the learned 
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Cachar, Silchar dismissing the 
complaint filed by the second respondent herein was set 
aside and case was remanded for consideration of the 
matter afresh for the purpose arriving at a finding as to 
whether any case for taking cognizance of the alleged 
offence(s) and for issuance of process has been made or 
not. 
2. 
Facts and circumstances giving rise to the 
captioned appeal, in succinct, are as under: - 
The second respondent herein filed a complaint on 
11.11.2010 before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Cachar, 
Silchar and it was forwarded for investigation under 
Section 156 (3) Cr.P.C. Consequently, on 05.12.2010, FIR 
No.244/2010 under Sections 406, 420 read with Section 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short the ‘IPC’) was 
registered at Dholai Police Station against the appellants. 
On completion of the investigation, Final Report under 
Section 173, Cr.P.C., was filed before the learned 
Magistrate on 28.02.2011. Virtually, it was a negative 
report as can be seen from Annexure-P3 – Final Report 
No.11 of 2011 dated 28.02.2011. Aggrieved by the said 
Final 
Report, 
the 
complainant 
filed 
a 
written 
objection/narazi petition on 05.05.2011, alleging that the 
investigation was not conducted properly and praying 
for taking cognizance on it. As per order dated 
06.06.2011, the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate (CJM) 
accepted the Final Report, after hearing the second 
respondent-complainant and considering the narazi 
petition, upon holding that the investigation did not 
suffer from any infirmity. On 20.07.2011, the second 
respondent filed the second complaint with the same set 
of allegations against the appellants and the others who 
were shown as accused in the first complaint, before the 
learned CJM alleging commission of offence under the 
very Sections viz., 406, 420 and 34 IPC, and the same was 
numbered as C.R. No.159 of 2011. On 19.09.2011, as per 
Annexure P-7 order, the learned CJM exercising the 
power 
under 
Section 

Cr.P.C., 
directed 
an 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

investigation after recording the initial deposition of the 
complainant and the statements of the witnesses. Feeling 
aggrieved by the said order of the learned CJM dated 
19.09.2011, 
the 
appellant(s)/accused 
preferred 
a 
Criminal Revision Petition before the High Court. As per 
Annexure P-8 order dated 24.05.2012, the High Court set 
aside the order of the learned CJM and directed the 
appellants herein to file an appropriate application 
raising the question of maintainability of the second 
complaint viz., C.R. No.159 of 2011. 
3. 
Pursuant to the order dated 24.05.2012, the learned 
CJM considered the application filed by the appellants 
raising the question of maintainability of the second 
complaint and dismissed the second complaint holding 
it not maintainable in law. Against the said order of the 
CJM 
dated 
12.07.2012, 
the 
second 
respondent-
complainant filed Criminal Revision Petition No.101 of 
2012. The learned Sessions Judge allowed the said 
Criminal Revision Petition as per Annexure P-10 order 
dated 28.02.2013 and set aside the order of the CJM and 
remanded the case for reconsideration of the matter 
afresh for the purpose of finding whether any case for 
taking cognizance of the alleged offences and issuance 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

of process have been made out or not. Aggrieved by the 
said order dated 28.02.2013 the appellants preferred 
 which was dismissed by 
the High Court as per the impugned order dated 
08.01.2021. 
4. 
Heard the learned counsel for the appellants and 
the learned counsel appearing for the respondents. 
5. 
In the wake of aforesaid factual background, the 
appellants, relying various decisions of this Court, 
contended that the second complaint filed by the second 
respondent-complainant is not maintainable. It is 
contended that the High Court had failed to consider the 
provisions under Section 300 (1), Cr.P.C., which resulted 
in dismissal of the revision petition. Dilating the said 
contentions, further grounds founded on Section 300 (1) 
of the Cr.P.C., are raised. 
6. 
Before dealing with the other contentions raised to 
assail the judgment dated 08.01.2021, we think it is only 
appropriate to consider the contentions raised by the 
appellants founded on Section 300 (1), Cr.P.C., reads 
thus: - 
“300. Person once convicted or acquitted not to be 
tried for same offence.—(1) A person who has once 
been tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction for an 
offence and convicted or acquitted of such offence shall, 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

while such conviction or acquittal remains in force, not 
be liable to be tried again for the same offence, nor on 
the same facts for any other offence for which a different 
charge from the one made against him might have been 
made under sub-section (1) of section 221, or for which 
he might have been convicted under sub-section (2) 
thereof.” 
 
7. 
In view of the indisputable and undisputed facts, 
referred hereinbefore, revealing the outcome of the first 
complaint dated 11.11.2010 and taking into account the 
stage of the second complaint the question is whether 
Section 300 (1), Cr.P.C., is applicable or not to the case 
at hand. 
8. 
Section 300 (1), Cr.P.C., is found on the maxim 
“Nemo debet bis vexari pro una et eadem causa”, which 
means that no one shall be vexed twice for one and the 
same cause. The Section provides that no man once 
convicted or acquitted shall be tried for the same offence 
again for one and the same cause. Thus, it can be seen 
that in order to bar the trial in terms of Section 300 (1), 
Cr.P.C., it must be shown: - 
a. that the person concerned has been tried by a 
competent Court for the same offence or one for 
which he might have been charged or convicted at 
that trial, on the same facts. 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

b. that he has been convicted or acquitted at the trial 
and that such conviction or acquittal is in force. 
 
9. 
This fundamental rule of our criminal law revealed 
from this Section enables raising of the special pleas of 
autrefois acquit and autrefois convict, subject to the 
satisfaction of the conditions enjoined thereunder. This 
position has been made clear by this Court in 
Vijayalakshmi v. Vasudevan1. In the case at hand, the 
undisputed facts stated hereinbefore would reveal that 
the appellants were never ever tried before a Court of 
competent jurisdiction for the aforesaid offence(s) on the 
basis of the aforesaid set of facts. Therefore, 
indisputably there was no verdict of conviction or 
acquittal in regard to the aforesaid Sections in respect of 
the appellants on the aforesaid set of facts, by a Court of 
competent jurisdiction. When that be the position, we 
have no hesitation to hold that the grounds founded on 
Section 300 (1), Cr.P.C. raised by the appellants merit no 
consideration. 
10. 
As noted at the outset, the question of law raised 
before and decided by the High Court was whether after 
the acceptance of the Final Report filed under Section 
 
1 (1994) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

173, Cr.P.C., upon considering the written objection/ 
protest petition and hearing the complainant, a fresh 
complaint on the same set of facts is maintainable or not. 
There can be no two views as relates the position that 
there can be no blanket bar for filing a second complaint 
on the same set of facts. We will deal with the moot 
question and the aforesaid position a little later. 
11. 
Firstly, the question as to what are the courses 
available to a Magistrate on receipt of a negative report 
is to be looked into and in fact, that question was 
considered by this Court in Bhagwat Singh v. 
Commissioner of Police and Anr.2 This Court held that 
on receipt of a negative report, the following four 
courses are open to the Magistrate concerned: - 
1. to 
accept 
the 
report 
and 
to 
drop 
the 
proceedings; 
2. to direct further investigation to be made by the 
police. 
3. to investigate himself or refer the investigation 
to be made by another Magistrate under Section 
159, Cr.P.C., and 
 
2 (1985) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

4. to take cognizance of the offence under Section 
200, Cr.P.C., as private complaint when 
materials are sufficient in his opinion as if the 
complainant is prepared for that course. 
The indisputable position is that in the case at hand 
the learned CJM on receipt of the negative report 
accepted it after rejecting the written objections/protest 
petition, which is one of the courses open to a Magistrate 
on receipt of a negative report, in terms of Bhagwat 
Singh’s case (supra). 
12. 
 In view of the confirmance of the judgment of the 
learned 
Sessions 
Judge 
carrying 
the 
following 
observations/findings it is not inappropriate to delve 
into them for the limited purpose. They, in so far as 
relevant, read thus:- 
“(i) 
Thus, the present complaint in question is 
truly qualify to the definition of the term 
complaint and the same has been filed on being 
aggrieved against the final report, submitted 
against his previous complaint. Hence, in my 
considered opinion the learned court below 
misconstrued 
the 
definition 
of 
the 
term 
complaint, by treating the simple objection 
petition as Narazi complaint, whereas terming 
the present complaint in question as second 
complaint. 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

Situated thus, the Hon’ble Apex Court of 
India, in the said decision, (referring to the 
decision in Abhinandan Jha v. Dinesh Misra, 
reported in AIR 1968 Supreme Court 117) 
specifically observed that even after accepting 
the final report, it is open to the Magistrate to 
treat 
the 
respective 
protest 
petitions 
as 
complaints and to take further proceedings in 
accordance with law.” 
 
13. 
According 
to 
us, 
the 
observations/findings 
referred above as (i) is actually an outcome of a 
misconstruction on the part of the learned Sessions 
Judge. In troth, the learned CJM termed the subject 
complaint dated 20.07.2011 as second complaint not with 
reference to the written objection/protest petition dated 
05.05.2011 and it was so treated with reference to the 
original complaint dated 11.11.2010. This fact is evident 
from the recitals in Annexure-P9 order dated 12.07.2012 
passed by the learned CJM in complaint numbered as 
Case No.159/2011, which was challenged before the 
learned Sessions Judge. In the said order the learned 
CJM observed and held thus:- 
“After the original complaint has been duly 
investigated by the police and Final Report 
submitted therein has been accepted by the 
Court in a Judicial Proceeding; therefore, in my 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

considered view it cannot be re-opened by 
means of filing of a second complaint in respect 
of the same facts and circumstances.” 
 
In view of the afore-extracted recital from the order 
dated 12.07.2012 of the learned CJM, it is evident that it 
was with reference to the original complaint that he 
termed the complaint filed by the second respondent on 
20.07.2011 as the second complaint. 
14. 
The second observation/finding referred above as 
(ii) also requires a clarification. It is true that correctly 
this Court held in the decision in Abhinandan Jha v. 
Dinesh Misra3 that even after accepting the final report 
it would be open to the Magistrate concerned to treat 
respective protest petition as complaint and to take 
further proceedings in accordance with law. Section 
2(d) of the Cr.P.C. defines the term ‘complaint’. No 
doubt in Cr.P.C., no form for filing complaint is 
prescribed. However, the essentials to constitute a 
complaint can be briefly mentioned thus: - 
(i) An oral or written allegation; 
(ii) That some person(s) known or unknown has 
committed an offence; 
 
 SC 117 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

(iii) It must be made to a Magistrate with a view to 
his taking action. 
15. 
In Bhimappa Bassappa Bhu Sannavar v. Laxman 
Shivarayappa Samagouda & Ors.4, this Court, as 
regards the meaning of a complaint, held thus: - 
“11. The word “complaint” has a wide 
meaning since it includes even an oral 
allegation. It may, therefore, be assumed that 
no form is prescribed which the complaint 
must take. It may only be said that there must 
be an allegation which prima facie discloses 
the commission of an offence with the 
necessary facts for the magistrate to take 
action. Section 190(1)(a) makes it necessary 
that the alleged facts must disclose the 
commission of an offence.” 
 
16. 
In the decision in Sunil Majhi v. The State5, the 
Calcutta High Court in paragraph 6 held thus: - 
“6. The term ‘naraji’ means ‘disapproval’ 
and in the context of things it signifies 
disapproval of the report in relation to which 
it is filed. It may simply challenge the report 
on grounds stated and pray for its rejection: 
it may while praying for rejection of the 
report also reiterate the allegations made in 
the petition of complaint and pray for further 
action by the court and in that view of the 
 
4 1970 (1) SCC 665 
 (Cal) 238 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

matter it would be a fresh complaint. In the 
case Jamini Kanta v. Bhabanath. AIR 1939 Cal 
273, it was observed: 
 
“The word ‘naraji’ is often loosely used and it is 
necessary to examine the petition which is filed in a 
particular case “to determine its true import in that 
case on an examination of the petition it was found 
that it was not a complaint. The reports of the cases 
cited by Mr. Banerji do not contain any discussion 
about the nature of the statements made in the naraji 
petitions in those cases, but from the fact that the 
naraji petitions were treated as complaints it would 
appear that they did satisfy the requirements of a 
complaint as defined in section 4(h) of the Code in 
order to be a complaint the petition must contain 
allegations of an offence and also a prayer for 
judicial action thereon. If therefore, the protest 
petition filed against an enquiry report filed or to be 
filed, while lodging a protest recites also the 
allegations already made and prays for action of the 
court thereon, there is no difficulty in treating it as a 
complaint and taking action thereon under Sections 
202, 203 or 204 of the Cr PC. In the cases of Lachmi 
Shaw. AIR 1932 Cal 383 (1) (Supra) and Satkari 
Ghose. AIR 1941 Cal 439 (Supra) there were 
complaints to the police which were found on 
investigation to be false and the police submitted 
final reports and at the same time prayed for 
prosecuting the complainant under section 211 
I.P.C. Naraji petitions were filed against the police 
reports but prosecutions were launched without 
considering them and it was held that the procedure 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

followed was irregular and that the naraji petitions 
should be treated as complaints and treated and 
disposed of as such before the prayer for 
prosecuting the complainant could be entertained.” 
 
17. 
In the light of the aforesaid decisions, we are of the 
view that a ‘narazi’ viz., disapproval against a final report 
submitted in a case investigated by the police on a first 
information report registered pursuant to the forwarding 
of a complaint under Section 156(3), Cr.P.C., for 
investigation should be treated as a complaint only if the 
same satisfies the requirement in law to constitute a 
complaint as defined under Section 2(d), Cr.P.C. As held 
in Sunil Majhi’s case (supra), if while praying for 
rejection of a final report after reiterating the allegations 
made in the original complaint and prayer for further 
action by the court, the same could be treated as a fresh 
complaint, but then, we may hasten to add that its 
maintainability depends upon the question as to how the 
original/protest petition was disposed of. 
18. 
It is relevant to note that in paragraph 9 of the 
judgment dated 28.02.2013 (Annexure-P10), the learned 
Sessions Judge after referring to the term ‘complaint,’ 
defined under Section 2(d) of the Cr.P.C. and taking note 
of the aforesaid essentials to constitute a complaint made 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

a scrutiny of the written objection dated 05.05.2011 
submitted by the second respondent-complainant 
against the negative report dated 28.02.2011 held that 
the said objection dated 05.05.2011 could not be termed 
as a ‘narazi complaint’ and found that it did not qualify to 
the definition of the term ‘complaint’. In that context, 
with reference to the definition in Section 2(d) of the 
Cr.P.C. and the essentials to constitute a complaint as 
referred above, it can only be said that the said finding 
of the learned Sessions Judge is perfectly in tune with the 
position of law. Once that is so found and when it is a fact 
that the negative report on the original complaint dated 
11.11.2010 was accepted after rejecting the written 
objection/protest petition dated 05.05.2011 it cannot be 
said that the learned CJM has gone wrong in describing 
the complaint dated 20.07.2011 as the second complaint. 
The clarification required to the observation/finding 
referred to as (ii), with reference to the Abhinandan 
Jha’s case (supra) is that though it would be open to the 
Magistrate to treat a protest petition as complaint and to 
take further proceedings in accordance with law even 
after accepting final report that is permissible only if the 
protest petition concerned satisfies the ingredients to 
constitute a complaint as defined under Section 2(d), 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

Cr.P.C. Since the narazi petition dated 05.05.2011 did 
not satisfy the ingredients to attract Section 2(d), Cr.P.C., 
it could not be treated as a complaint as held by the 
learned Sessions Judge. At the same time, in view of 
what is stated above and taking note of the fact that the 
allegations made in the original complaint are reiterated 
in the complaint dated 20.07.2011 and pray for further 
action by the court, it is rightly taken by the courts below 
as a complaint. Since the final report on the original 
complaint was already accepted after rejecting the 
narazi petition the complaint dated 20.07.2011 which 
satisfies all requirements of a complaint, if at all having 
the characteristics of a protest petition, could be treated 
as a complaint and hence, the learned CJM and the 
learned Sessions Judge have rightly treated it as a 
complaint. 
19. 
Now, we will consider the question whether the 
construction of the law laid down by this Court in regard 
to the maintainability of a second complaint, in the 
circumstances mentioned hereinbefore that led to the 
moot question, by the High Court as reflected under 
paragraph 20 of the impugned judgment and the 
consequential direction can be sustained. Paragraphs 
20 and 21 in the impugned judgment read thus: - 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

20. Evidently, the learned Magistrate did not act 
upon the said protest petition, inasmuch as, the 
learned Magistrate did not proceed under 
Section 200/202 of the CrPC treating the same 
as 
narazi 
complaint. 
When 
the 
learned 
Magistrate did not proceed under Section 200 to 
204 CrPC for taking cognizance upon received 
of the first protest petition nor the protest 
petition was dismissed under Section 203 CrPC, 
the complaint in question though considered to 
be a second narazi complaint with reference to 
the first protest petition as indicated above, the 
same is not barred under law, reason being that 
the alleged first protest petition did not contain 
detailed particulars of the case required for 
decision nor the learned Magistrate proceed on 
the basis of the first petition under Section 
200/202 CrPC and therefore the alleged first 
protest 
petition 
in 
my 
cosndiered 
(sic: 
considered) view cannot be held to have been 
dismissed after full consideration under Section 
203 CrPC. Even if it is assumed for the sake of 
argument that the first protest petition was 
dismissed after full consideration, the narazi 
complaint in question is maintainable for special 
circumstances, namely the first protest petition 
did not contain the full facts and particulars 
necessary to decide the case and the same was 
considered on incomplete facts and particulars 
and the learned Magistrate also did not 
examined the complainant or any witnesses 
under Section 200 CrPC nor proceeded under 
Section 202 CrPC to decide whether there was 
sufficient ground for proceeding. Therefore, in 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

any view of the matter, the present complaint in 
question cannot be considered as second 
complaint and the same also cannot be held to 
be barred for acceptance of the final report. 
Secondly, even if it is considered to be second 
narazi complaint with reference to the first 
protest petition, then also the complainant is not 
barred in the facts situation of the case because 
of the special on exceptional circumstances as 
indicated above. 
 
21. For the reasons stated above, this court do 
not find any fault with the impugned order 
passed by the learned Sessions Judge and 
accordingly, the revision petition is dismissed. 
The matter be remanded back to the learned 
Magistrate to proceed with the complaint in 
accordance with law. 

20. 
Paragraph 21 of the impugned judgment of the 
High Court, as extracted above, would reveal that the 
High Court also treated the petition dated 20.07.2011 
filed by the second respondent as a complaint. Since it 
is filed by the second respondent after the acceptance of 
the original complaint dated 11.11.2010 that too, after the 
rejection of his protest petition dated 05.05.2011, there 
can be no dispute regarding the status of the complaint 
dated 20.07.2011 as the second complaint of the second 
respondent. 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

21. 
The appellants herein contended that the second 
complaint carries the same set of allegations and in view 
of the dismissal of the first complaint after considering 
the protest petition and hearing the complainant, the 
second complaint filed by the second respondent dated 
20.07.2011 is not maintainable. To buttress the said 
contention, the learned counsel relied on the decisions 
of this Court in Shivshankar Singh v. State of Bihar & 
Anr.6, H. S. Bains v. State (Union Territory of 
Chandigarh)7, Bindeshwari Prasad Singh v. Kali Singh8 
and Poonam Chand Jain & Anr. v. Farzu9. 
22., the learned counsel appearing for the 
second respondent/ the complainant contended that the 
acceptance of the Final Report, based on the first 
complaint could not be a bar for maintaining a fresh 
complaint on the same set of facts. It is submitted that 
virtually upon filing of the Final Report based on the first 
complaint only an objection was filed by the second 
respondent and therefore, it ought not to have been 
taken as the first narazi complaint. At the same time, it is 
further contended that even if it is taken as the first narazi 
 
6 (2012) 
 SC 1883 
 SC 2432 
9 (2010) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

complaint, a second narazi complaint is not barred by 
law. To fortify the said contention, the learned counsel 
relied on the decision of this Court in Mahesh Chand v. 
B. Janaradhan Reddy & Anr.10 and Shivshankar Singh’s 
case (supra). 
23. 
In view of the plethora of decisions, there can be no 
doubt that even when Final Report filed after 
investigation based on the FIR registered pursuant to the 
receipt of complaint forwarded by a Court for 
investigation under Section 156 (3) of the Cr.P.C., is 
accepted and protest petition thereto is rejected, the 
Magistrate can still take cognizance upon a second 
complaint or second protest petition, on the same or 
similar allegations or facts. But this position is subject to 
conditions. 
24. 
In Samta Naidu & Anr. v. State of Madhya Pradesh 
& Anr.11, this Court considered all the relevant decisions 
including Pramatha Nath Talukdar v. Saroj Ranjan 
Sarkar12, Jatinder Singh v. Ranjit Kaur13, Poonam 
Chand Jain v. Farzu14, and Shivshankar Singh’s case 
 
10 (2003) 
11 (2020) 
 SC 876 
13 (2001) 
14 (2010) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

(supra) in regard to the moot question involved, in 
paragraphs 12 to 12.3, 12.5, 13 and 16 thereunder. The 
said paragraphs, insofar as they are relevant to this case, 
are as under: 
12. The law declared in Talukdar has consistently 
been followed, for instance, in Bindeshwari Prasad 
Singh v. Kali Singh it was observed: (Bindeshwari 
Prasad Singh case, SCC p. 59, para 4) 
“4. … it is now well settled that a second 
complaint can lie only on fresh facts or even on 
the previous facts only if a special case is made 
out.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
The view taken in Bindeshwari was followed in A.S. 
Gauraya v. S.N. Thakur. 
 
12.1. In Jatinder Singh v. Ranjit Kaur the issue was 
whether the first complaint having been dismissed 
for default, could the second complaint be 
maintained. The matter was considered as under: 
(SCC pp. 572-74, paras 9 & 12) 
“9. There is no provision in the Code or in any 
other statute which debars a complainant from 
preferring a second complaint on the same 
allegations if the first complaint did not result in a 
conviction or acquittal or even discharge. Section 
300 of the Code, which debars a second trial, has 
taken care to explain that “the dismissal of a 
complaint, or the discharge of the accused, is not 
an acquittal for the purposes of this section”. 
However, when a Magistrate conducts an inquiry 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

under Section 202 of the Code and dismisses the 
complaint on merits, a second complaint on the 
same facts cannot be made unless there are very 
exceptional circumstances. Even so, a second 
complaint is permissible depending upon how 
the complaint happened to be dismissed at the 
first instance. 
* 

* 

* 
12. If the dismissal of the complaint was not on 
merit but on default of the complainant to be 
present there is no bar in the complainant moving 
the Magistrate again with a second complaint on 
the same facts. But if the dismissal of the 
complaint under Section 203 of the Code was on 
merits the position could be different. There 
appeared a difference of opinion earlier as to 
whether a second complaint could have been 
filed when the dismissal was under Section 203. 
The controversy was settled by this Court in 
Pramatha Nath Talukdar v. Saroj Ranjan Sarkar, 
(1962) 1 Cri LJ 770. A majority of Judges of the 
three-Judge Bench held thus: (AIR p. 899, para 48) 
 
‘48. … An order of dismissal under 
Section 203, Criminal Procedure Code, 
is, however, no bar to the entertainment 
of a second complaint on the same facts 
but it will be entertained only in 
exceptional circumstances, e.g., where 
the previous order was passed on an 
incomplete 
record 
or 
on 
a 
misunderstanding of the nature of the 
complaint or it was manifestly absurd, 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

unjust or foolish or where new facts 
which 
could 
not, 
with 
reasonable 
diligence, have been brought on the 
record in the previous proceedings, 
have been adduced. It cannot be said to 
be in the interest of justice that after a 
decision has been given against the 
complainant upon a full consideration of 
his case, he or any other person should 
be given another opportunity to have his 
complaint inquired into.’ 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
 S.K. Das, J. (as he then was) while dissenting 
from the said majority view had taken the stand 
that right of a complainant to file a second 
complaint would not be inhibited even by such 
considerations. But at any rate the majority 
view is that the second complaint would be 
maintainable if the dismissal of the first 
complaint was not on merits. 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
12.2. In Ranvir Singh v. State of Haryana 
Haryana, the issue was set out in para 23 of the 
decision and the discussion that followed 
thereafter was as under: (SCC p. 647, paras 
23-26) 
 
“23. In the instant case, the question is 
narrowed down further as to whether such a 
second complaint would be maintainable 
when the earlier one had not been dismissed 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

on merits, but for the failure of the complainant 
to put in the process fees for effecting service. 
 
24. The answer has been provided firstly in 
Pramatha Nath Talukdar case, wherein this 
Court had held that even if a complaint was 
dismissed under Section 203 CrPC, a second 
complaint would still lie under exceptional 
circumstances, indicated hereinbefore. The 
said view has been consistently upheld in 
subsequent decisions of this Court. Of course, 
the question of making a prayer for recalling 
the 
order 
of 
dismissal 
would 
not 
be 
maintainable before the learned Magistrate in 
view of Section 362 CrPC, but such is not the 
case in these special leave petitions. 
 
25. In the present cases, neither have the 
complaints been dismissed on merit nor have 
they been dismissed at the stage of Section 203 
CrPC. On the other hand, only on being 
satisfied of a prima facie case, the learned 
Magistrate 
had 
issued 
process 
on 
the 
complaint. 
 
26. The said situation is mainly covered by the 
decision of this Court in Jatinder Singh case, 
wherein the decision in Pramatha Nath 
Talukdar 
case 
was 
also 
taken 
into 
consideration 
and 
it 
was 
categorically 
observed that in the absence of any provision 
in the Code barring a second complaint being 
filed on the same allegation, there would be no 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

bar to a second complaint being filed on the 
same facts if the first complaint did not result in 
the conviction or acquittal or even discharge of 
the accused, and if the dismissal was not on 
merit but on account of a default on the part of 
the complainant.” 
(Underline supplied) 
 
12.3. In Poonam Chand Jain v. Fazru the issue 
whether after the dismissal of the earlier complaint 
had attained finality, could a second complaint be 
maintained on identical facts was considered as 
under: (SCC pp. 634-36, paras 14-20) 
 
“14. In the background of these facts, the question 
which crops up for determination by this Court is 
whether after an order of dismissal of complaint 
attained finality, the complainant can file another 
complaint on almost identical facts without disclosing 
in the second complaint the fact of either filing of the 
first complaint or its dismissal. 
 
15. Almost similar questions came up for consideration 
before this Court in Pramatha Nath Talukdar v. Saroj 
Ranjan Sarkar. The majority judgment in Pramatha 
Nath was delivered by Kapur, J. His Lordship held that 
an order of dismissal under Section 203 of the Criminal 
Procedure Code (for short “the Code”) is, however, no 
bar to the entertainment of a second complaint on the 
same facts but it can be entertained only in exceptional 
circumstances. This Court explained the exceptional 
circumstances as: 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

(a) where the previous order was passed on 
incomplete record, or 
(b) on a misunderstanding of the nature of the 
complaint, or 
(c) the order which was passed was manifestly absurd, 
unjust or foolish, or 
(d) where new facts which could not, with reasonable 
diligence, have been brought on the record in the 
previous proceedings. 
 
16. This Court in Pramatha Nath made it very clear that 
interest of justice cannot permit that after a decision 
has been given on a complaint upon full consideration 
of the case, the complainant should be given another 
opportunity to have the complaint enquired into again. 
In para 50 of the judgment the majority judgment of 
this Court opined that fresh evidence or fresh facts 
must be such which could not with reasonable 
diligence have been brought on record. This Court 
very clearly held that it cannot be settled law which 
permits the complainant to place some evidence 
before the Magistrate which are in his possession and 
then if the complaint is dismissed adduce some more 
evidence. According to this Court, such a course is not 
permitted on a correct view of the law. (para 50, p. 
899) 
 
17. This question again came up for consideration 
before this Court in Jatinder Singh v. Ranjit Kaur. 
There also this Court by relying on the principle in 
Pramatha Nath held that here is no provision in the 
Code or in any other statute which debars a 
complainant from filing a second complaint on the 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

same allegation as in the first complaint. But this Court 
added when a Magistrate conducts an enquiry under 
Section 202 of the Code and dismisses a complaint on 
merits a second complaint on the same facts could not 
be 
made 
unless 
there 
are 
“exceptional 
circumstances”. This Court held in para 12, if the 
dismissal of the first complaint is not on merit but the 
dismissal is for the default of the complainant then 
there is no bar in filing a second complaint on the same 
facts. However, if the dismissal of the complaint under 
Section 203 of the Code was on merit the position will 
be different. 
 
19. Again in Mahesh Chand v. B. Janardhan Reddy, a 
three-Judge Bench of this Court considered this 
question in para 19 at p. 740 of the Report. The learned 
Judges of this Court held that a second complaint is not 
completely barred nor is there any statutory bar in 
filing a second complaint on the same facts in a case 
where a previous complaint was dismissed without 
assigning any reason. The Magistrate under Section 
204 of the Code can take cognizance of an offence and 
issue process if there is sufficient ground for 
proceeding. In Mahesh Chand this Court relied on the 
ratio in Pramatha and held if the first complaint had 
been dismissed the second complaint can be 
entertained only in exceptional circumstances and 
thereafter the exceptional circumstances pointed out 
in Pramatha were reiterated. Therefore, this Court 
holds that the ratio in Pramatha Nath is still holding the 
field. The same principle has been reiterated once 
again by this Court in Hira Lal v. State of U.P. In para 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

14 of the judgment this Court expressly quoted the 
ratio in Mahesh Chand discussed hereinabove. 
 
20. Following the aforesaid principles which are more 
or less settled and are holding the field since 1962 and 
have been repeatedly followed by this Court, we are 
of the view that the second complaint in this case was 
on almost identical facts which was raised in the first 
complaint and which was dismissed on merits. So the 
second complaint is not maintainable. This Court finds 
that the core of both the complaints is the same. 
Nothing has been disclosed in the second complaint 
which is substantially new and not disclosed in first 
complaint. No case is made out that even after the 
exercise of due diligence the facts alleged in the 
second complaint were not within the knowledge of 
the first complainant. In fact, such a case could not be 
made out since the facts in both the complaints are 
almost identical. Therefore, the second complaint is 
not 
covered 
within 
exceptional 
circumstances 
explained in Pramatha Nath. In that view of the matter 
the second complaint in the facts of this case, cannot 
be entertained.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
12.4….. 
 
12.5. In Ravinder Singh v. Sukhbir the matter was 
considered from the standpoint whether a frustrated 
litigant be permitted to give vent to his frustration and 
whether a person be permitted to unleash vendetta to 
harass any person needlessly. The discussion was as 
under: (SCC pp. 258-60, paras 26-27 & 33) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

“26. 
While 
considering 
the 
issue 
at 
hand 
in Shivshankar Singh v. State of Bihar this Court, 
after considering its earlier judgments in Pramatha 
Nath 
Talukdar v. Saroj 
Ranjan 
Sarkar, Jatinder 
Singh v. Ranjit Kaur, Mahesh Chand v. B. Janardhan 
Reddy and Poonam 
Chand 
Jain v. Fazru held: 
(Shivshankar Singh case, SCC p. 136, para 18) 
‘18. … it is evident that the law does not prohibit 
filing or entertaining of the second complaint 
even on the same facts provided the earlier 
complaint has been decided on the basis of 
insufficient material or the order has been 
passed without understanding the nature of the 
complaint or the complete facts could not be 
placed 
before 
the 
court 
or 
where 
the 
complainant came to know certain facts after 
disposal of the first complaint which could have 
tilted the balance in his favour. However, second 
complaint would not be maintainable wherein 
the earlier complaint has been disposed of on 
full consideration of the case of the complainant 
on merit.’ 
 
27. In Chandrapal Singh v. Maharaj Singh this 
Court has held that it is equally true that 
chagrined and frustrated litigants should not be 
permitted to give vent to their frustration by 
enabling them to invoke the jurisdiction of 
criminal courts in a cheap manner. In such a fact 
situation, the court must not hesitate to quash 
criminal proceedings. 
* 

* 

* 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

33. The High Court has dealt with the issue 
involved herein and the matter stood closed at 
the instance of Respondent 1 himself. Therefore, 
there can be no justification whatsoever to 
launch criminal prosecution on that basis afresh. 
The inherent power of the court in dealing with 
an extraordinary situation is in the larger 
interest of administration of justice and for 
preventing manifest injustice being done. Thus, 
it is a judicial obligation on the court to undo a 
wrong in course of administration of justice and 
to prevent continuation of unnecessary judicial 
process. It may be so necessary to curb the 
menace of criminal prosecution as an instrument 
of operation of needless harassment. A person 
cannot be permitted to unleash vendetta to 
harass 
any 
person 
needlessly. Ex 
debito 
justitiae is inbuilt in the inherent power of the 
court and the whole idea is to do real, complete 
and substantial justice for which the courts exist. 
Thus, it becomes the paramount duty of the 
court to protect an apparently innocent person, 
not to be subjected to prosecution on the basis 
of wholly untenable complaint.” 
 
25. 
After referring to the aforesaid decisions in Samta 
Naidu’s case (supra) this Court further, held in 
Paragraph 13 thus: - 
“13. The application of the principles laid down 
in Talukdar in Jatinder Singh shows that “a 
second complaint is permissible depending 
upon how the complaint happened to be 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

dismissed at the first instance”. It was further 
laid down that: (Jatinder Singh case, SCC p. 573, 
para 12) 
 
“12. If the dismissal of the complaint was not on 
merit but on default of the complainant to be 
present there is no bar in the complainant 
moving the Magistrate again with a second 
complaint on the same facts. But if the dismissal 
of the complaint under Section 203 of the Code 
was on merits the position could be different.” 
 
“To similar effect are the conclusions 
in Ranvir Singh and Poonam Chand Jain. Para 
16 of Poonam Chand Jain also considered the 
effect of para 50 of the majority judgment 
in Talukdar. These cases, therefore, show that 
if the earlier disposal of the complaint was on 
merits and in a manner known to law, the 
second complaint on “almost identical facts” 
which were raised in the first complaint would 
not be maintainable. What has been laid 
down is that “if the core of both the complaints 
is same”, the second complaint ought not to 
be entertained.” 
(underline supplied) 
 
26. 
It was further held in paragraph 16 of the decision in 
Samta Naidu’s case (supra) thus: - 
“16. As against the facts in Shivshankar, the 
present case stands on a different footing. 
There was no legal infirmity in the first 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

complaint filed in the present matter. The 
complaint was filed more than a year after the 
sale of the vehicle which meant the 
complainant had reasonable time at his 
disposal. 
The 
earlier 
complaint 
was 
dismissed after the Judicial Magistrate found 
that no prima facie case was made out; the 
earlier complaint was not disposed of on any 
technical ground; the material adverted to in 
the second complaint was only in the nature 
of supporting material; and the material 
relied upon in the second complaint was not 
such which could not have been procured 
earlier. Pertinently, the core allegations in 
both the complaints were identical. In the 
circumstances, 
the 
instant 
matter 
is 
completely covered by the decision of this 
Court in Talukdar as explained in Jatinder 
Singh and Poonam Chand Jain. The High 
Court was thus not justified in holding the 
second complaint to be maintainable.” 
 
27. 
Now, we will have to proceed with the appeal 
bearing in mind the exposition of law in Samta Naidu’s 
case (supra) that if earlier disposal of the complaint was on 
merits and in a manner known to law, the second 
complaint on ‘almost identical facts’ which were raised in 
the first complaint would not be maintainable. “If the core 
of both the complaints is same, the second complaint 
ought not to be entertained,” it was further held therein. 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

In the light of the factual narration with respect to the 
disposal of the original complaint dated 11.11.2010, made 
hereinbefore and in view of the courses open to a 
Magistrate on receipt of a negative report and applying 
the exposition of law in Samta Naidu’s case (supra) with 
respect to the maintainability of a second complaint we 
have no hesitation to hold that the maintainability of the 
second complaint dated 20.07.2011 filed by the second 
respondent would depend upon the question whether the 
core of the original complaint dated 11.11.2010 and the 
second complaint dated 20.07.2011 is the same as the 
disposal of the complaint dated 11.11.2010 was on merits 
and in a manner known to law. In this context, it is also to 
be noted after considering the final report, the protest 
complaint and admittedly, upon hearing the counsel for 
the complainant the protest petition was rejected not only 
by finding that the investigation suffers from no infirmity 
but also by finding that since it was conducted properly, 
no order for further investigation is invited and further 
that the materials are not sufficient to take cognizance. As 
noted earlier, despite the said nature of the order dated 
06.06.2011 the second respondent-complainant has not 
chosen to challenge the same but, chosen only to file a 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

fresh complaint, viz., the second complaint dated 
20.07.2011. 
28. 
In the contextual situation, it is relevant to note that 
earlier the learned Magistrate invoking the power under 
Section 202 Cr.P.C., postponed the issuance of summons. 
After recording the initial deposition of the complainant 
and the witnesses vide order dated 19.09.2011, he 
directed for police investigation and report. The High 
Court as per order dated 24.05.2012 in Criminal Petition 
No. 12/2012 set aside the order dated 19.09.2011 and 
directed the appellants herein to file appropriate 
application raising the issue of maintainability and in turn, 
directing the learned CJM to decide on the maintainability 
expeditiously. The order dated 12.07.2012 was passed by 
the learned CJM in compliance with the direction in the 
order dated 24.05.2012. 
29. 
The order dated 12.07.2012 of the learned CJM 
whereunder he discussed the second complaint dated 
20.07.2011 would undoubtedly reveal that after taking 
into consideration the entire factual background of the 
case and the nature of disposal of the original complaint 
dated 11.11.2010 under the order dated 06.06.2011 the 
application filed by the appellant herein raising 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

maintainability of the second complaint was considered 
by the learned CJM. 
30. 
We have already referred to the manner the 
original complaint was disposed of earlier. The 
submissions made on behalf of the parties, the 
documents annexed thereto and above all, the order 
dated 12.07.2012 of the learned CJM, would reveal that 
the second complaint was filed on the same set of facts 
contained in the first complaint and the second one was 
filed after the dismissal of the protest petition and the 
consequential acceptance of the Final Report in the first 
complaint. It is not in dispute that subsequent to the 
rejection of the protest petition and acceptance of the 
Final Report (Annexure P-5) as per order dated 
06.06.2011, the matter was not taken forward further by 
the respondent/complainant. The second complaint was 
filed thereafter on 20.07.2011 reiterating, rather, 
reproducing the complaint dated 11.11.2010 and further 
adding allegations, virtually made by way of the protest 
petition dated 05.05.2011 that the investigation pursuant 
to the original complaint was done perfunctorily. It is to 
be noted that the said allegation against the investigation 
was also rejected earlier as per order dated 06.06.2011 
holding that the investigation did not suffer from any 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

infirmity and further that it did not deserve further 
investigation. Now, a comparison of the first complaint 
dated 11.11.2010 and the second complaint dated 
20.07.2011 shows that they contain the same set of 
allegations against the same accused as has been 
observed by the learned CJM in the order dated 
12.07.2012. The learned CJM, in the order dated 
12.07.2012 after referring to various decisions observed 
and held thus:- 
“After the original complaint has been duly 
investigated by the police and Final Report submitted 
therein has been accepted by the Court in a Judicial 
Proceeding; therefore, in my considered view it cannot 
be re-opened by the means of filing of a second 
complaint in respect of the same facts and circumstances. 
In this connection, reliance can be placed n (Sic: in) a 
Judgment of the Hon’ble Patna High Court reported in 
1981 CRL. LAW JOURNAL 795 Bhuveneswar Prasad Singh 
and others Vs. State of Bihar and another. 
 
The Hon’ble Patna High Court relying upon a 
decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court reported in AIR 1968 
Supreme Court 117 Abhinandan Jha Vs. Dinesh Mishra 
had held 
Where the Final Report by police holding the 
case against the accused persons to be untrue; was 
accepted by the Magistrate earlier, than the complaint 
petition was filed against the accused, the Magistrate 
would not be justified in taking cognizance on the basis 
of the complaint petition in respect of the same facts 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

constituting the offence which were mentioned in the 
final form where a Judicial order was passed by 
accepting final form.” 
 
31. 
The circumstances expatiated above and a 
scanning of the decision in Samta Naidu’s case and the 
decisions referred to in the aforesaid paragraphs 
thereunder would constrain us to say, with respect, that 
the understanding of the settled position in regard to the 
maintainability of a second complaint or second protest 
petition of the High Court, as reflected mainly in 
paragraph 20 of the impugned judgment is not true to the 
position settled by this Court. Merely because this Court 
in some of such decisions held that when a Magistrate 
conducted an inquiry under Section 202 Cr.P.C., and 
dismissed a complaint on merits, a second complaint on 
the same facts would not be maintainable unless there 
are very exceptional circumstances, it could not be 
understood that in all cases where a complaint to a 
Magistrate was not proceeded under Section 202 of the 
Cr.P.C., and dismissed not at the stage of Section 203, 
Cr.P.C., a second complaint or a second protest petition 
would be maintainable. The various decisions referred 
above in Samta Naidu’s case and recitals therefrom, 
extracted above would indubitably reveal the said 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

position. The different situations where a second 
complaint or a second protest petition would be 
maintainable and would not be maintainable were 
specifically discussed and decided, in those decisions. 
In short, the maintainability or otherwise of the second 
complaint would depend upon how the earlier complaint 
happened to be rejected/dismissed at the first instance. 
32. 
In the context of the contentions, it is to be noted 
that the case at hand stands on a firmer footing than the 
case involved in Samta Naidu’s case (supra). Paragraph 
16 of Samta Naidu’s case (supra), as extracted above, 
would reveal that the earlier complaint involved in that 
case was disposed of not on technical ground but on 
finding that no prima facie case was made out and in the 
second complaint the nature of the supporting materials 
were furnished and this Court observed that it could not 
be said that those materials furnished and relied upon in 
the second complaint could not have been procured 
earlier. Thereafter, finding that both the complaints 
were identical the finding of the High Court that the 
second complaint was maintainable was rejected and the 
subject 
complaint 
was 
dismissed 
as 
not 
being 
maintainable. In the case at hand, a perusal of protest 
petition dated 05.05.2011 and the second complaint 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

dated 20.07.2011 would reveal that the second complaint 
filed after acceptance of final report filed pursuant to the 
investigation in the FIR registered based on the 
complaint dated 11.11.2010, that too after considering 
the narazi petition and hearing the complainant (the 
second respondent herein) the second complaint dated 
20.07.2011 has been filed reproducing the first 
complaint dated 11.11.2010 and stating that the said 
complaint was not properly investigated and action 
should be taken on the second complaint dated 
20.07.2011. In fact, the indubitable position is that the 
core of the original complaint dated 11.11.2010 and the 
second complaint dated 20.07.2011 is the same. 
33. 
In the light of the decision in Ravinder Singh v. 
Sukhbir Singh15, referred to in Samta Naidu’s case 
(supra) repeated complaints by frustrated litigants 
cannot be maintained. A scanning of the second 
complaint dated 20.07.2011 would reveal that none of the 
situations permissible in terms of the decisions referred 
supra exist in the case at hand to maintain the said 
complaint. When that be the position, the learned 
Sessions Judge as also the High Court were not justified 
 
15 (2013) 

SLP (Crl.) No.1242 of 2021 

in interfering with the order passed by the learned CJM 
dated 12.07.2012 holding the second complaint as not 
maintainable in law and issuing further direction. 
34. 
In the aforesaid circumstances we allow the appeal 
and set aside the decision of the High Court dated 
08.01.2021 and the decision of the learned Sessions 
Judge that got confirmance by the judgment of the High 
Court and consequently restore the order of the learned 
CJM dated 12.07.2012. In short, the complaint dated 
20.07.2011 stands rejected for not being maintainable. 
 
………………………, J. 
 (C.T. Ravikumar) 

………………………, J. 
 (Rajesh Bindal) 

New Delhi; 
November 05, 2024.