Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 4314-4316 OF 2024 

Directorate of Enforcement 
 …Appellant 

versus 

Bibhu Prasad Acharya, etc. 

…Respondents 

JUDGMENT 

ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
 
FACTUAL ASPECT 
1. 
The appellant has filed complaints against the 
respondents and others under Section 44(1)(b) of the 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (for short, ‘the 
PMLA’). The complaint is for an offence under Section 3 of 
the PMLA, which is punishable under Section 4. Both 
private respondents are accused in the complaints. They 
are Bibhu Prasad Acharya (described hereafter as the first 
respondent) and Adityanath Das (described hereafter as 
the second respondent). The Special Court took cognizance 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

of the complaints and issued summons to the respondents 
and other accused persons. Both of them filed writ 
petitions before the High Court challenging the cognizance 
taken by the Trial Court and inter alia prayed for quashing 
the complaints on the ground that both of them were 
public servants and, therefore, it was necessary to obtain 
prior sanction under sub-section (1) of Section 197 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘the 
CrPC’). By the impugned judgment, the High Court upheld 
the respondents' contentions and quashed the orders of 
taking cognizance passed by the Special Court on the 
complaints only as against the said respondents. 
 
SUBMISSIONS 
 
2. 
Shri S.V. Raju, learned Additional Solicitor General 
for India, 
appeared 
for the appellant-Enforcement 
Directorate. He submitted that in view of Section 71 of the 
PMLA, the provisions thereof have an overriding effect over 
the provisions of the other statutes, including the CrPC. 
He submitted that considering the object of the PMLA, the 
requirement of obtaining a sanction under Section 197(1) 
of CrPC will be inconsistent with the provisions of the 
PMLA. 
 
3. 
He pointed out from the assertions made in the 
complaints that at the relevant time, the first respondent 
was the Vice Chairman and Managing Director of Andhra 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Ltd. (for 
short, ‘the Corporation’). His submission is that he was 
not a public servant within the meaning of Section 197(1) 
of CrPC, as it cannot be said that while holding the said 
position, he was not removable from the office save by or 
with the sanction of the Government. He relied upon 
the decisions of this Court in the case of S.S. Dhanoa v. 
Municipal Corporation Delhi and Others1 and Mohd. 
Hadi Raja v. State of Bihar and Another2. He submitted 
that the first respondent was not employed in connection 
with the affairs of the State Government at the time of the 
commission of the offence. He submitted that officers of 
such Corporations are not public servants within the 
meaning of Section 197(1). He also relied upon a decision 
of this Court in the case of Prakash Singh Badal and 
Another v. State of Punjab and others3. He submitted 
that the issue of the requirement of sanction will have to 
be decided at the time of the trial. He submitted that the 
respondents’ act of money laundering cannot be 
considered to have been done in the discharge of their 
official duties. 
 
4. 
Mrs Kiran Suri, learned senior counsel appearing for 
the respondents accused, invited our attention to the 
 
1 (1981) 
2 (1998) 
3 (2007) 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

Memorandum and Articles of the Association (for 
short, “the Memorandum”) of the said Corporation and, in 
particular, Clauses 70 and 71 (b) thereof and submitted 
that power to appoint a Director of the Corporation and 
power to remove him vested in the State Government. 
Therefore, the first respondent continued to be a public 
servant as contemplated by Section 197(1) of CrPC. She 
submitted that the plea of absence of sanction can be 
raised at any stage of the proceedings, and it is not 
necessary to wait till the final hearing of the complaint. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
5. 
Section 197 (1) of CrPC (which corresponds to Section 
218 of Bhartiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023) reads 
thus: 
“197. Prosecution of Judges and 
public servants.— (1) When any 
person who is or was a Judge or 
Magistrate or a public servant not 
removable from his office save by or 
with the sanction of the Government, 
is accused of any offence alleged to 
have been committed by him while 
acting or purporting to act in the 
discharge of his official duty, no Court 
shall take cognizance of such offence 
except with the previous sanction — 
 
(a) in the case of a person who is 
employed or, as the case may be, was 
at the time of commission of the 
alleged 
offence 
employed, 
in 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

connection with the affairs of the 
Union, of the Central Government; 
 
(b) in the case of a person who is 
employed or, as the case may be, was 
at the time of commission of the 
alleged 
offence 
employed, 
in 
connection with the affairs of a State, 
of the State Government: 
 
[Provided that where the alleged 
offence was committed by a person 
referred to in clause (b) during the 
period while a Proclamation issued 
under clause (1) of Article 356 of the 
Constitution was in force in a State, 
clause (b) will apply as if for the 
expression 
“State 
Government” 
occurring therein, the expression 
“Central 
Government” 
were 
substituted.] 
 
[Explanation.—For the removal of 
doubts it is hereby declared that no 
sanction shall be required in case of a 
public servant accused of any offence 
alleged to have been committed under 
section 166A, section 166B, section 
354, section 354A, section 354B, 
section 354C, section 354D, section 
370, section 375, section 376 [section 
376A, section 376AB, section 376C, 
section 376D, section 376DA, section 
376DB] or section 509 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860).] 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

6. 
The object of Section 197(1) must be considered here. 
The object is to protect the public servants from 
prosecutions. It ensures that the public servants are not 
prosecuted for anything they do in the discharge of their 
duties. This provision is for the protection of honest and 
sincere officers. However, the protection is not unqualified. 
They can be prosecuted with a previous sanction from the 
appropriate government. 
 
7. 
The expression “to have been committed by him while 
acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official 
duty” has been judicially interpreted. A bench of three 
Hon'ble Judges of this Court in the case of Centre for 
Public Interest Litigation v. Union of India4, in 
paragraph no 9, observed thus: 
“9………………….. This protection has 
certain limits and is available only 
when the alleged act done by the 
public 
servant 
is 
reasonably 
connected with the discharge of his 
official duty and is not merely a cloak 
for doing the objectionable act. If in 
doing his official duty, he acted in 
excess of his duty, but there is a 
reasonable connection between the 
act and the performance of the 
official duty, the excess will not be a 
sufficient ground to deprive the 
public servant from the protection. 
The question is not as to the nature of 
the offence such as whether the alleged 
 
4 (2005) 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

offence 
contained 
an 
element 
necessarily 
dependent 
upon 
the 
offender being a public servant, but 
whether it was committed by a public 
servant acting or purporting to act as 
such in the discharge of his official 
capacity. Before Section 197 can be 
invoked, it must be shown that the 
official concerned was accused of an 
offence alleged to have been committed 
by him while acting or purporting to act 
in the discharge of his official duties. It 
is 
not 
the 
duty 
which 
requires 
examination so much as the act, 
because 
the 
official 
act 
can 
be 
performed both in the discharge of the 
official duty as well as in dereliction of 
it. The act must fall within the scope 
and range of the official duties of the 
public servant concerned. It is the 
quality of the act which is important 
and the protection of this section is 
available if the act falls within the scope 
and range of his official duty. There 
cannot 
be 
any 
universal 
rule 
to 
determine whether there is a reasonable 
connection between the act done and 
the official duty, nor is it possible to lay 
down any such rule. One safe and sure 
test in this regard would be to consider 
if the omission or neglect on the part of 
the public servant to commit the act 
complained of could have made him 
answerable for a charge of dereliction of 
his official duty. If the answer to this 
question is in the affirmative, it may be 
said that such act was committed by the 
public servant while acting in the 
discharge of his official duty and there 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

was every connection with the act 
complained of and the official duty of 
the public servant. This aspect makes it 
clear that the concept of Section 197 
does not get immediately attracted on 
institution of the complaint case.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
8. 
In the decision of this Court in the case of Prakash 
Singh Badal and Another3, in paragraph 38, this Court 
held thus: 
“38. The question relating to the need 
of sanction under Section 197 of the 
Code 
is 
not 
necessarily 
to 
be 
considered as soon as the complaint is 
lodged 
and 
on 
the 
allegations 
contained therein. This question may 
arise at any stage of the proceeding. 
The 
question 
whether 
sanction 
is 
necessary or not may have to be 
determined from stage to stage.” 
 (emphasis added) 
In the present case, after completing the investigation, the 
appellant has filed exhaustive complaints under Section 
44(1)(b) of the PMLA. Cognizance has been taken based on 
the complaints. Therefore, the issue of the absence of 
sanction will arise at this stage. 
9. 
The second respondent was at the relevant time 
holding the post of Principal Secretary, I&CAD Department 
of the Government of Andhra Pradesh. It is not disputed 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

that even the first respondent was a civil servant but was 
appointed on deputation as the Corporation's Vice 
Chairman and Managing Director during the relevant 
period. It is undisputed that as far as the second 
respondent is concerned, he was removable from his office 
by or with the sanction of the Government. 
10. As far as the first respondent is concerned, we find 
from clause 71 (a) of the Memorandum that the power to 
appoint Directors of the Corporation by nomination 
is vested in the Government of the erstwhile State of 
Andhra Pradesh. Under Clause 81 of the Memorandum, 
the State Government was empowered to appoint any of 
the Corporation's Directors to be the Corporation's 
Managing Director. Thus, the appointment of the first 
respondent as a Director and subsequently as the 
Managing Director has been made by the State 
Government. Sub-clause (b) of Clause 71 of the 
Memorandum provides that the Government shall have 
the power to remove any Director, including the Chairman, 
Vice Chairman and Managing Director. Therefore, at the 
relevant time, the State Government had the power to 
remove the first respondent from the post of Vice 
Chairman and Managing Director of the Corporation. 
11. There are two conditions for applicability of Section 
197(1). The first condition is that the accused must be a 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

public servant removable from his office by or with the 
government's sanction. The second condition is that the 
offence alleged to have been committed by the public 
servant while acting or purporting to act in the discharge 
of his duty. 
12. We have perused the decisions relied upon by learned 
ASG. In the case of Mohd. Hadi Raja2, this Court took 
the view that the protection of Section 197 of CrPC will not 
be available to the officer of the Government Companies or 
Public Sector Undertakings. The first respondent is a civil 
servant. As such, the State Government appointed him as 
the 
Corporation's 
Vice 
Chairman 
and 
Managing 
Director on deputation. Therefore, the decision in the 
abovementioned case will not apply to the first respondent. 
13. The first condition is satisfied in the case of both the 
respondents as they are civil servants. The allegation in 
the complaint against the first respondent is that he, in 
conspiracy and connivance with Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan 
Reddy (the then Chief Minister of the state), another 
accused, allotted 250 acres of land for the SEZ project to 
M/s. Indu Tech Zone Private Ltd. by violating the existing 
norms, regulations and procedures. Further allegation 
against the first respondent is that he was indirectly 
involved in the offence of money laundering by knowingly 
assisting M/s. Indu group of companies in the creation of 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

vast proceeds of crime. The allegation against the second 
respondent, who was at the relevant time Principal 
Secretary, I & CAD Department of the State Government, 
is that in conspiracy with Shri Y.S.Jagan Mohan Reddy, 
he extended favour to India Cement Limited by allotting 
an additional 10 lakh litres of water from River Kagna 
without referring the matter to Interstate Water Resources 
Authority and by violating the existing norms, regulations 
and procedures. 
14. A Bench of three Hon’ble Judges of this Court in the 
case of P.K. Pradhan v. State of Sikkim5, in paragraphs 
5 and 15 held thus: 
“5. The legislative mandate engrafted 
in sub-section (1) of Section 197 
debarring 
a 
court 
from 
taking 
cognizance of an offence except with 
the 
previous 
sanction 
of 
the 
Government concerned in a case 
where the acts complained of are 
alleged to have been committed by a 
public servant in discharge of his 
official duty or purporting to be in the 
discharge of his official duty and such 
public servant is not removable from 
office save by or with the sanction of 
the 
Government, 
touches 
the 
jurisdiction of the court itself. It is a 
prohibition imposed by the statute 
from taking cognizance. Different 
tests have been laid down in decided 
 
5 (2001) 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

cases to ascertain the scope and 
meaning 
of 
the 
relevant 
words 
occurring in Section 197 of the Code: 
“any offence alleged to have been 
committed by him while acting or 
purporting to act in the discharge of 
his official duty”. The offence alleged 
to have been committed must have 
something to do, or must be related 
in some manner, with the discharge 
of official duty. No question of 
sanction can arise under Section 197, 
unless the act complained of is an 
offence; 
the 
only 
point 
for 
determination is whether it was 
committed in the discharge of 
official duty. There must be a 
reasonable connection between the 
act and the official duty. It does not 
matter even if the act exceeds what 
is 
strictly 
necessary 
for 
the 
discharge of the duty, as this 
question will arise only at a later 
stage when the trial proceeds on 
the merits. What a court has to find 
out is whether the act and the 
official duty are so interrelated that 
one can postulate reasonably that 
it was done by the accused in the 
performance 
of 
official 
duty, 
though, possibly in excess of the 
needs and requirements of the 
situation” 
 
“15. Thus, from a conspectus of the 
aforesaid decisions, it will be clear 
that for claiming protection under 
Section 197 of the Code, it has to be 
shown by the accused that there is 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

reasonable connection between the 
act complained of and the discharge 
of official duty. An official act can be 
performed in the discharge of official 
duty as well as in dereliction of it. For 
invoking protection under Section 
197 of the Code, the acts of the 
accused complained of must be such 
that the same cannot be separated 
from the discharge of official duty, but 
if there was no reasonable connection 
between them and the performance of 
those 
duties, 
the 
official 
status 
furnishes 
only 
the 
occasion 
or 
opportunity for the acts, then no 
sanction would be required. If the 
case 
as 
put 
forward 
by 
the 
prosecution fails or the defence 
establishes that the act purported to 
be done is in discharge of duty, the 
proceedings will have to be dropped. 
It is well settled that question of 
sanction under Section 197 of the 
Code can be raised any time after 
the 
cognizance; 
maybe 
immediately after cognizance or 
framing of charge or even at the 
time of conclusion of trial and after 
conviction as well. But there may 
be certain cases where it may not 
be possible to decide the question 
effectively 
without 
giving 
opportunity to the defence to 
establish that what he did was in 
discharge of official duty. In order 
to come to the conclusion whether 
claim of the accused that the act 
that he did was in course of the 
performance of his duty was a 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

reasonable 
one 
and 
neither 
pretended nor fanciful, can be 
examined during the course of trial 
by 
giving 
opportunity 
to 
the 
defence to establish it. In such an 
eventuality, 
the 
question 
of 
sanction should be left open to be 
decided in the main judgment 
which may be delivered upon 
conclusion of the trial.” 
(emphasis added) 
 
Thus, there is no embargo on considering the plea of 
absence of sanction, after cognizance is taken by the 
Special Court of the offences punishable under Section 4 
of the PMLA. In this case, it is not necessary to postpone 
the consideration of the issue. 
15. We have carefully perused the allegations against the 
respondents in the complaint. The allegation against the 
second respondent is of allocating an additional 10 lakh 
litres of water to India Cement Ltd. Taking the averments 
made in the complaint against him as it is, the act alleged 
against him has been committed by him while purporting 
to act in the discharge of his official duties. The allegation 
against the first respondent is of the allotment of land 
measuring 250 acres to M/s. Indu Tech Zone Private Ltd. 
Taking the averments made in the complaint as correct, 
the act alleged against him has been done by him 
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties. In 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

the case of both respondents, the acts alleged against them 
are related to the discharge of the duties entrusted to 
them. It is not even the allegation in the complaints that 
the two respondents were not empowered to do the acts 
they have done. There is a connection between their duties 
and the acts complained of. The second condition for 
the applicability of Section 197(1) also stands satisfied, 
and therefore, in this case, Section 197(1) of CrPC applies 
to the respondents, assuming that Section 197(1) of CrPC 
applies to the proceedings under the PMLA. 
 
16. As far as the applicability of Section 197 of CrPC to 
the PMLA is concerned, there are two relevant provisions 
in the form of Section 65 and 71 of the PMLA which read 
thus: 
“65. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
to apply.-- The provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) 
shall apply, in so far as they are not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act, to arrest, search and seizure, 
attachment, confiscation, investigation, 
prosecution and all other proceedings 
under this Act.” 
“71. Act to have overriding effect.-- 
The provisions of this Act shall have 
effect 
notwithstanding 
anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any 
other law for the time being in force.” 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

17. Section 65 makes the provisions of the CrPC 
applicable to all proceedings under the PMLA, provided the 
same are not inconsistent with the provisions contained in 
the PMLA. The words ‘All other proceedings’ include a 
complaint under Section 44 (1)(b) of the PMLA. We have 
carefully perused the provisions of the PMLA. We do not 
find that there is any provision therein which is 
inconsistent with the provisions of Section 197(1) of CrPC. 
Considering the object of Section 197(1) of the CrPC, its 
applicability cannot be excluded unless there is any 
provision in the PMLA which is inconsistent with Section 
197(1). No such provision has been pointed out to us. 
Therefore, we hold that the provisions of Section 197(1) of 
CrPC are applicable to a complaint under Section 44(1)(b) 
of the PMLA. 
 
18. Section 71 gives an overriding effect to the provisions 
of the PMLA notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in 
force. Section 65 is a prior section which specifically makes 
the provisions of the CrPC applicable to PMLA, subject to 
the condition that only those provisions of the CrPC will 
apply which are not inconsistent with the provisions of the 
PMLA. Therefore, when a particular provision of CrPC 
applies to proceedings under the PMLA by virtue of Section 
65 of the PMLA, Section 71 (1) cannot override the 
provision of CrPC which applies to the PMLA. Once we 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

hold that in view of Section 65 of the PMLA, Section 197(1) 
will apply to the provisions of the PMLA, Section 71 cannot 
be invoked to say that the provision of Section 197(1) of 
CrPC will not apply to the PMLA. A provision of Cr. P.C., 
made applicable to the PMLA by Section 65, will not be 
overridden by Section 71. Those provisions of CrPC which 
apply to the PMLA by virtue of Section 65 will continue to 
apply to the PMLA, notwithstanding Section 71. If Section 
71 is held applicable to such provisions of the CrPC, which 
apply to the PMLA by virtue of Section 65, such 
interpretation will render Section 65 otiose. No law can be 
interpreted in a manner which will render any of its 
provisions redundant. 
 
19. In this case, the cognizance of the offence under 
Section 3, punishable under Section 4 of the PMLA, has 
been taken against the respondents accused without 
obtaining previous sanction under Section 197(1) of CrPC. 
Therefore, the view taken by the High Court is correct. We 
must clarify that the effect of the impugned judgment is 
that the orders of the Special Court taking cognizance only 
as against the accused B.P.Acharya and Adityanath Das 
stand set aside. The order of cognizance against the other 
accused will remain unaffected. However, it will be open 
for the appellant to move the Special Court to take 
cognizance of the offence against the two respondents if a 
sanction under Section 197(1) of CrPC is granted in future. 

 Criminal Appeal Nos. 4314-4316 of 2024 

This liberty will be subject to legal and factual objections 
available to the respondents. Hence, the appeals must fail 
and are dismissed subject to what is observed above. 

…..………………………..J. 
(Abhay S. Oka) 
 
……………………………..J. 
(Augustine George Masih) 
New Delhi; 
November 06, 2024