IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

GOVERNMENT OF GOA...Appellant(s) 
 
THROUGH THE CHIEF SECRETARY 

 Vs. 

MARIA JULIETA D’SOUZA (D) & ORS....Respondent(s)

 JUDGMENT 
 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
This is an appeal against the final judgment of the High 
Court of Bombay at Goa allowing the first appeal against the 
judgment of the Trial Court dated 25.07.2007 that dismissed the 
suit filed by the respondent herein. 
2. 
The suit came to be filed by the respondent(s) herein for 
declaration of title and injunction. The Trial Court dismissed 
the suit on two grounds: first, the plaintiff could not 
establish her title by way of a clear document of title in her 
favour. Second the suit is itself barred by limitation. 
3. 
In appeal, the High Court considered the matter in detail 
and in so far as the first ground is concerned, the High Court 
referred to various documents including deeds evidencing the 
presence of title in favour of the plaintiffs’ predecessor 
followed by their continuous possession and came to the 

conclusion that her title over the property is well-established. 
So far as limitation is concerned, the High Court held that the 
suit is within the period of limitation, apart from also noting 
that the question of limitation was not pressed by the 
Government before the Trial Court. 
4. 
We heard Ms. Ruchira Gupta, who was well-prepared on law 
and fact. She prepared a detailed list of dates and has also 
taken us through the relevant portions of the pleadings in the 
suit and other documents. She has pointed out the findings of 
fact as arrived by the Trial Court. Referring to the reasoning 
of the High Court, she submitted that the High Court had wrongly 
shifted the burden of proof on to the State (defendant) rather 
than requiring the plaintiff to prove its title. She further 
submitted that the High Court wrongly asked for proof of 
possession of the property rather than for proof of title of 
the property, which is the only inquiry in a suit for 
declaration. In support of her submission, she has referred to 
the precedents of this Court in Sebastiao Luis Fernandes (Dead) 
through LRs. v. K.V.P. Shastri (Dead) through LRs.1 and Union 
of India v. Vasavi Cooperative Housing Society Limited2. 
5. 
Having considered the matter in detail, we are of the 
opinion that the High Court has correctly reappreciated the 
facts and evidence while exercising first appellate jurisdiction 
and has also followed the law as applicable in proving a suit 
 
1(2013) 
2(2014) 

for declaration. The High Court has also examined the plea of 
limitation and held that the suit is within the period of 
limitation. 
6. 
While Ms. Ruchira Gupta submitted that the High Court 
wrongly shifted the plaintiff’s burden to prove its own case 
for declaration on to the State and that the plaintiff must 
prove its own case, we found that what she was submitting was 
not about the burden of proof but the standard of proof. We will 
explain this in the context of fact as well as law. 
7. 
On fact, the High Court referred to multiple pieces of 
evidence, orders, and documents and string them together to come 
to a clear conclusion that the title subsists in the plaintiff. 
Suffice for us to say that these pieces of evidence were adduced 
and proved by the plaintiff alone. The High Court did not solely 
rely on the lack of evidence by the State to establish its own 
title in coming to its conclusion. Thus, the burden of proof 
was well-discharged by the plaintiff and the High Court 
correctly examined and concluded its findings based on the 
plaintiff’s evidence. 
8. 
On law, the position is as follows. There is a clear 
distinction between burden of proof and standard of proof. This 
distinction is well-known to civil as well as criminal 
practitioners in common law jurisprudence. What Ms. Ruchira 
sought to point out is that the documents relied on by the 
plaintiff did not point out the existence of title at all. She 
is right to the extent that no single document in itself 

concludes title in favour of the plaintiff, but this is not an 
issue of burden of proof. This is a matter relating to the 
sufficiency of evidence. While inquiring into whether a fact is 
proved3, the sufficiency of evidence is to be seen in the context 
of standard of proof, which in civil cases is by preponderance 
of probability. By this test, the High Court has correctly 
arrived at its conclusion regarding the existence of title in 
favour of the plaintiff on the basis of the evidence adduced. 
9. 
For these reasons, Civil Appeal judgment 
of the High Court in First Appeal No. 282 of 2007 dated 
21.10.2010 is dismissed. 
10. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
11. 
No order as to costs. 

 …………………………………………………………………………J. 

 [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 

…………………………………………………………………………J.

[ARAVIND KUMAR] 

NEW DELHI; 
 
JANUARY 31, 2024 
 
3 Section 3 of the Indian Evidence Act defines the terms as: 
“Proved”.––A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters 
before it, the Court either believes it to exist, or considers its existence 
so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular 
case, to act upon the supposition that it exists