IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO 1294 OF 2020 

In Re Manoj Tibrewal Akash 

… Petitioner 
 
Vs 
 
….. Respondents 

 JUDGMENT 
 
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 

On 04 October 2019, Shri Manoj Tibrewal, a senior journalist, addressed a letter to this 
Court complaining of the unlawful demolition of his ancestral residential house and 
shop described as House Number 117, Ward Number 16, Mohalla Hamid Nagar, 
District Maharajganj, Uttar Pradesh by the authorities of the State. A suo motu Writ 
Petition was registered before this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution on the 
basis of the said letter1. 

On 07 December 2020, notice was issued to the District Magistrate and the 
Superintendent of Police, District Maharajganj. 

In order to obviate any controversy in regard to the facts, we would proceed on the 
basis of the facts as revealed in counter affidavit filed by the District Magistrate. 
 
1 WP (Civil) No 1294 of 2020. 

The counter affidavit states that on 7 March 2012, the road on which the petitioner’s 
house was situated was notified as a national highway (National Highway No. 730)2 
under the provisions of the National Highways Act, 1956. Prior to this notification, the 
road was a state highway spanning from District Pilibhit via Bahraich, Balrampur and 
Maharajganj to Padrauna. 

Subsequently, on 13 March 2018, Government of India sanctioned the widening of 
the existing road. A final Detailed Project Report was prepared stating that the 
applicable right of way for the chainage between two sections from KM 484 to KM 
505.120, was 30 meters. Following the sanction by the Government of India, an 
agreement was executed on 2 May 2018 between the State Public Works 
Department3 and Mahakaleshwar Infratech Private Limited4 for the execution of the 
work. The work order stated that the work would commence on 18 February 2019 
and conclude on 17 February 2020. 

The counter affidavit states that in June 2019, it emerged after identifying the right of 
way that out of the total sanctioned length of 21.120 km, about 4 kilometers of the 
stretch fell within Maharajganj town. It is alleged that the petitioner was one of 
several persons who had encroached upon the land of NH 730. According to the 
State, he had been directed to remove the encroachment from the land by way of 
a Munadi announcement (by beat of drums) from June 2019; between 25 August 
2019 and 30 August 2019 and between 1 September 2019 and 6 September 2019. 

2 “NH 730”. 
3 “PWD” 
4 “MIPL” 

On 4 July 2019, it is alleged, the mother of the petitioner made an application to the 
District Magistrate requesting him not to demolish her house by placing reliance on 
an interim order dated 14 November 1975 passed by the High Court of Judicature 
at Allahabad in a 1975 writ petition styled as Babulal Vs State of Uttar Pradesh. By the 
said interim order, the High Court had issued notice in the writ petition and directed 
that the petitioner’s house shall not be demolished except “in accordance with 
some statutory provisions of law and after giving to the petitioners a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause” until further orders. 

On 8 September 2019, Shri Shubh Karan Singh, the brother of the petitioner is stated 
to have furnished a letter to the District Magistrate averring that he had purchased 
the house/land which is registered in the revenue records under Abadi Land 
category 6.2; and that the house was co-owned by three persons. However, the 
letter stated that the writ petition was eventually dismissed in default. The letter 
further stated that in the event that the house was to be demolished for the 
construction of the national highway, compensation ought to be given to the 
brother of the petitioner. 

According to the Collector, on the evening of 12 September 2019, the occupants of 
the house were called upon to remove all their belongings and on 13 September 
2019, “the team removed the encroachment”. 

Lakshmi Devi Tibrewal, the mother of the petitioner instituted a writ petition before 
the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad on 28 September 20195. The petition 
 
5 WP No. 1335 of 2020. eventually came to be dismissed as withdrawn by an order dated 18 January 2020 
of the High Court. 

On 4 October 2019, the petitioner moved a complaint before the National Human 
Rights Commission,6 which was registered as Case No 27074/24/49/2019. NHRC 
constituted a team of two inspectors for conducting a spot enquiry. 

On 5 November 2019, the petitioner’s brother filed an affidavit stating that there was 
a two-storeyed ancestral house which was constructed in Hameednagar pursuant 
to the purchase of the house by his late father on 6 June 1964 by a registered deed 
in which he, the deponent had a 1/3 share. According to him, a registered deed of 
partition was executed in the family on 25 November 1967. 

When in 1975, the Public Works Department7 attempted to demolish the house for 
the construction of a road, a writ petition was instituted before the High Court in 
which, on 14 November 1975, a Division Bench had passed an interim order. Since 
the partition could not be implemented, a civil suit was stated to have been 
instituted as between the co-sharers. 

The Collector states that the brother of the petitioner has consented for the 
demolition of property to the extent of his share. 

When the petitioner moved the NHRC by a letter dated 04 October 2019, a detailed 
enquiry ensued. The enquiry culminated in a report dated 3 February 2020, whereby 
the NHRC concluded that: 
 
6“NHRC” 
7 “PWD” 

No notice was given prior to the demolition, save and except for a public 
announcement through loudspeakers; 

The house of the petitioner who was the complainant before the NHRC was 
constructed on land purchased by his grandfather in 1960 and 1964; 

The spot inspections and measurements done by Revenue Department 
officials in the presence of the NHRC enquiry team revealed that the extent 
of the encroachment on Government land was about 3.70 meters in length 
and demolition of that limited extent was justified because the land was 
falling under a 16-meter-wide road; 

However, 
the 
house was 
demolished 
beyond 
the 
extent 
of 
the 
encroachment of 3.70 meters and the actual demolition was in fact 
between 5 to 8 meters; 

No compensation has been tendered for the demolition of the property; 

The demolition action commenced on 7 July 2019 and on 13 September 
2019, the house, which was 16 meters from the center of the road was 
demolished; and 

The video clip provided by the officials of NH-PWD revealed that household 
goods, as alleged by the complainant, were still in the house before the work 
of demolition commenced. 

In this backdrop, the findings of the NHRC indicate that at the highest, demolition to 
the limited extent of 3.70 meters may have been justified on the ground of 

encroachment but there was no justification for the demolition beyond the 3.70 
meters. The NHRC concluded that the government agency had failed to provide 
any documents to support that the road in front of the petitioner’s house was 32 
meters (16 meters on each side from the centre of the road). The revenue records 
and the NH-PWD records revealed that the road width in front of the house was only 
16 meters (8 meters on each side from the centre of the road). However, the District 
administration and officers demolished properties beyond the permissible extent, 
upto 32 meters (16 meters from the centre of the road on both sides) without 
authority of law. 

The NHRC, therefore, opined that a prima facie violation of the human rights of the 
petitioner and his family was established. The NHRC: 

Issued notice under Section 18(a)(1) of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 
1993 to the Government of Uttar Pradesh through its Chief Secretary to show 
cause why interim compensation ought not to be directed to be paid to the 
petitioner; 

Directed the Director General of Police to register an FIR on the petitioner’s 
complaint and have it investigated by the CBCID; and 

Directed the Chief Secretary to take Departmental/punitive action against 
the errant officers of the District Administration, PWD or Police who 
dispossessed the petitioner and his family. 

Pursuant to the above directions of NHRC, the Government of Uttar Pradesh 
responded by a communication dated 21 April 2020. The communication broadly 

flagged the grievance of the State Government that the version of the State 
Government was not adequately heard during the NHRC enquiry. It also stated that 
a separate enquiry was being conducted by the Commissioner, Basti Division, Basti. 

The first report of the NHRC was followed by an order dated 6 July 2020 whereby a 
recommendation was issued to the Chief Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh 
to pay a compensation of Rs 5 Lakhs to the petitioner and his family for the loss 
caused to them. The Chief Secretary and the Director General of Police were 
directed to submit compliance reports. 

The NHRC order dated 06 July 2020 was challenged by the State of Uttar Pradesh in 
a writ petition before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. The writ petition is 
pending before the High Court. 

Besides the NHRC investigation, the issue was investigated by the Commissioner, 
Basti. The findings recorded by the Commissioner in an investigation report dated 18 
June 2020 are extracted below: 
 
“After scrutiny and on-site inspection of records related to 
the case, it was found that: 
 
1. 
For widening of the national highway in question, the 
DPR was not prepared by making a correct 
assessment 
of 
the 
availability 
of 
land, 
land 
requirement, etc. on the spot as per rules. 
 
2. 
During road widening, written notice should have 
been issued giving sufficient time in connection with 
the removal of the affected houses and other 
establishments/shops. Whereas in this case a notice, 
regarding the removal of the alleged encroachment 
was not issued. Rather, on 12-09-2019, before the 
demolition in question, Duggi-Munadhi was made, 
which was confirmed on the spot, but for such a big 

action, mere Duggi-Munadhi was not enough. For this, 
notice should be issued in writing2. During road 
widening, written notice should have been issued 
giving sufficient time in connection with the removal 
of 
the 
affected 
houses 
and 
other 
establishments/shops. Whereas in this case a notice, 
regarding the removal of the alleged encroachment 
was not issued. Rather, on 12-09-2019, before the 
demolition in question, Duggi-Munadhi was made, 
which was confirmed on the spot, but for such a big 
action, mere Duggi-Munadhi was not enough. For this, 
notice should be issued in writing to the affected 
persons as per rules. Which has not been done. to the 
affected persons as per rules. Which has not been 
done. 
 
3. 
It has been accepted by NH officials themselves that 
16-16 meters of land is to be taken from the middle to 
both sides for junction, and according to revenue 
records, there is only 16 meters' width (8-8 meters from 
the middle of the road) of land is available on the 
spot. In such a situation, legal process has not been 
followed for additional land. 
4. 
In the construction of the questioned road, as per the 
rules, 
compensation 
of 
landholding 
and 
other 
ownership land should be determined, which has not 
been done. 
 
5. 
The officials of the National Highway demolished the 
complainant's house by getting the support of the 
district administration in an illegal way by hiding the 
true facts, which was not fair. 
 
6. 
On 04/07/2019, Smt. Laxmi Devi, wife of Shri Sushil 
Kumar Tibrewal, presented a letter before the then 
District Magistrate Maharajganj and it was conveyed 
that Digar Araji was being marked, out of the road. In 
this regard, no information and prior notice has been 
given to them. If land is acquired by damaging the 
house etc. of the applicant, then appropriate 
compensation should be provided to him. According 
to the records, no action was taken at this time, due 
to 
which 
the 
dispute 
in 
question 
arose. 
The 
construction should have been destroyed only after 
determining this relationship, and after determining 
and distributing the compensation, which has not 
been done. Therefore, the then District Magistrate, 

Maharajganj seems guilty for not following the 
procedure laid down in the case in question. 
 
7. 
As far as the question regarding complainant 
attached 
at 
different 
levels 
presented 
with 
appointment section-5 of Uttar Pradesh Government 
letter 52/2-5-2020 dated 27/01/2020 and G-1-15 / 2-5-
2020 dated 07/02/2020, it is worth mentioning that, in 
the complaint letters addressed to the Director, 
Enforcement Directorate, Government of India and 
Government of India, the Hon'ble Prime Minister, 
complaint regarding the Disproportionate assets of 
Amarnath 
Upadhyay, 
then 
District 
Magistrate, 
Maharajganj. It has been requested to investigate the 
issue by making a high-level team. Therefore, it would 
not be expedient to make any kind of comments etc. in this regard from this level.” 

Following a representation by the District Magistrate, the Commissioner passed a 
further order dated 31 July 2020 whereby he observed: 
 
“It is clear that administrative before providing the 
administrative 
support, 
the 
then 
above 
District 
Magistrate Maharaganj had full responsibility to 
investigate the fact from their revenue records that 
whether the land on which National Highway is 
constructing a road claiming to be in their ownership 
belongs to them or not. Without verifying the same 
from the revenue and tehsil records, the house in 
question 
was 
demolished 
through 
police 
and 
administrative support which was not appropriate 
from any view point. During the terrestrial inspection, it 
was found by me that the width of the road at the site 
in question has been reduced. The place where the 
complainant's house was located is not mentioned as 
a road land in the maps. The responsibility Of 
demarcating and fixing the land of the road which 
belongs to Public Works department, is of the then 
District 
Magistrate 
Maharaganj. 
Therefore, 
the 
representation/ statement furnished by the then 
District 
Magistrate 
Maharaganj 
Sh. 
Amarnath 
Upadhyay to the effect that he had no direct 
responsibility in the case in question cannot be 
accepted under any circumstances. Therefore, the 
representation/ assertion submitted by the then District 

Magistrate Sh. Amarnath Upadhyay is not acceptable 
at all.” 

We have heard Mr Siddharth Bhatnagar, senior counsel who appeared on behalf of 
the petitioner and Ms Tulika Mukherjee, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
State of Uttar Pradesh. 

We are not inclined to accept the request of the counsel for the State for a further 
adjournment of these proceedings, having due regard to the fact that pleadings 
have been completed and the Court is required to evaluate material that has been 
placed on the record for deciding upon the legality of the action. 

The following position emerges from the narration of facts: 

The State of Uttar Pradesh has produced no document to establish the 
original width of the State Highway which was notified as NH 730, a National 
Highway; 

No material has been produced by the State of Uttar Pradesh to indicate 
whether any enquiry or demarcation was carried to earmark the 
encroachments; 

There is no material to indicate that the land had been acquired before the 
work of demolition was carried out beyond a statement on affidavit that 
there was ‘encroachment’; 

The State has failed to disclose: 

The precise extent of the encroachment; 

The width of the existing road; 

The width of the notified highway; 

The extent of the property of the petitioner which actually fell within 
the notified width; and 

Any justification for why the demolition was required to be carried out 
beyond even the area of alleged encroachment as the report which 
has been submitted by the NHRC would indicate that the demolition 
was far in excess of the alleged encroachment which was to the 
extent of 3.70 meters. 

The demolition was preceded only by a Munadi. There was no written notice; and 
no disclosure of the basis of demarcation or the extent of the demolition to the 
occupiers. Even in respect of the area allegedly encroached no due process was 
followed and a written notice was not issued. 

From the above facts that have emerged, based on very disclosures made by the 
State of Uttar Pradesh, it is clear that the demolition was high-handed and without 
the authority of law. 

At this stage, it may be also material to note the allegation of the petitioner in his 
letter dated 4 October 2019 addressed to the Secretary General which stated: 
 
“a few days before the demolition of the house, my father 
had demanded an inquiry by the SIT about the huge 
irregularities, bribes and corruption taking place in the 
construction being done with a cost of Rs.185 crore, of the 
20 km road at the NH – 730 between 484 to 505 km. This 
had been published in the local newspapers. The local 
political and administrative people were vexed with us for 

demanding an inquiry into a construction costing 185 crore 
rupees, and were seething with anger hidden inside them.” 

The petitioner has alleged that the demolition was a reprisal for a newspaper report 
which contained allegations of wrongdoing in relation to the construction of the 
road in question. We need not engage with this aspect, save and except to the 
extent that it supplies the background to the grievance of the petitioner. In any 
case, such high-handed and unilateral action by the State Government cannot be 
countenanced. Justice through bulldozers is unknown to any civilized system of 
jurisprudence. There is a grave danger that if high handed and unlawful behaviour is 
permitted by any wing or officer of the state, demolition of citizens’ properties will 
take place as a selective reprisal for extraneous reasons. Citizens’ voices cannot be 
throttled by a threat of destroying their properties and homesteads. The ultimate 
security which a human being possesses is to the homestead. The law does not 
undoubtedly 
condone 
unlawful 
occupation 
of 
public 
property 
and 
encroachments. There are municipal laws and town-planning legislation which 
contain adequate provisions for dealing with illegal encroachments. Where such 
legislation exists the safeguards which are provided in it must be observed. We 
propose to lay down certain minimum thresholds of procedural safeguards which 
must be fulfilled before taking action against properties of citizens. The state must 
follow due process of law before taking action to remove illegal encroachments or 
unlawfully constructed structures. Bulldozer justice is simply unacceptable under the 
rule of law. If it were to be permitted the constitutional recognition of the right to 
property under Article 300A would be reduced to a dead letter. Officials of the state 
who carry out or sanction such unlawful action must be proceeded against for 

disciplinary action. Their infractions of law must invite criminal sanctions. Public 
accountability for public officials must be the norm. Any action in respect of public 
or private property must be backed by due process of law. 

Before acting in pursuance of a road widening project, the State or its 
instrumentalities must: 

Ascertain the existing width of the road in terms of official records/maps; 

Carry out a survey/demarcation to ascertain whether there is any 
encroachment on the existing road with reference to the existing 
records/maps; 

If an encroachment is found, issue a proper, written notice to the 
encroachers to remove the encroachment; 

In the event that the noticee raises an objection with regard to the 
correctness or the validity of the notice, decide the objection by a speaking 
order in due compliance with the principles of natural justice; 

If the objection is rejected, furnish reasonable notice to the person against 
whom adverse action is proposed and upon the failure of the person 
concerned to act, proceed in accordance with law, to remove the 
encroachment unless restrained by an order of the competent authority or 
court; and 

If the existing width of road including the State land adjoining the road is not 
sufficient to accommodate the widening of the road, steps must be taken by 

the State to acquire the land in accordance with law before undertaking the 
road widening exercise. 

In the present case, we conclude that the entire process which was followed by the 
State was high handed. We, therefore, direct as follows: 

The State must make payment of punitive compensation; 

The Chief Secretary of the Government of Uttar Pradesh is directed to have 
an enquiry conducted into the entire matter pertaining to the illegal 
demolition, against all concerned officers of the state and the contractors 
who are responsible for the illegal demolition. In addition, disciplinary action 
must be initiated against any officer who is found to be involved in the illegal 
demolition, not only of the house of the petitioner but of other similarly 
situated properties in the area which were similarly demolished without 
adequate notice; and 

The Chief Secretary of the Government of UP shall lodge a First Information 
Report as directed by the NHRC. The FIR shall be investigated by the CB-CID. 

The State of Uttar Pradesh is directed to pay the petitioner compensation in the 
amount of Rs twenty-five Lakhs, as an interim measure. By way of abundant caution, 
we clarify that this compensation shall not come in the way of the petitioner, should 
he choose to pursue any other proceedings which are available in law for 
compensation for the demolition and for the taking over of property without the 
authority of law. 

The Chief Secretary of the Government of Uttar Pradesh shall, after conducting the 
enquiry, take suitable action including penal measures to ensure accountability of 
individual officials who have acted in violation of law. The implementation of these 
directions shall be initiated no later than within a period of one month from the date 
of this order. Disciplinary proceedings shall be completed within four months of 
initiation. 

The Registrar (Judicial) shall circulate a copy of this judgment to the Chief 
Secretaries of all the States/Union Territories to ensure compliance with the directions 
which have been issued in regard to the procedure to be followed for the purpose 
of road widening in general. 

The Writ Petition is accordingly disposed of. 

Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 
 
…...…...…...………………...…CJI. 
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 

…...…...…...………………...…..J. 
 [J B Pardiwala] 

…...…...…...………………...…..J. 
 [Manoj Misra] 

New Delhi; 
November 06, 2024