IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL Nos. OF 2024 
( SLP (C) Nos. 4494-95 of 2023) 

MANIK PANJABRAO KALMEGH 

 VERSUS 

EXECUTIVE ENGINEER BEMBLA 
PROJECT DIVISION YAVATMAL & ORS. 

JUDGMENT 

 PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 

1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The appeal is directed against the common judgment and 
order dated 02.12.2021 of the High Court in First Appeal 
No.492 of 2017 and in Cross Objection No.65 of 2017 filed 
therein. The High Court has allowed the appeal of the 
respondents and had dismissed the cross objections of the 
appellant herein. 

3. 
The controversy in this appeal is regarding determination 
of fair and adequate compensation for the acquired land, 
the fruit trees existing thereon and the borewell. 

4. 
The appellant was the owner of the lands bearing Survey 
No.14 
admeasuring 
4.32 
hectares, 
Survey 
No.15 
admeasuring 
1.40 
hectares 
and 
Survey 
No. admeasuring 5.87 hectares situate in village Barad, taluka 
Babhulgaon, 
District 
Yavatmal, 
Maharashtra. 
The 
aforesaid land was acquired for the benefit of Vidarbha 
Irrigation Development Corporation by the State of 
Maharashtra by issuing a notification dated 24.07.2003 
under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 18941. The 
Land Acquisition Officer2 passed an award on 27.06.2005 
offering compensation of the aforesaid land to the 
appellant as under: 

1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’ 
2 In short ‘LAO’ 

S.No. Land Details 
Amount of land 
(per hectare) 
 
Amount 
for 
fruit 
bearing tree/others 

Survey No.14 Rs.83,099/- 
Rs.7,27,669/- 

Survey No.15 
Rs.83,245/- 
Rs.23,600/- 

Survey No.17 Rs.82,904/- 
No 
compensation 
for alleged awala 
trees and borewell. 
 
5. 
The appellant was not satisfied by the compensation offered 
by the LAO. Therefore, he accepted the compensation 
amounting to Rs.17,13,445/- under protest and preferred 
a reference under Section 18 of the Act for the 
enhancement of compensation, claiming an additional 
amount of Rs.2,06,88,000/-. The Civil Judge Sr. Division 
allowed the reference in part and granted additional 
compensation vide judgment and order dated 04.04.2015. 
6. 
The appellant still not satisfied, applied for review of the 
aforesaid judgment and order alleging that in respect of 
land bearing Survey No.17, he had not been granted any 
compensation for the 1824 fruit bearing awala trees 
existing thereon as well as the borewell. The review 
application was allowed and the compensation in respect of 

the aforesaid awala trees and the borewell was also 
determined and awarded vide order dated 05.08.2015. 
7. 
Thus, aggrieved by the order passed on the review 
application granting compensation for the awala trees and 
the borewell situate on land bearing Survey No.17, the 
respondents preferred an appeal under Section 54 of the 
Act before the High Court. The appeal was admitted only 
on the limited aspect whether the award of compensation 
for the trees and the borewell is permissible in a review, but 
subsequently the order admitting the appeal on the above 
limited ground was modified and the appeal was ordered to 
be heard on merits without any restrictions. In the said 
appeal, cross objections were filed by the appellant claiming 
further enhancement. 
8. 
The High Court by the impugned order dismissed the cross-
objections of the appellant and partly allowed the appeal 
holding that the award of compensation for the awala trees 
and the borewell existing on land bearing Survey No.17 is 
per se illegal and, thus, the award was accordingly directed 
to be modified. 

9. 
We have heard Shri Pallav Sisodia, learned Senior Counsel 
for the appellant and Shri Uday B. Dube, learned Senior 
Counsel for the respondent. 
10. The main thrust of the argument of Shri Pallav Sisodia, 
learned Senior Counsel for the appellant, is that in 
awarding the compensation for the land, reliance was 
placed upon an exemplar sale deed of the year 1994 and 
since the present acquisition was of the year 2003, 10% rise 
per year was allowed in awarding the compensation but 
this 10% rise per year ought to have been with cumulative 
effect. In this connection, he has relied upon Ramrao 
Shankar Tapase v. Maharashtra Industrial Development 
Corporation and Others3. The second limb of the 
argument of Shri Pallav Sisodia, learned Senior Counsel for 
the appellant, is that on lands bearing Survey Nos.14 and 
15, there existed 600 orange trees but compensation in 
respect of only 500 orange trees have been granted. This 
apart, there existed 1824 awala trees and the borewell on 
land bearing Survey No.17 as is reflected from the 2nd Joint 
Measurement Report4 dated 08.07.2015. However, in 
 
3 (2022) 
4 In short ‘JMR’ 

respect thereof compensation granted by the reference 
court, while considering the review application, has been 
set aside illegally by the High Court. 
11. Shri Uday B. Dube, learned Senior Counsel for the 
respondent, submitted that the entire record was 
considered by the High Court in passing the impugned 
order and the court was satisfied that no admissible 
evidence was adduced to establish the existence of the 
awala trees and the borewell on the land bearing Survey 
No.17 on or before the acquisition. The grant of 
compensation for the land by allowing 10% increase per 
year on the basis of the exemplar sale deed of 1994 is 
perfectly justified and it is not in every case that the court 
is obliged to allow the said increase cumulatively. In the 
event, the court has exercised its discretion not to grant 
cumulative increase in the market value, it cannot be said 
that the court has acted arbitrarily and has committed any 
error of law in determining the fair market value of the land 
for the purpose of award of compensation. 
12. Let us first examine as to whether the appellant was 
entitled to any compensation in respect of 1824 awala trees 

and the borewell as claimed by him; and as was allowed in 
the review application which had ultimately been set aside 
by the High Court. 
13. The reference court, in the review application, granted 
Rs.1,000/- each for 1824 awala trees and a sum of 
Rs.40,000/- for the borewell situate on land bearing Survey 
No.17. 
14. A perusal of the award of the reference court dated 
04.04.2015 clearly reveals that it had rejected the claim for 
compensation of awala trees as the same were newly 
planted and were not fruit bearing at the relevant time. The 
plantation was reported to be of the year 2003-2004 which 
is subsequent to the proposal to acquire the land. The court 
also recorded that no substantial evidence was brought on 
record to prove the existence of the aforesaid trees or that 
they were fruit bearing trees. The court while allowing the 
review application had placed reliance upon the 2nd JMR 
which was not part of the evidence. The said report or the 
representations in that connection were produced by the 
appellant along with the review application and were never 
proved and were marked as exhibits. Thus, the said 2nd 

JMR and the representations were inadmissible in evidence 
which could not have been relied upon by the court while 
considering the review application. Moreover, the review 
application has been allowed in a manner as if the court 
considering it, was sitting in appeal or was deciding the 
reference afresh. The manner in which it has been decided 
was not within the scope of the review jurisdiction and 
could not have been allowed, that too on the basis of 
inadmissible evidence. Therefore, in our opinion, the High 
Court very rightly set aside the grant of compensation for 
the alleged awala trees said to be existing on land bearing 
Survey No.17. 
15. Since the court in review jurisdiction could not have 
allowed any additional compensation as the evidence 
produced during review was inadmissible, the grant of 
compensation for borewell is also unsustainable. 
16. Accordingly, no illegality has been committed by the High 
Court in passing the impugned order insofar as the relief 
granted in a review application was ordered to be set aside. 
17. Though, emphasis was also laid for the grant of 
compensation for additional 100 orange trees and for 1 

tamarind tree (imli tree) but we do not find any discussion 
in this context by the High Court probably for the reason 
that no such argument was pressed before it. The 
argument, not raised and pressed before the High Court, 
cannot be permitted to be raised for the first time herein 
this appeal, more particularly, when there is no evidence to 
even substantiate the same except for the 2nd JMR which 
has been held to be inadmissible. 
18. In determining the market value of lands bearing Survey 
Nos.14 and 15, the reference court had relied upon an 
earlier judgment in LAC No.48 of 2007 (Exh.68). The land 
involved in the aforesaid judgment was also acquired for 
the same project situate in the adjoining village. In the 
aforesaid judgment, reliance was placed upon an exemplar 
sale deed of the year 1994 (Exh.35). Therefore, the reference 
court granted increment of 10% per year as per the market 
value determined on the basis of the exemplar sale deed of 
the year 1994. The aforesaid judgment and order (Exh.68) 
is final and conclusive and no evidence or material has 
been brought on record to establish that the same was in 
any manner modified so as to grant cumulative increase of 

10% in the market value. Therefore, it would not be a 
prudent exercise to award cumulative increase as claimed 
by the appellant in the case at hand. 
19. In Ramrao Shankar Tapase (supra), this Court only 
observed that a cumulative increase of 10-15% per year in 
the market value of the land may be accepted in the facts 
and circumstances of the case. A plain reading of 
paragraph 28 of the aforesaid decision itself would make it 
clear that the grant of cumulative increase in the market 
value of the land is not an absolute rule and that it is 
optional and may be granted in a given case only. In the 
instant case, it has rightly not been granted for the simple 
reason that the Exh.68 which is a relied upon judgment 
pertaining to the same acquisition, no such cumulative 
increase was permitted. The said exhibit has to be accepted 
wholly and not in part. Thus, there is no arbitrary exercise 
of power in simply permitting 10% increase in the market 
value as determined on the basis of exemplar sale deed of 
the year 1994 as relied upon in the judgment i.e., Exh.68. 

20. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we find no 
merit in these appeals and the same are dismissed with no 
order as to costs. 
21. Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of....………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL)...……………………………….. J. 
(R. MAHADEVAN) 
NEW DELHI; 
NOVEMBER 06, 2024