IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Union of India & Ors. 

 … Appellants 

Versus 

Wing Commander M.S. Mander … Respondent 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
ABHAY S. OKA, J. 
FACTUAL ASPECT 
1. 
The respondent, along with four other officers of the 
Air Force, were tried by a General Court Martial (for short 
‘GCM’) for various offences. The first charge was of 
committing an offence punishable under Section 302, read 
with Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code (for short ‘IPC’). 
The second charge in the alternative was of the 
commission of offence punishable under Section 302 of 
IPC. There was also a charge of the commission of offences 
punishable under Sections 325 and 342, read with Section 
149 of IPC. There was also a charge of indulging in 
unbecoming conduct and committing acts prejudicial to 

good order. Thus, there were charges under Section 45 
(Unbecoming conduct), Section 65 (committing an act 
prejudicial to public order) and Section 71 (committing 
civil offences) of the Air Force Act, 1950 (for short ‘AFA’). 
Thirty-five prosecution witnesses were examined before 
the GCM. The GCM found the respondent and co-accused 
guilty of the offence under Section 304 Part II, read with 
149 of IPC. Even the charge for the offence under Section 
342 of IPC and charges under Sections 45 and 65 of the 
AFA Act were held as proved. The GCM sentenced the 
respondent to undergo rigorous imprisonment for five 
years and to be cashiered. The Chief of the Air Staff 
confirmed the conviction. He remitted the sentence of five 
years to imprisonment for two years in civil prison, but he 
confirmed the sentence of cashiering. As regards the co-
accused, he remitted the entire sentence of imprisonment 
and cashiering. However, past service for two years was 
forfeited 
for 
the 
purpose 
of 
promotion 
and 
the 
enhancement of pay and pension. They were reprimanded. 
The respondent challenged his conviction and sentence by 
filing a writ petition. After the constitution of the Armed 
Forces Tribunal (for short, ‘the Tribunal’), the writ petition 
was transferred to the Tribunal. By the impugned 
judgment dated 14th May 2010, the petition filed by the 
respondent was allowed and the respondent's conviction 
was set aside. Consequential reliefs except back wages 
were also granted. 

2. 
The deceased was signalman UD Garje. On 3rd March 
1998, it is alleged that the deceased was sent to repair the 
telephone at the residence of Flight Lieutenant Mr. S. 
Verma (accused No.3). It is alleged that the deceased 
misbehaved with accused No.3’s wife. Accused No.3 
reported the incident to the respondent, who, in turn, 
reported the incident to the station commander. It is 
alleged that the station commander informed the 
respondent to enquire about the matter before taking any 
action. Therefore, the respondent asked accused No.3 to 
secure the presence of the deceased. However, the 
deceased did not turn up. Therefore, the deceased was 
asked to be brought by sending someone personally. The 
allegation against the respondent is that as the deceased 
gave evasive answers, he directed that the deceased should 
be confined to the Guards' room. The allegation against 
the respondent is that for confining the deceased to 
the Guards’ room, he was taken in a gypsy vehicle driven 
by him in which accused Nos.3 and Flying Officer I.S. 
Shahab (accused No.4) were sitting. Even the accused 
No.2- Flight Lieutenant A.N. Menon was sitting in the 
Gypsy. The allegation is that the deceased jumped out of 
the vehicle and started running. The officers in the Gypsy 
followed him. While running, the deceased fell into a ditch. 
He suffered wounds and was taken to a hospital. This 
incident is of 6th March 1998. He died in the hospital on 
7th March 1998. 

SUBMISSIONS 
3. 
Learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants 
has taken us through the evidence of material prosecution 
witnesses. He submits that only the first two charges 
(Section 302 read with Section 149 of IPC and in the 
alternative Section 302 of IPC) have been discussed by the 
Tribunal, and there is no consideration of the other three 
charges held as proved against the respondent. He has 
mainly relied upon evidence of PWs 4 to 9 and 27, PW-10, 
12, 13 and 16. He has also relied upon the medical 
evidence and the testimony of PWs 20, 33, 34 and 35. 
Learned senior counsel submitted that PWs 4 to 10 and 12 
identified the respondent. He pointed out that PW-8 
deposed of having seen the respondent walking in the 
garden with a stick in his hand and entering the Air Crew 
Rest Room (ACRR). He deposed that thereafter the shutter 
was pulled down. He heard some noises after that. He 
pointed out that PW-9 also stated that he had seen 
the respondent entering ACRR. After that, he saw one 
person running from ACRR towards the airport. He heard 
shouts of “pakdo”. He tried to catch the person on the 
instructions of the accused. After that, he saw the accused 
Nos. 3 and 4 catching the said person who was a civilian 
and taking him towards the gypsy. Even PW-7 deposed 
that he saw the respondent starting the gypsy vehicle and 
simultaneously accused Nos. 3 and 4 catching a man in 
civilian cloths. He pointed out that other witnesses 

deposed that the respondent was driving the gypsy on 
a parallel taxi track. He submitted that the respondent, in 
his statement, clearly admitted that he had picked up the 
deceased and carried him in a gypsy vehicle for the 
purpose of confining him to a Guards' room. As suggested 
by accused No.3, he drove the gypsy to the parallel taxi 
track towards the married officers’ quarters. At that time, 
the deceased jumped from the gypsy and ran towards the 
kutcha road and thereafter fell into a ditch. The learned 
senior counsel thus submitted that the first and third to 
fifth charges were proved against the respondent as he 
admitted that he wanted to put the deceased in solitary 
confinement. 
4. 
The learned counsel appearing for the respondent 
pointed out that it is not even the case of the prosecution 
that the deceased was pushed out of the gypsy vehicle. He 
pointed out that none of the witnesses had deposed that 
the respondent had used any weapon or stick. None of 
them have alleged that the deceased was assaulted by the 
respondent or any other accused. The injuries sustained 
by him clearly show that the same were caused due to a 
fall in a concrete ditch. There were no injury marks on the 
scalp, such as lacerations or deep cuts. He submitted that 
the finding of fact recorded by the Tribunal is that there 
was no evidence against the respondent and therefore, 
even the other three charges cannot be sustained. 

CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS 
5. 
We have perused the evidence of the material 
prosecution witnesses relied upon by the learned senior 
counsel appearing for the appellants and the documents 
on record. PW-33 Dr Shiv Kochar, who conducted an 
autopsy on the body of the deceased, opined that there 
were injuries to the skull and brain, which were sufficient 
to cause death in the ordinary course. PW-33 stated that 
the deceased died due to a coma brought about as a result 
of antemortem injuries to the skull and brain. These 
injuries were sufficient in the ordinary course to cause 
death. He admitted that some of the injuries may be due 
to fall. He stated that there were no fractures in the body 
except at the place of surgical intervention. Though in the 
examination-in-chief he stated that blunt objects may 
have caused injury, in the cross-examination, he admitted 
that a floor-like hard surface is also considered a blunt 
object. 
6. 
At this stage, we must note that the allegation 
against the respondent is that the co-accused picked up 
the deceased and brought him to the gypsy driven by the 
respondent. It is alleged that he had directed the deceased 
to be picked up for confining him to the Guards' room and 
was being carried in his Gypsy for confining him to the 
Guards' room. While he was being taken by the gypsy, he 
jumped from the rear side and started running away. It is 

also undisputed that the deceased fell into a ditch and 
sustained injuries. There is no allegation made by the 
prosecution that while sitting in the gypsy or before that, 
any assault was made on the deceased either by the 
respondent or by any other accused. The injuries found 
on the person of the deceased cannot be attributed to the 
respondent. 
7. 
We have carefully perused the evidence of the 
material prosecution witnesses relied upon by the 
appellant. It is true that PW-8 deposed that he saw the 
respondent walking in the garden with a bamboo stick. 
However, he admitted that he did not see the respondent 
carrying the stick to the ACRR. Moreover, the stick is not 
recovered. None of the prosecution witnesses deposed that 
the deceased was taken inside ACRR. None of the 
witnesses have deposed that they saw the respondent 
assaulting the deceased. PW-12, who was sitting in the 
ATC tower of the airport, saw one gypsy vehicle going 
towards the parallel taxi track. He claimed that through 
the binoculars he saw that 4 to 5 persons had come out of 
the gypsy and were standing in front of the gypsy. He 
stated that there was some “Hathapai”. PW-16 claimed 
that while proceeding towards the ATC, he saw one person 
getting up from the ground and running towards the 
construction site. Before that, he had seen 4 to 5 persons 
standing next to the gypsy where they were bending down 
and doing something. 

8. 
After considering the evidence of all the relevant 
prosecution witnesses, we find that there is absolutely no 
evidence of the respondent or any other accused 
assaulting the deceased. There is no evidence to show that 
any act was done by the respondent with the intention of 
causing death or with the intention of causing such bodily 
injury to the deceased as is likely to cause death. As stated 
earlier, there is no act shown to have been committed by 
the respondent which has any direct connection with the 
cause of death of the deceased. 
9. 
The learned senior counsel appearing for the 
appellants relied upon the respondent's statement before 
the GCM. The respondent stated that on 6th March 1998, 
accused No. 3 brought to his notice that the deceased had 
misbehaved with his wife when he had gone to repair 
the telephone at his residence. Accordingly, he instructed 
accused No.3 to inform the deceased to report to him in 
the squadron on that day after flying was over. The 
respondent sat in the garden where both accused No.3 and 
the deceased came. The deceased denied the incident. 
Considering the language used by the deceased, the 
respondent warned him and reminded him that the 
complaint against him was very serious and that he could 
be court-martialled and sent to jail. He stated that the 
deceased was evasive in his answers, and he taunted that 
as he belonged to the Army, Air Force personnel could not 
do any damage to him. After that, the appellant instructed 

accused No. 3 to take the deceased to the Guards' room to 
lock him there. Thereafter, the accused ran out towards 
the vehicles parked by the side of Pen No. 14. As there was 
open defiance by the deceased, he had no option but to tell 
the officers to stop him. After that, accused Nos.3 and 4 
closed in, and they, along with the others, brought the 
deceased. He stated that apprehending that the deceased 
may do something, he decided to take the deceased to 
the Guards' room. At that time, accused No. 5 came there, 
and the respondent gestured to him to get into the gypsy. 
After the gypsy started, the deceased claimed that he never 
went to accused No.3’s residence, and that there may be 
a mistaken identity on the part of his wife. At that time, 
accused No.3 suggested that he should be first identified 
by his wife and that only after the identification, he could 
be taken to the Guards' room. The respondent accepted 
the said suggestion, and he turned the gypsy towards the 
parallel taxi track towards the married officers’ quarters 
for identification of the deceased by accused No.3’s wife. 
He stated that when he slowed down the gypsy to 
take a turn towards the barrier, he heard the voice of 
other officers calling upon him to stop the gypsy as the 
deceased had jumped off the vehicle. 
10. It is true that the respondent stated that initially he 
has instructed that the deceased should be taken to 
a Guards' room and confined in the room. Later, he 
accepted the suggestion that firstly, the identification of 

the deceased should be done by the accused No.3’s wife. 
The offence of wrongful confinement under Section 340 of 
IPC is made out when the accused wrongfully restrains 
any person in such a manner as to prevent that person 
from proceeding beyond certain circumscribing limits. 
This statement of the respondent does not contain any 
admission on the part of the respondent that he had 
wrongfully confined the deceased. Initially, the respondent 
may have directed that the deceased be confined to the 
Guards’ room. But actually, he was not confined in the 
Guards’ room. Though the respondent initially intended 
to take the deceased to the Guards' room, on a suggestion 
by the accused No.3, he changed his mind and decided to 
take the deceased to the officers’ quarters to ascertain 
whether accused No.3’s wife could identify him. 
11. We are dealing with an appeal against an order of 
acquittal. It is well-settled that an order of acquittal 
further enhances the presumption of innocence. It is 
equally well-settled that an order of acquittal cannot be 
interfered with only on the ground that another view can 
be taken based on the evidence on record. After having 
carefully perused the oral evidence, we are of the view that 
the findings recorded by the Tribunal are plausible 
findings which could have been reasonably recorded based 
on the evidence on record. Even assuming that another 
view could be taken based on the same evidence, that is 
no ground for interfering with the order of acquittal 

especially when we find a threadbare consideration of the 
evidence on record by the Tribunal. 
12. As the allegations of commission of offences under 
the IPC were not established, the respondent cannot be 
punished for the crimes under Sections 71,45 and 65 of 
the AFA. 
13. Hence, we find no error in the view taken by the 
Tribunal and the appeal is, accordingly, dismissed. 

……………………..J. 
(Abhay S. Oka) 

……………………..J. 
(Ujjal Bhuyan) 
New Delhi; 
November 06, 2024