IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

M/S ARIF AZIM CO. LTD....PETITIONER(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
M/S MICROMAX INFORMATICS FZE...RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 

J.B. PARDIWALA, J.: 
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following 
parts: - 
INDEX 
A. FACTUAL MATRIX... 3 
B. SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES... 11 
i. Submissions on behalf of the Petitioner.... 11 
ii. Submissions on behalf of the Respondent.... 18 
C. ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION... 21 
D. ANALYSIS... 21 
i. The Notional Doctrine of Concurrent Jurisdiction and Applicability of 
 
Part I of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996.... 24 
a. Pre-BALCO Regime.... 26 
b. Post BALCO Regime.... 43 
ii. Criterion or Test for Determination of Seat of Arbitration: Conflict of 
 
‘Venue’ versus ‘Seat’ of Arbitration.... 56 
a. Closest Connection Test – Place of Arbitration to be ascertained by the Law 
 
governing the Arbitration Agreement and not the Place of Arbitration.... 56 
b. The Shashoua Principle – ‘Venue’ to be construed as ‘Seat’... 71 
iii. Whether the Seat of Arbitration in the underlying Distributorship 
 
Agreement is in India?... 81 
iv. Doctrine of Forum non Conveniens... 89 
E. CONCLUSION... 95 

1. 
The present petition has been filed under Section 11 sub-section (6)(a) read 
with Section 11 sub-section (12)(a) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 (for short, the “Act, 1996”) seeking a referral of the disputes that have 
arisen between the parties to arbitration and consequent appointment of an 
arbitrator by this Court in terms of clauses 26 and 27 of the Consumer 
Distributorship Agreement respectively dated 09.11.2010 (hereinafter 
referred to as the “Agreement”) entered into between the petitioner and the 
respondent herein. 
 
2. 
The petitioner, ‘M/s Arif Azim Co. Ltd.’, is a company based in Afghanistan, 
having its registered office at 1st Floor, Zarnigar Hotel, Mohammed Jan 
Khan Watt, Kabul, Afghanistan and is inter-alia engaged in the business of 
distribution of handsets which are manufactured by the respondent no. 1 in 
the territory of Kabul, Afghanistan. The respondent no. 1, ‘M/s Micromax 
Informatics FZE’ is a Free Zone Establishment company incorporated under 
the laws of United Arab Emirates having its office at 28, Shed No. 18, 
Technology Park, Free Trade Zone, Ras-Al-Khaimah, UAE. Whereas, the 
respondent no. 2, ‘M/s Micromax India’ is a public limited company 
incorporated in India having its registered office at Block A, Plot No. 21/14, 
Naraina Industrial Area, Phase-II New Delhi. The respondent no. 1 company 
is a wholly owned subsidiary of the respondent no. 2 company with the same 
Board Members in both the companies, and together they are engaged in the 

business of manufacturing, importing and supplying various mobile handsets 
under its brand name ‘Micromax’ worldwide. We may clarify at the outset, 
that the respondent no. 2 company herein is a non-signatory to the arbitration 
agreement in respect of which the present Section 11 petition has been filed. 
 
A. 
FACTUAL MATRIX 
 
3. 
The petitioner herein and the respondent no. 1 company entered into a 
Consumer Distributorship Agreement dated 09.11.2010 (for short, the 
“Distributorship Agreement”) inter-alia for the distribution of handsets 
which are manufactured by the respondent no. 1 and the same was executed 
by the parties in Kabul, Afghanistan. As per the terms of the aforesaid 
agreement, the petitioner herein became the authorized distributor of the 
respondent’s products including mobile handsets and was granted a non-
exclusive right to market and distribute the same under its own account in 
the territory of Afghanistan as allotted and delineated under the said 
agreement. 
 
4. 
Before proceeding further, it would be apposite to first highlight some of the 
salient features of the aforesaid Distributorship Agreement which are 
relevant to the case at hand. Under the terms of the aforesaid Distributorship 
Agreement, it is stipulated that all payments shall be made by the distributor 

in full before the physical delivery of the products, and it further specifies 
that the mode of such payment shall be through a letter of credit (L/C). The 
Distributorship Agreement further provides that no additions or 
modifications made to the aforesaid agreement shall be binding unless it is 
in writing and is duly signed by the authorized representatives of the parties. 
Additionally, the said Distributorship Agreement defines a ‘supplementary 
agreement’ to mean and include any further agreement or agreements that 
may be executed by the parties including such other terms and conditions 
that are not incorporated in the main agreement. The relevant clauses read as 
under: - 
“1. DEFINITIONS 
In this agreement, unless the context otherwise requires, the 
following expressions have the following meanings: 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
Supplementary Agreement: means the further agreement(s) as 
may be executed between the parties including such other 
commercial terms and conditions which are not incorporated in 
this Agreement. xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
5. DISTRIBUTOR’S OBLIGATIONS 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
5.4 Payment 
5.4.1 Invoice and Payment Terms. Unless credit terms have been 
expressly agreed by Micromax, payment for the Products shall 
be made through irrevocable and confirmed letter of credit (L/C) 
in full before physical delivery of the Products to Distributor (or 
Distributor’s customer). Time for payment is of the essence and 
Micromax reserves the right to charge interest on sums overdue, 

on a day to day basis at the rate of 24% per annum. Such interest 
shall be payable on demand. 
 
5.4.2. Payments not received by Micromax as per the payment 
terms shall constitute a default by the Distributor. Micromax 
shall have the right to invoke the bank guarantee furnished by 
the Distributor for securing payments in case of default. 
Distributor agrees not to seek any adjustments, set-off of any 
other amounts outstanding to Micromax in respect of the bank 
guarantee nor counter claim from Micromax. xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
23. ENTIRE AGREEMENT 
23.1 This Agreement together with the Conditions of Sale, 
supersedes all prior agreements, arrangements, understandings 
and undertakings between the parties and constitutes the entire 
agreement between the parties relating to the subject matter 
hereof. 
 
23.2 No addition to or modification of any provision of this 
Agreement shall be binding upon the parties unless made by a 
written instrument signed by a duly authorized representative of 
each of the parties. 
 
23.3 Distributor hereby warrants to Micromax that it has not 
been induced to enter into the Agreement by any prior oral or 
written representations (whether innocently or negligently 
made) except as specifically contained in the Agreement.” 
 
5. 
Furthermore, the aforesaid Distributorship Agreement inter-alia stipulates 
that the said agreement will be governed by the laws of UAE and subject to 
the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the Dubai Courts. The said Distributorship 
Agreement also contains an arbitration clause which states that any dispute 
or difference pertaining to the said agreement or arising therefrom shall be 
resolved through arbitration alone, the venue of the arbitration shall be 

Dubai, UAE and that the arbitration shall be subject to the UAE Arbitration 
& Conciliation rules. The relevant clauses are reproduced hereunder: - 
 
“26. DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
In the event of any dispute or difference the 
Agreement, its validity, applicability, then the same shall be 
referred to the arbitration. The arbitration shall be subject to 
UAE Arbitration and Conciliation rules made there under. The 
venue of arbitration shall be Dubai, UAE. 
 
27. LAW AND JURISDICTION 
This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in 
accordance with the laws of UAE and shall be subject to the non-
exclusive jurisdiction of the Dubai Courts.” 
 
6. 
Pursuant to the aforesaid Distributorship Agreement several transactions 
took place between the petitioner and the respondents for the purchase and 
distribution of mobile handsets. It is the case of the petitioner that the 
business practice mutually followed by the parties for undertaking these 
transactions involved the petitioner first placing a purchase order, after 
which the respondents would raise an invoice, and the requisite payment 
would then be made either to the respondent no. 1 or the respondent no. 2 as 
per the instructions of the respondents. 
 
7. 
Around March, 2012 the petitioner herein placed an order for purchase of 
8000 (approx..) mobile handsets from the respondent no. 1. Against this 
purchase the respondent no. 1 raised a proforma invoice to the tune of 
$109,500/- (USD One hundred nine thousand five hundred) and as per the 

invoice the said amount was payable by the petitioner to the respondent no. 
1 company. 
 
8. 
According to the petitioner, although the terms of the Distributorship 
Agreement mandated that both the delivery of handsets and the payments 
thereof be processed through the respondent no. 1 yet, interestingly, this time 
the handsets and the corresponding invoices for the same were issued by the 
respondent no. 2 instead. The respondent no. 2 supplied only 7300 handsets 
to the petitioner and issued a new invoice for the same amount i.e., 
$109,500/- (USD One hundred nine thousand five hundred), which was now 
payable directly to the respondent no. 2 instead. 
 
9. 
It is the case of the petitioner herein that as on 12.05.2012, the petitioner 
company had a credit balance of $190,625/- (USD One hundred ninety six 
hundred twenty-five) with the respondent no. 1 company i.e., the running 
account of the respondent no. 1 reflected a sum of $190,625/- (USD One 
hundred ninety six hundred twenty-five) in favour of the petitioner company 
as outstanding credit. However, the respondent no. 2 whilst raising the 
invoice for supply of the aforesaid 7300 handsets, ignored the 
abovementioned credit balance of the petitioner and demanded payment, to 
be made directly to the respondent no. 2 in India. 

10. Thereafter some email correspondences were exchanged between the 
petitioner company and one Shri Vikas Jain, the executive director of the 
respondent no. 1 and the business director of the respondent no. 2 company 
for the adjustment of the abovementioned credit balance lying in favour of 
the petitioner against the outstanding invoices. On 23.10.2012, the 
respondents vide an email informed the petitioner company that since the 
accounts of Micromax Informatics FZE & M/s Micromax India are separate, 
the credit balance lying in its favour in the respondent no. 1’s account cannot 
be directly adjusted for the invoices raised by the respondent no. 2. It further 
stated that, the petitioner company should first make payment to the 
respondent no. 2 towards the invoices that have been raised, and thereafter, 
the respondent no. 1 company would remit the outstanding credit balance to 
the petitioner. The relevant portion of the respondent’s email dated 
23.10.2012 is reproduced below: - 
“Dt. 23.10.2012 
Subject: Account Statement 
 
Dear Sir, 
Kindly note that from Arif Azim we need to receive USD 109500 
for sales made in MMX India and Need to pay USD 190625 in 
respect of advance received respect of sale to be made in FZE. 
Both these accounts are of separate Cos. 
 
Hence we should first receive payment of MMX India account; 
then let Micromax FZE pay to Arif. 
 
Regards, Anita” 

11. On 15.01.2013, the petitioner made the requisite payment of $109,500/- 
(USD One hundred nine thousand five hundred), which was now payable 
directly to the respondent no. 2 towards the aforesaid invoices raised by it. 
Thereafter, it appears from the materials on record, that over a period of time 
many more transactions took place between the petitioner company and 
respondent no. 1 inter-alia for purchase and supply of various products 
whereby the credit balance lying in the respondent no.1’s account in favour 
of the petitioner company now came out to be $88,425/- (USD Eighty-Eight 
Thousand Four Hundred Twenty-Five). 
 
12. On 09.09.2019, the petitioner vide an email again requested Shri Vikas Jain 
to confirm the credit balance lying in its favour with the respondent no. 1 
and to undertake steps to transfer the same to the petitioner’s account. In 
response, Shri Vikas Jain directed the finance department of respondent no. 
1 to confirm the credit balance lying with it in favour of the petitioner and 
further requested the petitioner to furnish its statement of account so that the 
two books of account may be reconciled for making the requisite payment. 
 
13. Thereafter, several more correspondences took place between the petitioner 
and Shri Vikas Jain on behalf of the respondents through emails and texts 
inter-alia requesting for various documents and statements for the purpose 
of ascertaining the outstanding credit balance in favour of the petitioner. On 

06.05.2022, the petitioner furnished the necessary statement of accounts to 
the respondents and requested for an update on the payment. 
 
14. It appears from the material on record, that over the next 2-months several 
requests were made by the petitioner to the respondents for furnishing the 
outstanding credit balance in its favour and to make the requisite payment; 
however, the same were to no avail. Shri Vikas Jain, on behalf of the 
respondents’ time to time expressed his difficulty in ascertaining the exact 
figure for the outstanding credit balance, inter-alia citing that it was a very 
old running account and that the accountants responsible for maintaining the 
records had left the company, and thus requested for more time to do the 
needful. 
 
15. On 14.09.2022, the petitioner sent a notice for invocation of arbitration under 
Section 21 of the Act, 1996, in terms of Clause 26 of the Distributorship 
Agreement to the respondent nos. 1 & 2. Vide the notice, the petitioner raised 
a claim of $88,425/- (USD Eighty-Eight Thousand Four Hundred Twenty-
Five) with interest @24% p.a. as per the terms agreed in the Distributorship 
Agreement and nominated Shri. V. Giri and Shri. R. Basant, Senior 
Advocate as its nominee arbitrators and called upon the respondents to 
accordingly appoint an arbitrator either from the above suggested panel or 
any other suitable name within 28-days from receipt of the said notice. 

16. It is material to note that in the aforesaid notice of invocation dated 
14.09.2022, the petitioner further alluded that in the Distributorship 
Agreement more particularly Clause 27 the parties had not designated a 
specific court to the exclusion of all other courts to adjudicate the dispute, 
thus no exclusive jurisdiction had been conferred by the parties upon any 
particular court. It further stated that, as the cause of action had concurrently 
both in Afghanistan and India, the petitioner expressed its preference to 
resolve the dispute through arbitration administered under the jurisdiction of 
the courts in India. 
 
17. Since no reply to the aforesaid notice of invocation of arbitration was elicited 
from either of the respondents, the present petition came to be filed by the 
petitioner on 19.04.2023 before this Court for seeking appointment of an 
arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996 in other words due to the 
failure on part of the respondents in nominating an arbitrator as per the 
mutually agreed upon terms and procedure under the aforesaid 
Distributorship Agreement. 
 
B. 
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES 
 
i. 
Submissions on behalf of the Petitioner. 
18. Mr. R. Sathish the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner in his 
written submissions has stated thus: - 

“WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS MADE BY R. SATHISH, 
ADVOCATE ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER 
 
1. The Dispute Resolution clause defined the venue of arbitration 
as Dubai and the curial law as UAE Arbitration and 
Conciliation Rules and the jurisdiction clause, suggestive of 
control, does not confer jurisdiction to Dubai courts to the 
exclusion of all other courts. 
 
 2. For international arbitrations, the concept of seat assumes 
greater significance as it acts as the indicator for both curial law 
as well as supervisory jurisdiction whereas venue is not 
associated with the jurisdiction. 
 
3. The agreement, in so far the identity of Dubai courts, for 
jurisdiction, suffers from vagueness in that, it doesn’t specify 
which of the courts of Dubai and the laws governing thereunder, 
shall have jurisdiction to hear the disputes among three different 
courts constituted, namely 
(i) The UAE Courts (the language is not English) 
 (ii) Dubai International Financial Court (DIFC-Common law) 
(iii) Abu Dhabi Global court (ADGM-common law). 
 Therefore, at the threshold, it is submitted that the 2nd part of 
clause 27 dealing with jurisdiction that “……….and shall be 
subject to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the Dubai courts” is 
a valid opting out of the exclusive jurisdiction of Dubai courts, 
as the parties have intended to avoid impracticable and 
inconvenient process and procedures as a result of subsequent 
amendments and modifications to the agreement involving 
3countries, Afghanistan, India and UAE. This submission is 
discernible from a plain reading of various clauses in the subject 
of the agreement as well as the conduct of the parties including 
a non -signatory to the agreement. 
 
 4. As held in Bharat Aluminium vs Kaiser Aluminium Technical 
Services Inc. 2012 (9)SCC 522, at para 99, that, it would be a 
matter of construction of the individual agreement to decide, 
whether the designated foreign “seat” would be read as in fact 
only providing a “venue”/“place” where the hearings would be 
held; and in the present case on hand, given the choice of UAE 
Arbitration and Conciliation Rules as being the curial law and 
the venue at Dubai, will not dictate what the governing or 
controlling law would be when the 2nd part of clause 27 

reiterates the parties' autonomy in deciding/choosing the seat by 
expressly stating its intention that “This agreement shall be 
subject to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the Dubai Courts”. 
Regard being to other clauses in the agreement, this clause has 
been incorporated to avoid conflicts related to the jurisdictions 
of courts and confer jurisdiction on other courts too, it is 
submitted. (Emphasis supplied). 
 
5. At the outset, be it kindly noted that, the relied upon decision 
by the respondent to oust the jurisdiction of Indian courts in 
Mankatsu Impex Private Limited vs Airvisual Limited 2010 (5) 
SCC 399 is misplaced as it was a case of exclusive jurisdiction 
in terms conferred by the agreement. A clause therein like 
Cl.17.2 which provides “the place of arbitration shall be Hong 
Kong”, in addition to, also providing that “all disputes arising 
out of the MoU shall be referred to and finally resolved and 
administered in Hong Kong”…is conspicuously absent in the 
subject agreement. Still on a matter of law, emphasising the 
Party’s autonomy, Mankatsu Impex held; 

Quote “20. It is well-settled that “seat of 
arbitration” and “venue of arbitration” cannot be used 
interchangeably. It has also been established that mere 
expression “place of arbitration” cannot be the basis to 
determine the intention of the parties that they have intended that 
place as the “seat” of arbitration. The intention of the parties as 
to the “seat” should be determined from other clauses in the 
agreement and the conduct of the parties.” Unquote 
 
5. Proposition 
(i) Where in substance, the parties agreed that the local laws of 
one country will govern and control a given arbitration, the 
place where the arbitration is to be heard will not dictate what 
the governing law or controlling law will be. (Bharath 
Aluminium vs Kaiser Aluminium Technical services 2012 (9) 
SCC552 at page 613 Para 107. 
 (ii) When an agreement expressly designates the venue without 
any express reference to seat, given the various factors 
connecting the dispute to India in a contract executed in Kabul 
and wholly to be performed in India and Afghanistan and the 
absence of any foreign factors connecting the dispute to Dubai 
with its vagueness and uncertainty of what the parties had 
intended by their reference to the “Dubai courts”, the burden is 

on the respondents to establish that its terms constituted Dubai 
as the seat of arbitration. 
 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER 
6. The petitioner submits that the laws of the country with which 
the subject agreement was most closely connected are India and 
Afghanistan. The recitals in Sub- Cl. 22.4 (Interpretation 
Clause) of the Distribution agreement and the conduct of the 
parties reveal that the parties had attached very little importance 
to its local subsidiary FZE within the “Micromax Group” of 
companies that ultimately signed the Distributor agreement. It 
was formed to take advantage of concessional benefits in a free 
economic zone. The intention of the parties as to the “seat” 
should be determined from other clauses in the agreement and 
the conduct of the parties. 
 
7. A plain conjoint reading of the following 6 clauses in the 
agreement with a supplementary agreement executed by 
Micromax Inc. (Non-signatory parent Co.) in the form of two 
emails forming its integral part (Pages 37 to 54) would negate 
the contra plea of the respondents as to the jurisdiction of Indian 
courts. 
(i) Clause 26 Clause 27 deals with Dispute Resolution; law and 
jurisdiction. 
Quote.."Cl. 26. Dispute Resolution In the event of any dispute or 
difference the agreement, its validity, applicability, 
then the same shall be referred to arbitration. The arbitration 
shall be subject to UAE Arbitration and conciliation rules made 
there under. The venue of arbitration shall be Dubai, UAE. 
 Cl. 27. Law and jurisdiction 
This shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the 
laws of UAE and shall be subject to the non-exclusive 
jurisdiction of the Dubai Courts."...Unquote 
 
8. Petitioner submits that Clause 27 preserved the party’s 
autonomy in allowing the concerned parties to choose their 
seat/jurisdiction. The second part of jurisdictional Cl. 27 
discloses the intention - an agreement by itself- to opt out of 
Dubai court's jurisdiction and this is what the parties had 
intended by their reference to "the non-exclusive jurisdiction of 
the Dubai Courts. Since the parties had agreed not to confer 
exclusive jurisdiction to courts in Dubai, neither of the parties 

to the agreement construed the arbitration clause as designating 
courts in Dubai as the seat of arbitration. 
 Vide PASL vs GE 2021 SCC online 226. 
 
9. DETERMINATION OF THE SEAT BASED ON THE 
CLOSEST CONNECTION TEST IF IT IS UNCLEAR THAT THE 
SEAT HAS BEEN DESIGNATED EITHER BY THE PARTIES. 
The petitioner submits that the laws of the country with which 
the subject agreement was most closely connected is India. 
However, there is no stipulation whatsoever in the subject 
agreement about the supervisory power over the arbitration 
proceedings. In Enercon (India) Limited and others v. Enercon 
GMBH and another (2014), the arbitration clause 
provided London as the venue and not the seat. The Court 
pointed out various factors connecting the dispute to India and 
the absence of any foreign factors connecting the dispute to 
England. Supreme Court held that “the location of the Seat will 
determine the courts that will have exclusive jurisdiction to 
oversee the arbitration proceedings. It was further held that the 
Seat normally carries with it the choice of that country’s 
arbitration/curial law”. In the present case, the parties have 
only agreed on Dubai as a “Venue” of arbitration and not the 
juridical seat of the arbitration. If Dubai is treated as seat of the 
arbitration, ipso jure, local laws will be applied. So much so, the 
stipulation regarding the governing law of the agreement -Laws 
of UAE - contained in the first part of Cl. 27 will not dictate, 
what the governing or controlling law would be, whereas the 
second part applies to both the substantive law and curial law, 
did not concede an exclusive jurisdiction to Dubai courts. 
Therefore on a matter of construction, Dubai cannot be the seat 
of Arbitration. 
 
 10. In Indus Mobile Distribution Pvt. Ltd. v. Datawind 
Innovations Pvt. Ltd. and Ors., (2017) followed by 
M/s Emkay Global Financial Services Ltd. v. Girdhar Sondhi 
reiterated that “seat” in the context of arbitration proceedings 
is akin to an exclusive jurisdiction clause and would not vest the 
courts with seat if exclusive jurisdiction is not conceded. 
 
11. Submission is that “supervisory control over the arbitral 
proceedings” is not exclusively given to Dubai courts by the 2nd 
part of Clause 27 and the party's autonomy is thus preserved. 

12. 2nd submission. The Bi-party Agreement executed between 
the petitioner and a foreign company in Kabul was altered by 
invoking the Group of Companies doctrine by a non-signatory 
to the agreement. In terms, the agreement has become a tri-
partite agreement where a non-signatory to the original 
agreement directed the petitioner to make a direct payment of 
$109500 to India by changing the original invoice raised by a 
party to the agreement. Submission is, 2nd part of Cl.27 
envisages a jurisdictional situation as had happened 
subsequently by the conduct of parties. 
 
12.1 A jurisdiction clause is suggestive of control. In the context 
of this particular case, the Dubai Courts would have no real 
control or supervisory jurisdiction over the arbitral process, in 
as much as, this supplementary agreement further reiterates the 
party's autonomy of choosing the juridical seat of Arbitration in 
consonance with 2nd part of Cl.27 in which case, a reference to 
the “venue” cannot be treated as the “seat” of the arbitration. 
 
 12.2 Micromax Inc.'s insistence on payment in India by altering 
the original terms is a non-contest/in terrorem clause or a 
condition precedent which again substantiates the Party’s 
autonomy lest the respondents would have terminated the 
subsisting 
distribution 
agreement 
for 
violating 
the 
supplementary agreement by giving written notice under clause 
15. Equally, clause 16.7 (Effect of termination), obliges 
respondents to pay forthwith any amount standing to the credit 
of distributor, should they choose to terminate the agreement. 
Respondents have perpetrated a continuous wrong. 
 
12.3. The petitioner’s submission in this regard are fortified by 
a plain reading of the following clauses r/w the supplementary 
agreement, in the form of emails forming an integral part of the 
Agreement u/s 7 (4) (b) and Mc. Dermott International vs Burn 
Standard (2006 (11) SCC 181) 
Clause 1. Definitions. 
 Quote “Products: means goods but not spare or replacement 
parts supplied by Micromax (but not necessarily manufactured, 
assembled or, in the case of software, owned by Micromax Inc. or any of its subsidiary companies or affiliates) to the 
Distributor...Unquote (emphasis supplied) 
Quote “Supplementary agreements: means further agreement(s) 
as may be executed between the parties including such other 

commercial terms and conditions which are not incorporated in 
this agreement”. 
Cl. 5.4 Payment 
……….. 
 Cl. 5.4.3 “Micromax shall be entitled to deduct from any monies 
due to the Distributor any sums owed by Distributor to 
Micromax……”Unquote 
Cl. 22 Interpretation 
……… 
“22.4. references to Micromax shall be deemed to include 
reference to affiliates of Micromax where the context so 
requires”. 
 
24. Assignment - Micromax may assign or otherwise transfer 
this Agreement or any of its rights and obligations hereunder 
whether in whole or in part” ……..Unquote. 
 
12.5 Acting upon the supplementary terms, the petitioner made 
a payment of $109500 by SWIFT to Micromax Inc. in Bombay. 
(page 64 Annexure P7). In juxtaposition, curated details of the 
two emails originating from Sh. Vikash Jain (deponent in the 
counter) who is the Executive Director of Micromax FZE (at 
page 62 Annex P-4) and an authorised representative of 
Micromax Inc. is given below: 
Date: 11 December, 2012 
 Dear Ali Bhai, 
 
Please find attached your debit balance to Micromax, India. 
Also sending a credit balance statement from FZE, Would 
appreciate if you can make the mentioned payment to India and 
we remit credit balance to you back from FZE. 
 
Thanks 
 Vikas” 

(Page 52 of the Paper book) 
 
“Date 11 December, 2012 
 Dear Ali Bhai, 
This is about $190K that we owe back to your firm from FZE. 
Would appreciate if we can resolve the accounts at the fastest. 
 
 Thanks 
 Vikas” 

 (Page 54 of the Paper book) 

Final submission- Mere expression of venue of arbitration will 
not entail that the parties intended it to be the seat. The intention 
of the parties- keeping intact Party autonomy - has to be 
determined from other clauses of the Agreement and the conduct 
of the parties.” 
 
ii. 
Submissions on behalf of the Respondent. 
19. Mr. Mudit Sharma the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner in his 
written submissions has stated thus: - 
“WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE 
RESPONDENTS “M/S MICROMAX FZE (UAE)” 
 
I. PETITION NOT MAINTAINABLE AND THIS HON’BLE 
COURT LACKS JURISDICTION: 
1. It is humbly submitted that this Hon’ble Court does not have 
the jurisdiction to either entertain the Petition under Section 
11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (“the Act”) 
and / or appoint an Arbitrator in terms of the Arbitration 
Agreement between the Petitioner and the Respondent i.e. M/s. 
Micromax Informatics FZE(UAE) for neither the arbitration 
seat is India nor the parties ever envisaged the redressal of 
disputes through arbitration in terms of Indian laws and in India 
as per the Distributor Agreement dated 09.11.2010 between the 
Parties (Ann. P-1 g. 37 ( PDF Pg. 66 of Petition) 
(hereinafter referred to as “Distributor Agreement”) 
 
2. Moreover, admittedly, both the Petitioner (an entity of 
Afghanistan) and the Respondent, M/s. Micromax Informatics 
FZE(UAE) (an entity of UAE) are body corporates incorporated, 
registered and situated outside India (Please see description of 
Parties, Ann. P-1 g.37 (PDF Pg. 66) & 50 (PDF Pg. 79) of 
Petition) and the Distributor Agreement admittedly was entered 
and executed between the parties outside India. 
 
3. The Territory defined under the Distributor Agreement is 
Afghanistan (Please see Ann. P1 Clause 1 -Territory g.50 
(PDF Pg. 66) read with the Schedule g. 79 of 
Petition). All business transactions are outside India. 

 4. Clause 26 (Distributor Agreement, Ann. P-1 g. 49 (Pdf 
Pg. 78 of Petition) of the Distributor Agreement provides for 
dispute resolution at Dubai, UAE under UAE Arbitration and 
Conciliation rules. 
5. Clause 27 of the Distributor Agreement (Ann. P-1, g. 49 
(Pdf Pg. 78 of Petition) specifically provides that governing law 
to be exclusively of UAE. 
 
 6. There is clear intent between the parties that Dubai shall be 
the seat of Arbitration and the venue in the present case has to 
be construed as seat of arbitration. 
 
7. Section 2 (2) of the Act with respect to the applicability of 
Part-1 stipulate that Section 11 of the Act has no application to 
arbitrations seated outside India. Thus, this a an arbitration 
seated outside India and Part-1 of the Act would have no 
applicability. 
 
8. An “International Commercial Arbitration” in terms of 
Section 2(f) to attract the applicability of Section 11 for exercise 
of power of appointment of Arbitrator by this Hon’ble Court 
mandates that at least one party should be an individual or a 
body corporate in India and the arbitration agreement should 
compulsorily provide for seat of Arbitration in India. Admittedly 
neither of the Parties are individuals or body corporates in India 
nor the Distributor Agreement provides for arbitration seat in 
India. 
 
 9. Reliance is placed on the two Judgements of this Hon’ble 
Court: 
i. “Mankatsu Impex Private Limited Vs. Airvisual Ltd., (2020) 
”; relevant Paras being Para 20 at Page 406; Para 
25 at Page 408 and Para 26 and Para 27 at Page 409 and 
ii. “BGS SGS Soma JV Vs. NHPC Limited, (2020) ”; relevant Paras being Paras 61, 62 and 67 at are Page 
242). 
 
10. It is further submitted that the use of “non-exclusive 
jurisdiction of Dubai Courts” in Distributor Agreement did not 
ever envisage jurisdiction of Courts outside UAE and in no 
manner whatsoever the “Courts of India”. The word “non-
exclusive: has been used in the context that jurisdiction of other 
Courts in UAE may not be restricted. 

 11. Invoking of the provisions under section 11 of the Act; would 
tantamount to re-writing the terms of the Distributor Agreement 
and taking away parties’ autonomy which is the sole principle 
on which arbitration is based. As such; this Hon’ble Court 
cannot exercise its powers of appointment of Arbitrator to the 
present alleged dispute between the Parties. 
 
12. Given that the Governing law and jurisdiction is of Courts in 
UAE and Arbitration is stipulated to be under UAE Arbitration 
and Conciliation rules; this Hon’ble Court has no jurisdiction 
to either entertain the present Petition and apply any provisions 
of the Arbitration Act or any other Indian law. 
 
II. NO PRIVITY OF CONTRACT BETWEEN PETITIONER 
AND MICROMAX INFORMATICS LTD. (INDIA): 
 
13. Admittedly the Distributor Agreement dated 09.11.2010 
containing the Arbitration Clause provides for dispute 
resolution between the Petitioner and Respondent, M/s. 
Micromax Informatics FZE (UAE), an entity of UAE. 
Admittedly, Micromax Informatics Ltd. (India) is neither a party 
nor a signatory to the Distributor Agreement. Micromax 
Informatics Ltd. (India) is not even a Respondent to the present 
proceedings but has been sought to be impleaded by an Interim 
Application No.110064/2023. Thus, there exists no privity of 
contract between the Petitioner and the Indian Entity, Micromax 
Informatics Ltd. (India). 
 
14. Further, the Petitioner has sought to rely on communications 
between the Parties to establish privity of contract and assert 
Micromax Informatics Ltd. (India) as party to dispute. But in an 
email dated 23.12.2012 (Ann. P-2 g.52 (PDF Pg. 81) of 
Petition); Micromax Informatics Ltd. (India) while making 
reference to M/s. Micromax Informatics FZE (UAE) and 
Micromax Informatics Ltd. (India) has explicitly and 
categorically stated that the accounts of both companies are 
separate and there are sums receivable in Micromax Informatics 
Ltd. (India). 
 
 15. Even assuming though not admitting that the transactions 
with Micromax India were under the Distributor Agreement then 
too, the terms of the Distributor Agreement with respect to 

territory, rules of arbitration, governing law, jurisdiction and 
other terms of agreement would remain same and cannot be 
considered to be varied. The Distributor Agreement in Clause 
23.2 (Ann. P-1 at Pg. 48) (PDF Pg 77) stipulates that no 
addition to or modification of any provision of this agreement 
shall be binding unless made by a written instrument signed by 
duly authorized representative of each of the parties. 
 
In view of the above, it is most respectfully prayed that the 
present Petition may kindly be dismissed.” 
 
C. 
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION 
20. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone 
through the materials on record, the following questions of law fall for our 
consideration: - 
I. 
Whether, the present petition under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 is 
maintainable? 
II. 
Whether, Part I of the Act, 1996 is applicable to the arbitration clause 
contained in the Distributorship Agreement dated 09.11.2010? 
III. 
What is the seat of the arbitration in terms of the Distributorship 
Agreement dated 09.11.2010? 
 
D. 
ANALYSIS 
21. It is necessary to delve into the history of the law of arbitration in India. Prior 
to the 1996 Act, three Acts governed the law of Arbitration in India — the 
Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act, 1937, which gave effect to the 
Geneva Convention, the Arbitration Act, 1940 (for short, the “Act, 1940”), 

which dealt with domestic awards, and the Foreign Awards (Recognition and 
Enforcement) Act, 1961 (for short, the “Act, 1961”) which gave effect to the 
New York Convention of 1958 and which dealt with challenges to awards 
made which were foreign awards. Thereafter, in order to consolidate and 
amend the law relating to domestic arbitration, international commercial 
arbitration, enforcement of foreign arbitral awards and to define the law 
relating to conciliation, taking into account the said UNCITRAL Model Law 
and Rules, the Act, 1996 was enacted. 
 
22. The Act, 1996 is divided into four parts. Part I which is headed “Arbitration”; 
Part II which is headed “Enforcement of Certain Foreign Awards”; Part III 
which is headed “Conciliation” and Part IV being “Supplementary 
Provisions”. 
 
23. There was no concept of “juridical seat” or “situs of arbitration” under the 
Act, 1940, rather the jurisdiction of courts was determined on the basis of 
the definition of “court” under Section 2(c) of the Act, 1940 which was 
defined as any civil court having jurisdiction to decide questions forming the 
subject-matter of the reference to arbitration if the same had been the subject-
matter of a suit. 

24. Under the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration 
(as adopted by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law 
on 21-6-1985) which forms the basis of the Act, 1996, the concept of ‘place 
of arbitration’ or ‘seat of arbitration’ was encompassed in Article 20 which 
reads as under: - 
 
“20. Place of arbitration.— 
 
(1) The parties are free to agree on the place of arbitration. Failing 
such agreement, the place of arbitration shall be determined by the 
Arbitral Tribunal having regard to the circumstances of the case, 
including the convenience of the parties. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this article, 
the Arbitral Tribunal may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, 
meet at any place it considers appropriate for consultation among 
its members, for hearing witnesses, experts or the parties, or for 
inspection of goods, other property or documents.” 

25. When the Act, 1996 was enacted replacing the earlier Act, 1940, a new 
provision of Section 20 was inserted by the legislature which was absent in 
the earlier Act, 1940. The said provision reads as under: - 
“20. Place of arbitration.— 
 
(1) The parties are free to agree on the place of arbitration. 
 
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (1), the place 
of arbitration shall be determined by the Arbitral Tribunal having 
regard to the circumstances of the case, including the convenience 
of the parties. 
 
(3) Notwithstanding sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the Arbitral 
Tribunal may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, meet at any 

place it considers appropriate for consultation among its members, 
for hearing witnesses, experts or the parties, or for inspection of 
documents, goods or other property.” 

26. A cursory reading of the aforesaid provision would reveal that it is a 
replication of Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Model Law whereunder, the 
place or seat of arbitration has been given pride and primacy. However, 
despite the aforesaid inclusion, the legislature retained the definition of 
“court” from the Act, 1940 in Section 2(e) of the Act, 1996 with a minor 
tweak that instead of any civil court of the lowest grade competent to 
entertain the subject-matter, now only the principal civil court or the High 
Court of original jurisdiction which is competent to entertain the subject-
matter shall have jurisdiction. Due to this, the concept of juridical seat of the 
arbitral proceedings and its interrelationship with the jurisdiction of courts 
in respect of arbitral proceedings the Doctrine of Concurrent Jurisdiction 
emerged in the Indian Arbitration Regime. i. 
The Notional Doctrine of Concurrent Jurisdiction and Applicability of 
Part I of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996. 
 
27. It can thus be seen from the discussion in the preceding paragraphs of this 
judgment that the scheme of the Act, 1996 is bifurcated into distinct parts 
being Part I, II, III & IV. Each of these parts delineates a unique scheme that 

deals with different aspects of arbitration or conciliation as the case may be. 
Section 11 of the Act, 1996 which inter-alia empowers this Court to appoint 
an arbitrator in case of an international commercial arbitration is contained 
in Part I of the said Act. Section 2(2) in Part I of the Act, 1996 expressly 
provides that this part (sic Part I and by extension the provisions thereunder) 
shall apply where the place of arbitration is in India. The said provision is 
reproduced hereunder: - 
“2. Definitions. xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
(2) This Part shall apply where the place of arbitration is in 
India. 
 
Provided that subject to an agreement to the contrary the 
provisions of section 9, 27 and clause (a) of sub-section (1) and 
sub-section (3) of Section 37 shall also apply to international 
commercial arbitration, even if the place of arbitration is outside 
India, and an arbitral award made or to be made in such place 
is enforceable and recognized under the provisions of Part II of 
this Act.” 
 
28. Thus, a cursory reading of the aforesaid provision makes it clear that the 
exercise of power to appoint an arbitrator under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 
is dependent upon whether the said Part is applicable in the first place or not. 
As such it would be apposite to first understand the scope of Part I of the 
Act, 1996, more particularly the import of the expression “where the place 
of arbitration is in India” occurring in Section 2(2) of the Act and in which 

situations is the said Part applicable in order to enable this Court to exercise 
its powers under Section 11 to appoint an arbitrator. a. 
Pre-BALCO Regime. 
 
29. In National Thermal Power Corporation v. Singer Company & Ors. reported in (1992), although the award which was the subject-
matter of the said case had been challenged under the then Act, 1940 yet the 
observations made therein by this Court in regards the applicability of the 
Act, 1940 are significant insofar as the Act, 1996 is concerned. In the 
aforesaid case, the question before this Court was whether the Act, 1940 was 
applicable to the arbitration agreement between the parties therein. This 
Court held as follows: - 

First, it held that the choice of law governing the arbitration 
agreement i.e., the lex arbitri would determine which system of law 
would be applicable. It observed that since the arbitration agreement 
therein was to be governed by Indian laws, the Act, 1940 would be 
applicable to such arbitration proceedings. The relevant observations 
read as under: - 
“2. The National Thermal Power Corporation (the 
‘NTPC’) appeals from the judgment of the Delhi High 
Court in FAO (OS) No. 102 of 1990 dismissing the 
NTPC's application filed under Sections 14, 30 and 33 of 
the Arbitration Act, 1940 (No. X of 1940) to set aside an 

interim award made at London by a tribunal constituted 
by the International Court of Arbitration of the 
International Chamber of Commerce (the “ICC Court”) 
in terms of the contract made at New Delhi between the 
NTPC and the respondent — the Singer Company (the 
‘singer’) for the supply of equipment, erection and 
commissioning of certain works in India. The High Court 
held that the award was not governed by the Arbitration 
Act, 1940; the arbitration agreement on which the award 
was made was not governed by the law of India; the award 
fell within the ambit of the Foreign Awards (Recognition 
and Enforcement) Act, 1961 (Act 45 of 1961) (the 
‘Foreign Awards Act’); London being the seat of 
arbitration, English courts alone had jurisdiction to set 
aside the award; and, the Delhi High Court had no 
jurisdiction to entertain the application filed under the 
Arbitration Act, 1940. xxx 
47. The decisions relied on by counsel for the Singer do 
not support his contention that the mere fact of London 
being the place of arbitration excluded the operation of 
the Arbitration Act, 1940 and the jurisdiction of the courts 
in India. In Whitworth Street Estates (Manchester) 
Ltd. v. James Miller & Partners Ltd. the parties had not 
expressly stated which law was to govern their contract. 
On an analysis of the various factors, the House of Lords 
held that in the absence of any choice of the law governing 
arbitration proceedings, those proceedings were to be 
considered to be governed by the law of the place in which 
the arbitration was held, namely, Scotland because it was 
that system of law which was most closely connected with 
the proceedings. Various links with Scotland, which was 
the place of performance of the contract, unmistakably 
showed that the arbitral proceedings were to be governed 
by the law of Scotland, although the majority of the 
learned Law Lords (Lords Reid and Wilberforce 
dissenting on the point) held that, taking into account 
certain other factors, the contract was governed by 
English law. That case is no authority for the proposition 
that, even where the proper law of the contract is 
expressly stated by the parties, and in the absence of any 
contrary indication, a different law governed arbitration. 
The observations contained in that judgment do not 

support the contention urged on behalf of the Singer that 
merely because London was designated to be the place of 
arbitration, the law which governed arbitration was 
different from the law expressly chosen by the parties as 
the proper law of the contract. xxx 
51. In sum, it may be stated that the law expressly chosen 
by the parties in respect of all matters arising under their 
contract, which must necessarily include the agreement 
contained in the arbitration clause, being Indian law and 
the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts in Delhi having 
been expressly recognised by the parties to the contract in 
all matters arising under it, and the contract being most 
intimately associated with India, the proper law of 
arbitration and the competent courts are both exclusively 
Indian [...] 
 xxx 
54. The Delhi High Court was wrong in treating the 
award in question as a foreign award. The Foreign 
Awards Act has no application to the award by reason of 
the specific exclusion contained in Section 9 of that Act. 
The award is governed by the laws in force in India, 
including the Arbitration Act, 1940. Accordingly, we set 
aside the impugned judgment of the Delhi High Court and 
direct that Court to consider the appellant's application 
on the merits in regard to which we express no views 
whatsoever. The appeal is allowed in the above terms. We 
do not, however, make any order as to costs.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

Secondly, the Court held that where the parties have agreed to two 
distinct choices of law, one governing the arbitration agreement and 
the other governing the arbitration proceedings i.e., both lex arbitri 
and lex curiae, then the appropriate courts under both the laws will 
have concurrent jurisdiction in respect of the matters governed by 

their respective system of law. Thus, where the parties have agreed 
that the arbitration agreement would be governed by the Indian Laws 
whereas the arbitration proceedings would be conducted in 
accordance with the English Laws, then in such cases two different 
courts will have concurrent jurisdiction in respect of matters as 
agreed upon by the parties i.e., the competent English Courts will 
have jurisdiction in respect of procedural matters concerning the 
conduct of arbitration while the competent courts in India will have 
jurisdiction over all matters pertaining to and the 
arbitration agreement. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“26. Whereas, as stated above, the proper law of 
arbitration 
(i.e., 
the 
substantive 
law 
governing 
arbitration) 
determines 
the 
validity, 
effect 
and 
interpretation 
of 
the 
arbitration 
agreement, 
the 
arbitration proceedings are conducted, in the absence of 
any agreement to the contrary, in accordance with the law 
of the country in which the arbitration is held. On the 
other hand, if the parties have specifically chosen the law 
governing the conduct and procedure of arbitration, the 
arbitration proceedings will be conducted in accordance 
with that law so long as it is not contrary to the public 
policy or the mandatory requirements of the law of the 
country in which the arbitration is held. If no such choice 
has been made by the parties, expressly or by necessary 
implication, the procedural aspect of the conduct of 
arbitration (as distinguished from the substantive 
agreement to arbitrate) will be determined by the law of 
the place or seat of arbitration. Where, however, the 
parties have, as in the instant case, stipulated that the 
arbitration between them will be conducted in accordance 
with the ICC Rules, those rules, being in many respects 
self-contained or self-regulating and constituting a 
contractual code of procedure, will govern the conduct of 

the arbitration, except insofar as they conflict with the 
mandatory requirements of the proper law of arbitration, 
or of the procedural law of the seat of arbitration. [See the 
observation of Kerr, LJ. In Bank Mellat v. Helliniki 
Techniki 
SA. See 
also Craig, 
Park 
and 
Paulsson, International 
Chamber 
of 
Commerce 
Arbitration, 2nd edn. (1990).] To such an extent the 
appropriate courts of the seat of arbitration, which in the 
present case are the competent English courts, will have 
jurisdiction in respect of procedural matters concerning 
the conduct of arbitration. But the overriding principle is 
that the courts of the country whose substantive laws 
govern the arbitration agreement are the competent 
courts in respect of all matters arising under the 
arbitration agreement, and the jurisdiction exercised by 
the courts of the seat of arbitration is merely concurrent 
and not exclusive and strictly limited to matters of 
procedure. All other matters in respect of the arbitration 
agreement fall within the exclusive competence of the 
courts of the country whose laws govern the arbitration 
agreement. [See Mustil & Boyd, Commercial Arbitration, 
2nd edn.; Allen Redfern and Martin Hunter, Law & 
Practice of International Commercial Arbitration, 
1986; Russel on Arbitration, 20th edn. (1982); Cheshire & 
North’s Private International Law, 11th edn. (1987).]” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
30. Thus, this Court for the first time in NTPC (supra) laid down the Doctrine 
of Concurrent jurisdiction in arbitration albeit in a limited sense inasmuch as 
the exercise of concurrent jurisdiction by two different but competent courts 
was limited only to matters of procedure and conduct of arbitration, and that 
the exercise of jurisdiction by courts at the seat or situs of arbitration over 
the arbitration agreement and its ancillaries was still regarded to be an 
exclusive jurisdiction. 

31. The applicability of the Act, 1940 was again looked into by this Court in 
Sumitomo Heavy Industries Ltd. v. ONGC Ltd. & Ors. reported in (1998). The said decision is in three-parts: - 

First, it was held that as per Section 47 of the Act, 1940 the provisions 
of the said Act applies to all arbitrations and to all proceedings 
thereunder, and as such where the agreement to arbitrate is governed 
by the laws of India, then the said Act would be applicable. The 
relevant observations read as under: - 
“16. The law which would apply to the filing of the award, 
to its enforcement and to its setting aside would be the law 
governing the agreement to arbitrate and the performance 
of that agreement. Having regard to the clear terms of 
clause 17 of the contract between the appellant and the 
first respondent, we are in no doubt that the law governing 
the contract and the law governing the rights and 
obligations of the parties arising from their agreement to 
arbitrate, and, in particular, their obligation to submit 
disputes to arbitration and to honour the award, are 
governed by the law of India; nor is there any dispute in 
this behalf. Section 47 of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1940, 
reads thus: 
“47. Act to apply to all arbitrations.—
Subject to the provisions of Section 46, and 
save insofar as is otherwise provided by any 
law for the time being in force, the provisions 
of this Act shall apply to all arbitrations and 
to all proceedings thereunder: 
 
Provided that an arbitration award 
otherwise obtained may with the consent of 
all the parties interested be taken into 
consideration 
as 
a 
compromise 
or 
adjustment of a suit by any court before 
which the suit is pending.” 

17. [...] By reason of Section 9(b), the 1961 Act does not 
apply to any award made on an arbitration agreement 
governed by the law of India. The 1961 Act, therefore, 
does not apply to the arbitration agreement between the 
appellant and the first respondent. The 1940 Act applies 
to it and, by reason of Section 14(2) thereof, the courts in 
India are entitled to receive the award made by the second 
respondent. We must add in the interests of completeness 
that it is not the case of the appellant that the High Court 
at Bombay lacked the territorial jurisdiction to do so.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

Secondly, it reiterated that, where the parties have chosen both the law 
governing the arbitration agreement i.e., lex arbitri and the law 
governing the arbitrator’s procedure and conduct thereof i.e., the 
curial law, it would confer concurrent jurisdiction whereby the 
competent courts under the curial law will have jurisdiction to 
administer the procedure of arbitration and the competent courts under 
the law governing the arbitration agreement will have jurisdiction to 
administer the performance of such agreement and the arbitrability of 
the dispute including the enforcement or setting aside of an award 
pursuant to such agreement. It further observed that the court 
administering the curial law will only have the jurisdiction to 
administer the conduct of such arbitration or reference. As soon as the 
arbitration concludes the curial law ceases and with it the jurisdiction 
of the courts to administer it ceases as well. The relevant observations 
read as under: - 

“11. The conclusion that we reach is that the curial law 
operates during the continuance of the proceedings 
before the arbitrator to govern the procedure and 
conduct thereof. The courts administering the curial law 
have the authority to entertain applications by parties to 
arbitrations being conducted within their jurisdiction 
for the purpose of ensuring that the procedure that is 
adopted in the proceedings before the arbitrator 
conforms to the requirements of the curial law and for 
reliefs incidental thereto. Such authority of the courts 
administering the curial law ceases when the 
proceedings before the arbitrator are concluded.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
(iii) Lastly, this court added that, when it comes to the courts administering 
the law governing the arbitration agreement / the reference to 
arbitration, they will continue to exercise concurrent jurisdiction 
when it comes to the performance of the arbitration agreement even if 
the arbitration has concluded inasmuch as it is competent to first apply 
the lex arbitri to see if the dispute is arbitrable and then to apply the 
curial law to see how the reference ought to be conducted in order to 
give effect to the award. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“12. The proceedings before the arbitrator commence 
when he enters upon the reference and conclude with the 
making of the award. As the work by Mustill and Boyd 
aforementioned puts it, with the making of a valid award 
the arbitrator's authority, powers and duties in the 
reference come to an end and he is “functus officio” (p. 
404). The arbitrator is not obliged by law to file his 
award in court but he may be asked by the party seeking 
to enforce the award to do so. The need to file an award 
in court arises only if it is required to be enforced, and 
the need to challenge it arises if it is being enforced. The 
enforcement process is subsequent to and independent 

of the proceedings before the arbitrator. It is not 
governed by the curial or procedural law that governed 
the procedure that the arbitrator followed in the conduct 
of the arbitration. xxx 
15. We think that our conclusion that the curial law does 
not apply to the filing of an award in court must, 
accordingly, hold good. We find support for the 
conclusion in the extracts from Mustill and Boyd which 
we have quoted earlier. Where the law governing the 
conduct of the reference is different from the law 
governing the underlying arbitration agreement, the 
court looks to the arbitration agreement to see if the 
dispute is arbitrable, then to the curial law to see how 
the reference should be conducted, “and then returns to 
the first law in order to give effect to the resulting 
award”. 
(Emphasis supplied) 
32. The aforesaid Doctrine of Concurrent Jurisdiction in Arbitration was further 
expanded by this Court in Bhatia International v. Bulk Trading S.A. reported in (2002), wherein this Court examined the scope of 
Section 2(2) viz-a-viz Section 2(1)(e) & (f) of the Act, 1996 and held that 
Part I of the said Act applies to both (i) domestic arbitrations that take place 
in India and (ii) international commercial arbitrations that take place outside 
India. It held that unless the arbitration agreement states to the contrary, even 
if the seat or place of arbitration is outside India, the national courts in India 
will have concurrent jurisdiction in terms of Section 2(1)(e) along with the 
courts situated in the seat jurisdiction in terms of the arbitration agreement. 
The aforesaid decision is in two-parts: - 

First, it held that although Section 2 sub-section (2) of the Act, 1996 
says that Part I will apply where the place of arbitration is in India, yet 
the Act more particularly Section 2(1)(f) makes no distinction 
between international commercial arbitrations held in India or outside 
India, thus the courts in India will have jurisdiction in terms of Section 
2(1)(e) even in respect of international commercial arbitrations. The 
relevant observations read as under: - 
“14. At first blush the arguments of Mr Sen appear very 
attractive. Undoubtedly sub-section (2) of Section 2 
states that Part I is to apply where the place of 
arbitration is in India. [...] 
 xxx 
16. A reading of the provisions shows that the said Act 
applies to arbitrations which are held in India between 
Indian nationals and to international commercial 
arbitrations whether held in India or out of India. 
Section 2(1)(f) defines an international commercial 
arbitration. The definition makes no distinction between 
international commercial arbitrations held in India or 
outside India. An international commercial arbitration 
may be held in a country which is a signatory to either 
the New York Convention or the Geneva Convention 
(hereinafter called “the convention country”). An 
international commercial arbitration may be held in a 
non-convention country. The said Act nowhere provides 
that its provisions are not to apply to international 
commercial arbitrations which take place in a non-
convention country. Admittedly, Part II only applies to 
arbitrations which take place in a convention country. 
Mr Sen fairly admitted that Part II would not apply to an 
international commercial arbitration which takes place 
in a non-convention country. He also fairly admitted that 
there would be countries which are not signatories 
either to the New York Convention or to the Geneva 
Convention. It is not possible to accept the submission 
that the said Act makes no provision for international 

commercial arbitrations which take place in a non-
convention country. xxx 
20. Section 2(1)(e) defines “court” [...] A court is one 
which would otherwise have jurisdiction in respect of 
the subject-matter. The definition does not provide that 
the courts in India will not have jurisdiction if an 
international commercial arbitration takes place 
outside India. Courts in India would have jurisdiction 
even in respect of an international commercial 
arbitration. As stated above, an ouster of jurisdiction 
cannot be implied. An ouster of jurisdiction has to be 
express.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

Secondly, this Court observed that Section 2 sub-section (2) of the 
Act, 1996 nowhere specifies that Part I will “only” apply where the 
place of arbitration is in India, nor does it provide that Part I shall not 
apply where the place of arbitration is not in India. Thus, by not 
specifically providing in black and white, whether Part I of the Act, 
1996 would apply to international commercial arbitrations held 
outside India, the legislature’s intention appears to be to allow the 
parties the freedom to choose whether Part I or any of its provisions 
therein would apply or not by an express or implied agreement. The 
relevant observations read as under: - 
“21. Now let us look at sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) 
of Section 2. Sub-section (2) of Section 2 provides that 
Part I would apply where the place of arbitration is in 
India. To be immediately noted, that it is not providing 
that Part I shall not apply where the place of arbitration 
is not in India. It is also not providing that Part I will 
“only” apply where the place of arbitration is in India 

(emphasis supplied). Thus the legislature has not 
provided that Part I is not to apply to arbitrations which 
take place outside India. The use of the language is 
significant 
and 
important. 
The 
legislature 
is 
emphasising that the provisions of Part I would apply to 
arbitrations which take place in India, but not providing 
that the provisions of Part I will not apply to arbitrations 
which take place out of India. The wording of sub-
section (2) of Section 2 suggests that the intention of the 
legislature was to make provisions of Part I 
compulsorily applicable to an arbitration, including an 
international commercial arbitration, which takes place 
in India. Parties cannot, by agreement, override or 
exclude the non-derogable provisions of Part I in such 
arbitrations. By omitting to provide that Part I will not 
apply to international commercial arbitrations which 
take place outside India the effect would be that Part I 
would 
also apply 
to international 
commercial 
arbitrations held out of India. But by not specifically 
providing that the provisions of Part I apply to 
international commercial arbitrations held out of India, 
the intention of the legislature appears to be to ally 
(sic allow) parties to provide by agreement that Part I 
or any provision therein will not apply. Thus in respect 
of arbitrations which take place outside India even the 
non-derogable provisions of Part I can be excluded. 
Such an agreement may be express or implied. 
 
22. If read in this manner there would be no conflict 
between Section 1 and Section 2(2). The words “every 
arbitration” in sub-section (4) of Section 2 and the 
words “all arbitrations and to all proceedings relating 
thereto” in sub-section (5) of Section 2 are wide. Sub-
sections (4) and (5) of Section 2 are not made subject to 
sub-section (2) of Section 2. It is significant that sub-
section (5) is made subject to sub-section (4) but not to 
sub-section (2). To accept Mr Sen's submission would 
necessitate adding words in sub-sections (4) and (5) of 
Section 2, which the legislature has purposely omitted to 
add viz. “subject to provision of sub-section (2)”. 
However read in the manner set out hereinabove there 
would also be no conflict between sub-section (2) of 
Section 2 and sub-sections (4) and/or (5) of Section 2.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 

Thus, this Court held that Part I of the Act, 1996 would apply to all 
arbitrations. Where such arbitration is held in India, the provisions of Part 
I would be compulsorily applicable, and parties may deviate only to the 
extent permitted by the derogable provisions of Part I. In cases of 
international commercial arbitrations held out of India the provisions of 
Part I would apply unless the parties by agreement, express or implied, 
exclude all or any of its provisions. In that case the laws or rules agreed 
upon by the parties would prevail. Any provision, in Part I, which is 
contrary to or excluded by that law or rules will not apply. The operative 
portion reads as under: - 
“32. To conclude, we hold that the provisions of Part I would 
apply to all arbitrations and to all proceedings relating 
thereto. Where such arbitration is held in India the provisions 
of Part I would compulsorily apply and parties are free to 
deviate only to the extent permitted by the derogable provisions 
of Part I. In cases of international commercial arbitrations 
held out of India provisions of Part I would apply unless the 
parties by agreement, express or implied, exclude all or any of 
its provisions. In that case the laws or rules chosen by the 
parties would prevail. Any provision, in Part I, which is 
contrary to or excluded by that law or rules will not apply. xxx 
 
35. Lastly, it must be stated that the said Act does not appear 
to be a well-drafted legislation. Therefore the High Courts of 
Orissa, Bombay, Madras, Delhi and Calcutta cannot be faulted 
for interpreting it in the manner indicated above. However, in 
our view a proper and conjoint reading of all the provisions 
indicates that Part I is to apply also to international 
commercial arbitrations which take place out of India, unless 

the parties by agreement, express or implied, exclude it or any 
of its provisions. Such an interpretation does not lead to any 
conflict between any of the provisions of the said Act. On this 
interpretation there are no lacunae in the said Act. This 
interpretation also does not leave a party remediless. Thus 
such an interpretation has to be preferred to the one adopted 
by the High Courts of Orissa, Bombay, Madras, Delhi and 
Calcutta. It will therefore have to be held that the contrary view 
taken by these High Courts is not good law.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

33. In yet another decision of this Court in Venture Global Engineering v. 
Satyam Computer Services Ltd. reported in (2008) it was held 
that Part I of the Act, 1996 and the provisions thereunder would apply to all 
arbitrations including international commercial arbitrations. It further 
clarified that although Part II of the Act, 1996 provides a special set of 
provisions that are applicable only to “foreign awards” passed pursuant to 
international commercial arbitrations held outside yet this in no manner 
means that by virtue of the same the Part I would be inapplicable. Part I of 
the Act, 1996 would apply to all arbitrations outside India including “foreign 
awards” passed pursuant thereto unless its application has been specifically 
excluded by the parties. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“19. Mr Nariman heavily relied on para 26 of Bhatia 
International which we have extracted supra. According to him, 
the said paragraph contains not only the submissions of Mr Sen, 
who appeared for Bhatia International therein but also the 
ultimate conclusion of the Bench. He reiterated that the Court 
concluded: 
26. … Thus Section 44 (in Chapter I) and Section 53 
(in Chapter II) define foreign awards, as being awards 
covered by arbitrations under the New York 

Convention and the Geneva Convention respectively. 
Part II then contains provisions for enforcement of 
‘foreign awards’ which necessarily would be different. 
For that reason special provisions for enforcement of 
foreign awards are made in Part II. To the extent that 
Part II provides a separate definition of an arbitral 
award and separate provisions for enforcement of 
foreign awards, the provisions in Part I dealing with 
these aspects will not apply to such foreign awards. It 
must immediately be clarified that the arbitration not 
having taken place in India, all or some of the 
provisions of Part I may also get excluded by an 
express or implied agreement of parties. But if not so 
excluded the provisions of Part I will also apply to 
‘foreign awards’. The opening words of Sections 45 
and 54, which are in Part II, read ‘notwithstanding 
anything contained in Part I’. Such a non obstante 
clause had to be put in because the provisions of Part 
I apply to Part II.” 
 
 xxx 
 
31. On close scrutiny of the materials and the dictum laid down 
in the three-Judge Bench decision in Bhatia International20 we 
agree with the contention of Mr K.K. Venugopal and hold that 
paras 32 and 35 of Bhatia International1 make it clear that the 
provisions of Part I of the Act would apply to all arbitrations 
including international commercial arbitrations and to all 
proceedings relating thereto. We further hold that where such 
arbitration is held in India, the provisions of Part I would 
compulsorily apply and parties are free to deviate to the extent 
permitted by the provisions of Part I. It is also clear that even in 
the case of international commercial arbitrations held out of 
India provisions of Part I would apply unless the parties by 
agreement, express or implied, exclude all or any of its 
provisions. We are also of the view that such an interpretation 
does not lead to any conflict between any of the provisions of the 
Act and there is no lacuna as such. The matter, therefore, is 
concluded by the three-Judge Bench decision in Bhatia 
International. 
 
32. The learned Senior Counsel for the respondent based on 
para 26 submitted that in the case of foreign award which was 

passed outside India is not enforceable in India by invoking the 
provisions of the Act or CPC. However, after critical analysis of 
para 26, we are unable to accept the argument of the learned 
Senior Counsel for the respondent. Paras 26 and 27 start by 
dealing with the arguments of Mr Sen who argued that Part I is 
not applicable to foreign awards. It is only in the sentence 
starting at the bottom of para 26 that the phrase “it must 
immediately be clarified” that the finding of the Court is 
rendered. That finding is to the effect that an express or implied 
agreement of parties can exclude the applicability of Part I. The 
finding specifically states: “But if not so excluded, the 
provisions of Part I will also apply to all ‘foreign awards’. …” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

34. Thus, the concept of “concurrent jurisdiction” in arbitration in India was 
further expanded in Venture Global (supra) inasmuch as by holding Part I 
of the Act, 1996 to be applicable to foreign awards as-well, this Court 
clarified that even after the arbitration has concluded and the award has been 
passed, the courts in India will continue to have jurisdiction in terms of 
Section 2(e) of the said Act. 
 
35. Similarly, in Indtel Technical Services (P) Ltd. v. W.S. Atkins Rail Ltd., 
reported in (2008), this Court reiterated that Part I of the Act, 
1996 applies to both domestic and international arbitrations, notwithstanding 
the provisions of Section 2(2) of the said Act and irrespective of whether the 
seat of arbitration is in India or not. It further observed that the courts of the 
country, whose substantive laws govern the arbitration agreement, are 
competent courts in respect of all matters arising under the arbitration 

agreement, and the jurisdiction exercised by the courts of the seat of 
arbitration is merely concurrent and not exclusive and strictly limited to the 
matter of procedure. Thus, an application under Section 11 for appointment 
of arbitrator in India was held to be maintainable though the seat of 
arbitration was in England. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“16. The submissions made on behalf of Bhatia International 
were accepted by this Court upon a finding that, although, 
Section 2(2) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, 
provides that Part I of the Act would apply where the place of 
arbitration is in India, it did not provide that Part I would not 
apply where the place of arbitration is not in India. It was also 
held that it was nowhere provided that Part I of the aforesaid 
Act would not apply to arbitrations taking place outside India. 
… 
 
 xxx 
26. Referring to the decision in NTPC case [(1992) ] which had also been referred to by Mr Gupta, Mr Tripathi 
submitted that in the said decision the views of jurists such as 
Dicey, Mustill and Boyd and Russell had been reiterated in 
support of the contention that the overriding principle is that the 
courts of the country, whose substantive laws govern the 
arbitration agreement, are competent courts in respect of all 
matters arising under the arbitration agreement, and the 
jurisdiction exercised by the courts of the seat of arbitration is 
merely concurrent and not exclusive and strictly limited to the 
matter of procedure. Mr Tripathi submitted that the decision in 
the aforesaid case supports the proposition that when the parties 
to the contract, do not express any choice with regard to the law 
governing the contract or the arbitration agreement in 
particular, a presumption has to be drawn that the parties 
intended that the proper law of the contract as well as the law 
governing the arbitration agreement would be the same as the 
law of the country which is the seat of arbitration. But when the 
parties expressly choose the proper law of the contract, as in the 
instant case, in the absence of a clear intention such law must 
govern the arbitration agreement also though it is collateral and 
ancillary to the main contract. xxx 
36. Although the matter has been argued at great length and Mr 
Tripathi has tried to establish that the decision of this Court 
in Bhatia International case [(2002) ] is not relevant 
for a decision in this case, I am unable to accept such contention 
in the facts and circumstances of the present case. It is no doubt 
true that it is fairly well settled that when an arbitration 
agreement is silent as to the law and procedure to be followed in 
implementing the arbitration agreement, the law governing the 
said agreement would ordinarily be the same as the law 
governing the contract itself. The decisions cited by Mr Tripathi 
and the views of the jurists referred to in NTPC case [(1992) ] support such a proposition. What, however, 
distinguishes the various decisions and views of the authorities 
in this case is the fact that in Bhatia International [(2002) ] this Court laid down the proposition that notwithstanding 
the provisions of Section 2(2) of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996, indicating that Part I of the said Act would apply 
where the place of arbitration is in India, even in respect of 
international commercial agreements, which are to be governed 
by the laws of another country, the parties would be entitled to 
invoke the provisions of Part I of the aforesaid Act and 
consequently the application made under Section 11 thereof 
would be maintainable. 
 
37. The decision in Bhatia International case [(2002) has been rendered by a Bench of three Judges and governs 
the scope of the application under consideration, as it clearly 
lays down that the provisions of Part I of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996, would be equally applicable to 
international commercial arbitrations held outside India, unless 
any of the said provisions are excluded by agreement between 
the parties expressly or by implication, which is not so in the 
instant case.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

b. 
Post BALCO Regime. 

36. The correctness of the decision in Bhatia International (supra) came under 
cloud, and the same was ultimately referred to a larger bench, which then 
culminated into the landmark decision of a 5-Judge Constitution Bench of 
this Court in Bharat Aluminium Co. v. Kaiser Aluminium Technical 
Services Inc reported in (2012). 
 
37. This Court in BALCO (supra) after a thorough examination of the scheme 
of the Act, 1996 held that the conclusions reached by this Court in Bhatia 
International (supra) are neither supported by the text nor the context of the 
provisions of Section 1(2) and the proviso thereto or Section 2(2) of the said 
Act. It held that the applicability of Part I of the Act, 1996 is limited only to 
arbitrations that take place in India. The said decision is in two-parts: - 

First, it held that a plain reading of Section 2(2) makes it clear that 
Part I of the Act, 1996 is limited in its application to arbitrations which 
take place in India. It observed that although the UNCITRAL Model 
Law which was the basis for the Act, 1996 has not been boldly 
adopted, yet it does not mean that the territorial principle envisaged 
under the Model Law has not been accepted. It held that the 
Parliament through Section(s) 1(2) and 2(2) of the Act, 1996 has 
clearly given recognition to the territorial principle that Part I of the 
said Act will only apply to arbitrations having their place / seat in 
India. The relevant observations read as under: - 

“64. [...]Thereafter, this Court has given further instances 
of provisions of the Arbitration Act, 1996, not being in 
conformity with the Model Law and concluded that “… 
The Model Law and judgments and literature thereon are, 
therefore, not a guide to the interpretation of the Act and, 
especially of Section 11 thereof”. The aforesaid position, 
according to Mr Sorabjee has not been disagreed with by 
this Court in SBP & Co. We agree with the submission of 
Mr Sorabjee that the omission of the word “only” in 
Section 2(2) is not an instance of “casus omissus”. It 
clearly indicates that the Model Law has not been bodily 
adopted by the Arbitration Act, 1996. But that cannot 
mean that the territorial principle has not been accepted. 
We would also agree with Mr Sorabjee that it is not the 
function of the court to supply the supposed omission, 
which can only be done by Parliament. In our opinion, 
legislative surgery is not a judicial option, nor a 
compulsion, whilst interpreting an Act or a provision in 
the Act. xxx 
67. We are unable to accept the submission of the learned 
counsel for the appellants that the omission of the word 
“only” from Section 2(2) indicates that applicability of 
Part I of the Arbitration Act, 1996 is not limited to the 
arbitrations that take place in India. We are also unable 
to accept that Section 2(2) would make Part I applicable 
even to arbitrations which take place outside India. In our 
opinion, a plain reading of Section 2(2) makes it clear that 
Part I is limited in its application to arbitrations which 
take place in India. We are in agreement with the 
submissions made by the learned counsel for the 
respondents, and the interveners in support of the 
respondents, that Parliament by limiting the applicability 
of Part I to arbitrations which take place in India has 
expressed a legislative declaration. It has clearly given 
recognition to the territorial principle. Necessarily 
therefore, it has enacted that Part I of the Arbitration Act, 
1996 applies to arbitrations having their place/seat in 
India. xxx 
70. [...] Therefore, the Arbitration Act, 1996 consolidates 
the law on domestic arbitrations by incorporating the 
provisions to expressly deal with the domestic as well as 

international commercial arbitration by taking into 
account the 1985 Uncitral Model Laws. It is not confined 
to the New York Convention, which is concerned only with 
enforcement of certain foreign awards. It is also 
necessary to appreciate that the Arbitration Act, 1996 
seeks to remove the anomalies that existed in the 
Arbitration Act, 1940 by introducing provisions based on 
the Uncitral Model Laws, which deals with international 
commercial arbitrations and also extends it to 
commercial domestic arbitrations. Uncitral Model Law 
has unequivocally accepted the territorial principle. 
Similarly, the Arbitration Act, 1996 has also adopted the 
territorial principle, thereby limiting the applicability of 
Part I to arbitrations, which take place in India. xxx 
77. We are of the opinion that the omission of the word 
“only” in Section 2(2) of the Arbitration Act, 1996 does 
not detract from the territorial scope of its application as 
embodied in Article 1(2) of the Model Law. The article 
merely states that the arbitration law as enacted in a given 
State shall apply if the arbitration is in the territory of that 
State. The absence of the word “only” which is found in 
Article 1(2) of the Model Law, from Section 2(2) of the 
Arbitration Act, 1996 does not change the content/import 
of Section 2(2) as limiting the application of Part I of the 
Arbitration Act, 1996 to arbitrations where the place/seat 
is in India. 
 
78. For the reasons stated above, we are unable to 
support 
the 
conclusion 
reached 
in Bhatia 
International and Venture Global Engg., that Part I 
would also apply to arbitrations that do not take place in 
India. xxx 
81. We quote the above in extenso only to demonstrate 
that Section 2(2) is not merely stating the obvious. It 
would not be a repetition of what is already stated in 
Section 1(2) of the Arbitration Act, 1996 which provides 
that “it extends to the whole of India”. Since the 
consolidated Arbitration Act, 1996 deals with domestic, 
commercial and international commercial arbitrators, it 
was necessary to remove the uncertainty that the 
Arbitration Act, 1996 could also apply to arbitrations 

which do not take place in India. Therefore, Section 2(2) 
merely reinforces the limits of operation of the Arbitration 
Act, 1996 to India.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

Secondly, this court rejected the contention that the Act, 1996 is 
‘subject-matter centric’ and not exclusively ‘seat centric’. It observed 
that the words “subject-matter of the arbitration” and “subject-matter 
of the suit” occurring in Section 2(1)(e) should not be conflated as the 
former confers jurisdiction on the basis of cause of action while the 
latter confers jurisdiction on the basis of “place of arbitration”, thus, 
the Act, 1996 is not merely ‘subject-matter centric’. It observed that 
although the legislature by use of the words “subject-matter of 
arbitration” in addition to “subject-matter of the suit” under Section 
2(1)(e) has conferred jurisdiction to two-courts i.e., the court of 
jurisdiction over the cause of action and the court of the seat of the 
arbitration process, yet the expression “subject-matter of suit” 
occurring in Section 2(1)(e) is confined only to Part I of the Act, 1996, 
and thus, wherever it is found that the seat or place of arbitration is 
outside India, Part I would be inapplicable and the jurisdiction then 
will be “exclusively seat centric”. In other words, where the seat of 
arbitration is outside India, only those courts situated where the 
‘subject-matter of arbitration’ lies i.e., at the place of arbitration will 
be competent to exercise supervisory jurisdiction over arbitration in 

terms of Section 2(1)(e) of the Act, 1996. The relevant observations 
read as under: - 
“95. The learned counsel for the appellants have 
submitted that Section 2(1)(e), Section 20 and Section 28 
read with Section 45 and Section 48(1)(e) make it clear 
that Part I is not limited only to arbitrations which take 
place in India. That these provisions indicate that the 
Arbitration Act, 1996 is subject-matter centric and not 
exclusively seat-centric. That therefore, “seat” is not the 
“centre of gravity” so far as the Arbitration Act, 1996 is 
concerned. We are of the considered opinion that the 
aforesaid provisions have to be interpreted by keeping the 
principle of territoriality at the forefront. We have earlier 
observed that Section 2(2) does not make Part I 
applicable to arbitrations seated or held outside India. In 
view of the expression used in Section 2(2), the 
maxim expressum facit cessare tacitum, would not permit 
by interpretation to hold that Part I would also apply to 
arbitrations held outside the territory of India. The 
expression “this Part shall apply where the place of 
arbitration is in India” necessarily excludes application 
of Part I to arbitration seated or held outside India. It 
appears to us that neither of the provisions relied upon by 
the learned counsel for the appellants would make any 
section of Part I applicable to arbitration seated outside 
India. It will be apposite now to consider each of the 
aforesaid provisions in turn. 
 
96. [...] We are of the opinion, the term “subject-matter of 
the arbitration” cannot be confused with “subject-matter 
of the suit”. The term “subject-matter” in Section 2(1)(e) 
is confined to Part I. It has a reference and connection 
with the process of dispute resolution. Its purpose is to 
identify the courts having supervisory control over the 
arbitration proceedings. Hence, it refers to a court which 
would essentially be a court of the seat of the arbitration 
process. In our opinion, the provision in Section 2(1)(e) 
has to be construed keeping in view the provisions in 
Section 20 which give recognition to party autonomy. 
Accepting the narrow construction as projected by the 
learned counsel for the appellants would, in fact, render 

Section 20 nugatory. In our view, the legislature has 
intentionally given jurisdiction to two courts i.e. the court 
which would have jurisdiction where the cause of action 
is located and the courts where the arbitration takes 
place. This was necessary as on many occasions the 
agreement may provide for a seat of arbitration at a place 
which would be neutral to both the parties. Therefore, the 
courts where the arbitration takes place would be 
required to exercise supervisory control over the arbitral 
process. For example, if the arbitration is held in Delhi, 
where neither of the parties are from Delhi, (Delhi having 
been chosen as a neutral place as between a party from 
Mumbai and the other from Kolkata) and the tribunal 
sitting in Delhi passes an interim order under Section 17 
of the Arbitration Act, 1996, the appeal against such an 
interim order under Section 37 must lie to the courts of 
Delhi being the courts having supervisory jurisdiction 
over the arbitration proceedings and the tribunal. This 
would be irrespective of the fact that the obligations to be 
performed under the contract were to be performed either 
at Mumbai or at Kolkata, and only arbitration is to take 
place in Delhi. In such circumstances, both the courts 
would have jurisdiction i.e. the court within whose 
jurisdiction the subject-matter of the suit is situated and 
the courts within the jurisdiction of which the dispute 
resolution i.e. arbitration is located. 
 
97. The definition of Section 2(1)(e) includes “subject-
matter of the arbitration” to give jurisdiction to the courts 
where the arbitration takes place, which otherwise would 
not exist. On the other hand, Section 47 which is in Part 
II of the Arbitration Act, 1996 dealing with enforcement 
of certain foreign awards has defined the term “court” as 
a court having jurisdiction over the subject-matter of the 
award. This has a clear reference to a court within whose 
jurisdiction 
the 
asset/person 
is 
located, 
against 
which/whom the enforcement of the international arbitral 
award is sought. The provisions contained in Section 
2(1)(e) being purely jurisdictional in nature can have no 
relevance to the question whether Part I applies to 
arbitrations which take place outside India. xxx 

Only if the agreement of the parties is construed to 
provide for the “seat”/“place” of arbitration being in 
India — would Part I of the Arbitration Act, 1996 be 
applicable. If the agreement is held to provide for a 
“seat”/“place” outside India, Part I would be 
inapplicable to the extent inconsistent with the arbitration 
law of the seat, even if the agreement purports to provide 
that the Arbitration Act, 1996 shall govern the arbitration 
proceedings. xxx 
117. It would, therefore, follow that if the arbitration 
agreement is found or held to provide for a seat/place of 
arbitration outside India, then the provision that the 
Arbitration Act, 1996 would govern the arbitration 
proceedings, would not make Part I of the Arbitration Act, 
1996 applicable or enable the Indian courts to exercise 
supervisory jurisdiction over the arbitration or the award. 
It would only mean that the parties have contractually 
imported from the Arbitration Act, 1996, those provisions 
which are concerned with the internal conduct of their 
arbitration and which are not inconsistent with the 
mandatory 
provisions 
of 
the English 
procedural 
law/curial law. This necessarily follows from the fact that 
Part I applies only to arbitrations having their seat/place 
in India.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 
 
Thus, this Court held that Part I of the Act, 1996 is only applicable 
to arbitrations that take place in India and as such the decision of this Court 
in Bhatia International (supra) and Venture Global (supra) are no longer a 
good law. However, to avoid the chaos that might ensue upon arbitrations 
agreements and proceedings thereto which are already underway pursuant to 
the ratio of Bhatia International (supra) and Venture Global (supra), this 
Court held that the law declared by it will only apply prospectively to all 
arbitration agreements that have been executed on or after 06.09.2012 i.e., 

the date of pronouncement. This Court ultimately summed up its findings 
with the following conclusions reproduced below: - 
“Conclusion 
194. In view of the above discussion, we are of the considered 
opinion that the Arbitration Act, 1996 has accepted the 
territoriality 
principle 
which 
has 
been 
adopted 
the Uncitral Model Law. Section 2(2) makes a declaration that 
Part I of the Arbitration Act, 1996 shall apply to all arbitrations 
which take place within India. We are of the considered opinion 
that Part I of the Arbitration Act, 1996 would have no 
application to international commercial arbitration held outside 
India. Therefore, such awards would only be subject to the 
jurisdiction of the Indian courts when the same are sought to be 
enforced in India in accordance with the provisions contained in 
Part II of the Arbitration Act, 1996. In our opinion, the 
provisions contained in the Arbitration Act, 1996 make it crystal 
clear that there can be no overlapping or intermingling of the 
provisions contained in Part I with the provisions contained in 
Part II of the Arbitration Act, 1996. 
 
195. With utmost respect, we are unable to agree with the 
conclusions recorded in the judgments of this Court in Bhatia 
International and Venture Global Engg. In our opinion, the 
provision contained in Section 2(2) of the Arbitration Act, 1996 
is not in conflict with any of the provisions either in Part I or in 
Part II of the Arbitration Act, 1996. In a foreign-seated 
international commercial arbitration, no application for interim 
relief would be maintainable under Section 9 or any other 
provision, as applicability of Part I of the Arbitration Act, 1996 
is limited to all arbitrations which take place in India. Similarly, 
no suit for interim injunction simpliciter would be maintainable 
in India, on the basis of an international commercial arbitration 
with a seat outside India. 
 
196. We conclude that Part I of the Arbitration Act, 1996 is 
applicable only to all the arbitrations which take place within 
the territory of India. 
 
197. The judgment in Bhatia International was rendered by this 
Court on 13-3-2002. Since then, the aforesaid judgment has been 
followed by all the High Courts as well as by this Court on 

numerous occasions. In fact, the judgment in Venture Global 
Engg. has been rendered on 10-1-2008 in terms of the ratio of 
the decision in Bhatia International. Thus, in order to do 
complete justice, we hereby order, that the law now declared by 
this Court shall apply prospectively, to all the arbitration 
agreements executed hereafter.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

38. This Court in Union of India v. Reliance Industries Ltd. & Ors. reported in 
(2015) clarified the true import and effect of the decision in 
BALCO (supra). It held that although the doctrine of concurrent jurisdiction 
had been prospectively overruled in BALCO (supra) yet it would not mean 
or understood that all arbitration agreements prior to the date of 
pronouncement of BALCO (supra) will continue to be governed by Bhatia 
International (supra). It observed that Bhatia International (supra) itself 
had held that Part I of the Act, 1996 will not apply if it has been excluded 
expressly or by necessary implication. It said that the position of law that 
emerges from a conjoint reading of BALCO (supra) and Bhatia 
International (supra) is that where the court comes to a determination that 
the juridical seat is outside India or where law other than Indian law governs 
the arbitration agreement, Part I of the Arbitration Act, 1996 would be 
excluded by necessary implication and the doctrine of concurrent 
jurisdiction will not apply irrespective of whether the arbitration agreement 
pre-dates BALCO (supra) or not. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“13. It can be seen that this Court in Singer case did not give 
effect to the difference between the substantive law of the 

contract and the law that governed the arbitration. Therefore, 
since a construction of Section 9(b) of the Foreign Awards Act 
led to the aforesaid situation and led to the doctrine of 
concurrent jurisdiction, the 1996 Act, while enacting Section 
9(a) of the repealed Foreign Awards Act, 1961, in Section 51 
thereof, was careful enough to omit Section 9(b) of the 1961 Act 
which, as stated hereinabove, excluded the Foreign Awards Act 
from applying to any award made on arbitration agreements 
governed by the law of India. 
 
14. This being the case, the theory of concurrent jurisdiction was 
expressly given a go-by with the dropping of Section 9(b) of the 
Foreign Awards Act, while enacting Part II of the Arbitration 
Act, 1996, which repealed all the three earlier laws and put the 
law of arbitration into one statute, albeit in four different parts. 
 
15. However, this Court in Bhatia International v. Bulk Trading 
S.A., resurrected this doctrine of concurrent jurisdiction by 
holding, in para 32, that even where arbitrations are held 
outside India, unless the parties agree to exclude the application 
of Part I of the Arbitration Act, 1996, either expressly or by 
necessary implication, the courts in India will exercise 
concurrent jurisdiction with the court in the country in which the 
foreign award was made. Bhatia International was in the 
context of a Section 9 application made under Part I of the 1996 
Act by the respondent in that case for interim orders to safeguard 
the assets of the Indian company in case a foreign award was to 
be executed in India against it. The reductio ad absurdum of this 
doctrine of concurrent jurisdiction came to be felt in a most 
poignant 
form 
in 
the 
judgment 
of Venture 
Global 
Engg. v. Satyam Computer Services Ltd., by which this Court 
held that a foreign award would also be considered as a 
domestic award and the challenge procedure provided in 
Section 34 of Part I of the 1996 Act would therefore apply. This 
led to a situation where the foreign award could be challenged 
in the country in which it is made; it could also be challenged 
under Part I of the 1996 Act in India; and could be refused to be 
recognised and enforced under Section 48 contained in Part II 
of the 1996 Act. 
 
16. Given this state of the law, a five-Judge Bench of this Court 
in BALCO v. Kaiser Aluminium Technical Services Inc., 

overruled both Bhatia International and Venture Global Engg. 
[...] 
 
17. It will thus be seen that facts like the present case attract 
the Bhatia International3 principle of concurrent jurisdiction 
inasmuch as all arbitration agreements entered into before 12-
9-2012, that is, the date of pronouncement of BALCO judgment, 
will be governed by Bhatia International. 
 
18. It is important to note that in para 32 of Bhatia 
International itself this Court has held that Part I of the 
Arbitration Act, 1996 will not apply if it has been excluded either 
expressly or by necessary implication. Several judgments of this 
Court have held that Part I is excluded by necessary implication 
if it is found that on the facts of a case either the juridical seat of 
the arbitration is outside India or the law governing the 
arbitration agreement is a law other than Indian law. … 
 xxx 
21. The last paragraph of BALCO judgment has now to be read 
with two caveats, both emanating from para 32 of Bhatia 
International itself — that where the Court comes to a 
determination that the juridical seat is outside India or where 
law other than Indian law governs the arbitration agreement, 
Part I of the Arbitration Act, 1996 would be excluded by 
necessary implication. Therefore, even in the cases governed by 
the Bhatia principle, it is only those cases in which agreements 
stipulate that the seat of the arbitration is in India or on whose 
facts a judgment cannot be reached on the seat of the arbitration 
as being outside India that would continue to be governed by the 
Bhatia principle. Also, it is only those agreements which 
stipulate or can be read to stipulate that the law governing the 
arbitration agreement is Indian law which would continue to be 
governed by the Bhatia rule.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
39. Thus, the legal position that emerges from a conspectus of all the decisions 
referred to above is that Part I of the Act and the provisions thereunder only 
applies where the arbitration takes place in India i.e., where either (I) the 
seat of arbitration is in India OR (II) the law governing the arbitration 

agreement is Indian law. As a natural corollary to the above, the position 
of law may be summarized as under: - 

Arbitration agreements executed after 06.09.2012 where the seat of 
arbitration is outside India, Part I of the Act, 1996 and the provisions 
thereunder will not be applicable and would fall beyond the 
jurisdiction of Indian courts by virtue of the decision of this Court in 
BALCO (supra). 

Even those arbitration agreements that have been executed prior to 
06.09.2012 and thus, governed by Bhatia International (supra), Part 
I of the Act, 1996 may not necessarily be applicable, if its application 
has been excluded by the parties in the arbitration agreement either 
explicitly by designating the seat of arbitration outside India or 
implicitly by choosing the law governing the agreement to be any 
other law other than Indian law, by virtue of Reliance Industries 
(supra). 
(iii) Thus, irrespective of the date of execution of arbitration agreement, 
Part I of the Act, 1996 will be applicable only to those arbitration 
agreements where the seat or place of arbitration is in India OR in 
the absence of any categorical finding as to the place or seat of 
arbitration, where such agreement stipulates or can be read to 
stipulate that the law governing the arbitration agreement would be 
Indian law. 

40. The petitioner contended that since the aforesaid Distributorship Agreement 
that contains the arbitration agreement was executed on 09.11.2010 i.e., prior 
to the decision of BALCO (supra), Part I of the Act, 1996 would be 
applicable. However, as discussed in the foregoing paragraphs, Part I of the 
Act, 1996 is applicable to arbitration agreements prior to BALCO (supra) if 
the seat of arbitration is in India or where the arbitration agreement is found 
to be governed by Indian laws. Thus, now the only question that remains to 
be answered in the present case is whether the seat of arbitration designated 
under the aforesaid Distributorship Agreement is in India, if not, whether the 
arbitration agreement could be said to be governed by the Indian laws? ii. 
Criterion or Test for Determination of Seat of Arbitration: Conflict of 
‘Venue’ versus ‘Seat’ of Arbitration. 
 
41. Before proceeding further with the analysis, it would be apposite to first 
understand what is the criterion or test for determining the ‘seat’ or place of 
arbitration. a. 
Closest Connection Test – Place of Arbitration to be ascertained by 
 
the Law governing the Arbitration Agreement and not the Place of 
 
Arbitration. 

42. The "closest connection test" is a legal principle used to determine which 
law governs an arbitration agreement when the parties have not expressly 
chosen a governing law or where there is a conflict between the choice of 
law by the parties. This test seeks to identify the jurisdiction that has the 
closest relationship with the subject-matter in question or simplicter the 
dispute between the parties by identifying which system of law has the 
closest and most real connection with the transaction or dispute between the 
parties. 
 
43. The ‘Closest Connection Test’ was first applied by this Court in its decision 
in NTPC (supra). In the aforesaid case, the main substantive contract therein 
had been executed in India, the general terms and conditions appended to the 
main contract stipulated that the said contract shall be construed and 
governed according to Indian laws. It further stipulated that the courts of 
Delhi were conferred exclusive jurisdiction in all matters arising under the 
said contract. It also contained an arbitration clause which inter-alia 
stipulated that where the dispute concerns a foreign contractor, then it will 
be resolved through arbitration and that the rules of conciliation and 
arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce shall apply to such 
arbitrations. Pursuant to the above, arbitration was conducted between the 
parties therein by a tribunal constituted by the International Chamber of 
Commerce and an interim award was made at London. The appellant therein 

approached the Delhi High Court for setting aside the said interim award, 
however the High Court held that the award was not governed by the Act, 
1940 and could only be set-aside at London being the designated seat of 
arbitration. Aggrieved by it, the appellant therein approached this Court by 
way of an appeal. 
 
44. This Court in NTPC (supra) held that the law governing the contract will be 
the proper law governing the arbitration agreement and by it the place of 
arbitration itself. Where the parties have expressly chosen the proper law of 
the contract, the courts of that system of law will have jurisdiction. Where 
however, the parties have not expressly chosen the substantive law 
governing the contract, there the intention has to be discovered by applying 
the ‘Closest Connection Test’ to determine which place or system of law has 
its closest and most real connection with the transaction or dispute. It further, 
cautioned that mere selection of place of arbitration will not be sufficient to 
draw an inference as to the intention of parties as regards the seat of 
arbitration, unless there is a significant link with such place. The aforesaid 
decision may be better understood in three-parts: - 

First, it observed that the proper law of the arbitration agreement is 
normally the same as the proper law of the contract or the substantive 
law governing the contract. Where the proper law of the contract is 
expressly chosen by the parties then such law must, in the absence of 

an unmistakable intention to the contrary, govern the arbitration 
agreement which, though collateral or ancillary to the main contract, 
is nevertheless a part of such contract. In other words, if the proper 
law of the contract is expressly chosen and the arbitration agreement 
forms part and parcel of such contract, then the substantive law of such 
contract will govern the arbitration agreement, and by its extension 
the place of arbitration. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“24. The validity, effect and interpretation of the 
arbitration agreement are governed by its proper law. 
Such law will decide whether the arbitration clause is 
wide enough to cover the dispute between the parties. 
Such law will also ordinarily decide whether the 
arbitration clause binds the parties even when one of them 
alleges that the contract is void, or voidable or illegal or 
that such contract has been discharged by breach or 
frustration. (See Heyman v. Darwins Ltd.) The proper law 
of arbitration will also decide whether the arbitration 
clause would equally apply to a different contract between 
the same parties or between one of those parties and a 
third party. 
 
25. The parties have the freedom to choose the law 
governing an international commercial arbitration 
agreement. They may choose the substantive law 
governing the arbitration agreement as well as the 
procedural law governing the conduct of the arbitration. 
Such choice is exercised either expressly or by 
implication. Where there is no express choice of the law 
governing the contract as a whole, or the arbitration 
agreement in particular, there is, in the absence of any 
contrary indication, a presumption that the parties have 
intended that the proper law of the contract as well as the 
law governing the arbitration agreement are the same as 
the law of the country in which the arbitration is agreed 
to be held. On the other hand, where the proper law of the 
contract is expressly chosen by the parties, as in the 

present case, such law must, in the absence of an 
unmistakable intention to the contrary, govern the 
arbitration agreement which, though collateral or 
ancillary to the main contract, is nevertheless a part of 
such contract.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

Secondly, if there is no express statement about the governing law, 
then the true intention of parties as to the place or seat of arbitration 
has to be discovered by applying sound ideas of business, convenience 
and sense to the language of the contract itself in order to determine 
the proper law of the contract. This may be done by applying the 
‘Closest Connection Test’ whereby the courts impute an intention by 
applying the objective test to determine what the parties would have 
as just and reasonable persons intended as regards the applicable law 
had they applied their minds to the question. For this purpose, the 
place where the contract was made, the form and object of the 
contract, the place of performance, the place of residence or business 
of the parties, reference to the courts having jurisdiction and such 
other links are to be examined to determine the system of law with 
which the transaction has its closest and most real connection. The 
relevant observations read as under: - 
“13. [...] Where, however, the intention of the parties is 
not expressly stated and no inference about it can be 
drawn, their intention as such has no relevance. In that 
event, the courts endeavour to impute an intention by 

identifying the legal system with which the transaction has 
its closest and most real connection. xxx 
16. Where the parties have not expressly or impliedly 
selected the proper law, the courts impute an intention by 
applying the objective test to determine what the parties 
would have as just and reasonable persons intended as 
regards the applicable law had they applied their minds 
to the question.7 The Judge has to determine the proper 
law for the parties in such circumstances by putting 
himself in the place of a “reasonable man”. He has to 
determine the intention of the parties by asking himself 
how a just and reasonable person would have regarded 
the problem” [...] 
 
17. For this purpose the place where the contract was 
made, the form and object of the contract, the place of 
performance, the place of residence or business of the 
parties, reference to the courts having jurisdiction and 
such other links are examined by the courts to determine 
the system of law with which the transaction has its closest 
and most real connection.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
(iii) Lastly, the choice of place of arbitration or selection of courts of 
particular country for submission to its jurisdiction, will have little 
relevance in determining the system of law to govern the arbitration 
agreement and may not be sufficient to draw an inference as to the 
intention of parties to regard the chosen place as the proper law of 
arbitration unless it is supported by the law governing the contract or 
in its absence if there is a significant link with such place that gives a 
strong indication that the law governing the arbitration agreement is 

the law of the place chosen for arbitration. The relevant observations 
read as under: - 
“15. In the absence of an express statement about the 
governing law, the inferred intention of the parties 
determines that law. The true intention of the parties, in 
the absence of an express selection, has to be discovered 
by applying “sound ideas of business, convenience and 
sense to the language of the contract itself”. In such a 
case, selection of courts of a particular country as having 
jurisdiction in matters arising under the contract is 
usually, but not invariably, an indication of the intention 
of the parties that the system of law followed by those 
courts is the proper law by which they intend their 
contract to be governed. However, the mere selection of a 
particular place for submission to the jurisdiction of the 
courts or for the conduct of arbitration will not, in the 
absence of any other relevant connecting factor with that 
place, be sufficient to draw an inference as to the intention 
of the parties to be governed by the system of law 
prevalent in that place. This is specially so in the case of 
arbitration, for the selection of the place of arbitration 
may have little significance where it is chosen, as is often 
the case, without regard to any relevant or significant link 
with the place. This is particularly true when the place of 
arbitration is not chosen by the parties themselves, but by 
the arbitrators or by an outside body, and that too for 
reasons unconnected with the contract. Choice of place 
for submission to jurisdiction of courts or for arbitration 
may thus prove to have little relevance for drawing an 
inference as to the governing law of the contract, unless 
supported in that respect by the rest of the contract and 
the surrounding circumstances. Any such clause must 
necessarily give way to stronger indications in regard to 
the intention of the parties.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
45. Accordingly, this Court in NTPC (supra) held that since the proper law 
governing the contract was expressly stipulated to be the laws in force in 

India and because the parties had specifically accepted the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the courts in Delhi in all matters arising under the contract it 
meant that the law governing the arbitration agreement would be same as the 
proper law governing the contract which contained the relevant arbitration 
clause. It further observed that since London had no significant connection 
with the contract or the parties except being a neutral place that had been 
chosen only because of the rules of the International Chamber of Commerce, 
it held that, the stipulation of such rules merely governed the procedure and 
conduct of the arbitration and could not in any manner supersede the 
overriding jurisdiction and control of the Indian law and the Indian courts 
that governed the main contract including the arbitration clause that formed 
part and parcel of the main contract. The aforesaid relevant observations read 
as under: - 
“26. [...]Where, however, the parties have, as in the instant case, 
stipulated that the arbitration between them will be conducted in 
accordance with the ICC Rules, those rules, being in many 
respects self-contained or self-regulating and constituting a 
contractual code of procedure, will govern the conduct of the 
arbitration, except insofar as they conflict with the mandatory 
requirements of the proper law of arbitration, or of the 
procedural law of the seat of arbitration. 
 
27. The proper law of the contract in the present case being 
expressly stipulated to be the laws in force in India and the 
exclusive jurisdiction of the courts in Delhi in all matters arising 
under the contract having been specifically accepted, and the 
parties not having chosen expressly or by implication a law 
different from the Indian law in regard to the agreement 
contained in the arbitration clause, the proper law governing the 
arbitration agreement is indeed the law in force in India, and the 

competent courts of this country must necessarily have 
jurisdiction over all matters concerning arbitration. Neither the 
rules of procedure for the conduct of arbitration contractually 
chosen by the parties (the ICC Rules) nor the mandatory 
requirements of the procedure followed in the courts of the 
country in which the arbitration is held can in any manner 
supersede the overriding jurisdiction and control of the Indian 
law and the Indian courts. xxx 
50. The arbitration clause must be considered together with the 
rest of the contract and the relevant surrounding circumstances. 
In the present case, as seen above, the choice of the place of 
arbitration was, as far as the parties are concerned, merely 
accidental insofar as they had not expressed any intention in 
regard to it and the choice was made by the ICC Court for 
reasons totally unconnected with either party to the contract. On 
the other hand, apart from the expressly stated intention of the 
parties, the contract itself, including the arbitration agreement 
contained in one of its clauses, is redolent of India and matters 
Indian. The disputes between the parties under the contract have 
no connection with anything English, and they have the closest 
connection with Indian laws, rules and regulations. In the 
circumstances, the mere fact that the venue chosen by the ICC 
Court for the conduct of arbitration is London does not support 
the case of the Singer on the point. Any attempt to exclude the 
jurisdiction of the competent courts and the laws in force in India 
is totally inconsistent with the agreement between the parties. 
 
51. In sum, it may be stated that the law expressly chosen by the 
parties in respect of all matters arising under their contract, 
which must necessarily include the agreement contained in the 
arbitration clause, being Indian law and the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the courts in Delhi having been expressly 
recognised by the parties to the contract in all matters arising 
under it, and the contract being most intimately associated with 
India, the proper law of arbitration and the competent courts are 
both exclusively Indian, while matters of procedure connected 
with the conduct of arbitration are left to be regulated by the 
contractually chosen rules of the ICC to the extent that such 
rules are not in conflict with the public policy and the mandatory 
requirements of the proper law and of the law of the place of 
arbitration. The Foreign Awards Act, 1961 has no application 

to the award in question which has been made on an arbitration 
agreement governed by the law of India. xxx 
53. All substantive rights arising under the agreement including 
that which is contained in the arbitration clause are, in our view, 
governed by the laws of India. In respect of the actual conduct 
of arbitration, the procedural law of England may be applicable 
to the extent that the ICC Rules are insufficient or repugnant to 
the public policy or other mandatory provisions of the laws in 
force in England. Nevertheless, the jurisdiction exercisable by 
the English courts and the applicability of the laws of that 
country in procedural matters must be viewed as concurrent and 
consistent with the jurisdiction of the competent Indian courts 
and the operation of Indian laws in all matters concerning 
arbitration insofar as the main contract as well as that which is 
contained in the arbitration clause are governed by the laws of 
India.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 
 
46. What has been conveyed in so many words by this Court in NTPC (supra) 
is that the law which governs the contract including the arbitration 
agreement, the courts of that system of law will have the supervisory 
jurisdiction over the arbitration. Where however the parties have expressly 
chosen a place of arbitration or selected a court of particular country for 
submission to the jurisdiction or selected the law for conduct of arbitration 
i.e., curial law, such place will only be regarded as venue, unless such factor 
is supported by relevant connecting factor sufficient to draw an inference as 
to what the parties would have intended as regards the applicable law. Thus, 
a mere place chosen by the parties will only be regarded as a venue and will 
not be construed as seat unless there is a significant link with such place to 

be ascertained by applying the ‘Closest Connection Test’ to determine which 
place or system of law has the most real with the transaction or dispute. 
 
47. Similarly, in Enercon (India) Ltd. & Ors. v. Enercon GMBH & Anr. reported in (2014) this Court, held that where the parties have 
expressly agreed that the law governing the contract, the law governing the 
arbitration agreement and the law of arbitration / curial law would be Indian 
laws, then the seat or place of arbitration would be India. It further observed 
that mere mentioning of London as the place of arbitration will not designate 
it as the seat of arbitration, in the absence of anything to connect it to the 
arbitration agreement. This Court applying the closest connection test, held 
that the place with the closest and most real connection with the arbitration 
agreement and the law of arbitration was India and not London. The relevant 
observations read as under: - 
“98. We find much substance in the submissions of Mr Nariman 
that there are very strong indicators to suggest that the parties 
always understood that the seat of arbitration would be in India 
and London would only be the “venue” to hold the proceedings 
of arbitration. We find force in the submission made by the 
learned Senior Counsel for the appellants that the facts of the 
present case would make the ratio of law laid down in Naviera 
Amazonica Peruana S.A. applicable in the present case. 
Applying 
the closest 
and 
the 
intimate connection 
to 
arbitration, it would be seen that the parties had agreed that the 
provisions of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1996 would apply to the 
arbitration proceedings. By making such a choice, the parties 
have made the curial law provisions contained in Chapters III, 
IV, V and VI of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1996 applicable. Even 
Dr Singhvi had submitted that Chapters III, IV, V and VI would 

apply if the seat of arbitration is in India. By choosing that Part 
I of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1996 would apply, the parties 
have made a choice that the seat of arbitration would be in 
India. Section 2(2) of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1996 provides 
that Part I “shall apply where the place of arbitration is in 
India”. In Balco, it has been categorically held that Part I of the 
Indian Arbitration Act, 1996, will have no application, if 
the seat of arbitration is not in India. In the present case, London 
is mentioned only as a “venue” of arbitration which, in our 
opinion, in the facts of this case cannot be read as the “seat” of 
arbitration. 
 
99. We are fortified in taking the aforesaid view since all the 
three laws applicable in arbitration proceedings are Indian 
laws. The law governing the contract, the law governing the 
arbitration agreement and the law of arbitration/curial law are 
all stated to be Indian. In such circumstances, the observation 
in Naviera Amazonica Peruana S.A. would become fully 
applicable. In that case, the Court of Appeal in England 
considered the agreement which contained a clause providing 
for the jurisdiction of the courts in Lima, Peru in the event of 
judicial dispute; and at the same time contained a clause 
providing that the arbitration would be governed by the English 
law and the procedural law of arbitration shall be the English 
law. The Court of Appeal summarised the state of the 
jurisprudence on this topic. [...] 
 
xxx 
 
116. The submission made by Dr Singhvi would only be worthy 
of acceptance on the assumption that London is the seat. That 
would be to put the cart before the horse. Surely, jurisdiction of 
the courts cannot be rested upon unsure or insecure foundations. 
If so, it will flounder with every gust of wind from different 
directions. Given the connection to India of the entire dispute 
between the parties, it is difficult to accept that parties have 
agreed that the seat would be London and that venue is only a 
misnomer. The parties having chosen the Indian Arbitration Act, 
1996 as the law governing the substantive contract, the 
agreement to arbitrate and the performance of the agreement 
and the law governing the conduct of the arbitration; it would, 
therefore, in our opinion, be vexatious and oppressive if Enercon 
GmbH is permitted to compel EIL to litigate in England. … 

xxx 
 
123. The cases relied upon by Dr Singhvi relate to the phrase 
“arbitration in London” or expressions similar thereto. The 
same cannot be equated with the term “venue of arbitration 
proceedings shall be in London”. Arbitration in London can be 
understood to include venue as well as seat; but it would be 
rather stretching the imagination if “venue of arbitration shall 
be in London” could be understood as “seat of arbitration shall 
be London”, in the absence of any other factor connecting the 
arbitration to London. In spite of Dr Singhvi's seemingly 
attractive submission to convince us, we decline to entertain the 
notion that India would not be the natural forum for all 
remedies in relation to the disputes, having such a close and 
intimate connection with India. In contrast, London is described 
only as a venue which Dr Singhvi says would be the natural 
forum. xxx 
135. In the present case, even though the venue of arbitration 
proceedings 
has 
been 
fixed 
in 
London, 
it 
cannot 
be presumed that the parties have intended the seat to be also in 
London. In an international commercial arbitration, venue can 
often be different from the seat of arbitration. In such 
circumstances, the hearing of the arbitration will be conducted 
at the venue fixed by the parties, but this would not bring about 
a change in the seat of the arbitration. [...]” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
48. What can be discerned from the above decision of this Court in Enercon 
(supra) is that for determining the seat of arbitration the closest connection 
test involves identifying the law with which the agreement to arbitrate has 
its closest and most real connection. Where the parties have expressly or 
impliedly provided the law governing the substantive contract, the 
arbitration agreement and the curial law, the law with which the agreement 
to arbitrate has its closest and most real connection would be the law of 

the seat of arbitration. Where the question before the courts involves 
ascertaining whether a particular place is the seat or venue of arbitration, the 
place with the closest connection with the law governing the arbitration 
agreement would be the seat of arbitration. Interestingly, although this Court 
deliberately did not address whether seat is to be determined based on the 
closest connection with the law governing the arbitration agreement or the 
curial law since in the facts of the said case both the law governing the 
contract and the curial law were the same, yet this Court approvingly referred 
to two other decisions in Roger Shashoua (1) v. Sharma, [2009] EWHC 
957 (Comm) and Sulame´rica Cia Nacional de Seguros SA v. Enesa 
Engelharia SA, (2013) 1 WLR 102 (CA) wherein the seat of arbitration was 
construed on the basis of the curial law. The relevant observations read as 
under: - 
“105. We are also unable to accept the submission made by Dr 
Singhvi that in this case the venue should be understood as 
reference to place in the manner it finds mention in Section 
20(1), as opposed to the manner it appears in Section 20(3) of 
the Indian Arbitration Act, 1996. Such a submission cannot be 
accepted since the parties have agreed that curial law would be 
the Indian Arbitration Act, 1996. xxx 
 
124. In Shashoua, such an expression was understood 
as seat instead of venue, as the parties had agreed that the ICC 
Rules would apply to the arbitration proceedings. In Shashoua, 
the ratio in Naviera and Braes of Doune has been followed. In 
that case, the Court was concerned with the construction of the 
shareholders' agreement between the parties, which provided 
that “the venue of the arbitration shall be London, United 

Kingdom”. It provided that the arbitration proceedings should 
be conducted in English in accordance with the ICC Rules and 
that the governing law of the shareholders' agreement itself 
would be the law of India. The claimants made an application to 
the High Court in New Delhi seeking interim measures of 
protection under Section 9 of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1996, 
prior to the institution of arbitration proceedings. Following the 
commencement of the arbitration, the defendant and the joint 
venture company raised a challenge to the jurisdiction of the 
Arbitral Tribunal, which the panel heard as a preliminary issue. 
The Tribunal rejected the jurisdictional objection. xxx 
 
131. Upon consideration of the entire matter, it was observed 
in Sulamérica that “In these circumstances it is clear to me that 
the law with which the agreement to arbitrate has its closest and 
most real connection is the law of the seat of arbitration, namely, 
the law of England”. It was thereafter concluded by the High 
Court that the English law is the proper law of the agreement to 
arbitrate. xxx 
133. We also do not find any merit in the submission of Dr 
Singhvi that the close and the most intimate connection test is 
wholly irrelevant in this case. It is true that the parties have 
specified all the three laws. But the Court in these proceedings 
is required to determine the seat of the arbitration, as the 
respondents have taken the plea that the term “venue” in the 
arbitration clause actually makes a reference to the “seat” of 
the arbitration.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

49. Thus, with the decision of Enercon (supra), the stage is now set to examine 
the decision of Roger Shashoua (1) (supra) to trace the evolution of the 
Shashoua Principle. b. 
The Shashoua Principle – ‘Venue’ to be construed as ‘Seat’ 
 
50. In Roger Shashoua (1) a Queen’s Bench Division (Commercial Court) of 
the England & Wales High Court held that when there is an express 
designation of the arbitration venue as London and no designation of any 
alternative place as the seat, combined with a supranational body of rules 
governing the arbitration and no other significant contrary indicia, the 
inexorable conclusion would be that such venue in-fact is the juridical seat. 
It observed that often in arbitration agreements it is much more likely that 
the law of the arbitration agreement will coincide with the curial law, and 
thus any express stipulation of the curial law would aid in determination of 
the juridical seat. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“26. The Shareholders Agreement provided that "the 
venue of arbitration shall be London, United Kingdom" 
whilst providing that the arbitration proceedings 
should be conducted in English in accordance with ICC 
Rules and that the governing law of the Shareholders 
Agreement itself would be the laws of India. It is 
accepted by both parties that the concept of the seat is 
one which is fundamental to the operation of the 
Arbitration Act and that the seat can be different from 
the venue in which arbitration hearings take place. It is 
certainly not unknown for hearings to take place in an 
arbitration in more than one jurisdiction for reasons of 
convenience of the parties or witnesses. The claimants 
submitted that in the ordinary way, however, if the 
arbitration agreement provided for a venue, that would 
constitute the seat. If a venue was named but there was 
to be a different juridical seat, it would be expected that 
the 
seat 
would 
also 
be 
specifically 
named. 
Notwithstanding the authorities cited by the defendant, 

I consider that there is great force in this. The 
defendant submits however that as "venue" is not 
synonymous with "seat", there is no designation of the 
seat of the arbitration by clause 14.4 and, in the 
absence of any designation, when regard is had to the 
parties' agreement and all the relevant circumstances, 
the juridical seat must be in India and the curial law 
must be Indian law. 
 
27. In my judgment, in an arbitration clause which 
provides for arbitration to be conducted in accordance 
with the Rules of the ICC in Paris (a supranational 
body of rules), a provision that the venue of the 
arbitration shall be London, United Kingdom does 
amount to the designation of a juridical seat. The 
parties have not simply provided for the location of 
hearings to be in London for the sake of convenience 
and there is indeed no suggestion that London would be 
convenient in itself, in the light of the governing law of 
the Shareholders Agreement, the nature and terms of 
that agreement and the nature of the disputes which 
were likely to arise and which did in fact arise 
(although the first claimant is resident in the UK). 
 
28. The defendant relies upon the nature of the 
Shareholders Agreement, the provision for the proper 
law of the agreement to be that of India, the application 
of the ICC Rules and the Interim Measures Application 
made by the claimants in India as pointing to Indian 
law as, not only the curial law, but also that of the 
agreement to arbitrate. Furthermore reliance is placed 
on clause 14.5 of the Shareholders Agreement which 
provides that each party is to bear its own costs of the 
arbitration, which, on its face, is inconsistent with 
section 60 of the Arbitration Act. It is said that this 
conflict, when seen objectively, must militate against 
the application of English law to the arbitration and to 
the seat being London. In my judgment none of these 
matters will bear the weight which the defendant seeks 
to put upon them. 
 
29. The defendant contends that the law of the 
agreement to arbitrate is Indian law, essentially 

because the proper law of the Shareholders Agreement 
is Indian law. As appears from the decided authorities 
however, although there have been dicta to this effect, 
recent decisions, where the focus has been on the seat 
of the arbitration and the agreement to arbitrate, 
establish that it is much more likely that the law of the 
arbitration agreement will coincide with the curial law. 
This does not therefore much assist the defendant and 
the argument that the nature of the Shareholders 
Agreement points to Indian law as the curial law is in 
reality no more than an argument that its nature points 
to Indian law as the substantive law of the Shareholders 
Agreement, which is in any event expressly provided. 
[...] 
 
xxx 
 
34. "London arbitration" is a well known phenomenon 
which is often chosen by foreign nationals with a 
different law, such as the law of New York, governing 
the substantive rights of the parties. This is because of 
the legislative framework and supervisory powers of 
the courts here which many parties are keen to adopt. 
When therefore there is an express designation of the 
arbitration venue as London and no designation of any 
alternative place as the seat, combined with a 
supranational body of rules governing the arbitration 
and no other significant contrary indicia, the 
inexorable conclusion is, to my mind, that London is the 
juridical seat and English law the curial law. In my 
judgment it is clear that either London has been 
designated by the parties to the arbitration agreement 
as the seat of the arbitration or, having regard to the 
parties' agreement and all the relevant circumstances, 
it is the seat to be determined in accordance with the 
final fall back provision of section 3 of the Arbitration 
Act.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
51. In Roger Shashoua (2) v. Mukesh Sharma reported in (2017) 
this Court held that the test that was applied in NTPC (supra) was no longer 

a good law in view of the repeal of Section 9(b) of the Act, 1961. It further, 
held that the principle enunciated in Roger Shashoua (1) had been expressly 
approved by the 5-Judge Bench decision of this Court in BALCO (supra). 
Accordingly, this Court applying the Shashoua Principle held that the 
mention of London in the arbitration agreement was not merely as a location 
but as a juridical seat. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“46. As stated earlier, in Shashoua Cooke, J., in the 
course of analysis, held that “London arbitration” is 
a well-known phenomenon which is often chosen by 
foreign nationals with a different law, such as the law 
of New York, governing the substantive rights of the 
parties and it is because of the legislative framework 
and supervisory powers of the courts here which many 
parties are keen to adopt. The learned Judge has 
further held that when there is an express designation 
of the arbitration venue as London and no designation 
of any alternative place as the seat, combined with a 
supranational body of rules governing the arbitration 
and no other significant contrary indicia, the 
inexorable conclusion is that London is the juridical 
seat and English law the curial law. xxx 
54. We had earlier extracted extensively from the said 
judgment, as we find, the Court after adverting to 
various aspects, has categorically held that the High 
Court had not followed the Shashoua principle. The 
various decisions referred to in Enercon (India) Ltd., 
the analysis made and the propositions deduced leads 
to an indubitable conclusion that Shashoua principle 
has been accepted by Enercon (India) Ltd. It is also to 
be noted that in Balco, the Constitution Bench has not 
merely 
reproduced 
few 
paragraphs 
from Shashoua but has also referred to other 
decisions on which Shashoua has placed reliance 
upon. As we notice, there is analysis of earlier 
judgments, though it does not specifically state that 
“propositions laid down in Shashoua are accepted”. 

On a clear reading, the ratio of the decision in Balco, 
in 
the 
ultimate 
eventuate, 
reflects 
that 
the Shashoua principle has been accepted and the 
two-Judge Bench in Enercon (India) Ltd., after 
succinctly analysing it, has stated that the said 
principles have been accepted by the Constitution 
Bench. Therefore, we are unable to accept the 
submission of Mr Chidambaram that the finding 
recorded 
in Enercon 

Ltd. that Shashoua principle 
has 
been 
accepted 
in Balco should be declared as per incuriam. xxx 
60. Tested on the aforesaid principle, we find that the 
question that arose in Balco and the discussion that 
has been made by the larger Bench relating 
to Shashoua and C v. D are squarely in the context of 
applicability of Part I or Part II of the Act. It will not 
be erroneous to say that the Constitution Bench has 
built the propositional pyramid on the basis or 
foundation 
of 
certain 
judgments 
and Shashoua and C v. D are two of them. It will be 
inappropriate to say that in Enercon (India) Ltd. the 
Court has cryptically observed that observations 
made in Shashoua have been approvingly quoted by 
the Court in Balco in para 110. We are inclined to 
think, 
as 
we 
are 
obliged 
to, 
that 
the Shashoua principle has been accepted in Balco as 
well as Enercon (India) Ltd. on proper ratiocination 
and, therefore, the submission advanced on this score 
by Mr Chidambaram, learned Senior Counsel for the 
respondent, is repelled. xxx 
72. It is worthy to note that the arbitration agreement 
is not silent as to what law and procedure is to be 
followed. On the contrary, Clause 14.1. lays down that 
the arbitration proceedings shall be in accordance 
with the Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration of ICC. 
In Enercon (India) Ltd., the two-Judge Bench 
referring to Shashoua case accepted the view of 
Cooke, J. that the phrase “venue of arbitration shall 
be in London, UK” was accompanied by the provision 
in the arbitration clause or arbitration to be 
conducted in accordance with the Rules of ICC in 

Paris. The two-Judge Bench accepted the Rules of 
ICC, Paris which is supranational body of Rules as 
has been noted by Cooke, J. and that is how it has 
accepted that the parties have not simply provided for 
the location of hearings to be in London. To elaborate, 
the distinction between the venue and the seat 
remains. But when a court finds that there is 
prescription for venue and something else, it has to be 
adjudged on the facts of each case to determine the 
juridical seat. As in the instant case, the agreement in 
question has been interpreted and it has been held that 
London is not mentioned as the mere location but the 
courts in London will have the jurisdiction, another 
interpretative perception as projected by the learned 
Senior Counsel is unacceptable. xxx 
74. It is apposite to note that the said decision has 
been discussed at length in Union of India v. Reliance 
Industries Ltd. The Court, in fact, reproduced the 
arbitration clause in Singer Co. and referred to the 
analysis made in the judgment and noted that 
notwithstanding the award, it was a foreign award, 
since the substantive law of the contract was Indian 
law and the arbitration law was part of the contract, 
the arbitration clause would be governed by Indian 
law and not by the Rules of International Chamber of 
Commerce. On that basis the Court held in Singer 
Co. that the mere fact that the venue chosen by the 
ICC Court or conduct of the arbitration proceeding 
was London, does not exclude the operation of the Act 
which dealt with the domestic awards under the 1940 
Act. and thereafter opined: 
 
“13. It can be seen that this Court 
in Singer case9 did not give effect to the 
difference between the substantive law of 
the contract and the law that governed 
the arbitration. Therefore, since a 
construction of Section 9(b) of the 
Foreign Awards Act led to the aforesaid 
situation and led to the doctrine of 
concurrent jurisdiction, the 1996 Act, 
while enacting Section 9(a) of the 

repealed Foreign Awards Act, 1961, in 
Section 51 thereof, was careful enough to 
omit Section 9(b) of the 1961 Act which, 
as stated hereinabove, excluded the 
Foreign Awards Act from applying to 
any 
award 
made 
on 
arbitration 
agreements governed by the law of India. 
 
14. This being the case, the theory of 
concurrent jurisdiction was expressly 
given a go-by with the dropping of 
Section 9(b) of the Foreign Awards Act, 
while enacting Part II of the Arbitration 
Act, 1996, which repealed all the three 
earlier laws and put the law of 
arbitration into one statute, albeit in four 
different parts.” 

75. We respectfully concur with the said view, for 
there is no reason to differ. Apart from that, we have 
already held that the agreement in question having 
been interpreted in a particular manner by the English 
courts and the said interpretation having gained 
acceptation by this Court, the inescapable conclusion 
is that the courts in India have no jurisdiction.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
52. This Court in its decision in BGS SGS SOMA JV v. NHPC LTD., reported 
in (2020) held that wherever in the arbitration agreement there is 
designation of a place of arbitration as ‘venue’ of the ‘arbitral proceedings’, 
then such place effectively is the ‘seat’ of arbitration. This is because, the 
expression ‘arbitral proceedings’ does not refer to individual hearings but 
rather the whole arbitration process including the making of the award. It 
further held that where the parties have anchored the arbitral proceedings to 

one fixed location or place, it would indicate that the parties intended such 
place to be the seat of arbitration. It held that where the place designated as 
venue in the arbitration agreement is coupled with there being no other 
significant contrary indicia that such place is merely a venue, then such place 
would be construed as the ‘seat’ of the arbitral proceedings. This Court also 
added that the international context where a supranational body of rules is to 
govern the arbitration in or in the national context the laws of a particular 
country then this would further be an indicia that the ‘venue’ designated in 
the arbitration agreement is really the seat of arbitration. The relevant 
observations read as under: - 
“82. On a conspectus of the aforesaid judgments, it 
may be concluded that whenever there is the 
designation of a place of arbitration in an arbitration 
clause as being the “venue” of the arbitration 
proceedings, the expression “arbitration proceedings” 
would make it clear that the “venue” is really the 
“seat” of the arbitral proceedings, as the aforesaid 
expression does not include just one or more individual 
or particular hearing, but the arbitration proceedings 
as a whole, including the making of an award at that 
place. This language has to be contrasted with 
language such as “tribunals are to meet or have 
witnesses, experts or the parties” where only hearings 
are to take place in the “venue”, which may lead to the 
conclusion, other things being equal, that the venue so 
stated is not the “seat” of arbitral proceedings, but only 
a convenient place of meeting. Further, the fact that the 
arbitral proceedings “shall be held” at a particular 
venue would also indicate that the parties intended to 
anchor arbitral proceedings to a particular place, 
signifying thereby, that that place is the seat of the 
arbitral proceedings. This, coupled with there being no 
other significant contrary indicia that the stated venue 

is merely a “venue” and not the “seat” of the arbitral 
proceedings, would then conclusively show that such a 
clause designates a “seat” of the arbitral proceedings. 
In an international context, if a supranational body of 
rules is to govern the arbitration, this would further be 
an indicia that “the venue”, so stated, would be the seat 
of the arbitral proceedings. In a national context, this 
would be replaced by the Arbitration Act, 1996 as 
applying to the “stated venue”, which then becomes the 
“seat” for the purposes of arbitration.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

53. Thus, this Court in BGS SGS SOMA (supra) laid down a three-condition test 
as to when ‘venue’ can be construed as ‘seat’ of arbitration. The conditions 
that are required to be fulfilled are as under: - 
i. The arbitration agreement or clause in question should designate or 
mention only one place; 
ii. Such place must have anchored the arbitral proceedings i.e., the arbitral 
proceedings must have been fixed to that place alone without any scope 
of change; 
iii. There must be no other significant contrary indicia to show that the place 
designated is merely the venue and not the seat. 

Where the aforesaid conditions are fulfilled, then the place that has 
been designated as ‘venue’ can be construed as the ‘seat’ of arbitration. It 
is clarified that, while applying the aforesaid test, it must be borne in mind 
that where a supranational body of rules has been stipulated in an 

arbitration agreement or clause, such stipulation is not to be regarded as a 
contrary indicium, such stipulation does not mean that no seat has been 
designated rather such stipulation is a positive indicia that the place so 
designated is actually the ‘seat’. 
 
54. The aforesaid test was approvingly applied by this Court in Mankastu 
Impex Private Ltd. v. Airvisual Ltd. reported in (2020) and it 
was held that where the reference to a place in the arbitration agreement is 
not simply as “venue” and rather a reference as place for final resolution 
by arbitration, such place shall be construed as the seat of arbitration. The 
relevant observations read as under: - 
“20. It is well settled that “seat of arbitration” and 
“venue 
of 
arbitration” 
cannot 
be 
used 
interchangeably. It has also been established that 
mere expression “place of arbitration” cannot be the 
basis to determine the intention of the parties that 
they have intended that place as the “seat” of 
arbitration. The intention of the parties as to the 
“seat” should be determined from other clauses in 
the agreement and the conduct of the parties. 
 
21. In the present case, the arbitration agreement 
entered into between the parties provides Hong Kong 
as the place of arbitration. The agreement between 
the parties choosing “Hong Kong” as the place of 
arbitration by itself will not lead to the conclusion 
that the parties have chosen Hong Kong as the seat 
of arbitration. The words, “the place of arbitration” 
shall be “Hong Kong”, have to be read along with 
Clause 17.2. Clause 17.2 provides that “… any 
dispute, controversy, difference or 
relating to MoU shall be referred to and finally 

resolved by arbitration administered in Hong 
Kong….”. On a plain reading of the arbitration 
agreement, it is clear that the reference to Hong 
Kong as “place of arbitration” is not a simple 
reference as the “venue” for the arbitral 
proceedings; but a reference to Hong Kong is for 
final resolution by arbitration administered in Hong 
Kong. The agreement between the parties that the 
dispute “shall be referred to and finally resolved by 
arbitration administered in Hong Kong” clearly 
suggests that the parties have agreed that the 
arbitration be seated at Hong Kong and that laws of 
Hong Kong shall govern the arbitration proceedings 
as well as have power of judicial review over the 
arbitration award. 
 
22. As pointed out earlier, Clause 17.2 of MoU 
stipulates that the dispute or relating 
to 
MoU 
including 
the 
existence, 
validity, 
interpretation, breach or termination thereof or any 
dispute or relating to it shall be 
referred to and finally resolved by the arbitration 
administered in Hong Kong. The words in Clause 
17.2 that “arbitration administered in Hong Kong” 
is an indicia that the seat of arbitration is at Hong 
Kong. Once the parties have chosen “Hong Kong” 
as the place of arbitration to be administered in 
Hong Kong, the laws of Hong Kong would govern 
the arbitration. The Indian courts have no 
jurisdiction for appointment of the arbitrator.” 
 (Emphasis supplied) 
iii. 
Whether the Seat of Arbitration in the underlying Distributorship 
Agreement is in India? 
 
55. Now coming to the facts of the present case, Clause 26 of the aforesaid 
Distributorship Agreement stipulates that the arbitration shall be subject to 
UAE Arbitration and Conciliation rules. The aforesaid arbitration clause 

further designates only one place i.e., Dubai, UAE as the venue of 
arbitration. 
 
56. In view of the law laid down by this Court in BGS SGS SOMA (supra), since 
only one place has been designated in the arbitration clause, and such place 
has been categorically fixed inasmuch as there is no scope for the place 
designated as venue to change in terms of Clause 26, and furthermore, the 
said clause has explicitly stipulated that the curial law would be the UAE 
Arbitration and Conciliation rules and there being no other contrary indicia 
let alone a significant contrary indicia, we are of the considered opinion that 
the Dubai, UAE has not been designated merely as a venue but rather as the 
juridical seat of arbitration in terms of clause 26 of the Distributorship 
Agreement. 
 
57. We are further reinforced in our findings in light of the Shashoua Principle 
as laid down in Roger Shashoua (1) (supra) wherein it was held that more 
often than not the law of the arbitration agreement and by it the seat of the 
arbitration coincides with the curial law. Since the parties herein have 
expressly chosen the curial law of arbitration to be the UAE Arbitration and 
Conciliation rules, there is no second opinion that the seat of arbitration in 
the underlying Distributorship Agreement is Dubai, UAE and not India. 

58. It has been contended by the petitioner herein that, no one fixed place or seat 
of arbitration has been designated under the Distributorship Agreement since 
Clause 27 of the aforesaid Agreement stipulates that it shall be subject to the 
non-exclusive jurisdiction of the Dubai Courts. It has been submitted that 
since the parties had agreed not to confer exclusive jurisdiction to courts in 
Dubai, neither of the parties to the agreement construed the arbitration clause 
as designating courts in Dubai as the seat of arbitration. It was also contended 
that the non-exclusive jurisdiction clause had been specifically incorporated 
to confer jurisdiction on other courts too. 
 
59. In Enercon (supra), this Court held that the ‘seat’ or the situs of arbitration 
is a crucial location as it determines the courts that will have exclusive 
jurisdiction to oversee the arbitration proceedings. The relevant observations 
read as under: - 
“97. This now clears the decks for the crucial question i.e. is the “seat” of arbitration in London or in India. This is 
necessarily so as the location of the seat will determine 
the courts that will have exclusive jurisdiction to oversee 
the arbitration proceedings. Therefore, understandably, 
much debate has been generated before us on the question 
whether the use of the phrase “venue shall be in London” 
actually refers to designation of the seat of arbitration in 
London.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

60. Similarly, in Indus Mobile Distribution (P) Ltd. v. Datawind Innovations 
(P) Ltd reported in (2017), this Court held that in arbitration law, 

the moment ‘seat’ is determined, it would be akin to an exclusive jurisdiction 
clause whereby only the jurisdictional courts of that seat will have the 
jurisdiction to regulate the arbitral proceedings. It further held that where 
more than one court has jurisdiction, it is open for the parties to exclude all 
other courts and choose to submit to the jurisdiction of one court alone. The 
relevant observations read as under: - 
“19. A conspectus of all the aforesaid provisions shows 
that the moment the seat is designated, it is akin to an 
exclusive jurisdiction clause. On the facts of the present 
case, it is clear that the seat of arbitration is Mumbai and 
Clause 19 further makes it clear that jurisdiction 
exclusively vests in the Mumbai courts. Under the Law 
of Arbitration, unlike the Code of Civil Procedure which 
applies to suits filed in courts, a reference to “seat” is a 
concept by which a neutral venue can be chosen by the 
parties to an arbitration clause. The neutral venue may 
not in the classical sense have jurisdiction — that is, no 
part of the cause of action may have arisen at the neutral 
venue and neither would any of the provisions of 
Sections 16 to 21 CPC be attracted. In arbitration law 
however, as has been held above, the moment “seat” is 
determined, the fact that the seat is at Mumbai would vest 
Mumbai courts with exclusive jurisdiction for purposes 
of regulating arbitral proceedings the 
agreement between the parties. 
 
20. It is well settled that where more than one court has 
jurisdiction, it is open for the parties to exclude all other 
courts. …” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
61. In Swastik Gases (P) Ltd. v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd., reported in (2013), it was held that in a jurisdictional clause even if words like 
“alone”, “only”, “exclusive” or “exclusive jurisdiction” have not been used 

it would make no material difference as to the exclusive nature of the 
jurisdiction conferred by such clause. This Court observed that this is 
because, the moment a jurisdiction is conferred, the maxim expressio unius 
est exclusio alterius i.e., expression of one is the exclusion of another 
comes into play, and it would be as if its an exclusive clause if there is 
nothing to indicate the contrary. The relevant observations read as under: - 
 
“31. In the instant case, the appellant does not dispute 
that part of cause of action has arisen in Kolkata. What 
appellant says is that part of cause of action has also 
arisen in Jaipur and, therefore, the Chief Justice of the 
Rajasthan High Court or the designate Judge has 
jurisdiction to consider the application made by the 
appellant for the appointment of an arbitrator under 
Section 11. Having regard to Section 11(12)(b) and 
Section 2(e) of the 1996 Act read with Section 20(c) of 
the Code, there remains no doubt that the Chief Justice 
or the designate Judge of the Rajasthan High Court has 
jurisdiction in the matter. The question is, whether 
parties by virtue of Clause 18 of the agreement have 
agreed to exclude the jurisdiction of the courts at 
Jaipur or, in other words, whether in view of Clause 18 
of the agreement, the jurisdiction of the Chief Justice of 
the Rajasthan High Court has been excluded? 
 
32. For answer to the above question, we have to see 
the effect of the jurisdiction clause in the agreement 
which provides that the agreement shall be subject to 
jurisdiction of the courts at Kolkata. It is a fact that 
whilst providing for jurisdiction clause in the 
agreement the words like “alone”, “only”, “exclusive” 
or “exclusive jurisdiction” have not been used but this, 
in our view, is not decisive and does not make any 
material difference. The intention of the parties—by 
having Clause 18 in the agreement—is clear and 
unambiguous that the courts at Kolkata shall have 
jurisdiction which means that the courts at Kolkata 

alone shall have jurisdiction. It is so because for 
construction of jurisdiction clause, like Clause 18 in the 
agreement, the maxim expressio unius est exclusio 
alterius comes into play as there is nothing to indicate 
to the contrary. This legal maxim means that expression 
of one is the exclusion of another. By making a 
provision that the agreement is subject to the 
jurisdiction of the courts at Kolkata, the parties have 
impliedly excluded the jurisdiction of other courts. 
Where the contract specifies the jurisdiction of the 
courts at a particular place and such courts have 
jurisdiction to deal with the matter, we think that an 
inference may be drawn that parties intended to exclude 
all other courts. A clause like this is not hit by Section 
23 of the Contract Act at all. Such clause is neither 
forbidden by law nor it is against the public policy. It 
does not offend Section 28 of the Contract Act in any 
manner. xxx 
55. It will be seen from the above decisions that except 
in A.B.C. Laminart [A.B.C. Laminart (P) Ltd. v. A.P. 
Agencies, (1989) ] where this Court declined 
to exclude the jurisdiction of the courts in Salem, in all 
other similar cases an inference was drawn (explicitly 
or 
implicitly) 
that 
the 
parties 
intended 
the 
implementation of the exclusion clause as it reads 
notwithstanding the absence of the words “only”, 
“alone” or “exclusively” and the like. The reason for 
this is quite obvious. The parties would not have 
included the ouster clause in their agreement were it 
not to carry any meaning at all. The very fact that the 
ouster clause is included in the agreement between the 
parties conveys their clear intention to exclude the 
jurisdiction of courts other than those mentioned in the 
clause concerned. Conversely, if the parties had 
intended that all courts where the cause of action or a 
part thereof had arisen would continue to have 
jurisdiction over the dispute, the exclusion clause 
would not have found a place in the agreement between 
the parties.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 

62. As discussed in the foregoing paragraphs, since the Distributorship 
Agreement already designates Dubai, UAE as the seat of arbitration, the 
same would be akin to an exclusive jurisdiction clause with only the courts 
in Dubai, UAE having the jurisdiction over such arbitration in view of the 
decision of this Court in Indus Mobile Distribution (supra). 
 
63. Even if it is assumed that the aforesaid clause does not confer jurisdiction 
exclusively to the courts where the seat of arbitration is situated, still this 
Court will not have jurisdiction to entertain the present Section 11 petition. 
This is because, in view of the law laid down in BALCO (supra) and 
Reliance Industries (supra), Part I of this Act, 1996 will not be applicable 
where the seat of arbitration is outside India or where the law governing 
the arbitration agreement is not Indian laws. In the present case as 
discussed in the foregoing paragraphs, the Distributorship Agreement, 
more particularly Clauses 26 & 27 respectively makes it abundantly clear 
that the seat of arbitration is in fact Dubai, UAE, furthermore both the law 
governing the contract and the curial law are not Indian laws. In such 
scenario, even if the argument of the petitioner that the non-exclusive 
jurisdiction clause had been incorporated to confer jurisdiction on other 
courts too is accepted in toto, even then this Court will not have any 
jurisdiction to exercise its powers under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 as 
neither the seat is India nor is the arbitration agreement governed by Indian 

laws. Since Part I of the Act, 1996 is inapplicable, the parties cannot confer 
any jurisdiction to a court which otherwise has no jurisdiction even if such 
conferment is permissible as per the Distributorship Agreement. 
 
64. Clause 27 of the aforesaid Distributorship Agreement reads as follows: 
“This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with 
the laws of UAE and shall be subject to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of 
the Dubai Courts”. The expression “non-exclusive jurisdiction of the 
Dubai Courts” occurring in the said clause cannot be singled out and 
construed devoid of its context. The said clause provides the law governing 
the entire Distributorship Agreement and the stipulation that it shall be 
subject to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the Dubai Court only relates to 
the substantive agreement and not the arbitration agreement contained in 
the preceding clause. The said clause can at best be construed to stipulate 
that any substantive part pertaining to such agreement which might not fall 
within the scope of ‘disputes’ covered under Clause 26 i.e.., those disputes 
which are not arbitrable between the parties will then in turn be amenable 
to the jurisdiction of Dubai Courts or any other courts. The said clause in 
no manner can be construed to mean that there exists no ‘seat’ or ‘situs’ of 
arbitration and that parties merely because there is no court that has been 
conferred exclusive jurisdiction in respect of the said agreement. It is the 

seat of arbitration which determines which court will have exclusive 
jurisdiction and not vice-versa. a. 
Doctrine of Forum non Conveniens 
 
65. The aforesaid may be looked at from one another angle, through the 
doctrine of forum non conveniens. The term ‘forum non conveniens’ is a 
latin term which means “an inconvenient forum” and provides that a court 
which otherwise might have jurisdiction may decline jurisdiction over a 
case if there is a more appropriate forum available to the parties, and is 
typically invoked in respect of cross-border subject-matters that are 
amenable to multiple concurrent jurisdictions. Depending upon the nature 
of the dispute, the subject-matter involves and the parties thereto, the courts 
by invoking this doctrine proceed to determine which one of the available 
forums may be more convenient and fair for entertaining and adjudicating 
the matter. 
 
66. In order to apply the doctrine of forum non conveniens an dequate 
alternative forum must exist where the subject-matter may be espoused. 
The alternative forum must be capable of providing a fair and adequate 
remedy for the dispute, however this does not mean that the alternative 
forum must offer identical remedies, and this doctrine may be applied as 

long as the other alternative forum offers a reasonably fair process of 
remedy and is more convenient or appropriate in the opinion of the court 
invoking the doctrine. Courts in doing so must weigh the relative 
importance of private and public interest factors. In doing so, they exercise 
a high level of discretion and often issue rulings that are fact-specific. 
 
67. In Spiliada Maritime Corp v. Cansulex Ltd. reported in [1987] AC 460, 
the House of Lords while considering a non-exclusive jurisdiction clause 
laid down the test for applying the doctrine of forum non conveniens to 
decline jurisdiction on the grounds that another forum is more appropriate. 
It held that where the court is satisfied that there is some other available 
forum, having competent jurisdiction, which is more appropriate to decide 
the dispute the courts can decline its jurisdiction or stay the proceedings 
before it in favour of a more suitable forum for the interests of all the parties 
and the ends of justice. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“The existence of a non-exclusive jurisdiction clause is 
a factor, but it is not conclusive. It must be weighed 
alongside other considerations of convenience and 
connection to determine the appropriate forum. 
 
The basic principle is that a stay will only be granted 
on the ground of forum non conveniens where the court 
is satisfied that there is some other available forum, 
having competent jurisdiction, which is the appropriate 
forum for the trial of the action, i.e., in which the case 
may be tried more suitably for the interests of all the 
parties and the ends of justice. The principle of forum 
non conveniens allows discretion to stay proceedings in 
favor of a clearly more appropriate forum unless justice 

requires the case to proceed in the chosen forum due to 
special circumstances. 
 
If the court concludes at the end of stage one that there 
is another clearly more appropriate forum, it will 
ordinarily grant a stay unless the plaintiff can show that 
there are special circumstances by reason of which 
justice requires that the trial should nevertheless take 
place in England. While the plaintiff’s choice of forum 
is significant, it is not decisive; the court must weigh it 
against factors that might inconvenience the defendant 
or make the chosen forum less appropriate for the 
interests of justice. 
 
If the defendant shows another available forum is more 
suitable, then the court should only retain jurisdiction 
if the plaintiff can show that substantial justice would 
not be achieved in the alternative forum. In determining 
whether there is another forum which is more 
appropriate for the trial of the action, the court will 
look for the forum with which the action has the most 
real and substantial connection.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 

68. In Modi Entertainment Network v. W.S.G. Cricket Pte. Ltd. reported in 
(2003), this Court observed that while construing a non-
exclusive jurisdiction clause, where more forums than one are available, 
the court in exercise of its discretion will examine as to which is the 
appropriate forum (forum conveniens) having regard to the convenience of 
the parties. It further observed that Where parties have agreed, under a non-
exclusive jurisdiction clause, to approach a neutral foreign forum and be 
governed by the law applicable to it for the resolution of their disputes 

arising under the contract, ordinarily should not be entertained as s it shall 
be presumed that the parties have thought over their convenience and all 
other relevant factors before submitting to the non-exclusive jurisdiction 
of the court of their choice which cannot be treated just as an alternative 
forum. It also held that the burden of establishing that the forum of choice 
is a forum non-conveniens or the proceedings therein are oppressive or 
vexatious would be on the party so contending to aver and prove the same. 
The relevant observations read as under: - 
“24. From the above discussion the following 
principles emerge: 
 
(1) In exercising discretion to grant an anti-suit 
injunction the court must be satisfied of the following 
aspects: 
 
(a) the defendant, against whom injunction is sought, 
is amenable to the personal jurisdiction of the court; 
 
(b) if the injunction is declined, the ends of justice will 
be defeated and injustice will be perpetuated; and 
 
(c) the principle of comity — respect for the court in 
which the commencement or continuance of 
action/proceeding is sought to be restrained — must 
be borne in mind. 
 
(2) In a case where more forums than one are 
available, the court in exercise of its discretion to 
grant anti-suit injunction will examine as to which is 
the appropriate forum (forum conveniens) having 
regard to the convenience of the parties and may grant 
anti-suit injunction in regard to proceedings which 
are oppressive or vexatious or in a forum non-
conveniens. 

(3) Where jurisdiction of a court is invoked on the 
basis of jurisdiction clause in a contract, the recitals 
therein in regard to exclusive or non-exclusive 
jurisdiction of the court of choice of the parties are not 
determinative but are relevant factors and when a 
question arises as to the nature of jurisdiction agreed 
to between the parties the court has to decide the same 
on a true interpretation of the contract on the facts and 
in the circumstances of each case. 
 
(4) A court of natural jurisdiction will not normally 
grant anti-suit injunction against a defendant before 
it where parties have agreed to submit to the exclusive 
jurisdiction of a court including a foreign court, a 
forum of their choice in regard to the commencement 
or continuance of proceedings in the court of choice, 
save in an exceptional case for good and sufficient 
reasons, with a view to prevent injustice in 
circumstances such as which permit a contracting 
party to be relieved of the burden of the contract; or 
since the date of the contract the circumstances or 
subsequent events have made it impossible for the 
party seeking injunction to prosecute the case in the 
court of choice because the essence of the jurisdiction 
of the court does not exist or because of a vis major or 
force majeure and the like. 
 
(5) Where parties have agreed, under a non-exclusive 
jurisdiction clause, to approach a neutral foreign 
forum and be governed by the law applicable to it for 
the resolution of their disputes arising under the 
contract, ordinarily no anti-suit injunction will be 
granted in regard to proceedings in such a forum 
conveniens and favoured forum as it shall be 
presumed that the parties have thought over their 
convenience and all other relevant factors before 
submitting to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the 
court of their choice which cannot be treated just as 
an alternative forum. 
 
(6) A party to the contract containing jurisdiction 
clause 
cannot 
normally 
be 
prevented 
from 
approaching the court of choice of the parties as it 

would amount to aiding breach of the contract; yet 
when one of the parties to the jurisdiction clause 
approaches the court of choice in which exclusive or 
non-exclusive jurisdiction is created, the proceedings 
in that court cannot per se be treated as vexatious or 
oppressive nor can the court be said to be forum non-
conveniens. 
 
(7) The burden of establishing that the forum of choice 
is a forum non-conveniens or the proceedings therein 
are oppressive or vexatious would be on the party so 
contending to aver and prove the same.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 
 
69. What can be discerned from above is that where more than one forum is 
available, it is the discretion of the court to entertain the matter by 
examining as to which is the appropriate forum more suited for the interests 
of all the parties and the ends of justice. Ordinarily, the burden to prove 
that the court or forum in seisin of the matter is an inconvenient forum or 
the proceeding therein are oppressive or vexatious lies on the party 
contending the same, yet the choice of forum by the other party is not 
decisive, and that it is for the court to determine whether the proceedings 
before it might be an inconvenience to the interests of the parties or less 
appropriate for the subject-matter in question. 
 
70. Thus, even if it is assumed that Clause 27 of the aforesaid Distributorship 
Agreement conferred concurrent jurisdiction to both the courts in UAE and 
the other courts and thus, the petitioner herein was well-within its right to 

approach this Court in terms of the non-exclusive jurisdiction clause for the 
purpose of appointment of arbitrator, this Court can decline to exercise its 
jurisdiction if there exists a more appropriate forum. As discussed in the 
foregoing paragraphs, the seat of arbitration in terms of the aforesaid 
Distributorship Agreement is Dubai, UAE, both the law governing the 
contract and the curial law are the laws of UAE, the respondent no. 1 herein 
with whom the petitioner’s credit account lies is also situated in Dubai, even 
the venue of arbitration is Dubai, thus by all reasons of logic the more 
appropriate forum suitable for appointment of arbitrator is Dubai, UAE and 
not the courts of India. 

E. 
CONCLUSION 
 
71. From the above exposition of law, the following position of law emerges: - 

Part I of the Act, 1996 and the provisions thereunder only applies 
where the arbitration takes place in India i.e., where either (I) the seat 
of arbitration is in India OR (II) the law governing the arbitration 
agreement are the laws of India. 

Arbitration agreements executed after 06.09.2012 where the seat of 
arbitration is outside India, Part I of the Act, 1996 and the provisions 
thereunder will not be applicable and would fall beyond the 
jurisdiction of Indian courts. 

(iii) Even those arbitration agreements that have been executed prior to 
06.09.2012 Part I of the Act, 1996 will not be applicable, if its 
application has been excluded by the parties in the arbitration 
agreement either explicitly by designating the seat of arbitration 
outside India or implicitly by choosing the law governing the 
agreement to be any other law other than Indian law. 

The moment ‘seat’ is determined, it would be akin to an exclusive 
jurisdiction clause whereby only the jurisdictional courts of that seat 
alone will have the jurisdiction to regulate the arbitral proceedings. 
The notional doctrine of concurrent jurisdiction has been expressly 
rejected and overruled by this Court in its subsequent decisions. 

The ‘Closest Connection Test’ for determining the seat of arbitration 
by identifying the law with which the agreement to arbitrate has its 
closest and most real connection is no longer a viable criterion for 
determination of the seat or situs of arbitration in view of the Shashoua 
Principle. The seat of arbitration cannot be determined by formulaic 
and unpredictable application of choice of law rules based on abstract 
connecting factors to the underlying contract. Even if the law 
governing the contract has been expressly stipulated, it does not mean 

that the law governing the arbitration agreement and by extension the 
seat of arbitration will be the same as the lex contractus. 

The more appropriate criterion for determining the seat of arbitration 
in view of the subsequent decisions of this Court is that where in an 
arbitration agreement there is an express designation of a place of 
arbitration anchoring the arbitral proceedings to such place, and there 
being no other significant contrary indicia to show otherwise, such 
place would be the ‘seat’ of arbitration even if it is designated in the 
nomenclature of ‘venue’ in the arbitration agreement. 
 
(vii) Where the curial law of a particular place or supranational body of 
rules has been stipulated in an arbitration agreement or clause, such 
stipulation is a positive indicium that the place so designated is 
actually the ‘seat’, as more often than not the law governing the 
arbitration agreement and by extension the seat of the arbitration tends 
to coincide with the curial law. 
 
(viii) Merely because the parties have stipulated a venue without any 
express choice of a seat, the courts cannot sideline the specific choices 
made by the parties in the arbitration agreement by imputing these 
stipulations as inadvertence at the behest of the parties as regards the 

seat of arbitration. Deference has to be shown to each and every choice 
and stipulations made by the parties, afterall the courts are only a 
conduit or means to arbitration, and the sum and substance of the 
arbitration is derived from the choices of the parties and their 
intentions contained in the arbitration agreement. It is the duty of the 
court to give weight and due consideration to each choice made by the 
parties and to construe the arbitration agreement in a manner that 
aligns the most with such stipulations and intentions. 

We do not for a moment say that, the Closest Connection Test has no 
application whatsoever, where there is no express or implied 
designation of a place of arbitration in the agreement either in the form 
of ‘venue’ or ‘curial law’, there the closest connection test may be 
more suitable for determining the seat of arbitration. 

Where two or more possible places that have been designated in the 
arbitration agreement either expressly or impliedly, equally appear to 
be the seat of arbitration, then in such cases the conflict may be 
resolved through recourse to the Doctrine of Forum Non Conveniens, 
and the seat be then determined based on which one of the possible 
places may be the most appropriate forum keeping in mind the nature 
of the agreement, the dispute at hand, the parties themselves and their 

intentions. The place most suited for the interests of all the parties and 
the ends of justice may be determined as the ‘seat’ of arbitration. 
 
72. Thus, for all the foregoing reasons, we have reached the conclusion that 
the present petition under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 is not maintainable 
as neither the seat of arbitration is India nor is the arbitration agreement 
governed by laws of India. 
 
73. In the result, the present petition filed by the petitioner fails and is hereby 
dismissed. 
 
74. The parties shall bear their own costs. 
75. Pending application(s), if any, also stand disposed of.... CJI. 
(Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud)... J. 
(J.B. Pardiwala)... J. 
(Manoj Misra) 
 
New Delhi; 
7th November, 2024.