IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

HARYANA STAFF SELECTION COMMISSION 
APPELLANT(S)

VERSUS

SUBHASH CHAND & ORS. 
RESPONDENT(S)
JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.
Despite service, none appears for the second and the third
respondents.
2.
Heard the learned counsel appearing for the appellant and the
learned senior counsel appearing for the first respondent.
3.
The appellant-Haryana Staff Selection Commission published an
advertisement on 28th June, 2015 inviting applications for the posts
of (PGT)-H.E.S.II (Group-B Services). The closing date for the
submission of online applications was 21st September, 2015. The
last date for the deposit of fee by the candidates was 24th
September, 2015. The advertisement itself specifies the posts
reserved for various categories, including SBC (5%) and EBPGC (5%).
The first respondent specifically applied under the SBC category
for the post of PGT in Political Science. It appears that on 29th
August, 2018, the first respondent was informed that he was
qualified in the written test and, therefore, he was called for

scrutiny of documents. 
 In the result declared on
17th September, 2018, the first respondent was shown in the General
category. The first respondent secured total 118 marks. The cut-
off in the General category was 129 marks and, therefore, the first
respondent was not selected.
4.
It appears that the Government of Haryana issued
communications dated 21st February, 2018 and 1st June, 2018,
recording therein that in view of the order passed by the High
Court in CWP No.18514/2016, the Notification dated 27th September,
2013, should not be given effect. The said Notification dated
27th September, 2013 was for providing a quota to the candidates
belonging to the SBC category.
5.
On 5th June, 2017, a certificate was issued to the first
respondent recording that he belongs to the EBPGC category. On 29th
August, 2018, the first respondent filed a representation to
consider the change of his category to the EBPGC category. Perhaps,
this representation was made considering the stand that the quota
notified for SBC category was merged into the General category. The
above representation was followed by one more representation on 1st
October, 2018. 
6.
As the representation was not considered, on 3rd October, 2018,
the first respondent filed a 
(O&M) under Article 226 of the Constitution of India before the
High Court. While issuing notice on the said writ petition, on 8th
October, 2018, one post was ordered to be kept reserved. The

learned Single Judge vide judgment and order dated 10th December,
2018, referred to the interim order dated 8th October, 2018 and
observed that the State of Haryana did not dispute the rest of the
conditions of eligibility, except the category. A direction was
issued by the High Court to grant appointment to the first
respondent in General Caste (EBPGC) category. A Letters Patent
Appeal being LPA No.1199/2019 was preferred by the appellant before
the Division Bench of the High Court. The Letters Patent Appeal
was dismissed by the impugned judgment dated 24th March, 2023.
7.
The submission of the learned counsel appearing for the
appellant is that the first respondent never applied under the
quota reserved for the EBPGC category before the cut-off date and,
in fact, he was granted the certificate long after the cut-off
date. The learned counsel submitted that in view of the directions
issued by the High Court on 27th June, 2015 and 26th May, 2016, the
State Government was restrained from acting upon the Notifications
dated 28th February, 2013 and 24th January, 2013. Thus, the State
Government was prevented from giving effect to the reservation for
the SBC category quota. Therefore, the applications of those
candidates who had applied under the SBC category quota were
ordered to be considered against the General category. The learned
counsel further submitted that the first respondent did not score
enough marks to get appointment in the General category and,
therefore, he was not selected. The learned counsel also submitted
that the appellant has acted in terms of the directions issued by
the High Court.

8.
We have also heard the learned senior counsel appearing for
the first respondent.
9.
The first order of the High Court directing the State
Government not to give any employment in the Government service and
admission in the educational institutions against the SBC category
was passed on 27th July, 2015 in CWP No.9132/2015 (Ved Prakash and
another vs. State of Haryana and others). A perusal of the said
order (Annexure R/5 to the counter affidavit) shows that the State
Government was represented by the learned Advocate General when the
said order was passed. It is pertinent to note that the
advertisement subject matter of controversy was issued on
28th June, 2015 and the last date for submitting online applications
was 21st September, 2015. Obviously, it was the duty of the State
Government to instruct the appellant to modify the advertisement
and postpone the last date of submission of the online
applications. Having full knowledge of the order dated 27th July,
2015 of the High Court, the State Government and the appellant took
no steps, therefore, the candidates like the first respondent
applied under the SBC category quota.
10.
Even assuming that the State Government and the appellant
overlooked the order dated 27th July, 2015 of the High Court, even
after noticing the said order, the State Government could have
directed the appellant to cancel the process and issue a fresh
advertisement. We may note here that though the cut-off date for
submitting the online applications was 21st September, 2015, the

result of the written test was declared nearly three years
thereafter on 29th August, 2018. It is because of the default on
the part of the State Government, the first respondent was
prevented from making an application in the EBPGC category. These
aspects have been considered by the Division Bench of the High
Court in the impugned judgment. In fact, in the impugned judgment,
it is noted that the District Administration started receiving the
applications for issuance of EBPGC certificates only when the
instructions were issued on 7th June, 2017 by the Chief Secretary of
the Government of Haryana. Therefore, the finding of fact recorded
by the Division Bench is that the first respondent cannot be blamed
for claiming reservation under the SBC category quota and for not
claiming reservation under the EBPGC category quota. It is in the
light of these peculiar facts that the Division Bench has confirmed
the judgment of the learned Single Judge. As noted earlier, the
learned Single Judge has directed the appointment of the first
respondent to be made against one post reserved under the interim
order. At this stage, we may note here that the contention of the
learned senior counsel appearing for the first respondent is that
about 11 seats belonging to the EBPGC category quota earmarked
under the same advertisement are still vacant.
11.
Considering the fact that the first respondent was placed in a
very peculiar position due to the default on the part of the State
Government, the learned Single Judge has passed an order for
accommodating the first respondent. The order is just and
equitable. 

12.
In view of the peculiar facts which we have discussed above,
we are of the view that no interference with the impugned judgments
is called for. While we say so, we direct that the appointment
order be issued to the first respondent in terms of the impugned
judgment dated 10th December, 2018 of the learned Single Judge
within a period of one month from the date on which a copy of this
judgment is uploaded on the website of this Court. We clarify that
the first respondent shall not be entitled to back wages. However,
the period from 10th December, 2018 till the date on which the
appointment order is issued, shall be taken into consideration for
grant of further promotions, if any, and for retiral benefits.
13.
Subject to the above directions, the Appeal is dismissed.