IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 
 
IN THE MATTER OF: - 
KIRLOSKAR FERROUS INDUSTRIES LIMITED & ANR …PETITIONER(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
UNION OF INDIA & ORS. 
 
JUDGMENT 
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.: 
 
1. The petitioners have invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 32 of 
the Constitution inter-alia seeking to challenge the validity of the Explanation 
to Rule 38 of the Mineral (Other than Atomic and Hydrocarbons Energy 
Minerals) Concession Rules, 2016 (for short, the “MCR, 2016”) and the 
Explanation to Rule 45(8)(a) of the Mineral Conservation and Development 
Rules, 2017 (for short, the “MCDR, 2017”) that stipulates the computation of 
royalty to be levied for the extraction or consumption of mined ores. 

A. 
BRIEF FACTUAL MATRIX 
2. The petitioner no.1 herein is a mining leasehold company inter-alia engaged 
in the extraction of pig iron and the manufacturing and sale of its byproducts 
by way of a mining lease for iron ores in the State of Karnatak in terms of the 
provisions and procedure envisaged under the Mineral (Development and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015 (for short the “2015 Amendment Act”). 
The petitioner no.2 herein is one of the shareholders in the petitioner no.1 
company. The respondent no. 1 herein is the Union of India through the 
Secretary, Ministry of Mines, whereas the respondent no. 2 herein is the Indian 
Bureau of Mines. 
 
3. As per Section 9 of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1957 (for short, the (“MMDR, Act”), the revenue required to be paid for 
any mineral removed or consumed from the leasehold area would be in the 
form of royalty and mandates the mining leaseholder to pay such royalty as 
may be specified in the Second Schedule in respect of any minerals removed 
or consumed in the leased area allotted to him. Section 9 sub-section (3) of the 
MMDR Act further empowers the Central Government to enhance or reduce 
the rate of royalty payable by the leaseholders by way of a notification once 
every 3-years. The aforesaid provision reads as under: - 
“9. Royalties in respect of mining leases. – 
(1) The holder of a mining lease granted before the 
commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding anything 

contained in the instrument of lease or in any law in force at such 
commencement, pay royalty in respect of any mineral removed or 
consumed by him or by his agent, manager, employee, contractor 
or sub-lessee from the leased area after such commencement, at 
the rate for the time being specified in the Second Schedule in 
respect of that mineral. 
 
(2) The holder of a mining lease granted on or after the 
commencement of this Act shall pay royalty in respect of any 
mineral removed or consumed by him or by his agent, manager, 
employee, contractor or sub-lessee from the leased area at the 
rate for the time being specified in the Second Schedule in respect 
of that mineral. 
 
(2A) The holder of a mining lease, whether granted before or after 
the commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and 
Development) Amendment Act, 1972 (56 of 1972) shall not be 
liable to pay any royalty in respect of any coal consumed by a 
workman engaged in a colliery provided that such consumption 
by the workman does not exceed one-third of a tonne per month. 
 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend the Second Schedule so as to enhance or reduce 
the rate at which royalty shall be payable in respect of any mineral 
with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification: 
 
Provided that the Central Government shall not enhance the rate 
of royalty in respect of any mineral more than once during any 
period of three years.” 
 
4. Section(s) 13 and 18 of the MMDR Act respectively further empowers the 
Central Government to frame Rules for regulating the grant of mineral 
concession and for the conservation and systematic development of minerals 
respectively. Pursuant to the above provisions, the Central Government 
enacted the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 (for short, the “MCR, 1960”) 
which later came to be replaced by the MCR, 2016 for the computation and 

payment of royalty in terms of Section 9 read with Schedule II of the MMDR, 
Act. 
5. The erstwhile MCR, 1960, more particularly Rule 64D that was inserted vide 
Notification bearing no. GSR 883(E) dated 10.12.2009, stipulated that the 
royalty to be paid for all non-atomic and non-fuel minerals would be computed 
on the basis of the State-wise sale price of different minerals as published by 
the Indian Bureau of Mines / the respondent no. 2. The said provision reads as 
under: - 
" 64 D. Manner of payment of royalty on minerals on ad valorem 
basis: 
(1) Every mine owner, his agent, manager, employee, 
contractor or sub-lessee shall compute the amount of 
royalty on minerals where such royalty is charged on ad 
valorem basis as follows: 
 
(i) for all non-atomic and non fuel minerals sold in the 
domestic market or consumed in captive plants or exported 
by the mine owners (other than bauxite and laterite 
despatched for use in alumina and metallurgical industries, 
copper, lead, zinc, tin, nickel, gold, silver and minerals 
specified under Atomic Energy Act), the State-wise sale 
prices for different minerals as published by Indian Bureau 
of Mines shall be the sale price for computation of royalty 
in respect of any mineral produced any time during a month 
in any mine in that State, and the royalty shall be computed 
as per the formula given below: 
 
Royalty = Sale price of mineral (grade wise and State-wise) 
published by IBM X Rate of royalty (in percentage) X Total 
quantity of mineral grade produced/ dispatched: 
 
Provided that if for a particular mineral, the information for 
a State for a particular month is not published by the Indian 
Bureau of Mines, the latest information available for that 

mineral in the State shall be referred, failing which the 
latest information for All India for the mineral shall be 
referred. 
 
(ii) for the grades of minerals produced for captive 
consumption (other than bauxite and laterite despatched for 
use in alumina and metallurgical industries, copper, lead, 
zinc, tin, nickel, gold and silver) and those not despatched for 
sale in domestic market or export, the sale price published by 
the Indian Bureau of Mines shall be used as the benchmark 
price for computation of royalty. 
 
(iii) for primary gold, silver, copper, nickel, tin, lead and 
zinc, the total contained metal in the ore or concentrate 
produced during the period for which the royalty is computed 
and reported in the statutory monthly returns under Mineral 
Conservation and Development Rules, 1988 or recorded in 
the books of the mine owners shall be considered for the 
purposes of computing the royalty in the first place and then 
the royalty shall be computed as the percentage of the 
average metal prices published by the Indian Bureau of 
Mines for primary gold, silver, copper, nickel, tin, lead and 
zinc during the period of computation of royalty as follows: 

Royalty = sale price X rate of royalty in percentage 
 
where sale price = Average price of metal as published by 
Indian Bureau of Mines during the month X Total contained 
metal in ore or concentrate produced X Rupee or Dollar 
exchange rate selling as on the last date of the month of 
computation of royalty: 
 
Provided that in case of by-product gold and silver the 
royalty shall be based on the total quantity of metal produced 
and such royalty shall be calculated as follows: 
 
Royalty = Sale price X rate of royalty in percentage 
 
Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-clause sale price 
means, average price of metal as published by Indian Bureau 
of Mines during the month X Total byproduct metal actually 

produced X Rupee or Dollar Exchange rate selling as on the 
last date of the month of computation of royalty. 
 
(iv) For bauxite or laterite ore despatched for use in alumina and 
aluminium metal extraction or despatched to alumina or 
aluminium metal extraction industry within India, the total 
contained alumina in the bauxite or laterite ore on dry basis 
produced during the period for which the royalty is computed and 
reported in the statutory monthly returns under Mineral 
Conservation and Development Rules, 1988 or recorded in the 
books of the mine owners shall be considered for the purpose of 
computing the royalty in the first place and then the royalty shall 
be computed as the percentage of the average monthly price for 
the contained aluminium metal in the said alumina content of the 
ore published by the Indian Bureau of Mines, on the following 
basis namely:- 
 
Royalty = 
 
52.

X Percentag
e of Al2O3 
in 
the 
bauxite on 
dry 
basis 
(as 
reported in 
the 
Statutory 
Monthly 
return 
under 
MCDR) 
X Average 
monthly 
price 
of 
aluminiu
m 
as 
published 
by 
the 
IBM 
X Rupee/ 
dollar 
exchange 
rate 
(selling) as 
on the last 
date of the 
period of the 
computation 
of royalty 
X 
Rate 
of 
royalty (in 
percentag
e) 

Provided that for computing the royalty for bauxite or laterite 
despatched for end use other than alumina and aluminium metal 
extraction and for exports provisions of this clause shall not 
apply. 
 
(2) In case of metallic ores based on metal contained in ore and 
metal prices based on benchmark prices, the royalty shall be 
charged on dry basis, and the mine owner shall establish suitable 
facilities for collection of sample and its analysis on dry basis at 
the mine site." 

6. A bare perusal of the aforesaid provision makes it clear that for computing the 
royalty that may be payable both the i) grade-wise and State wise sale price of 
mineral as published by IBM and the ii) rate of royalty were being factored 
along with the quantity of mineral that is produced or dispatched in order to 
determine the ultimate royalty that may be payable. 
 
7. Thereafter, the Central Government by way of the aforesaid 2015 Amendment 
Act inter-alia inserted Section(s) 9B and 9C into the MMDR Act whereby 
contributions were required to be paid to the District Mineral Foundation 
(“DMF”), a non-profit body established to work for the interest and benefit of 
persons and areas affected by mining related operation and to the National 
Mineral Exploration Trust (“NMET”) a non-profit autonomous body for the 
purposes of regional and detailed exploration. 
 
8. As per Section 9B sub-section (5) of the MMDR Act, the contributions 
towards the DMF were computed as a percentage of the royalty paid by the 
mining leaseholder that could extend upto a sum equivalent to a maximum of 
one-third of such royalty. Thereafter, the Mines and Minerals (Contribution to 
District Mineral Foundation) Rules, 2015 ("DMF Rules") came to be enacted, 
Rule 2(a) of which stipulated that the contributions towards DMF shall be 
computed as ten percent of the royalty paid in accordance with the Second 
Schedule. On the other hand, the contributions towards the NMET under 

Section 9C of the MMDR Act, were calculated as a sum equivalent to two 
percent of the royalty paid. 
 
9. On 04.03.2016, the Central Government vide Notification no. GSR 278(E) 
enacted and notified the MCR, 2016 rules replacing the erstwhile rules of 
MCR, 1960, in order to revamp the entire mechanism inter-alia for the 
calculation of royalty on minerals and the grant of concessions. 
 
10. Rule 38 of the MCR, 2016 defines the term ‘Sale Value’ as the gross amount 
payable as per the sale invoice where the sale transaction is on an arms’ length 
basis and such price is the sole consideration for the sale excluding taxes. The 
Explanation appended to the said rule further provides that for computation of 
‘Sale Value’ there shall no deduction in respect of royalty, payments or 
contributions towards DMF and NMET. The relevant provision reads as 
under: - 
“38. Sale Value. – 
Sale value is the gross amount payable by the purchaser as 
indicated in the sale invoice where the sale transaction is on an 
arms' length basis and the price is the sole consideration for the 
sale, excluding taxes, if any. 
 
Explanation - For the purpose of computing sale value no 
deduction from the gross amount will be made in respect of 
royalty, payments to the District Mineral Foundation and 
payments to the National Mineral Exploration Trust.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 

11. Rule 39 sub-rule (3) of the MCR, 2016 further provides how royalty is to be 
paid and the manner in which it is to be computed. It stipulates that royalty in 
respect of any mineral is to be paid on an Ad valorem basis. It further provides 
that royalty shall be calculated at the specified percentage of the ‘average sale 
price’ of such mineral for the month of removal / consumption as published 
by the Indian Bureau of Mines. 
 
12. Rule 42 of the MCR, 2016 provides the manner in which the ‘average sale 
price’ shall be computed. Rule 42 sub-rule (1) stipulates that the average sale 
price of mineral grade / concentrate shall be computed on the basis of its ‘ex-
mine price’. Rule 42 sub-rule (3) further provides that the ‘average sale price’ 
shall be the weighted average of the ‘ex-mine price’ as computed in terms of 
sub-rule (2) of Rule 42. Rule 42 sub-rule (2)(b) provides that the ‘ex-mine 
price’ shall be computed as the sale value of the mineral less the actual 
expenditure incurred where the sale takes place domestically but beyond the 
mining lease area. The said provision reads as under: - 
“42. Computation of average sale price. 
(1) The ex-mine price shall be used to compute average sale price 
of mineral grade/concentrate. 
 
(2) The ex-mine price of mineral grade or concentrate shall be: 
(a) where export has occurred, the free-on-board (F.O.B) 
price of the mineral less the actual expenditure incurred 
beyond the mining lease area towards transportation 
charges by road, loading and unloading charges, railway 
freight (if applicable), port handling charges/export duty, 
charges for sampling and analysis, rent for the plot at the 

stocking yard, handling charges in port, charges for 
stevedoring and trimming, any other incidental charges 
incurred outside the mining lease area as notified by the 
Indian Bureau of Mines from time-to-time, divided by the 
total quantity exported. 
 
(b) where domestic sale has occurred, sale value of the 
mineral less the actual expenditure incurred towards 
transportation loading, unloading, rent for the plot at the 
stocking yard, charges for sampling and analysis and any 
other charges beyond mining lease area as notified by the 
Indian Bureau of Mines from time-to-time, divided by the 
total quantity sold. 
 
(c) where sale has occurred, between related parties and/or 
where the sale is not on arms’ length basis, then such sale 
shall not be recognized as a sale for the purpose of this rule 
and in such case, sub-clause (d) shall be applicable. 
 
(d) where sale has not occurred, the average sale price 
published monthly by the Indian Bureau of Mines for that 
mineral grade / concentrate for a particular State: 
 
Provided that if for a particular mineral grade / concentrate, the 
information for a State for a particular month is not published by 
the Indian Bureau of Mines, the last available information 
published for that mineral grade / concentrate for that particular 
State by the Indian Bureau of Mines in the last six months previous 
to the reporting month shall be used, failing which the latest 
information for All India for the mineral grade / concentrate, shall 
be used. 

(3) The average sale price of any mineral grade/concentrate in 
respect of a month shall be the weighted average of the ex-mine 
prices of the non-captive mines, accordance with computed the in 
above provisions, the weight being the quantity dispatched from 
the mining lease area of mineral grade I concentrate relevant to 
each ex-mine price." 

13. In other words, Rule 39(3) of the MCR, 2016 provides that royalty would be 
calculated as the percentage of the average of the ‘Sale Value’. The Sale Value 
of any graded mineral / concentrate for the purposes of these rules in terms of 
Rule 38 is the gross amount payable as per the sale invoice including the 
royalty, DMF and NEMT paid. This Sale Value minus the actual expenditure 
incurred (without deducting the royalty, DMF and NEMT in terms of the 
Explanation to Rule 38) would be the ex-mine price of such mineral grade / 
concentrate. The weighted average of this ‘ex-mine price’ shall be the 
‘Average Sale Price’ for the purposes of calculating royalty. 
 
14. Similarly, under the Mineral Conservation and Development Rules, 2017 (for 
short, the “MCDR, 2017”) that was enacted by the Central Government for 
the conservation and systematic development of minerals in exercise of its 
powers under Rule 18 of the MMDR Act, Rule 45(8)(b) provides that the ‘Sale 
Value’ for the purposes of the said rules is the gross amount payable without 
any deduction in respect of royalty, DMF and NEMT paid. The said rule reads 
as under: - 
“45. Monthly and annual returns – 
(8) In case of mining of minerals by the holder of a mining lease, 
the – 
(b) ex-mine price of mineral grade or concentrate shall be,– 
 
(I) where export has occurred, the total of, sale value on free-on-
board (F.O.B) basis, less the actual expenditure incurred beyond 
the mining lease area towards – 

(i) transportation charges by road; 
(ii) loading and unloading charges; 
(iii) railway freight (if applicable); 
(iv) port handling charges or export duty; 
(v) charges for sampling and analysis; 
(vi) rent for the plot at the stocking yard; 
(vii) handling charges in port; 
(viii) charges for stevedoring and trimming; 
(ix) any other incidental charges incurred outside the mining 
lease area as notified by the Indian Bureau of Mines from 
time-to-time, divided by the total quantity exported; 
 
(II) where domestic sale of mineral has occurred, the total of sale 
value of the mineral, less the actual expenditure incurred towards 
loading, unloading, transportation, rent for the plot at the stocking 
yard, charges for sampling and analysis and any other charges 
beyond mining lease area as notified by the Indian Bureau of 
Mines from time-to-time, divided by the total quantity sold; 
 
(III) where sale has occurred, between related parties and is not 
on arms’ length basis, then such sale shall not be recognised as a 
sale for the purposes of this rule and in such case, sub-clause shall 
be applicable; 
 
(IV) where the sale has not occurred, the average sale price 
published monthly by the Indian Bureau of Mines for that mineral 
grade or concentrate for a particular State: 
 
Provided that if for a particular mineral grade or concentrate, the 
information for a State for a particular month is not published by 
the Indian Bureau of Mines, the last available information 
published for that mineral grade or concentrate for that particular 
State by the Indian Bureau of Mines in the last six months previous 
to the reporting month shall be referred, failing which the latest 
information for all India for the mineral grade or concentrate, 
shall be referred; 
 
(V) the per unit cost of production in case of captive mines.” 

15. It is the case of the petitioners that, in view of the Explanation(s) appended to 
the definition of ‘Sale Value’ in Rule 38 of the MCR, 2016 and Rule 45 of the 
MCDR, 2017, royalty which has already been paid in the previous month is 
again being factored for the purposes of computation of royalty to be paid for 
the subsequent months. Thus, it is the contention of the petitioners that this 
“compounding” of royalty by virtue of the aforesaid Explanations is 
manifestly arbitrary inasmuch as it has led to a cascading effect within the fold 
of determination of the rate of royalty under Section 9 sub-section (3) of the 
MMDR Act. 
 
16. However, when it comes to computation of royalty in respect of coal, it was 
submitted by the petitioners that the Central Government has remedied the 
aforesaid anomaly by excluding the previously paid royalty and contributions 
towards DMF and NMET in its calculation, by way of an amendment vide 
Notification No. GSR 445(E) by inserting an Explanation in Entry A, Item 10 
in the Second Schedule of the MMDR Act. The relevant provision reads as 
under: - 
"Explanation:- For the purposes of this sub entry – 

(iv) Actual price means the sale invoice value of coal, net of 
statutory dues including taxes, · contribution to levies, · royalty, 
National Mineral Exploration Trust and District Mineral 
Foundation... " 

17. The petitioners have contended that for the purposes of computation of royalty 
there exists no intelligible differentia between coal and iron ore and thus, the 
exclusion of royalty, DMF and NMET contributions for computation of sale 
value for coal but not for other minerals such as iron is manifestly arbitrary 
and the aforesaid Explanation(s) to Rule 38 of the MCR, 2016 and Rule 45 of 
the MCDR, 2017 is in consequence of violation of Article 14 of the 
Constitution and liable to be struck down. 
 
18. During the course of hearing, our attention was also drawn to the fact that on 
25.05.2021, a notice was issued by a committee of the Ministry of Mines 
inviting comments and suggestions from all stakeholders on this issue of 
double calculation of royalty for computation of the ‘average sale price’, and 
that after receiving the responses, a report dated 31.01.2022 was submitted by 
the said committee to the Ministry of Mines giving its recommendations on 
the incidence of compounding royalty. 
 
19. Although the aforesaid report has not been made publicly available, yet the 
Ministry of Mines pursuant to the aforesaid report has issued a Notice dated 
25.05.2022 for public consultation on amending the MMDR Act to bring 
reforms in the mining sector by inter-alia proposing amendment to the 
relevant rules for removing the cascading impact of royalty on royalty in the 

calculation of the ‘average sale price’. The relevant portion of the aforesaid 
notice reads as under: - 
“1. Calculation of ASP: Removing the cascading impact of royalty 
on royalty 
(iv) A committee was constituted by the Ministry of Mines under 
chairmanship by Shri Praveen Kumar, /AS (Retd.) with members 
from Ministry of Mines, NIT/ Aayog, Ministry of Steel, Indian 
Bureau of Mines (IBM) and Indian Statistical Institute to examine 
the incidence of double calculation of royalty. The committee 
concluded that since the sale value already includes royalty, DMF 
and NMET, the Jessee pays royalty on royalty, DMF and NMET. 
Due to this, there is an additional charge on the miners under the 
current methodology. 
 
(vi) Accordingly, it is proposed to (i) introduce new section in the 
MMDR Act regarding ASP; (ii) the provision shall specifically 
provide that ex-mine price for determination of ASP shall exclude 
GST, export duty, royalty. DMF & NMET & such other levies as 
may be prescribed; (iii) the change will be applicable for all the 
MLs, whether auctioned/ granted before or after the 
commencement of the proposed MMDR Amendment Act, for the 
minerals removed or consumed from the leased area after the 
commencement of the said Act; and (iv) adoption of new formula 
only for the future dues for existing MLs arising after the 
amendment" 

20. The petitioners on the strength of the aforesaid notices issued by the Ministry 
of Mines have contended that although the respondents themselves have 
acknowledged the compounding of royalty in the computation of ‘average sale 
price’ yet no action or amendment has been made to the MMDR Act and the 
relevant rules thereunder in this regard. 

21. In such circumstances referred to above, the petitioners have come up before 
this Court with the present writ petition. 
 
B. 
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PETITIONER 
 
22. Dr. A.M. Singhvi, the learned senior counsel for the petitioners presented the 
statutory background to us in his submissions. He submitted that Section 9(2) 
of the MMDR Act contemplates payment of royalty at the rates specified in 
the Second Schedule to the MMDR Act and that Section 9(3) of the MMDR 
Act affords revision of the rates, but with a proviso restricting it to once every 
3 years. 
 
23. Dr. Singhvi apprised us of the fact that Section 13 of the MMDR Act 
empowers the Government of India to make rules, inter alia, with respect to 
the manner in which royalty shall be payable and consequent to such powers, 
the MCR, 2016 have been enacted. He submitted that Rule 39(3) of the MCR, 
2016 provides that where royalty is to be paid on ad valorem basis, it shall be 
calculated as a specified percentage of the ASP as published by the Indian 
Bureau of Mines for the month of removal/consumption. Moreover, he 
underlined that Rule 42 provides for the manner of computation of the ASP, 
and sub-rule (2)(b) thereof excludes the actual expenditure incurred from the 
sale value, in its prescriptions of the manner of computation. 

24. We were further apprised of the fact that the method to compute ASP is in turn 
governed by Rule 38 of the MCR, 2016 which defines the term “sale value” 
and the Explanation thereto which stipulates that the royalty as well as the 
contributions made to DMF and NMET will not be deducted while computing 
the “sale value”. He pointed out a similar method of computation in Rule 
45(8)(a) of the MCDR, 2017 which prescribes the manner of filing of monthly 
and annual returns. 
 
25. He submitted that the present petition seeks to challenge the Explanation to 
Rule 38 of the MCR, 2016 and Explanation to Rule 45(8)(a) of the MCDR, 
2017 as they mandate the non-exclusion of royalty and the contributions made 
to DMF and NMET, in the computation of the “sale value”. 
 
26. The learned senior counsel contended that the Impugned Explanations lead to 
a situation where the royalty as well as payments to DMF and NMET made 
previously, are included in the ASP, which, in turn, is used as the basis to 
compute royalty for the next month. Such method of computation of ASP 
effectively results in the payment of royalty as well as DMF and NMET 
contributions not only on the value of the ore/mineral, but also on the royalty, 
DMF and NMET contributions paid in the previous month. Thus, there is an 
imposition of royalty on a royalty. It was contended that the Impugned 
Explanations create a twin charge on royalty: first, a charge on the value of 

the mineral before payment of royalty at the prescribed rate; and, secondly, a 
re-charge of royalty on royalty at a prescribed rate. It was submitted that such 
re-charge of royalty on royalty is ultra vires to the scope of Section 9(3) of the 
MMDR Act. 
 
27. The learned senior counsel contended that the Impugned Explanations are 
manifestly arbitrary for the following reasons: 
(i) The present methodology for computing royalty leads to a 
compounding or cascading effect as it creates a charge of royalty on 
previous month’s royalty. 
(ii) It has been held by a 9-Judge Bench of this Court in Mineral Area 
Development Authority & Anr. v. Steel Authority of India Limited & 
Anr. reported in that royalty is a 
consideration for extracting minerals. Therefore, such consideration 
cannot be compounded every month. 
(iii) Rule 42(2)(b) of the MCR, 2016 excludes actual expenditure incurred 
towards transportation, loading, unloading, rent for the plot at the 
stocking yard, charges for sampling and analysis and any other charges 
beyond mining lease area. However, the impugned Explanations do not 
exclude royalty, DMF and NMET contributions from such actual 
expenditure. It was contended that royalty is also an expense as it has 

been excluded from the category of taxes, therefore, it is illogical to not 
exclude the same from the ex-mine price. 
 
28. The learned senior counsel referred to the following judgments pronounced 
by this Court to submit that manifest arbitrariness is a well-recognized 
ground to challenge the validity of a legislation and the same has been 
acknowledged as a facet of Article 14: 
• Manish Kumar v. Union of India reported in (2021); 
• Dy. Commissioner of Income Tax & Anr. v. Pepsi Foods Limited 
reported in (2021). 
29. Dr. Singhvi also submitted that there is no statutory prescription for the 
inclusion of royalty, DMF and NMET contributions while computing ASP. 
It is only the Impugned Explanations which save these payments from being 
excluded thereby resulting in a compounding or cascading effect. 
 
30. We were informed by the learned senior counsel that this anomaly has been 
noticed by the Government of India in a report of a committee set up by the 
Ministry of Mines and a public notice dated 25.05.2022 has been published 
to call for suggestions in this regard. He submitted that the Ministry of Mines 
is charged with administering the MMDR Act. Therefore, the Consultation 
Paper of 2022, published by it is contemporeo exposito and is a valid aid of 

construction of the relevant Rules and the Impugned Explanations as per the 
dictum of this Court in K.P. Varghese v. ITO reported in (1981). 
 
31. Furthermore, such anomaly was remedied by the Ministry of Coal with 
respect to only coal by effecting an amendment to Schedule II of the MMDR 
Act, which defined “actual price” for the purpose of imposing royalty at ad 
valorem rates, to mean the sale invoice value of coal, net of statutory dues 
including taxes, levies, royalty, contribution to National Mineral 
Exploration Trust and District Mineral Foundation. The learned senior 
counsel submitted that remedying such anomaly for coal but not for iron ore 
creates a classification which has no intelligible differentia and is in 
violation of Article 14. 
 
32. It was also submitted that lessees such as the petitioner herein, who have 
secured a mine in an auction, also pay a premium in terms of Rules 8 and 
13(2) of the Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2015 respectively which is calculated 
on the basis of the flawed definition of ASP. 
 
33. Dr. Singhvi while countering the submissions of the learned senior counsel 
for the Union of India, submitted that the compounding or cascading effect 
occurring every single month cannot come within the fold of determination 
of the rate of royalty under Section 9(3) of the MMDR Act, as it would be 

in contravention to the proviso thereto which prohibits a change of rate of 
royalty for three years. 
 
C. 
SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENT 
 
34. Mr. Shailesh Madiyal, the learned ASG appearing on behalf of the Union of 
India presented the scheme of the MMDR Act and the MCR, 2016 in relation 
to the computation of royalty and submitted that Section 9(1) of the MMDR 
Act requires the holder of a mining lease to pay royalty in respect of the 
mineral being mined from the lease area at the rate specified in Schedule II of 
the MMDR Act. He apprised us of the fact that Section 9(3) permits the 
Government of India to issue notifications to amend Schedule II to increase or 
reduce the rate at which royalty is payable. He informed that the rate of royalty 
for iron ore at present is 15% of average sale price on ad valorem basis. 
 
35. The learned ASG submitted that the computation of the ASP is to be done on 
a monthly basis and as per Rule 42(3), the ASP of any mineral 
grade/concentrate for a particular month shall be the weighted average of the 
ex-mine prices of the non-captive mine. He submitted that the ASP with 
respect to a particular month is unrelated to the ASP of the previous month 
and there can be no cumulative effect on the royalty charged. 

36. It was submitted that Rule 42(2)(b) of the MCR, 2016 provided that where 
domestic sale has occurred, the ex-mine price of a mineral grade or 
concentrate is the “sale value” of the mineral less the actual expenditure 
incurred towards transportation, loading and unloading, etc. divided by the 
total quantity sold. 
 
37. The learned senior counsel then proceeded to submit that the term “sale value” 
is defined in Rule 38 of the MCR, 2016 and the Explanation thereto provides 
that no deduction from the gross amount will be made in respect of royalty, 
payments to the DMF and NMET. 
38. Mr. Madiyal submitted that the writ petition, challenging the Impugned 
Explanations, has been filed under Article 32 of the Constitution of India and 
therefore, is not maintainable as the petitioner ought to have approached the 
High Court under Article 226. 
 
39. The learned senior counsel referred to the decision of a 5-Judge Bench of this 
Court in the case of Natural Resources Allocation, In Re: Special Reference 
No. 1 of 2012 reported in (2012) to submit that the methodology 
pertaining to disposal of natural resources is an economic policy entailing 
intricate economic choices. Therefore, the manner of computation of royalty 
is a matter of policy and must be left to the discretion of the executive and 
legislative authorities, as the case may be. 

40. The learned ASG that the petitioner’s challenge to the Impugned Explanations 
does not meet the threshold of ‘manifest arbitrariness’ that is, whether an 
action was done or legislation was enacted capriciously, irrationally and/or 
without adequate determining principle, and cannot be excessive and 
disproportionate. He vehemently argued that no evidence or data was provided 
by the petitioner to show that the Impugned Explanations result in an endless 
monthly cumulative exaction of royalty. He submitted that the ASP for a 
succeeding month could in fact be lower than that of the previous month and 
no consistent monthly cumulative effect was possible. 
41. Mr. Madiyal also contended that at the time of the auction of mining leases, 
the bids submitted are taking into consideration the existing legal regime, 
which includes Rule 38 of the MCR, 2016 as well as the Explanation thereto, 
and the bidders are aware that royalty and auction premium is calculated on 
the basis of the sale value which is inclusive of the royalty and contributions 
to DMF and NMET of the previous month. He submitted that the revenue of 
a State comprises of the royalty collected from such mining leases. Changing 
the methodology of calculation of “sale value” by excluding the royalty 
payable for mining leases which have already been auctioned would therefore, 
result in loss of revenue to the States as estimated at the beginning of the 
auctioning process. It was submitted that it is important that the revenue of the 
state Governments should be protected. 

42. He further submitted that there is no legal bar on the imposition of royalty on 
royalty and cannot be adjudged on the same footing as a case of “tax on tax”, 
in light of this Court’s decision in Mineral Area Development Authority 
(supra)wherein it was held that royalty is not a tax. 
43. On the status of public consultations, Mr. Madiyal submitted that the 
Committee constituted by the Ministry of Mines has received the views & 
suggestions from various stakeholders as well as from the State Governments. 
However, the issue is under consideration and no decision yet has been taken 
on the matter. The learned ASG apprised us of the fact that the Committee is 
deliberating on the question of the amendment of the Rules and the impact of 
such amendment on the determination of royalty and auction premium payable 
in respect of mining leases auctioned prior to the amendment, if any carried 
out in the future. 
 
D. 
ISSUE FOR DETERMINATION 
44. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone 
through the materials on record, the pivotal question of law that falls for our 
consideration: - 
I. 
Whether, the Explanation(s) appended to Rule 38 of the MCR, 2016 
and Rule 45 of the MCDR, 2017 respectively are unreasonable and 
manifestly arbitrary and in consequence of violation of Article 14 of 
the Constitution? 

E. 
ANALYSIS 
45. Before, we proceed with the analysis, it is necessary to understand the case of 
the petitioners in the present litigation as discernible from their pleadings. The 
argument of the petitioners in sum is twofold: - 

First, that the very inclusion of the royalty, and contributions towards 
DMF and NMET paid previously for the purpose of computation of the 
requisite royalty for subsequent months is manifestly arbitrary. The said 
mechanism of computation of royalty has a cascading effect on the rate 
of royalty for every subsequent month. 

Secondly, the exclusion of the royalty, and contributions towards DMF 
and NMET paid previously for coal but not for other minerals such as 
iron ore for computation of royalty is unreasonable and manifestly 
arbitrary. There exists no intelligible differentia between coal and iron 
ore or any other similar mineral and thus the act of the legislature in 
excluding the royalty, and contributions towards DMF and NMET for 
one but not for the other i.e., for coal but not for iron is in violation of 
Article 14 of the Constitution and thus, the Explanation(s) to Rule 38 of 
the MCR, 2016 and Rule 45 of the MCDR, 2017 is liable to be struck 
down. i. 
Whether the manner or mechanism of computation of royalty under 
the MCR, 2016 and MCDR, 2017 is manifestly arbitrary? 
 
46. In M.P. Oil Extraction & Anr. v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors, reported 
in (1997), this Court held that policy decisions are the domain of 
the executive authority of the State and that the courts should not embark on 
the unchartered ocean of public policy and should not question the efficacy or 
otherwise of such policy so long the same does not offend any provision of 
the stature or the Constitution of India. It further observed that unless the 
policy framed is absolutely capricious or not informed by reasons, the court 
cannot and should not outstep its limit and tinker with the policy decision of 
the executive functionary of the State. The relevant observations read as 
under: - 
"41. After giving our careful consideration to the facts and 
circumstances of the case and to the submissions made by the 
learned counsel for the parties, it appears to us that the Industrial 
Policy of 1979 which was subsequently revised from time to time 
cannot be held to be arbitrary and based on no reason whatsoever 
but founded on mere ipse dixit of the State Government of M.P. 
The executive authority of the State must be held to be within its 
competence to frame a policy for the administration of the State. 
Unless the policy framed is absolutely capricious and, not being 
informed by any reason whatsoever, can be clearly held to be 
arbitrary and founded on mere ipse dixit of the executive 
functionaries thereby offending Article 14 of the Constitution or 
such policy offends other constitutional provisions or comes into 
conflict with any statutory provision, the Court cannot and should 
not outstep its limit and tinker with the policy decision of the 
executive functionary of the State. This Court, in no uncertain 
terms, has sounded a note of caution by indicating that policy 
decision is in the domain of the executive authority of the State 

and the Court should not embark on the unchartered ocean of 
public policy and should not question the efficacy or otherwise of 
such policy so long the same does not offend any provision of the 
stature or the Constitution of India. The supremacy of each of the 
three organs of the State i.e. legislature, executive and judiciary 
in their respective fields of operation needs to be emphasised. The 
power of judicial review of the executive and legislative action 
must be kept within the bounds of constitutional scheme so that 
there may not be any occasion to entertain misgivings about the 
role of judiciary in outstepping its limit by unwarranted judicial 
activism being very often talked of in these days. The democratic 
set-up to which the polity is so deeply committed cannot function 
properly unless each of the three organs appreciate the need for 
mutual respect and supremacy in their respective fields.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 
 
47. Similarly, in Premium Granites & Anr. v. State of Tamil Nadu & Ors. reported in (1994), this Court observed that it is not the domain of 
the courts to consider as to whether a particular policy is wise or that a better 
public policy can be evolved, and that such matters must be left to the 
discretion of the executive and legislature. The relevant observations read as 
under: - 
“54. It is not the domain of the Court to embark upon unchartered 
ocean of public policy in an exercise to consider as to whether the 
particular public policy is wise or a better, public policy can be 
evolved. Such exercise must be left to the discretion of the 
executive and legislative authorities as the case may be. …” 

(Emphasis supplied) 
 
48. In yet one another decision of this Court in Delhi Science Forum and Others 
v. Union of India and Another reported in (1996) it was observed 
that the courts should not express opinion as to whether a particular policy 

should be adopted or not, and no such direction can be given unless they 
pertain to the implementation of any policy as a result of which there is a 
violation or infringement of any constitutional or statutory provision. The 
relevant observations read as under: - 
"7. What has been said in respect of legislations is applicable even 
in respect of policies which have been adopted by Parliament. 
They cannot be tested in Court of Law. The courts cannot express 
their opinion as to whether at a particular juncture or under a 
particular situation prevailing in the country any such national 
policy should have been adopted or not. There may be views and 
views, opinions and opinions which may be shared and believed 
by citizens of the country including the representatives of the 
people in Parliament. But that has to be sorted out in Parliament 
which has to approve such policies. Privatisation is a fundamental 
concept underlying the questions about the power to make 
economic decisions. What should be the role of the State in the 
economic development of the nation? How the resources of the 
country shall be used? How the goals fixed shall be attained? 
What are to be the safeguards to prevent the abuse of the economic 
power? What is the mechanism of accountability to ensure that the 
decision regarding privatisation is in public interest? All these 
questions have to be answered by a vigilant Parliament. Courts 
have their limitations because these issues rest with the policy-
makers for the nation. No direction can be given or is expected 
from the courts unless while implementing such policies, there is 
violation or infringement of any of the constitutional or statutory 
provision. The new Telecom policy was placed before Parliament 
and it shall be deemed that Parliament has approved the same. 
This Court cannot review and examine as to whether the said 
policy should have been adopted. Of course, whether there is any 
legal or constitutional bar in adopting such policy can certainly 
be examined by the Court". 

(Emphasis supplied) 
 
49. In Balco Employees’ Union v. Union of India reported in (2002) 
this Court held that it is not for the courts to consider the relative merits of 

different economic policies and consider whether a better policy may be 
evolved. It further held that when it comes to policy decisions on economic 
matters, the courts ought to be very circumspect in disturbing such conclusions 
unless there is an illegality in the decision itself. The relevant observations 
read as under: - 
“93. Wisdom and advisability of economic policies are ordinarily 
not amenable to judicial review unless it can be demonstrated that 
the policy is contrary to any statutory provision or the 
Constitution. In other words, it is not for the Courts to consider 
relative merits of different economic policies and consider 
whether a wiser or better one can be evolved. For testing the 
correctness of a policy, the appropriate forum is the Parliament 
and not the Courts. xxx xxx xxx 
 
98. In the case of a policy decision on economic matters, the 
Courts should be very circumspect in conducting any enquiry or 
investigation and must be most reluctant to impugn the judgement 
of the experts who may have arrived at a conclusion unless the 
Court is satisfied that there is illegality in the decision itself.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 
 
50. It is possible that at the relevant time in respect of some of the minerals, royalty 
was being computed without inclusion of the royalty, DMF and NEMT 
contributions previously paid, however, that does not mean that the Central 
Government’s power is restricted and that the Central Government cannot 
alter the mode of computation of royalty. Merely, because the methodology 
or formula for computation of royalty has been altered from what it was under 
the erstwhile MCR, 1960 will not make the new mechanism or methodology 
unreasonable or arbitrary and liable to be struck down. 

51. From the above conspectus of decisions referred to by us, it is clear that the 
whether a particular policy is wise or that a better public policy can be evolved 
is purely the domain of the executive of the state. Matters such as computation 
of royalty or the levy of such royalty on different minerals is entirely a matter 
of policy making which is beyond the expertise and domain of the courts. It is 
no longer res-integra, that a question as regards the validity of a particular 
policy is concerned with reviewing not the merits of such decision or policy, 
but the very policy making process itself. The duty of the courts is to confine 
itself to the question of legality and its concern should be whether a 
policymaking authority exceeded its powers, whether it committed an error of 
law or committed a breach of the rules of natural justice or reached a decision 
which no reasonable authority would have reached or whether it has abused 
its powers. 
 
52. In a constitutional democracy, each branch of government—executive, 
legislative, and judiciary — has a defined role and operates within its 
designated boundaries. This separation of powers ensures that one branch does 
not encroach upon the functions of the others, preserving a system of checks 
and balances crucial to democratic governance. Within this framework, courts 
are primarily responsible for interpreting and upholding the law, while the 
executive and legislature hold the mandate to formulate and implement policy. 
This division is essential, as it aligns with the principle that policy-making, 

particularly in areas requiring specialized knowledge, foresight, and 
discretion, should remain within the domain of the elected representatives and 
those with the requisite expertise. 
 
53. Judicial restraint is rooted in the understanding that courts should respect the 
decisions made by the legislative and executive branches, provided these 
decisions are legally sound and constitutionally valid. By adhering to judicial 
restraint, courts avoid overstepping their constitutional role and thereby 
prevent potential conflicts with the executive and legislative branches. The 
principle of separation of powers supports the idea that each branch has a 
unique role, and mutual respect between these branches is essential for the 
proper functioning of government. The courts are to ensure that laws and 
policies do not infringe upon citizens' rights or exceed the authority granted 
by law. However, this role does not extend to evaluating whether a policy is 
“wise” or whether a better one could be devised, and rather this process is 
entrusted to the legislature and executive, which have the expertise to make 
these determinations. 
 
54. The doctrine of judicial restraint, which is central to this discussion, 
emphasizes that courts should exercise caution and avoid involvement in 
policy decisions, as these are complex judgments that require a balancing of 
diverse and often competing interests. Policies are crafted based on thorough 

analysis of social, economic, and political factors, considerations beyond the 
court’s purview. The court is tasked with ensuring that policies do not breach 
constitutional provisions or statutory limits; however, they should not replace 
policymakers' judgments with their own unless absolutely necessary. 
 
55. Policy decisions often require the expertise of professionals and specialists in 
fields such as economics, public health, national security, and environmental 
science. These domains involve specialized knowledge that judges, as 
generalists in legal matters, may lack. For instance, in economic policy, the 
executive may decide on trade tariffs or subsidies based on extensive data and 
projections that aim to balance domestic industry support with global trade 
commitments. The courts, lacking the same level of economic expertise and 
without the authority to make trade-offs among competing policy objectives, 
is typically not equipped to second-guess these kinds of decisions. 
 
56. While courts have the power of judicial review to ensure that executive actions 
and legislative enactments comply with the Constitution, this power is not 
absolute. Judicial review is meant to act as a safeguard against actions that 
overstep legal boundaries or infringe on fundamental rights, but it does not 
entail a comprehensive re-evaluation of the policy’s wisdom. The judicial 
review of policy decisions is limited to assessing the legality of the decision-
making process rather than the substantive merits of the policy itself. For 
example, if a government policy infringes on fundamental rights or 

discriminates against a particular group, the courts have a duty to strike down 
such policies. However, in the absence of constitutional or legal violations, 
the courts should respect the policy choices made by the executive or 
legislature. 
 
57. The duty of the court in policy-related cases is primarily to determine whether 
the policy falls within the scope of the authority granted to the relevant body. 
If the policy decision is within the executive's legal authority and has been 
made following proper procedures, the courts should defer to the expertise and 
discretion of the policy-makers, even if the policy appears unwise or 
imprudent. This restraint ensures that the courts do not impose its own 
perspective on policy matters that are rightly the responsibility of other 
branches. 
 
58. Economic and social policies often involve significant redistribution of 
resources, prioritization of interests, and balancing of public needs, which 
requires careful consideration by those with specialized knowledge and broad 
perspectives. In the realm of economic policy, for instance, questions 
regarding the allocation of subsidies, fiscal deficits, or budget allocations are 
best managed by the executive, which has access to economic data and is 
accountable to the public for its financial management. Judicial interference 

in such areas risks creating disruptions in the economic balance that policy-
makers are trying to achieve. 
 
59. Courts should assume that policy-makers act in good faith unless there is clear 
evidence to the contrary. As long as the policy does not contravene the 
Constitution or violate statutory provisions, it is not the role of the courts to 
question the wisdom or fairness of such policy. 
 
60. While judicial restraint is essential in respecting the boundaries of each branch 
of government, it does not mean that courts abdicate their responsibility to 
protect constitutional rights. The courts must still intervene if a policy 
infringes on fundamental rights, discriminates unfairly, or breaches statutory 
provisions. The role of the court in such instances is to protect individuals and 
groups from unlawful actions while maintaining the overall integrity of the 
policy-making process. This balance ensures that while courts do not interfere 
in matters of policy wisdom, they remain vigilant guardians of constitutional 
rights. 
 
61. In the present case, there is no doubt that the mechanism for computation of 
royalty in terms of Rule 38 of the MCR, 2016 and Rule 45 of the MCDR, 2017 
devised by the respondents might have onerous implications in monetary 
terms on the mining leaseholders inasmuch as there is a compounding effect 
on the rate of royalty for every subsequent month. However, this Court in the 

absence of anything to show that such policy is in excess of the powers or 
domain of the respondents herein or in breach of any statutory provision, 
cannot strike down the same. 
 
62. It was argued by the petitioners, that here is no statutory prescription for the 
inclusion of royalty, DMF and NMET contributions while computing ASP. In 
other words, but for these Explanations, there would be no compounding or 
cascading effect in the computation of royalty. 
 
63. This Court in State of Punjab v. Principal Secretary to the Governor of 
Punjab & Anr. reported in 2023 INSC 1017 it was held that a proviso may be 
in the form of an exception or in the form of an explanation or in addition to 
the substantive provision of a statute. The relevant observations read as under: 
- 
“22. A proviso, as is well settled, may fulfil the purpose of being 
an exception. Sometimes, however, a proviso may be in the form 
of an explanation or in addition to the substantive provision of a 
statute. [...]” 
 
64. Similarly in State of U.P. v. Achal Singh, reported in (2018) this 
Court reiterated that an Explanation becomes part of the main section and can 
be read as proviso and be understood as explaining the scope of the main 
provision. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“19. Reliance was also placed on the decision rendered by this 
Court in State of Bombay v. United Motors (India) Ltd. [State of 
Bombay v. United Motors (India) Ltd., (1953): AIR 

1953 SC 252] and Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. v. State of Bihar 
[Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. v. State of Bihar, AIR 1955 SC 661], 
in which it has been observed that Explanation can be read as 
proviso and it explains the scope of the main provision and the 
Explanation becomes part of the main section. There is no dispute 
with the aforesaid proposition. The Explanation in the Rules in 
question has to be applied to both the situations as contemplated 
in Rule 56(c) and is applicable to both the exigencies not only 
when the Government decides to retire an employee, but also 
applicable where voluntary retirement is sought by an employee. 
It cannot be said that no further restriction by Explanation has 
been added in a case where an employee has decided to obtain 
voluntary retirement. The public interest is the prime 
consideration on which authority has to decide such a prayer as 
per the rules applicable in the State of Uttar Pradesh.” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 
 
65. What can be discerned from the above is that an Explanation must be read so 
as to harmonise with and clear up any ambiguity in the main section. It should 
not be so construed as to widen the ambit of the section. An explanation does 
not enlarge the scope of the original section that it is supposed to explain. It is 
axiomatic that an explanation only explains and does not expand or add to the 
scope of the original section. The purpose of an explanation is, however, not 
to limit the scope of the main provision. The construction of the explanation 
must depend upon its terms, and no theory of its purpose can be entertained 
unless it is to be inferred from the language used. An 'explanation' must be 
interpreted according to its own tenor. Sometimes an explanation is appended 
to stress upon a particular thing which ordinarily would not appear clearly 
from the provisions of the section. The proper function of an explanation is to 
make plain or elucidate what is enacted in the substantive provision and not to 

add or subtract from it. Thus, an explanation does not either restrict or extend 
the enacting part; it does not enlarge or narrow down the scope of the original 
section that it is supposed to explain. The Explanation must be interpreted 
according to its own tenor; that it is meant to explain and not vice versa. 
Explanation added to a statutory provision is not a substantive provision in 
any sense of the term but as the plain meaning of the word itself shows it is 
merely meant to explain or clarify certain ambiguities which may have crept 
in the statutory provision. 
 
66. Merely because the Explanation(s) to Rule 38 of the MCR, 2016 and Rule 45 
of the MCDR, 2017 provides that there shall be no deduction of royalty, 
payments to the District Mineral Foundation and payments to the National 
Mineral Exploration Trust from the gross amount for the purpose of 
computing sale value does not in any manner makes the aforesaid Explanation 
in derogation of the main provision. The aforesaid Explanation(s) are merely 
clarificatory in nature inasmuch as it explains the ambiguities in the main 
provisions of Rule 38 of the MCR, 2016 and Rule 45 of the MCDR, 2017, and 
thus, they cannot be said to exceed the ambit of the main provisions or in 
contravention of the statutory scheme. ii. 
Whether the exclusion of royalty, and contributions towards DMF and 
NMET paid previously for coal but not for other minerals is 
unreasonable and manifestly arbitrary? 

67. In R.K. Garg v. Union of India reported in (1981), this Court 
observed that laws relating to economic activities should be viewed with 
greater latitude and the legislature should be allowed some play in the joints, 
because it has to deal with complex problems which do not admit of solution 
through any doctrinaire or strait-jacket formula. The relevant observations 
read as under: - 
“8. Another rule of equal importance is that laws relating to 
economic activities should be viewed with greater latitude than 
laws touching civil rights such as freedom of speech, religion, etc. 
It has been said by no less a person than Holmes, J. that the 
legislature should be allowed some play in the joints, because it 
has to deal with complex problems which do not admit of solution 
through any doctrinaire or strait-jacket formula and this is 
particularly true in case of legislation dealing with economic 
matters, where, having regard to the nature of the problems 
required to be dealt with, greater play in the joints has to be 
allowed to the legislature. The court should feel more inclined to 
give judicial deference to legislative judgment in the field of 
economic regulation than in other areas where fundamental 
human rights are involved.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 
68. Similarly in State of Tamil Nadu and Anr. v. National South Indian River 
Interlinking Agriculturist Association reported in (2021) it was 
held that courts should show a higher degree of deference to matters 
concerning economic policy. The relevant observations read as under: - 

“11. … It is also settled that the Courts would show a higher 
degree of deference to matters concerning economic policy, 
compared to other matters of civil and political rights. …” 
 
69. While examining the challenge to the validity of laws relating to economic 
activities, the courts must be slow and circumspect. A higher degree of 
deference needs to be shown in such matters, and sufficient flexibility should 
be given to the legislature and the executive in dealing with economic matters. 
Complex issues of economic and fiscal nature cannot be construed by any 
strait-jacket formula or unidirectional approach. This Court has time and again 
recognised that a judicial hands-off approach must be followed qua economic 
legislation and that the legislature is to be allowed wide latitude in 
experimenting with economic legislation, by virtue of it being an extension of 
the Government’s economic policy. 
 
70. Since the MMDR Act and the rules thereunder pertain to the extraction, 
disposal and sale of natural resources which is an economic policy that entails 
intricate economic choices and have a direct effect on the macroeconomics, 
we are of the considered opinion that when it comes to computation of royalty 
the legislature must have greater play in the joints. 
 
71. The exclusion of royalty, and contributions towards DMF and NMET paid 
previously for coal but not for other minerals cannot be termed as arbitrary or 
unreasonable, merely because the computation for one differs from the other 

in certain aspects. Deference needs to be shown to the legislature in deciding 
how royalty must be computed in respect of different mineral grades / 
concentrates. 
 
72. However, the present petition particularly the challenge to the validity of the 
Explanation(s) to Rule 38 of the MCR, 2016 and Rule 45 of the MCDR, 2017 
is unique in its own way. While there is nothing to show that such policy is in 
excess of the powers or domain of the respondents herein or in breach of any 
statutory provision, at the same time, we should not ignore or overlook the 
fact that the legislature itself has acknowledged the anomaly in compounding 
of royalty etc. for the purpose of computation of average sale price. 
 
73. Similarly, though the discretion to exclude previously paid royalty and 
contributions for coal but not for other minerals cannot be approached in a 
rigid manner and it would be incorrect to import policies framed and tailored 
by the executive for one particular subject-area and blanketly apply it to other 
related subject-areas, as it is the executive which is best suited to determine 
the fine distinctions existing between interlacing or seemingly similar 
domains and formulate distinct policies to best factor in the dissimilarities. 
 
74. However, this Court in Tata Steel Ltd. v. Union of India, reported in (2015) 
 while examining Rule 64B of the erstwhile MCR, 1960 has 
observed that the aforesaid rules were general in nature and applicable to types 

of minerals including coal. This Court rejected the categorization of coal on a 
different pedestal from other minerals under the MMDR Act for the purpose 
of levy of royalty. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“70. There is nothing to indicate in Rule 64-B and Rule 64-C of 
the MCR that coal has been put on a different pedestal from other 
minerals mentioned in the MMDR Act read with the Second 
Schedule thereto. It is, therefore, difficult to accept the view 
canvassed by the Union of India that these Rules “may not be 
particularly applicable on coal minerals”. That apart, the stand 
of the Union of India is not definite or categorical (“may not be”). 
In any event, we are not bound to accept the interpretation given 
by the Union of India to Rule 64-B and Rule 64-C of the MCR as 
excluding only coal. On the contrary, in NMDC [National Mineral 
Development Corpn. Ltd. v. State of M.P., (2004) ] this 
Court has observed that these Rules are general in nature, 
applicable to all types of minerals, which includes coal. The 
expression of opinion by the Union of India is contrary to the 
observations of this Court. 
 
71. Therefore, on a plain reading of Rule 64-B and Rule 64-C of 
the MCR, we are of the opinion that with effect from 25-9-2000 
when these Rules were inserted in the MCR, royalty is payable on 
all minerals including coal at the stage mentioned in these Rules, 
that is, on removal of the mineral from the boundaries of the 
leased area. For the period prior to that, the law laid down in 
Central Coalfields Ltd. [Central Coalfields Ltd. v. State of 
Jharkhand, decided by three 
learned Judges on 24-9-2003. Ed.: Now reported at (2015).] will operate, as far as coal is concerned, from 10-8-1998 
when SAIL [State of Orissa v. SAIL, (1998) ] was 
decided, though for different reasons.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
75. Even the respondents herein appear to have acknowledged that the differing 
mechanism for computation of royalty for coal and other minerals is not based 
on any fine distinction between the two, but rather an anomaly in the MCR, 

2016 and MCDR, 2017, which is why it constituted a committee to look into 
the same and has proposed amendments for rectifying the same. 
 
76. In view of the fact that the appropriate authorities are actively considering the 
issue of compounding royalties in the computation of average sale price for 
all other minerals, and the fact that a notice for public consultation on 
amending the MMDR Act to inter-alia address the aforementioned issue, we 
may not say anything further as regards whether the Explanation(s) to Rule 38 
of the MCR, 2016 and Rule 45 of the MCDR, 2017 are manifestly arbitrary or 
not. Although, the computation of royalty for different minerals is purely a 
matter of policy yet we should not just shut our eyes to the prima-facie 
anomaly that exists both in the very computation mechanism of average sale 
price for minerals in terms of the aforesaid provisions and the perplexing 
stance of exclusion of only coal from such mechanism despite the general 
nature and application of the aforesaid rules. 
 
77. However, we intend to grant one last opportunity to the respondents herein to 
seriously consider the mechanism of computation of average sale for the 
purposes of determining the rate of royalty for all other minerals in terms of 
the Explanation(s) to Rule 38 of the MCR, 2016 and Rule 45 of the MCDR, 
2017. We direct the respondents to conclude the process of public consultation 
in respect of the compounding of royalties and take a well-meaning decision 
keeping in mind the representations made by the petitioners herein. 

78. We may remind the respondents that, it cannot continue to keep the aforesaid 
issue in limbo on the pretext of ongoing process of public consultation process. 
In this regard, we may refer to the decision in State of Jharkhand v. 
Brahmputra Metallics Ltd., reported in (2023), wherein the 
following observations of this Court are significant: - 
“50. It is one thing for the State to assert that the writ petitioner 
had no vested right but quite another for the State to assert that it 
is not duty-bound to disclose its reasons for not giving effect to the 
exemption notification within the period that was envisaged in the 
Industrial Policy, 2012. Both the accountability of the State and 
the solemn obligation which it undertook in terms of the policy 
document militate against accepting such a notion of State power. 
The State must discard the colonial notion that it is a sovereign 
handing out doles at its will. Its policies give rise to legitimate 
expectations that the State will act according to what it puts forth 
in the public realm. In all its actions, the State is bound to act 
fairly, in a transparent manner. This is an elementary requirement 
of the guarantee against arbitrary State action which Article 14 of 
the Constitution adopts. A deprivation of the entitlement of private 
citizens and private business must be proportional to a 
requirement grounded in public interest. This conception of State 
power has been recognised by this Court in a consistent line of 
decisions. As an illustration, we would like to extract this Court's 
observations in National Buildings Construction Corpn. 
[National Buildings Construction Corpn. v. S. Raghunathan, 
(1998): 1998 SCC (L&S) 1770]: (SCC p. 75, para 18) 
 
“18. … The Government and its departments, in 
administering the affairs of the country, are 
expected to honour their statements of policy or 
intention and treat the citizens with full personal 
consideration without any iota of abuse of 
discretion. The policy statements cannot be 
disregarded unfairly or applied selectively. 
Unfairness in the form of unreasonableness is 
akin to violation of natural justice.”” 

 (Emphasis supplied) 

79. We may also remind the respondents of one another decision of this Court in 
Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India & Ors. reported in AIR 1979 SC 1628 wherein it was held that an executive authority 
must be rigorously held to the standard by which it professes its actions to be 
judged. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“10. [...] It is a well-settled rule of administrative law that an 
executive authority must be rigorously held to the standards by 
which it professes its actions to be judged and it must scrupulously 
observe those standards on pain of invalidation of an act in 
violation of them. [...]” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
80. Once the respondents have themselves initiated a public consultation process 
for amending the MMDR Act to inter-alia address the aforementioned 
anomaly in computation of royalty, they must take a prompt decision in this 
regard. Merely because it has the discretion to take such policy decision does 
not mean that it can endlessly keep on prolonging the decision-making process 
whereby the very discretion is rendered ad-lib and the issue in itself a forgone 
conclusion. 
 
81. Before, we close this matter, we must make a reference to the decision in 
Narottam Kishore Deb Varman v. Union of India, reported in (1964) wherein this Court was called upon to decide a batch of petitions 
challenging the validity of Section 87B of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
In the said decision, although this Court stopped short from holding the 
provision as unconstitutional yet it called upon the government to examine if 

the provision was to be allowed to continue for all times to come. It further 
observed that the considerations on which the validity of the provision is 
founded will wear out with the passage of time and may later become open to 
a serious challenge. The relevant observations read as under: - 
“11. Before we part with this matter, however, we would like to 
invite the Central Government to consider seriously whether it is 
necessary to allow Section 87-B to operate prospectively for all 
time. The agreements made with the Rulers of Indian States may, 
no doubt, have to be accepted and the assurances given to them 
may have to be observed. But considered broadly in the light of 
the basic principle of the equality before law, it seems somewhat 
odd that Section 87-B should continue to operate for all time. For 
past dealings and transactions, protection may justifiably be given 
to Rulers of former Indian States; but the Central Government 
may examine the question as to whether for transactions 
subsequent to 26th of January, 1950, this protection need or 
should be continued. If under the Constitution all citizens are 
equal, it may be desirable to confine the operation of Section 87-
B to past transactions and not to perpetuate the anomaly of the 
distinction between the rest of the citizens and Rulers of former 
Indian States. With the passage of time, the validity of historical 
considerations on which Section 87-B is founded will wear out and 
the continuance of the said section in the Code of Civil Procedure 
may later be open to serious challenge.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 
 
82. Similarly in H.H. Shri Swamiji of Shri Amar Mutt v. Commr., Hindu 
Religious and Charitable Endowments Deptt., reported in (1979), 
this Court was called upon to determine the constitutionality of application of 
the Madras Hindu Religious Charitable Endowments Act to South Kanara 
District. This Court observed that even after the passage of 23 years, no serious 
attempts were made to remove the inequality that was being caused in the 

South Kanara District by the said Act. However, this Court while refraining 
itself from declaring the law as inapplicable, called upon the legislature look 
into the issue in the hope that it would act promptly, lest the said Act suffer a 
serious and successful challenge in the not-so-distant future. The relevant 
observations read as under: - 
 
“31. But that is how the matter stands today. Twenty-three years 
have gone by since the States Reorganisation Act was passed but 
unhappily, no serious effort has been made by the State 
Legislature to introduce any legislation — apart from two 
abortive attempts in 1963 and 1977 — to remove the inequality 
between the temples and Mutts situated in the South Kanara 
Disrict and those situated in other areas of Karnataka. Inequality 
is so clearly writ large on the face of the impugned statute in its 
application to the district of South Kanara only, that it is 
perilously near the periphery of unconstitutionality. We have 
restrained ourselves from declaring the law as inapplicable to the 
district of South Kanara from today but we would like to make it 
clear that if the Karnataka Legislature does not act promptly and 
remove the inequality the application of the Madras 
Act of 1951 to the district of South Kanara only, the Act will have 
to suffer a serious and successful challenge in the not distant 
future. We do hope that the Government of Karnataka will act 
promptly and move an appropriate legislation, say, within a year 
or so. A comprehensive legislation which will apply to all temples 
and Mutts in Karnataka, which are equally situated in the context 
of the levy of fee, may perhaps afford a satisfactory solution to the 
problem. This, however, is a tentative view-point because we have 
not investigated whether the Madras Act of 1951, particularly 
Section 76(1) thereof, is a piece of hostile legislation of the kind 
that would involve the violation of Article 14. Facts in regard 
thereto may have to be explored, if and when occasion arises.” 

(Emphasis supplied) 

83. In view of the decisions referred to above, we may only say that since the 
respondents herein are already in seisin of the anomaly in computation of 
royalty and the policy is being reconsidered on the grounds raised by the 
petitioners herein, we do not say anything further as regards the provisions in 
question other than what we have observed. We clarify that this decision shall 
not preclude the petitioners from challenging the final policy decision that the 
respondents may take on completion of the ongoing consultation process. 
 
F. 
CONCLUSION 
 
84. In view of the aforesaid, we grant the respondents a period of 2-months from 
the date of pronouncement of this judgment to conclude the public 
consultation process undertaken for amending the MMDR Act initiated 
pursuant to the Notice dated 25.05.2022 and take a final decisive call in regard 
to the cascading impact of royalty on royalty in the calculation of the ‘average 
sale price’ by virtue of the Explanation(s) to Rule 38 of the MCR, 2016 and 
Rule 45 of the MCDR, 2017. 

85. The challenge to the validity of Explanation(s) appended to Rule 38 of the 
MCR, 2016 and Rule 45 of the MCDR, 2017 is answered accordingly. 

86. The Registry shall notify this matter before an appropriate Bench after a period 
of two months from the date of pronouncement of this judgment to report 
compliance of our directions.... CJI. 
(Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud)... J. 
(J.B. Pardiwala)... J. 
(Manoj Misra) 
 
New Delhi: 
November 7, 2024.