IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE/ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

Aligarh Muslim University 

…Appellant 

Versus 
 
Naresh Agarwal & Ors. 

 …Respondents 

With 

With 

With 

With 

With 

With 

With 

With 

With 

And With 
T.C. (C) No. 46 of 2023 

JUDGMENT 

Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 
 
Table of Contents 
A. Background... 5 
B. The reference and related events... 10 
C. 
Submissions... 19 
D. 
Issues... 33 
E. Analysis... 36 
i. 
The preliminary objection by the Union of India... 36 
ii. 
The scope of Article 30... 39 
a. 
The purpose of Article 30(1)... 44 
b. 
The ‘special protection’ guaranteed by Article 30(1)... 49 
iii. 
Indicia for a Minority Educational Institution... 55 
iv. Applicability of Article 30 to a ‘University’ established before the 
commencement of the Constitution... 64 
a. 
Article 30(1) applies to educational institutions established before the 
commencement of the Constitution... 65 
b. 
There is no difference between ‘Universities’ and ‘colleges’ established 
before the commencement of the Constitution... 69 
c. 
The minority character of the institution is not ipso facto surrendered upon 
the incorporation of the University... 77 
d. 
‘Minority’ as on the commencement of the Constitution... 88 

v. 
Indicia for the ‘establishment’ of a minority educational institution.. 91 
vi. Impact of Entry 63 of List I on the minority status of educational 
institutions... 103 
vii. 
The decision of this Court in Prof. Yashpal... 107 
viii. 
The amendment of the NCMEI Act in 2010... 112 
ix. Registration under the Societies Registration Act... 114 
F. Conclusion... 115 

PART A 

1. 
Article 30 of the Constitution of India guarantees to religious and linguistic 
minorities, the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their 
choice. The issues which arise for adjudication in this reference pertain to the 
criteria to be fulfilled to qualify as a minority educational institution for the 
purpose of Article 30(1) of the Indian Constitution. 
A. 
Background 
2. 
In 1977, the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College was established in Aligarh. 
The college was a teaching institution affiliated to the Calcutta University at 
first and subsequently to the Allahabad University. The imperial legislature 
passed the Aligarh Muslim University Act 1920.1 The enactment, as the 
preamble indicates, “established and incorporated” Aligarh Muslim 
University2. The AMU Act was amended by the Aligarh Muslim University 
(Amendment) Act 19513 and Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) Act 
19654. The amendments related to the religious instructions of Muslim 
students5 and the administrative set-up of the university6. Proceedings under 
Article 32 of the Constitution were instituted before this Court for challenging 
 
1 “AMU Act” 
2 “AMU” 
3 “1951 Amendment Act” 
4 “1965 Amendment Act” 
5 Section 8 was amended to stipulate that it would be unlawful for the University to adopt or impose any test 
of religious belief for admission or recruitment except where the religious test was made a condition for 
benefaction. The amended proviso to the provision stipulated that nothing in the Section shall be deemed to 
prevent the provision of religious instruction to those who consent to it. Section 9 which empowered the Court 
to mandate religious instruction for Muslim students was deleted by the amendment. Section 23(1), which 
provided that all members of the Court would be Muslims, was also deleted. 
6 Section 23 of the AMU Act was amended to delete clauses (2) and (3). By this amendment, the powers of 
the Court were significantly reduced. The Court which was the supreme governing body of the University 
now only had the power to advise the Visitor or any other authority of the University on matters which may 
be referred to it for advice and exercise powers assigned to it by the Visitor. The powers of the Court were 
instead placed in the hands of the Executive Council. The composition of the Court (which was an all-Muslim 
body) was also amended. The process of constituting the Court and the Executive Council was also 
amended. 

PART A 

the constitutional validity of the 1951 Amendment Act and the 1965 
Amendment Act. A Constitution Bench in the decision in S Azeez Basha v. 
Union of India7 upheld the constitutional validity of the Amendments. The 
petitioners made a three-fold argument: (a) AMU was established by Muslims, 
who are a religious minority for the purposes of Article 30(1); (b) Article 30(1) 
guarantees Muslims the right to administer the University established by 
them; and (c) the 1951 and 1965 Amendments are violative of Article 30(1) to 
the extent that it infringed the right of the Muslim community to administer the 
institution. Article 30 is extracted below: 
“30. Right of minorities to establish and administer 
educational institutions.—(1) All minorities, whether 
based on religion or language, shall have the right to 
establish and administer educational institutions of 
their choice. 
(1A) In making any law providing for the compulsory 
acquisition of any property of an educational 
institution established and administered by a 
minority, referred to in clause (1), the State shall 
ensure that the amount fixed by or determined under 
such law for the acquisition of such property is such 
as would not restrict or abrogate the right 
guaranteed under that clause. 
(2) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational 
institutions, discriminate against any educational 
institution on the ground that it is under the 
management of a minority, whether based on 
religion or language.” 
The amendments were also impugned on the ground that they violated 
Articles 14, 19, 25, 26, 29 and 31 of the Constitution. 
 
 SC 662 

PART A 

3. 
The Union of India opposed the petitions, arguing that the Muslim minority did 
not have the right to administer AMU since they had not established the 
institution. It was submitted that AMU was established by Parliament. That 
being the case, it was contended that the amendments were not violative of 
Article 30(1). 
4. 
A Constitution Bench dismissed the writ petitions in Azeez Basha (supra). 
The challenge on the ground of violation of Article 30(1) was rejected on the 
following grounds: 
a. 
The phrase “establish and administer” in Article 30(1) must be read 
conjunctively. Religious minorities have the right to administer those 
educational institutions which they established. Religious minorities do 
not have the right to administer educational institutions which were not 
established by them, even if they were administering them for some 
reason before the commencement of the Constitution; 
b. 
The word “establish” in Article 30(1) means “to bring into existence”; 
c. 
AMU was not established by the Muslim minority for the following 
reasons: 
i. 
AMU was brought into existence by the AMU Act, which was 
enacted by Parliament in 1920. Section 6 of the AMU Act provides 
that the degrees conferred to persons by the University would be 
recognised by the government. This provision indicates that AMU 
was established by the Government of India because the Muslim 

PART A 

minority could not have insisted that the degrees conferred by a 
university established by it ought to be recognized by the 
Government. The AMU Act may have been passed as a result of 
the efforts of the Muslim community but that does not mean that 
AMU was established by them; 
ii. 
The conversion of the College to the University was not by the 
Muslim minority but by virtue of the 1920 Act; and 
iii. 
Section 4 of the AMU Act by which the MAO College and the 
Muslim University Association were dissolved, and the properties, 
rights and liabilities in the societies were vested in AMU shows that 
the previous bodies legally ceased to exist; 
d. 
Since the Muslim community did not establish AMU, it cannot claim a 
right to administer it under Article 30(1). Thus, any amendment to the 
AMU Act would not be ultra vires Article 30 of the Constitution; 
e. 
The argument that the administration of the University vested in the 
Muslim community though it was not established by them was rejected. 
The administration of AMU did not vest in the Muslim minority under the 
AMU Act for the following reasons: 
i. 
 Although all the members of the Court (which was the supreme 
governing body in terms of Section 23 of the AMU Act) were 
required to be Muslims, the electorate (which elected the members 
of the Court) did not comprise exclusively of Muslims; 

PART A 

ii. 
Other authorities of AMU such as the Executive Council and the 
Academic Council were tasked with the administration of the 
University and were given significant powers. The members of 
these bodies were not required to be Muslims; 
iii. 
The Governor General (who was the Lord Rector) was also 
entrusted with certain “overriding” powers concerning the 
administration of the University. The Governor General was not 
required to be a Muslim. In terms of Section 28(3), the Governor 
General had overriding powers to amend or repeal the Statutes. 
The Governor General possessed similar powers with respect to 
amending or repealing Ordinances. In terms of Section 40, the 
Governor General had the power to remove any difficulty in the 
establishment of the University; and 
iv. 
The Visiting Board which consisted of the Governor of the United 
Provinces, the members of the Executive Council and Ministers 
were not necessarily required to be Muslims; 
f. 
The term “establish and maintain” in Article 26 must be read 
conjunctively, like the phrase “establish and administer” in Article 30. 
Assuming that educational institutions fall within the ambit of Article 26, 
the Muslim community does not have the right to maintain AMU because 
it did not establish it; and 
g. 
The impugned amendments do not violate Articles 14, 19, 25, 29 and 
31. 

PART B 

B. 
The reference and related events 
5. 
In 1981, a two-Judge Bench of this Court in Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya v. 
District Inspector of Schools8 was faced with a question of whether 
V.M.H.S Rehmania Inter College is a minority educational institution. By an 
order dated 26 November 1981, the Bench questioned the correctness of 
Azeez Basha (supra) and referred the matter to a Bench of seven Judges, in 
the following terms: 
“After hearing counsel for the Parties, we are clearly 
of the opinion that this case involves two substantial 
questions regarding the interpretation of Article 30(1) 
of the Constitution of India. The present institution 
was founded in the year 1938 and registered under 
the Societies Registration Act in the year 1940. The 
documents relating to the time when the 
institution was founded clearly shows that while 
the institution was established mainly by the 
Muslim community but there were members 
from the non-Muslim community also who 
participated in the establishment process. The 
point that arises is as to whether Art. 30(1) of the 
Constitution envisages an institution which is 
established by minorities alone without the 
participation for the factum of establishment 
from any other community. On this point, there 
is no clear decision of this court. There are some 
observations in S. Azeez Basha & ors. Vs. Union of 
India 1968(1) SCR 333, but these observations can 
be explained away. Another point that arises is 
whether soon after the establishment of the 
institution if it is registered as a Society under 
the Society Registration Act, its status as a 
minority institution changes in view of the broad 
principles laid down in S. Azeez Basha's case. 
Even as it is several jurists including Mr. Seervai 
have expressed about the correctness of the 
decision of this court in S. Azeez Basha's case. 
Since the point has arisen in this case we think 
that this is a proper occasion when a larger 
bench can consider the entire aspect fully. We, 
 
8 W.P.(C) No. 54-57 of 1981 

PART B 

therefore, direct that this case may be placed 
before Hon. The Chief Justice for being heard by 
a bench of at least 7 judges so that S. Azeez 
Basha's case may also be considered and the 
points that arise in this case directly as to the 
essential conditions or ingredients of the 
minority institution may also be decided once for 
all. A large number of jurists including Mr. Seervai, 
learned counsel for the petitioners Mr. Garg and 
learned counsel for respondents and interveners Mr. 
Dikshit and Kaskar have stated that this case 
requires reconsideration. In view of the urgency it is 
necessary that the matter should be decided as early 
as possible we give liberty to the counsel for parties 
to mention the matter before Chief Justice.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
The above extract indicates that the following three questions were of concern 
to this Court: (i) the essential conditions or ingredients of a minority educational 
institution; (ii) whether the expression ‘establish’ in Article 30 means that the 
institution should be established only by a minority without any association by 
other communities; and (iii) whether the registration under the Societies 
Registration Act 1860 after the establishment of the institution alters its 
character. 
6. 
About a month after the order referring the matter to a Bench of seven Judges, 
the AMU Act was amended. On 31 December 1981, the Aligarh Muslim 
University (Amendment) Act 19819 received the assent of the President. 
Various provisions of the AMU Act were amended, including the long title and 
preamble from which the words “establish and” were omitted.10 Section 2(l) 
which defined the term ‘University’ was also amended.11 After the 
 
9 AMU (Amendment) Act 1981 
10 AMU (Amendment) Act 1981, Section 2 
11 AMU (Amendment) Act 1981, Section 3 

PART B 

amendment, ‘University’ was defined to mean “the educational institution of 
their choice established by the Muslims of India, which originated as the 
Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental College, Aligarh, and which was subsequently 
incorporated as the Aligarh Muslim University.” The amendment included 
Section 5(2)(c) by which the University was required to promote “the 
educational and cultural advancement of the Muslims of India”12. 
7. 
In 2002, an eleven-Judge Bench of this Court in TMA Pai Foundation v. 
State of Karnataka13 heard a batch of tagged matters which included 
Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya (supra). This Court formulated a question which 
reflected the reference made in Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya (supra). The 
question was as follows: what is the indicia for an educational institution to be 
a minority education institution to which the rights in Article 30 would apply: 
“3(a) What are the indicia for treating an educational 
institution as a minority educational institution? 
Would an institution be regarded as a minority 
educational institution because it was established by 
a person(s) belonging to a religious or linguistic 
minority or its being administered by a person(s) 
belonging to a religious or linguistic minority?” 
8. 
Despite framing the question arising from the reference, this Court did not 
answer it in TMA Pai (supra). The decision stated that a regular Bench would 
adjudicate the question. However, the regular Bench disposed of the matters 
before it on 11 March 2003 without answering the question. 
 
12 AMU (Amendment) Act 1981, Section 4 
13 (2002) 

PART B 

9. 
Separately, AMU proposed a policy for admission into its post-graduate 
medical course by which 50% of the seats were reserved for Muslim 
candidates. The proposal was accepted by the Union of India. Proceedings 
were initiated under Article 226 for challenging the constitutional validity of the 
reservation policy. 
10. The petitioners argued that the reservation policy by which 50% of the seats 
were earmarked for Muslims was unconstitutional because AMU was not a 
minority educational institution in view of the judgment of this Court in Azeez 
Basha (supra). They averred that the amendments to Sections 2(l) and 
5(2)(c) of the AMU Act by the AMU (Amendment) Act 1981 attempted to 
overrule the judgment in Azeez Basha (supra) without altering the basis of 
the decision in that case. In response, AMU contended that the AMU 
(Amendment) Act 1981 had the effect of changing the basis of Azeez Basha 
(supra) and that AMU was a minority institution after the amendment, and 
thus was entitled to reserve seats for candidates from the Muslim community. 
11. A Single Judge of the Allahabad High Court in the decision in Dr. Naresh 
Agarwal v. Union of India declared the reservation policy unconstitutional 
on the following grounds:14 
a. 
The basis for the decision in Azeez Basha (supra) was Sections 3, 4, 
and 6. These provisions were not amended by the AMU (Amendment) 
Act 1981. The deletion of the word ‘establish’ from the long title and the 
preamble, and the amendment to the definition of the term ‘University’ in 
 
14 2005 SCC OnLine All 1705 

PART B 

Section 2(l) are not sufficient to hold that AMU is a minority institution 
under Article 30; 
b. 
The Muslim community willingly surrendered the right to administer the 
University to statutory bodies; 
c. 
The amendment to Section 2(l) is a legislative action which encroaches 
on judicial power and is akin to Parliament functioning as an appellate 
court or tribunal. To prevent Section 2(l) from being struck down for 
overruling Azeez Basha (supra), it is necessary to read down the term 
"established" in the amended AMU Act as referring to MAO College; and 
d. 
AMU, not being a minority institution, is not entitled to the protection of 
Article 30 and shall not provide for reservation on the basis of religion as 
this would amount to a violation of Article 29(2). 
12. The Court declared AMU’s reservation policy unconstitutional and directed 
the cancellation of the admissions made under this policy. It directed the 
University to conduct a fresh entrance examination without reservation on the 
basis of religion. 
13. The judgement in appeal by a Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court 
was reported as Aligarh Muslim University v. Malay Shukla.15 The Division 
Bench affirmed the judgment of the Single Judge, with some modifications. 
AN Ray, C.J. speaking for the Division Bench held that: 
 
15 Judgment in Special Appeal No 1321 of 2005 and connected matters, High Court of Allahabad 

PART B 

a. 
When the minority status is not assumed or admitted, the factor of 
administration and control by non-minority groups becomes important. 
The indicia for the determination of whether an educational institution is 
a minority educational institution is (i) who established it; (ii) who is 
responsible for administration; and (iii) the purpose of the establishment; 
b. 
By amending Section 2(l), Parliament attempted to overrule the decision 
in Azeez Basha (supra). This amendment does not change the basis of 
that decision because the incorporation of the University was not the 
sole factor which influenced the decision; 
c. 
Section 5(2)(c) is discriminatory. Further, it does not change the basis of 
the decision in Azeez Basha (supra); 
d. 
The removal of the words “establish and” from the long title and 
preamble of the AMU Act is impermissible because Azeez Basha 
(supra) held that incorporation and establishment are intimately 
connected. Permitting the omission of the word “establish” may give rise 
to doubts as to whether incorporation alone is sufficient for the surrender 
of the minority character of the institution; 
e. 
AMU is not merely a university but a field of legislative power in Entry 63 
of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. Section 2(l) 
modified the definition of a word in an entry in the Seventh Schedule. 
The definition of a word in the Constitution cannot be altered except 
through a constitutional amendment. The AMU (Amendment) Act 1981 
therefore suffers from lack of legislative competence; and 

PART B 

f. 
Parliament lacks the authority to create a minority institution. Only a 
minority can do so and courts may declare whether a minority has 
succeeded in establishing an institution under Article 30. 
14. Ashok Bhushan, J. concurred with AN Ray, C.J. in a separate judgment. The 
learned Judge observed that the institution must have been both established 
and administered by a minority to seek the protection of Article 30(1). The 
1981 Amendment, in his view, has dealt with the establishment component of 
the judgment but has left the administration component untouched. Further, 
the learned Judge agreeing with Chief Justice Ray observed that the 
requirements for a minority to establish an institution cannot be secured by 
merely altering the definition of the institution and the long title and the 
preamble of the Act. In view of the findings detailed above, the Court declared 
that AMU was not a minority institution within the meaning of Article 30 and 
struck down Sections 2(l) and 5(2)(c) as amended by the AMU (Amendment) 
Act 1981. The High Court held that the removal of the words “establish and” 
from the long title and preamble was invalid and restored them. It affirmed the 
conclusion of the Single Judge that the reservation policy was 
unconstitutional. However, it overruled the direction issued by the Single 
Judge to AMU to cancel the admission of students who had already been 
accommodated in the University on the basis of the reservation policy. 
15. On 12 February 2019, while hearing the appeal against the judgment of the 
Division Bench, a three-Judge Bench of this Court presided over by Chief 
Justice Ranjan Gogoi noticed that the High Court relied on the decision in 

PART B 

Azeez Basha (supra). It also noticed that the reference in Anjuman-e-
Rahmaniya (supra) on the correctness of Azeez Basha (supra) was yet to 
be determined. The observations in Azeez Basha (supra) that the words 
“establish” and “administer” in Article 30(1) must be read conjunctively were 
referred to. Having noticed all of the above, the three-Judge Bench observed 
that the correctness of the question arising from the decision in Azeez Basha 
(supra) is unanswered: 
“1. This Court in S. Azeez Basha and Anr. Vs. Union of 
India, inter alia, has observed as follows: 
“It is to our mind quite clear that Art. 30(1) 
postulates that the religious community will 
have the right to establish and administer 
educational institutions of their choice 
meaning thereby that where a religious 
minority 
established 
an 
educational 
institution, it will have the right to administer 
that. An argument has been raised to the 
effect that even though the religious 
minority may not have established the 
educational institution, it will have the right 
to administer it, if by some process it had 
been administering the same before the 
Constitution came into force. We are not 
prepared to accept this argument. The 
Article in our opinion clearly shows that the 
minority will have the right to administer 
educational institutions of their choice 
provided they have established them, but 
not otherwise. The Article cannot be read 
to mean that even if the educational 
institution 
has 
been 
established 
by 
somebody else, any religious minority 
would have the right to administer it 
because, for some reason or other, it might 
have been administering it before the 
Constitution came into force. The words 
“establish and administer” in the Article 
must be read conjunctively and so read it 
gives the right to the minority to administer 
an educational institution provided it has 

PART B 

been established by it. ……….We are of 
the opinion that nothing in that case 
justifies the contention raised on behalf of 
the petitioners that the minorities would 
have the right to administer an educational 
institution even though the institution may 
not have been established by them. The 
two words in Art. 30(1) must be read 
together and so read the Article gives the 
right 
to 
the 
minority 
to 
administer 
institutions established by it. If the 
educational institution has not been 
established by a minority it cannot claim the 
right to administer it under Art. 30(1).” 
[…] 
8. The said facts would show that the 
correctness of the question arising from the 
decision of this Court in S. Azeez Basha (supra) 
has remained undetermined. 
9. That apart, the decision of this Court in Prof. 
Yashpal and another vs. State of Chhattisgarh 
and others and the amendment of the National 
Commission for Minority Educational Institutions 
Act, 2004 made in the year 2010 would also 
require an authoritative pronouncement on the 
aforesaid question formulated, as set out above, 
besides 
the 
correctness 
of 
the 
view 
expressed in the judgment of this Court in S. 
Azeez 
Basha 

which 
has 
been 
extracted above.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
16. The three-Judge Bench then referred the matter to a seven-Judge Bench. 
17. When this matter was taken up for hearing, the Union of India sought to 
withdraw its appeal against the decision of the Division Bench of the 
Allahabad High Court.16 This Court is competent to hear the present case 
 
16, Supreme Court of India 

PART C 

even if the Union of India was permitted to withdraw its appeal because the 
other appellants continue to press their case. 
C. 
Submissions 
18. The petitioners broadly contend that the decision in Azeez Basha (supra) is 
not correct, and that AMU is a minority institution. The submissions of the 
learned counsel on behalf of the petitioners and the intervenors are 
summarized below. 
19. Dr. Rajeev Dhawan, learned senior counsel made the following submissions: 
a. 
The Union of India's recent attempt to withdraw its appeal against the 
minority status of AMU contradicts its consistent position since 1981; 
b. 
Azeez Basha (supra) is no longer good law because: 
i. 
It failed to recognize that the words 'establish' and 'administer' are 
not preconditions to define a minority but the consequential rights 
that flow from such a recognition; 
ii. 
The assumption that universities lose their minority status when 
recognized by a statute conflicts with the right of minorities to 
establish educational institutions; 
iii. 
It recognized the role of the Muslim community in the establishment 
of AMU but held that its origins and administration were rooted in 
legislation. This interpretation could restrict the recognition of 
minority institutions under Article 30; 

PART C 

iv. 
Its restrictive interpretation of the word 'establish' in Article 30(1) is 
contrary to the expansive view adopted by subsequent judgments; 
and 
v. 
This decision has been superseded by subsequent decisions like 
TMA Pai (supra), which emphasized that the religious character of 
an 
institution 
cannot 
be 
stripped 
down 
by 
government 
interventions. c. 
Upholding Azeez Basha (supra) could jeopardize the minority status of 
several 
educational 
institutions, 
including 
recognized 
minority 
institutions like St. Stephen’s College and Christian Medical College; 
d. 
Minority rights were acknowledged by the State before the adoption of 
the Constitution through various legislative enactments like the Indian 
Councils Act of 1909, and the Government of India Acts of 1919 and 
1935, which provided reservations to Muslims, Sikhs, and Christians in 
the legislature; 
e. 
The formation of AMU was characterized as a "movement" rather than 
a "surrender" by the Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental College. Provisions 
in the AMU Act, including the transfer of assets, liabilities, and special 
provisions for Muslim students, underscore the continuation of minority 
rights with the establishment of AMU; 
f. 
Entry 63 in the Union List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution 
deals with the competence of the Union to make laws regarding AMU 

PART C 

and BHU but does not determine who established or administers the 
universities. Article 30, which guarantees minority rights, cannot be 
negated merely because the institution is of national importance in terms 
of Entry 63; 
g. 
The evolution of the AMU Act can be broken down into four phases: pre-
1951 with Muslim administration, the 1951 Amendment aligning with the 
Constitution, the 1965 Amendment diluting minority status, and attempts 
to restore minority status in 1972 and 1981; 
h. 
While the 1951 amendment aligned the Act with the Constitution by 
removing compulsory religious education, the 1965 amendment diluted 
minority administration by reducing "the Court” to an advisory role, 
shifting the supreme governing authority to the "Visitor" and the 
President of India; and 
i. 
Amendments in 1972 and 1981 aimed to restore AMU to minorities. The 
1981 amendment explicitly stated that AMU was "established by the 
Muslims of India" and aimed to promote Muslim educational and cultural 
advancement. The 1981 amendment accommodated a democratic 
setup, focusing on the institution's original purpose rather than numerical 
representation. 
20. Mr Kapil Sibal, learned senior counsel made the following submissions: 

PART C 

a. 
The enactment of the Act of 1920 marked the formal recognition of the 
MAO "College" as the Aligarh Muslim University, reflecting a crucial 
legislative step in its evolution into a full-fledged University; 
b. 
Compliance with regulatory requirements, constitutionally grounded in 
Article 19(6), is crucial for university status. However, adherence to 
these regulations does not diminish the right guaranteed by Article 30 to 
minorities to establish institutions of their choice; 
c. 
Article 30 grants religious and linguistic minorities the autonomy to 
establish and administer institutions of their “choice”. Institutions 
covered by Article 30 have the flexibility to choose their administrative 
set-up, even if it includes individuals outside the minority community. 
This choice is solely vested in the institution; 
d. 
Assessing the numerical composition within the administration is 
inadequate to determine its minority status. Minority institutions have the 
prerogative to include non-minorities in their administration while 
maintaining their minority status. St. Stephen’s College, Delhi, despite 
having a Christian representation of less than 5 per cent, maintains its 
classification as a minority institution; 
e. 
The crucial factor for recognizing an educational institution as a Minority 
educational institution lies in its genesis, focusing on three key aspects: 
i. the purpose for which it was founded (educational advancement of 
the minority community); 

PART C 

ii. the identity of the founders and major fund providers (being 
substantially from the concerned minority); and 
iii. the concept's initiation by a member of the minority, 
f. 
Provisions within the AMU Act focus on governance structures, 
academic standards, and prevention of maladministration. These 
statutory measures primarily relate to the administration of the University 
and do not alter the constitutional fact of its establishment by a minority; 
g. 
"Establish" under Article 30 must be interpreted to mean ‘found’. The 
word does not cover the conversion process from a college to a 
university through the AMU Act; 
h. 
AMU was established with the objective of providing quality education 
specifically to Muslims. The exclusivity of such institutions in offering 
education tailored to the needs of minorities was not adequately 
considered by Azeez Basha (supra); 
i. 
The denial of reservation to institutions like AMU results in fewer degrees 
and job opportunities, exacerbating socio-economic disparities within 
minority groups; 
j. 
The founders of AMU satisfactorily fulfilled the five-step criteria laid down 
in TMA Pai (supra) to ascertain the right to administer. The criteria 
related to admission policies, fee structures, governance, faculty 
appointments and disciplinary action; 

PART C 

k. 
The objective of establishing AMU was to obtain the status of an 
independent university and not demonstrate allegiance to colonial 
authorities; 
l. 
A minority institution can accede to some regulations to maintain a 
particular standard of education. With that, the institution also retains the 
right to challenge any invasive restrictions imposed on it; and 
m. 
The imperial government never interfered with the administration of the 
University after it was incorporated. MAO College was also supervised 
by the British government even when it was not a university. MAO 
College was acknowledged as a minority institution under Azeez Basha 
(supra). 
21. Mr Salman Khurshid, learned senior counsel made the following submissions: 
a. 
Adopting a 'political, moral reading' of Article 30 would facilitate a 
broader interpretation of the term 'established'. Ronald Dworkin’s 
definition of a 'political moral reading' involves invoking moral principles 
about political decency and justice for interpreting constitutional 
provisions17; 
b. 
Aligarh Tehzeeb represents a distinctive cultural ethos cultivated by the 
AMU. This unique cultural identity encompasses traditions, values and 
practices that have evolved within the university; 
 
17 Reliance was placed on Ronald Dworkin, “The Moral Reading of the Constitution” (March 21, 1996). 

PART C 

c. 
The concept of takeover in the context of educational institutions can be 
categorized into non-consensual and consensual takeovers. In the case 
of AMU, there was a consensual takeover, where changes and 
amendments were made to its structure and character through a process 
that involved the University's participation and consent; and 
d. 
AMU was founded by members of the community. The societies formed 
for this purpose had a crucial role in the establishment and evolution of 
the University, contributing resources, support and a collective vision 
that shaped the identity and character of AMU. 
22. Mr. Shadan Farasat, learned counsel submitted that: 
a. 
The purpose of Article 30 rests primarily on two grounds: 
i. 
 The ability to retain the minority identity; 
ii. 
The ability to fully participate in the national mainstream; 
Azeez Basha (supra) adopts an approach by which the institution could 
either retain the minority status or integrate into the national mainstream 
and lose it; 
b. 
The Indian secularism model allows state involvement in religious 
activities without compromising their character; 
c. 
In advocating for a broader interpretation of 'establish' in Article 30, there 
is a need to distinguish between 'establish' and 'incorporate' to better 
preserve constitutional protection for minority educational institutions. 

PART C 

The AMU Act of 1920 only “incorporated” AMU. This is fundamentally 
different from the establishment of the institution; 
d. 
Stripping away the minority character of AMU would diminish its 
significant place in history since the institution has led to: 
i. 
The creation of a Muslim-educated middle class; and 
ii. 
The education of women. e. 
The validity of the 1981 amendment should not be considered in this 
case. The Parliament enacted it to reinstate AMU's minority status, 
which is now being contested by the current Union government. 
Considering the Union's arguments requires reassessing Parliament's 
reasoning behind the law. 
23. Mr MR Shamshad, learned counsel submitted that an inclusive definition of 
‘minority educational institutions’ includes universities established and 
administered by minorities. 
24. The respondents broadly submitted that Azeez Basha (supra) is good law, 
and that AMU is not a minority institution. They argued that AMU was 
established by Parliament. The submissions of the learned counsel on behalf 
of the respondents and the intervenors are summarized below. 
25. Mr R Venkataramani, Attorney General for India appearing for the Union of 
India, made the following submissions: 

PART C 

a. 
The right guaranteed by Article 30 can only be exercised if there is 
legislation in place to enable the establishment and administration of 
minority institutions. This legislation should empower minorities to form 
institutions under constitutional provisions; and 
b. 
While Article 30 guarantees minorities certain rights, they are not exempt 
from 
other 
constitutional 
requirements, 
particularly 
regarding 
reservation. 
26. Mr Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General of India appearing for the Union of India, 
made the following submissions: 
a. 
Azeez Basha (supra) correctly recognized the choices available to AMU 
in 1920. It had the choice of either affiliating with another university or 
surrendering its minority status to the imperial government; 
b. 
Under the AMU Act, AMU voluntarily surrendered its minority institution 
status to the imperial government. This is shown by the historical context 
of the Aligarh Split, where the institution's leaders chose cooperation 
with the British government over retaining its Muslim character; 
c. 
The British government exerted control over AMU, as evidenced by 
provisions in the 1920 Act. The Lord Rector had significant authority in 
the administration of the institution. The Act dissolved the previous 
governing body and transferred property and decision-making authority 
to secular government authorities; 

PART C 

d. 
The 1920 Act was a substantive statute which dealt with the specifics of 
the administration of the institution. The administration of the institution 
predominantly vested with the non-minority; 
e. 
The British government mandated that AMU should not be a religious 
institution and should be controlled by secular authorities; 
f. 
Amendments in 1951 made the 1920 Act consistent with constitutional 
provisions. This affirmed that AMU was established by statute, not by 
the minority community; 
g. 
Justice M.C. Chagla in the course of legislative debates in 1965 stated 
that AMU was neither established nor administered by minorities. Azeez 
Basha (supra) correctly held that AMU surrendered its minority status to 
the British Government; 
h. 
The validity of the 1981 amendment is questionable, as it is contrary to 
previous judicial decisions; 
i. 
The 1981 reference sought clarity on the definition of a minority 
educational institution. The reference did not include the question of 
whether AMU is a minority educational institution. Legal challenges in 
2005 regarding reservations for Muslims in postgraduate programs led 
to the current reference. This reference also focused on a specific legal 
question without reopening factual controversies; 
j. 
The term "establish" under Article 30 should be interpreted to mean 
tangible and manifest establishment. The indicia to decide the minority 

PART C 

character of an institution contemplated under Article 30(1) of the 
Constitution, must include the following: 
i. 
The institution/university must necessarily be established and 
administered by the minority community; and 
ii. 
The institution/university should be established by the minority, for 
the minority and as a minority institution. k. 
There are concerns about the potential misuse of minority status without 
a strict standard of actual establishment. The drafting history of 
fundamental rights under Articles 29 and 30 consistently uses “establish” 
and “administer” conjunctively and further expresses apprehensions 
about an over-expansive interpretation of these Articles; 
l. 
The genesis of an institution does not determine its minority status. 
Legislative enactments are the final authority on the establishment, as 
seen in legislations where the minority status is explicitly recognised; 
m. 
The reliance on St. Stephen’s (supra) is self-defeating since this Court 
applied the standard of administrative control as an indicia in that case. 
The involvement of the Government in AMU's establishment, clear intent 
and specific provisions indicate the national and non-minority character 
of the institution; 

PART C 

n. 
The Nation Commission for Minority Educational Institution Act 200418 
and its Amendment in 2010 provide that an institution needs to be 
established and administered by minorities to be a minority educational 
institution. The said definition is not under challenge; and 
o. 
The consequence of recognising AMU as a minority educational 
institution is that seats cannot be reserved for the other categories of the 
Scheduled 
Castes/Scheduled 
Tribes/Socially 
and 
Educationally 
Backward Classes. 
27. Mr Rakesh Dwivedi, learned senior counsel submitted that: 
a. 
For a community to be considered a "minority," it must fulfil three criteria: 
i. 
It must be numerically lesser than the majority; 
ii. 
It cannot be the ruling group even if it is numerically smaller; and 
iii. 
The group itself should identify as a minority. b. 
Muslims were not recognized as a minority during British rule, as Hindus 
and Muslims were considered equals. Syed Ahmed Khan, the founder 
of Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental College, claimed in a letter that the 
Muslim community never considered itself as a minority and instead as 
rulers prior to the British government; 
c. 
Judgments of this Court have held that Article 30(1) applies to 
institutions that were established before the commencement of the 
 
18 “NCMEI Act” 

PART C 

Constitution. However, these decisions dealt with colleges and schools 
and not a University. Article 30(1) does not apply to a University that was 
established before the commencement of the Constitution because a 
University before the enactment of the University Grants Commission 
1956 could only have been established by the Government and not a 
person; and 
d. 
Azeez Basha (supra) was a standalone and statute-specific judgment. 
Overruling it would disrupt the Union's control over AMU, constituting 
“public mischief”. The precedent set by the case should only be 
overturned if there is a substantial risk to public interest, which is not the 
case here. 
28. Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned senior counsel submitted that: 
a. 
The correctness or validity of Azeez Basha (supra) was not within the 
purview of the reference order, which solely aimed to clarify the meaning 
of "established and administered" under Article 30; 
b. 
Parliament cannot deny a fact by creating legal fiction in a subsequent 
legislation. The 1981 amendment only attempted to change who 
“established” the University but made no change in the provision related 
to the administration of the University. It attempted to rewrite history by 
altering the recognition of the University's establishment; 
c. 
AMU's inclusion as an institution of national importance under Entry 63 
of the Union list gives the Union government sole authority over it. 

PART C 

Altering AMU's status would require a constitutional amendment rather 
than a legislative amendment; and 
d. 
Over the past decades, there has been no demand for minority status 
for AMU, as evidenced by legislative actions in 1951 and 1965. The 
demand for minority rights now would conflict with existing reservation 
rights for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and Socially and 
Economically Backward Classes. 
29. Mr Guru Krishnakumar, learned senior counsel made the following 
submissions: 
a. 
The "new sovereign," presumably referring to contemporary legislative 
and executive authorities, holds the discretion to determine the approach 
towards minority rights. This implies that decisions regarding minority 
rights are subject to the interpretation and judgment of current governing 
bodies; 
b. 
H.V. Kamath in the Constituent Assembly advocated for parliamentary 
legislation on universities to demonstrate their impartial and non-
communal nature. Similarly, Naziruddin Ahmed, a member of the Muslim 
League in the Constituent Assembly, asserted that universities were 
rightly under the Union's jurisdiction; and

PART D 

c. 
A fact established by legislation cannot override a fact recognised by the 
Court.19 
30. Mr Vijay Navare, learned senior counsel submitted that granting minority 
status to AMU would undermine Parliament's authority and interfere with 
powers vested under Entry 63. 
31. Ms. Archana Pathak Dave, learned senior counsel submitted that AMU was 
created 'by the Statute' (Act 21 of 1920) and not 'under the Statute’. 
32. Mr. Nachiketa Joshi, learned counsel submitted that the Rajya Sabha debates 
related to the amendments of 1981 reveal a misconception that this Court in 
Azeez Basha (supra) neglected AMU's history before 1920. The amendment 
failed to alter the foundational aspect of Azeez Basha (supra), which is 
centred on the Muslim community's concessions to the terms of the British 
Government. 
D. 
Issues 
33. The petitioner and the respondents disagree on whether this Bench must 
determine if AMU is a minority educational institution. In Anjuman-e-
Rahmaniya (supra), the two-Judge Bench referred the question of the 
essential ingredients of a minority education institution. This was the core 
issue which was referred to the Constitution Bench. The other two questions 
which were formulated, that is, the meaning of the phrase “establish” and the 
impact of registration under the Societies Registration Act 1860 after the 
 
19 Reliance was placed on Indira Sawhney (II) v. Union of India & Ors, AIR 2000 SC 498. 

PART D 

establishment of the institution are in essence, subsets of the core issue. The 
question of the indicia for recognising an educational institution as a minority 
educational institution was reflected in question 3(a) framed in TMA Pai 
(supra). Thus, neither was Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya (supra) nor TMA Pai 
(supra) concerned with the factual situation in Azeez Basha: that is, whether 
AMU is a minority education institution. 
34. The 2019 reference order also limits the reference to the legal aspects arising 
from the decision in Azeez Basha (supra) and not the factual aspects of the 
decision relating to AMU. This is clear from the passages from the 2019 
reference order extracted above, particularly paragraphs 8 and 9. Paragraph 
8 states that the correctness of the “question arising from” Azeez Basha 
(supra) has “remained undetermined”. The paragraph indicates that the 2019 
reference order must be read along with the previous references in both 
Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya (supra) and TMA Pai Foundation (supra). 
Paragraph 9 mentions that the correctness of the view in Azeez Basha 
(supra) “which has been extracted above” requires an authoritative 
pronouncement. The paragraph from Azeez Basha (supra) extracted in the 
2019 reference order deals with the question of indicia to be considered a 
minority educational institution. It is evident upon a reading of the reference 
orders that only the question of the criteria to be fulfilled to qualify as a minority 
educational institution is referred to this Bench. 

PART D 

35. From the order in Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya (supra) referring the judgment in 
Azeez Basha (supra) to a larger Bench, the question formulated in TMA Pai 
(supra) and the 2019 Reference order, the question that must be decided by 
this Bench is what are the ingredients, indicia or criteria for an educational 
institution to be considered a minority educational institution under Article 30. 
The following issues must be answered for this purpose: 
a. 
Whether an educational institution must be both established and 
administered by a linguistic or religious minority to secure the guarantee 
under Article 30; 
b. 
What are the criteria to be satisfied for the ‘establishment’ of a minority 
institution? Whether Article 30(1) envisages an institution which is 
established by a minority with participation from members of other 
communities; 
c. 
Whether a minority educational institution which is registered as a 
society under the Societies Registration Act 186020 soon after its 
establishment loses its status as a minority educational institution by 
virtue of such registration; and 
d. 
Whether the decision of this Court in Prof. Yashpal v. State of 
Chhattisgarh21 and the amendment of National Commission for Minority 
 
20 “Societies Registration Act” 
21 (2005) 

PART E 

Educational Institutions Act 200522 in 2010 have a bearing on the 
question formulated above and if so, in what manner. 
E. 
Analysis 
i. 
The preliminary objection by the Union of India 
36. The Union of India advanced a preliminary objection to the reference. It 
argued that the order dated 26 November 1981 in Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya 
(supra) by which the matter was referred to a Bench of seven Judges is 
“wholly bad in law.” It relies on the decision of a Constitution Bench in Central 
Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community v. State of Maharashtra23 to argue 
that the two-Judge Bench of this Court in Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya (supra) 
could not have referred the correctness of the decision rendered by the 
Constitution Bench in Azeez Basha (supra) directly to a Bench of seven 
Judges. It was suggested that the two-Judge Bench ought to have referred 
the matter to a Bench of equal strength to the decision the correctness of 
which is doubted, that is, a Bench of five Judges. The Union of India argued 
that only a Bench of five Judges could have referred the matter to a Bench of 
seven Judges. 
37. In Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community (supra), a Constitution 
Bench discussed the legal precepts which apply to orders of reference and 
reiterated the position of law as below:24 
 
22 “NCMEI Act” 
23 (2005) 
24 Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community (supra) [12] 

PART E 

a. 
Decisions of this Court rendered by a Bench of larger strength are 
binding on Benches of a less or equal strength; 
b. 
If a Bench of lower strength is doubtful about the correctness of a 
judgment delivered by a Bench of larger strength, it cannot disagree or 
dissent from the view taken by the larger Bench. In case of doubt, it can 
invite the attention of the Chief Justice of India to its opinion and request 
the Chief Justice to list the matter before a Bench, the strength of which 
is greater than that which delivered the judgment which has been 
doubted; 
c. 
The correctness of the view taken by any Bench can only be doubted by 
a Bench of equal strength. The matter will then be placed for hearing 
before a Bench of greater strength; 
d. 
There are two exceptions to the rules discussed above: 
i. 
The discretion of the Chief Justice is not bound by the rules. As the 
master of the roster, the Chief Justice may list any case before any 
Bench of any strength; 
ii. 
Despite the rules discussed above, if a particular case has come 
up for hearing before a Bench of larger strength and that Bench is 
of the opinion that the judgment of the Bench of lower strength 
requires reconsideration or correction, or is otherwise doubtful of 
its correctness, it may dispense with the need for a reference in the 

PART E 

terms described above or an order of the Chief Justice and hear 
the matter for reasons given by it. 
38. The position of law laid down in Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra 
Community (supra) is correct. Decisions of a larger Bench are binding 
precedent, and judicial discipline and propriety dictate that Benches of lower 
strength must adhere to such decisions. This will also avoid inconsistencies 
in the development of law. Questions concerning the correctness of 
judgments must ordinarily be referred only by a Bench which is equal in 
strength to the Bench whose judgment is doubted. We also agree with the 
two exceptions to this rule, as detailed by this Court in Central Board of 
Dawoodi Bohra Community (supra). They must remain exceptions and not 
transmogrify into the rule itself. 
39. The three issues which required an authoritative pronouncement in 
Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya (supra), were not directly a point of contention in 
Azeez Basha (supra). However, the decision would have a bearing on them. 
Doubting the correctness of the opinion in Azeez Basha (supra), without 
disagreeing with it, the two-Judge Bench requested that the matter may be 
placed before the Chief Justice of India for being heard by a Bench of seven 
Judges. This falls within the permissible limits laid down in Central Board of 
Dawoodi Bohra Community (supra) as explained in point (b) of paragraph 
37. Further, the Solicitor General has also stated that he is not pressing the 
Union’s preliminary objection. The order of reference dated 12 February 
2019, too, noted that although a three-Judge Bench could not ordinarily refer 

PART E 

a case directly to a seven-Judge Bench, it was doing so in this case because 
the question was already referred to a Bench of seven Judges but was not 
answered. The reference order notes: 
“10. Ordinarily and in the normal course the judicial 
discipline would require the Bench to seek a 
reference of this matter by a Five Judges Bench. 
However, having regard to the background, as 
stated above, when the precise question was 
already referred to a Seven Judges Bench and was, 
however, not answered, we are of the view that the 
present question, set out above, should be referred 
to a Bench of Hon’ble Seven Judges. 
11. Consequently and in the light of the above, place 
these matters before the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of 
India on the administrative side for appropriate 
orders.” 
40. This Court will hear the questions referred to a seven-Judge Bench for these 
reasons. ii. 
The scope of Article 30 
41. The fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution do not operate in silos. 
In A.K. Gopalan v. State of Madras,25 the majority judgment of this Court 
held that fundamental rights operate to the mutual exclusion of one another. 
In other words, each fundamental right was understood as being distinct and 
unrelated to the others. This view of Part III of the Constitution was later 
rejected in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper v. Union of India,26 which held that 
Part III “weaves a pattern of guarantees on the texture of basic human rights. 
The guarantees delimit the protection of those rights in their allotted fields: 
 
 SC 27 
26 (1970) 

PART E 

they do not attempt to enunciate distinct rights.”27 Maneka Gandhi v. Union 
of India28 affirmed that Rustom Cavasjee Cooper (supra) overruled the 
majority judgment in A.K. Gopalan (supra). Thus, the scope of the right of 
“minorities to establish and administer educational institutions” must be 
identified in the background of the other cultural and religious rights 
guaranteed by the Constitution. 
42. Articles 25 to 28 are placed under the heading ‘Right to freedom of religion’. 
Article 25(1) stipulates that all persons are equally entitled to freedom of 
conscience, the right to freely profess, practice or propagate religion. This is 
subject, however, to public order, morality, health and other provisions of Part 
III of the Constitution. Clause (2) of Article 25 provides that nothing in Clause 
(1) would affect the operation of any existing law or prevent the State from 
enacting a law regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or 
secular activity, which may be associated with religious practice, and 
legislation providing for social welfare reform or opening Hindu religious 
institutions of public character to all classes and sections of Hindus. Article 26 
guarantees religious denominations or a section of them, the right to establish 
and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes, manage their 
own affairs in the matter of religion, to own and acquire movable and 
immovable property, and administer such property in accordance with law. 
The rights are subject to public order, morality and health. Article 27 mandates 
that no one shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the proceeds of which are 
 
27 (1970) [52] 
28 (1978) 

PART E 

to be specifically appropriated in payment of expenses for the promotion and 
maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination. 
43. Article 28, deals with the rights of individuals and secures to them vide clause 
(3), the right not to take part in any religious instructions that may be imparted 
in any educational institution recognised by the State or receiving aid of the 
State funds. The provision stipulates that a person need not attend religious 
worship conducted in such institution or any premises attached thereto unless 
he wishes to do so, and if such person is a minor, upon the consent of his 
guardian. Clause (1) of Article 28 restricts educational institutions wholly 
maintained out of the State funds29 from imparting ‘religious instructions’. 
However, clause (2) to Article 28 stipulates that clause (1) will not apply to an 
educational institution which is administered by the State but was established 
under an endowment or trust which required religious instruction to be 
imparted in such institution. The clause recognises the distinction between 
‘establishment’ and ‘administration’ of an institution. 
44. Articles 29 and 30 under the heading ‘Cultural and Educational Rights’, are 
two provisions which specifically confer rights on a section of citizens residing 
in the territory of India or a part thereof, having a distinct language, script, or 
culture. Some would say that these are in nature of special privileges, yet in 
substance, they are in the nature of guarantees and protections given by the 
Constitution not to any specific denomination by identity, but to any section of 
 
29 The expression ‘wholly maintained out of the State funds’ has been interpreted in DAV College v. State of 
Punjab (II), (1971), to mean an institution which receives grants for its expenditure that may be 
wholly maintained out of the State funds even though it receives a fee for affiliation or holding examination 
as quid pro quo. 

PART E 

the citizens which can be distinguished on the basis of language, script or 
culture. Clause (1) of Article 29 gives them the right to conserve, secure and 
extol their language, script or culture. The clause underscores the right to 
conserve and nurture the language, script or culture. Clause (2) of Article 29 
is a negative right which stipulates that no citizen shall be denied admission 
on the grounds of religion, race, caste, language, or any of them in any 
educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of the State 
funds. 
45. Though the heading of Article 29 states that it is a provision for the protection 
of the interest of minorities, the substantive portion stipulates that the right is 
available to “any section of citizens” residing in India and having a distinct 
language, script or culture of their own. Thus, Article 29 applies to non-
minorities as much as it applies to minorities, provided that the sections have 
a distinct language, script and culture of their own.30 Similarly, Articles 25 to 
28 also do not make a distinction between majority and minority religious 
sections. The provisions guarantee the right to freedom of religion to both 
minorities and non-minorities. Article 25 recognises the right of all persons 
to freedom of conscience and the right to freely profess, practice and 
propagate religion. Article 26 recognises the right of every religious 
denomination or any section thereof to manage its religious affairs. The 
provisions of Article 28 also do not distinguish between a minority and a non-
minority educational institution. The provisions apply equally to educational 
 
30 See Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College Society v. State of Gujarat, (1974), (9J) [Chief Justice 
Ray writing for himself and Justice Palekar [5,6], Justice Khanna [73], Justice Mathew writing for himself and 
Justice YV Chandrachud [125, 126]; Rev. Father W Proost v. State of Bihar [5J] (1969) [8,9] 

PART E 

institutions established by religious and linguistic minorities and non-
minorities.31 
46. The provisions noted above, whether they refer to individual rights or 
denomination rights are manifestations that India is a pluralistic society with 
different religions, practices, cultures and languages. These provisions which 
are in the nature of rights and guarantees, also prescribe the ambit of State 
interference. 
47. Article 30 consists of three clauses. Clause (1) states that all minorities 
whether based on religion or language, shall have a right to establish and 
administer educational institutions of their choice. Clause (1)(a) deals with 
the provision for compulsory acquisition of any property for an educational 
institution established and administered by a minority. We are not concerned 
per se with the said clause. Clause (2) of Article 30 provides that the State 
shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions, discriminate against any 
educational institution on the ground that it is under the management of a 
minority whether based on religion or language. 
48. The two crucial expressions which arise for consideration and interpretation 
in this decision are the words ‘establish’ and ‘administer’ used in clause (1) of 
Article 30. These two words and expressions have to be interpreted in the 
 
31 See TMA Pai (supra) [88-90;144]; “144 […] As in the case of a majority-run institution, the moment a 
minority institution obtains a grant of aid, Article 28 of the Constitution comes into play. When an educational 
institution is maintained out of State funds, no religious instruction can be provided therein. Article 28(1) does 
not state that it applies only to educational institutions that are not established or maintained by religious or 
linguistic minorities. Furthermore, upon the receipt of aid, the provisions of Article 28(3) would apply to all 
educational institutions whether run by the minorities or the non-minorities. […] Just as Articles 28(1) and (3) 
become applicable the moment any educational institution takes aid, likewise, Article 29(2) would also be 
attracted and become applicable to an educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of 
State funds.” 

PART E 

context of clause (1) to Article 30 which confers a guarantee and protection 
to minority communities based on religion or language. a. 
The purpose of Article 30(1) 
49. A brief reference to the drafting history of the provision will help us discern 
the purpose of the provision. On 19 April 1947, the Minorities Sub-Committee 
(which was appointed to examine and propose changes to the draft clauses 
of the fundamental rights Committee) submitted the interim report to the 
Chairperson of the Advisory Committee on Minorities and Fundamental 
Rights.32 The Minorities Sub-Committee recommended, inter alia, the 
inclusion of a constitutional provision that stipulated that all minorities, 
whether based on religion, community or language shall be free to establish 
and administer educational institutions of their choice.33 However, when the 
first Draft of the Constitution was submitted by the Drafting Committee to the 
President of the Constituent Assembly, the provision guaranteed a right to 
establish and administer educational institutions.34 This change in the 
language of the provision is crucial to understanding the scope of the 
provision. The provision guaranteed a purely negative group right to religious 
and linguistic minorities against the State with the use of the words “shall be 
free”, that is, the right to ensure that the State does not discriminate against 
minorities who wish to establish and administer educational institutions. 
 
32 B. Shiva Rao, The Framing of India’s Constitution: Select Documents [Vol II, The Indian Institute of Public 
Administration] 207 
33 Ibid [ 273] 
34 Draft Constitution of India 1948, Article 23(a) 

PART E 

However, upon the use of the phrase ‘right’, the possibility of interpreting the 
provision as a guarantee of a positive right arose. 
50. It cannot be disputed that Article 30(1) guarantees the minority educational 
institutions, the right to not be discriminated. In fact, Article 30(2) is a facet of 
the principle of non-discrimination of minorities. The Article provides that the 
State shall not discriminate in granting aid to educational institutions or 
discriminate on the ground that it is under the management of a religious or 
linguistic minority. The question is whether the use of ‘right’ in Article 30(1) 
also guarantees a ‘special right’ in addition to the right to non-discrimination. 
51. While there is no doubt that Article 30 protects the rights of minorities, this 
Court has in numerous judgments conceptualised varied reasons for the 
constitutional guarantee. In Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College Society v. 
State of Gujarat35, a nine-Judge Bench discussed the objective of the 
provision in detail. Chief Justice Ray writing for himself and Justice Palekar 
observed that Article 30 ensures equality between the majority and the 
minority, which would be denied in the absence of a special provision.36 
Justice HR Khanna cast the purpose of the provision in terms of substantive 
equality and observed that Article 30 guarantees ‘special rights’ to give 
minorities a ‘sense of security’. The learned Judge observed that the real 
effect of the provision was to “ensure the preservation of the minority 
institutions by guaranteeing the minorities autonomy […] in administration.”37 
 
35 (1974) 
36 Ibid [8,9] 
37 Ibid [77] 

PART E 

Justice Mathew, writing for himself and Justice YV Chandrachud, also traced 
the purpose to the guarantee to substantive equality for minorities. The 
learned Judge observed that it will be impossible to protect the group identity 
of minorities and prevent the assimilation of identities in the absence of a 
provision guaranteeing substantive equality.38 
52. Justice Mathew referred to the Advisory opinion of the Permanent Court of 
International Justice on Minority Schools in Albania to draw on the purpose of 
providing additional guarantees for minorities39. In this judgment, a crucial 
principle regarding equality and differential treatment for minority groups was 
articulated. The Permanent Court of International Justice observed that true 
equality might necessitate differential treatment to establish equilibrium 
between different situations: 
“Whereas equality in fact may involve the necessity 
of differential treatment in order to attain a result 
which establishes an equilibrium between different 
situations. It is easy to imagine cases in which 
equality of treatment of the majority and of the 
minority whose situation and requirements are 
different, would result in inequality. The equality 
between the members of the majority and of the 
minority must be effective, genuine equality…” 
53. This perspective underscores the imperative to enable minorities to maintain 
their distinctive characteristics and fulfil their specific needs. The case in 
 
38 Ibid [131-133]; “132.The problem of the minorities is not really a problem of the establishment of equality 
because if taken literally, such equality would mean absolute identical treatment of both the minorities and 
the major ities. This would result only in equality in law but inequality in fact. The distinction need not be 
elaborated for it is obvious that “equality in law precludes discrimination of any kind; whereas equality in fact 
may involve the necessity of differential treatment in order to attain a result which establishes an equilibrium 
between different situations.” 
39 Minority Schools in Albania, Advisory Opinion, PCIJ Series A/B no 64, ICGJ 314 (PCIJ 1935), 6th April 
1935, League of Nations; Permanent Court of International Justice. 

PART E 

question involved the abolition of all private schools, a measure challenged 
primarily by the minority. The Court emphasized that the rationale for the 
protection of minorities aimed at preserving their unique attributes. To achieve 
this objective, it deemed two aspects crucial. Firstly, it stressed the 
importance of ensuring that members of minority groups enjoy complete 
equality with other nationals of the state. Secondly, it emphasized the 
necessity of providing minority groups with appropriate means for preserving 
their racial peculiarities, traditions and national characteristics. 
54. Distinct and diverse languages and religions have inherent value. It is also 
indisputable that cultures are often entangled with language and religion. The 
Constitution recognises that people who practise such religions or speak such 
languages who find themselves in the minority must not be at a disadvantage 
because of their numbers. 
55. That being said, the purpose of Article 30 is not solely to enable religious 
minorities to impart religious instruction. Article 30 extends to secular 
education as well. That minorities may wish to impart secular and religious 
instruction side by side may be one aspect of the matter. Another equally 
relevant aspect is that minorities may wish to impart secular education in a 
manner that is conducive to the practice of their religion or harmonious with 
it, even if religious instruction does not form part of the curriculum. In this way, 
the right of linguistic and religious minorities to equality is protected. 
56. The nine-Judge Bench in St. Xavier’s (supra) held that Article 30(1) is in 
pursuance of the anti-discrimination and substantive equality facets of the 

PART E 

equality doctrine.40 In TMA Pai (supra), Chief Justice Kirpal writing for the 
majority of the eleven-Judge Bench observed that a law that discriminates 
based on whether the institution is established by a minority or a majority is 
unconstitutional for violation of Article 30. The Chief Justice observed that, 
however, the provision should not lead to reverse discrimination.41 This 
observation on a cursory view seems to indicate that the Court has taken a 
volte-face by shifting from a special rights/substantive equality approach of 
the provision to an anti-discrimination/formal equality reading of the provision. 
However, a closer examination reveals that the observations of the majority 
in TMA Pai (supra) were in line with the precedents that viewed the provision 
as a guarantee of a ‘special right’. This is evident from the interpretation of 
the interrelationship between Article 29(2) and Article 30. One of the issues 
in that case was whether Article 29(2) which provides that no person shall be 
denied admission in State aided educational institution only on the grounds 
of religion, race, caste, language or any of them is applicable to minority 
 
40 St. Xavier’s (supra) Chief Justice Ray for himself and Justice Palekar [9]; Justice HR Khanna [77]; Justice 
Mathew for himself and Justice YV Chandrachud [131-133] 
41 “138. As we look at it, Article 30(1) is a sort of guarantee or assurance to the linguistic and religious minority 
institutions of their right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. Secularism and 
equality being two of the basic features of the Constitution, Article 30(1) ensures protection to the linguistic 
and religious minorities, thereby preserving the secularism of the country. Furthermore, the principles of 
equality must necessarily apply to the enjoyment of such rights. No law can be framed that will discriminate 
against such minorities with regard to the establishment and administration of educational institutions vis-à-
vis other educational institutions. Any law or rule or regulation that would put the educational institutions run 
by the minorities at a disadvantage when compared to the institutions run by the others will have to be struck 
down. At the same time, there also cannot be any reverse discrimination. It was observed in St. Xavier's 
College case [(1974): (1975) ] at SCR p. 192 that: (SCC p. 743, para 9) 
“The whole object of conferring the right on minorities under Article 30 is to ensure that there will be equality 
between the majority and the minority. If the minorities do not have such special protection they will be denied 
equality.” 
In other words, the essence of Article 30(1) is to ensure equal treatment between the majority and the minority 
institutions. No one type or category of institution should be disfavoured or, for that matter, receive more 
favourable treatment than another. Laws of the land, including rules and regulations, must apply equally to 
the majority institutions as well as to the minority institutions. The minority institutions must be allowed to do 
what the non-minority institutions are permitted to do.” 

PART E 

education institutions. The opinion of the majority held that the denial of 
admission to non-minorities in minority institutions to a “reasonable extent” is 
not violative of Article 29(2) since it “preserves the minority character of the 
institution”.42 Thus, Article 30, beyond preventing the State from 
discriminating against religious and linguistic minorities who wish to establish 
educational institutions also guarantees a ‘special protection’. b. 
The ‘special protection’ guaranteed by Article 30(1) 
57. This purpose of Article 30 was further expanded in PA Inamdar v. State of 
Maharashtra43, where a seven-Judge Bench observed that the provision is 
better understood as a ‘protection’ and/ or a ‘privilege’ of the minority rather 
than an abstract right.44 What is the special guarantee that Article 30 provides 
educational institutions established by religious and linguistic minorities which 
is not otherwise available to non-minorities? 
58. Until the judgment of the eleven-Judge Bench in TMA Pai (supra), the right 
to establish and administer educational institutions was interpreted as a right 
that was exclusively available to religious and linguistic minorities by virtue of 
Article 30. In TMA Pai (supra), the right of every citizen to establish and 
administer educational institutions was traced to Article 19(1)(g)45, which 
guarantees the freedom to practise any profession, or to carry on any 
 
42 TMA Pai (supra) [133] 
43 (2005) 
44 PA Inamdar (supra) [100]; Also see St. Stephen’s (supra) [28,30(1), 59] 
45 TMA Pai (supra) [Chief Justice Kirpal 19-20]; Chief Justice Kirpal authoring the majority opinion observed 
that Article 19(1)(g) covers activities of citizens in respect of which income or profit is generated. The learned 
Judge observed that “the establishment and running of an educational institution where a large number of 
persons are employed as teachers or administrative staff, and an activity is carried on that results in the 
imparting of knowledge to the students, must necessarily be regarded as an occupation.” [para 25] 

PART E 

occupation, trade or business. The eleven-Judge Bench also traced the right 
of ‘every’ religious denomination (of both the majority and the minority) to 
establish and administer educational institutions to Article 26(a) which 
guarantees the right to establish and maintain institutions for religious and 
‘charitable’ purposes. Charitable purposes was interpreted to include 
education.46 
59. The rights guaranteed by Articles 19(1)(g) and 26(a) can be reasonably 
restricted on the grounds in Articles 19(6) and 26 respectively. An educational 
institution established and administered by any citizen can be regulated on 
the grounds stipulated in Article 19(6) which includes the ground of 
professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any 
profession or carrying on any occupation, trade, business.47 An educational 
institution established by a religious denomination (without any element of 
profit48) can be regulated on grounds of public order, morality and health. As 
opposed to these two provisions, Article 30 does not circumscribe the right on 
any grounds. This Court has, however, consistently emphasised that the right 
guaranteed by Article 30 is not absolute. 
 
46 TMA Pai (supra) [Chief Justice Kirpal 26]; “26.The right to establish and maintain educational institutions 
may also be sourced to Article 26(a), which grants, in positive terms, the right to every religious denomination 
or any section thereof to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes, subject to 
public order, morality and health. Education is a recognized head of charity. Therefore, religious 
denominations or sections thereof, which do not fall within the special categories carved out in Articles 29(1) 
and 30(1), have the right to establish and maintain religious and educational institutions. This would allow 
members belonging to any religious denomination, including the majority religious community, to set up an 
educational institution.” 
47 The right of citizens of establish and administer educational institutions does not prevent the State from 
making any law relating to: (a) professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession 
or carrying on any occupation, trade, business; (b) carrying on by the State or by a corporation owned or 
controlled by the State, of any trade, business, industry or service, whether to the exclusion, complete or 
partial of citizens or otherwise. 
48 PA Inamdar [6] 

PART E 

60. In Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai v. State of Bombay49, a Constitution Bench 
observed that Article 30 is absolute and cannot be restricted on any grounds 
such as in Article 19. However, in the very next sentence this Court observed 
that the right can be restricted on the grounds of efficiency of instruction, 
discipline, health, sanitation, morality and public order.50 It must be noticed 
that these grounds resemble the grounds for restraint prescribed in Articles 
19(6) and 26. 
61. The inconsistency of the observations in Rev. Sidhajbahi (supra) was set 
right in State of Kerala v. Very Rev. Mother Provincial51. The six-Judge 
Bench differentiated between restrictions on the autonomy of a minority 
institution and the standard of education.52 The former is impermissible in 
view of the protection under Article 30(1). The latter was traced to the 
regulation of the profession which is covered by Article 19(6). Thus, regulation 
of a minority educational institution is permissible on the grounds in Article 
19(6). However, the regulation must not infringe the minority character of the 
educational institution. Article 30(1) is absolute in that sense. Justice 
Khanna’s concurring opinion in St. Xavier’s (supra) also highlighted this 
point. The learned Judge observed that reasonable restrictions can be 
imposed to ensure that a minority educational institution is an institution of 
excellence. The examples given by the Judge included ensuring regular 
payment of salaries and audit of accounts.53 The distinction between 
 
49 1962 (3) SCR 837 
50 1962 (3) SCR 837 [849] 
51 (1970) 
52 Ibid [9, 10] 
53 St. Xavier’s [91] 

PART E 

regulation which affects the minority character and a regulation in pursuance 
of ‘national interest’ was also drawn by the opinion of the majority in TMA Pai 
(supra).54 National interest was interpreted to include public safety, national 
security and national integrity, preventing the exploitation of students or the 
teaching community, and application of general laws such as laws on 
taxation, sanitation and social welfare.55 The principle that can be inferred 
from the above precedents is that regulations that may be justified on the 
grounds stipulated in Articles 19(6) and 26 may fall foul of Article 30 if they 
infringe the ‘minority character’ of the institution.56 This is the ‘special right’ or 
‘protection’ which the Constitution guarantees minority education institutions. 
62. The right to administer was considered in some depth in St. Xavier’s (supra) 
by Chief Justice AN Ray and Justice HR Khanna. Justice Khanna 
emphasised that the right to administer an institution is to effectively manage 
and conduct the affairs of the institution. The learned Judge held that it means 
shaping the institution in congruence with their vision and ideas for best 
serving the interests of both the community and the institution. Chief Justice 
AN Ray, on the other hand, observed that the right to administer has four 
components: (a) the right to choose its managing or governing body; (b) the 
right to choose the teachers; (c) the right not to be compelled to refuse 
admission to students; and (d) the right to use its properties and assets for 
the benefit of its own institutions. The right to administer as guaranteed under 
Article 30(1) ensures autonomy in administration and the right of choice which 
 
54 TMA Pai (supra) [107] 
55 PA Inamdar (supra) [119]; TMA PAI [136] 
56 See PA Inamdar (supra)[92,122] 

PART E 

may not otherwise be available to a non-minority institution. The right to 
administration, however, does not grant a carte blanche to flout or disregard 
the regulations and controls established by statute, which are essential for 
protecting the larger public interest and maintaining educational standards. 
Thus, the right to administer is not impaired by factors such as rules and 
regulations prescribing the proper utilization of State funds, qualifications of 
the teachers, their remuneration and benefits, eligibility criteria for admission 
of students, attendance requirements and the threshold to pass the exams 
conducted by the board/university to which the college or school is affiliated. 
What is barred is the interference in the internal management and overall 
control of the institution. At the same time, we must clarify that a minority 
institution can employ non-minority employees. Non-minority individuals can 
be teachers or even hold the position of the academic or institution head. To 
hold otherwise, would amount to interference with the choice, as envisaged 
by Article 30(1). 
63. This proposition was clearly elucidated by the seven-Judge Bench in PA 
Inamdar v. State of Maharashtra57 which was formed to cull out the ratio 
decidendi of the eleven - Judge Bench in TMA Pai (supra). The degree of 
interference of the State in the administration of an educational institution 
differs based on whether the institution receives aid or recognition from the 
Government or whether the institution was established by a minority. In PA 
Inamdar (supra), this Court discussed the extent of State interference in an 
 
57 (2005) 

PART E 

(i) unaided and unrecognised/unaffiliated minority institution; (ii) unaided 
minority institution seeking recognition; and (iii) aided minority institution. In 
the case of the first class, the seven-Judge Bench held that the minority ‘can 
exercise the right to heart’s content’. Institutions that fall within the first class 
could even fill all the seats with students from their community.58 With respect 
to the second class, this Court held that the State cannot interfere in the day 
to day administration, including the essential ingredients of management, 
admission of students, recruiting staff and charging of fees.59 This Court held 
that the regulation must be reasonable and for the purpose of ensuring that 
the institution is effective for the minority and others who resort to it.60 For 
institutions that fall within the third class, the State can only regulate the 
proper utilisation of the grant without diluting the minority status of the 
educational institution.61 
64. Thus, the position that emerges is that: (i) the regulations must be relevant to 
the purpose of granting recognition (in the case of a State-recognised 
institutions) and aid (in the case of Government aided institutions); and (ii) the 
effect of the regulation must not infringe the minority character of the 
institution. 
65. From the discussion above, the following principles emerge: 
a. 
The purpose of Article 30(1) is to ensure that the State does not 
discriminate against religious and linguistic minorities which seek to 
 
58 PA Inamdar (supra) [120]; TMA Pai (supra) [145] 
59 Ibid [121] 
60 ibid [122] 
61 PA Inamdar [123]; TMA Pai [143] 

PART E 

establish 
and 
administer 
educational 
institutions 
(“the 
non-
discrimination” purpose); and 
b. 
The purpose of Article 30(1) is also to guarantee a ‘special right’ to 
religious and linguistic minorities that have established educational 
institutions. This special right is the guarantee of limited State regulation 
in the administration of the institution. The State must grant the minority 
institution sufficient autonomy to enable it to protect the essentials of its 
minority character. The regulation of the State must be relevant to the 
purpose of granting recognition or aid, as the case may be. This special 
or additional protection is guaranteed to ensure the protection of the 
cultural fabric of religious and linguistic minorities. iii. 
Indicia for a Minority Educational Institution 
66. To recall, the petitioners while challenging the 1951 and 1965 amendments 
to the AMU Act in Azeez Basha (supra) argued that the amendments were 
violative of the right to administration guaranteed by Article 30(1). The Union 
of India responded to the argument with the submission that the Muslim 
minority cannot claim the right to administration since it did not ‘establish’ the 
institution. Opposing this argument, the petitioners in Azeez Basha (supra) 
submitted that Article 30(1) guarantees the ‘right to administer’ an educational 
institution to minorities even if it was not established by them, if by “some 
process, it had been administering the same before the Constitution came 
into force.” The argument of the petitioners was rejected. This Court held that 
the words “establish” and “administer” must be read conjunctively, that is, the 

PART E 

guarantee of the right to administration is contingent on the establishment of 
the institution by religious or linguistic minorities. In this context, the following 
observations were made: 
“It is to our mind quite clear that Art. 30(1) postulates 
that the religious community will have the right to 
establish and administer educational institutions of 
their choice meaning thereby that where a religious 
minority establishes an educational institution, it will 
have the right to administer that. An argument has 
been raised to the effect that even though the 
religious minority may not have established the 
educational institution, it will have the right to 
administer it, if by some process it had been 
administering the same before the Constitution 
came into force. We are not pre-pared to accept this 
argument. The Article in our opinion clearly shows 
that the minority will have the right to administer 
educational institutions of their choice provided they 
have established them, but not otherwise. The 
Article cannot be read to mean that even if the 
educational institution has been established by 
somebody else, any religious minority would have 
the right to administer it because, for some reason 
or other, it might have been administering it before 
the Constitution came into force. The words 
"establish and administer" in the Article must be 
read conjunctively and so read it gives the right 
to the minority to administer an educational 
institution provided it has been established by it. 
… 
We are of opinion that nothing in that case justifies 
the contention raised on behalf of the petitioners that 
the minorities would have the right to administer an 
educational institution even though the institution 
may not have been established by them. The two 
words in Art. 30(1) must be read together and so 
read the Article gives the right to the minority to 
administer institutions established by it.” 

(emphasis supplied) 

PART E 

The Constitution Bench in St. Stephen’s (supra) reiterated this 
interpretation of the phrases ‘establish’ and ‘administer’ in Article 30(1).62 
67. Let us refer to Article 19(1)(a) to understand what it means to conjunctively 
read two words in a provision. Article 19 guarantees the fundamental right to 
free speech and expression. The guarantee of the freedom of expression is, 
however, not dependent on the freedom of speech. They are two separate 
rights. However, the situation differs with regard to the rights to establish and 
administer outlined in Article 30. It is settled that the rights to establish and 
administer must be read conjunctively and not disjunctively. This Court has 
not doubted this interpretation in any of the judgments subsequent to Azeez 
Basha (supra).63 
68. The question is whether the conjunctive reading of the words “establish” and 
“administer” would also mean that for an educational institution to be a 
minority institution, it should have been both established and administered by 
a minority. In Azeez Basha (supra), the Constitution Bench held that the 
institution must be both established and administered by the minority. The 
Constitution Bench framed the following three questions to determine if AMU 
was a minority educational institution: 
 
62 St Stephen’s [28] “It should be borne in mind that the words “establish” and “administer” used in Article 
30(1) are to be read conjunctively. The right claimed by a minority community to administer the educational 
institution depends upon the proof of establishment of the institution. The proof of establishment of the 
institution, is thus a condition precedent for claiming the right to administer the institute.” 
63 Manager, St. Thomas UP School v. Commr. & Secy, to general Education Dept., (2002); St. 
Stephen’s (supra); DAV College trust & Management Society v. State of Maharashtra, (2013); SP 
Mittal v. Union of India, (1983) 

PART E 

a. 
Whether on the reading of the AMU Act, the University was established 
by the Muslim minority; 
b. 
Whether the right to administer the University ever vested in the minority; 
and 
c. 
If (b) is affirmative, whether the right to administer the University was 
surrendered when AMU was established. 
69. The issue before this Bench is the indicia for an educational institution to be 
a minority educational institution. Should it be proved that the institution was 
established by the minority, or it was administered by the minority, or both? 
The petitioners and the respondents agree that the words ‘establish’ and 
‘administer’ must be read conjunctively. They argue that administration is a 
sequitur to establishment. However, they disagree on the test to be applied 
to identify a minority education institution. The petitioners argue that the only 
indicia for a minority educational institution is that it must be established by a 
minority, while the respondents argue that the dual test of establishment and 
administration must be satisfied. 
70. Before proceeding further, it is relevant to note the provisions of the NCMEI 
Act. The NCMEI Act was enacted in 2004 to constitute a National Commission 
for minority educational institutions and to provide for matters connected or 
incidental to it. Section 10 of the NCMEI Act was amended in 2006. The 
amended provision prescribed a procedure for the establishment of a minority 

PART E 

educational institution.64 Thus, there can be no ambiguity about the minority 
status of educational institutions established after the enactment of NCMEI 
(Amendment) Act 2006. However, that is not the case for institutions which 
were established before the 2006 Amendment. How do we identify if an 
educational institution established before 2006 is a minority educational 
institution? 
71. Article 30 does not prescribe conditions which must be fulfilled for an 
educational institution to be considered a minority educational institution. 
Article 30 confers two group rights on all linguistic and religious minorities: the 
right to establish an educational institution and the right to administer an 
educational institution. This right can be exercised by an individual belonging 
to a group or a collection of persons.65 As observed above, the provision 
guarantees both a positive and negative right. Thus, the provision, in addition 
to ensuring that the State does not discriminate against the minority 
community also guarantees the minority educational institution certain 
 
64 “10. Right to establish a Minority Educational Institution.- (1) Any person who desires to establish a Minority 
Educational Institution may apply to the Competent authority for the grant of the no objection certificate for 
the said purpose. 
(2) The Competent authority shall, - 
(a) on perusal of documents, affidavits or other evidence, if any; 
(b) after gving an opportunity of being heard to the applicant, decide every application filed under sub-section 
(1) as expeditiously as possible and grant or reject the application, as the case may be: 
Provided that where an application is rejected, the Competent authority shall communicate the same to the 
applicant. 
(3) Where within a period of ninety days from the receipt of the application under sub-section (1) for the grant 
of no objection certificate,- 
(a) the Competent authority does not grant such certificates; or 
(b) where an application has been rejected and the same has not been communicated to the person who 
has applied for the grant of such certificate, 
It shall be deemed that the Competent authority has granted a no objection certificate to the applicant. 
(4) The applicant shall, on the grant of a no objection certificate or where the Competent authority has 
deemed to have granted the no objection certificate, be entitled to commence and proceed with the 
establishment of a Minority Educational Institution in accordance with the rules and regulaitons, as the case 
may be, laid down by or under any law for the time being in force. 
65 Mother Provincial (supra) 

PART E 

guarantees. The institution is guaranteed the right of lesser State regulation 
and greater autonomy in the administration of the educational institution. The 
right to establish an educational institution guaranteed to the minority is not a 
special right. That, as held in TMA Pai (supra) (as explained in the preceding 
section), is a right which is available to every citizen under Article 19(1)(g) and 
to minority and non-minority religious denominations under Article 26. The 
special right that the provision guarantees to religious and linguistic minorities 
relates to the administration of educational institutions “of their choice”. The 
expression “of their choice” is of an expansive nature indicating that the 
choice extends to the full range of educational institutions. 
72. Article 30(1) cannot extend to a situation where the minority community which 
establishes an educational institution has no intention to administer it. A 
religious or linguistic community may establish an educational institution 
and yet not administer it. This is evident from Article 28(2) of the 
Constitution which states that Article 28(1) will not apply to an educational 
institution which is administered by the State but was established under an 
endowment or a trust which require religious instruction to be imparted. It 
is quite possible that a member or a group belonging to the minority 
community wishes to establish an institution but intends to accept greater 
State regulation and lesser autonomy for the community. In that case, putting 
a ‘minority’ tag on such an educational institution merely because it has been 
established by a person or a group belonging to a religious or linguistic 
minority would not be permissible under Article 30(1). An educational 
institution established by a minority, whether linguistic or religious, can give 

PART E 

up their right to claim the benefit under clause (1) of Article 30. The right can 
be given up consciously by waiver. This may occur where administration has 
been consciously and willingly entrusted to the State. Therefore, to determine 
whether an educational institution is a minority educational institution, a 
formalistic test such as to whether it was established by a person or group 
belonging to a religious or linguistic minority is not sufficient. The tests 
adopted must elucidate the purpose and intent of establishing an educational 
institution for the minority. Both the establishment and the administration by 
the minority must be fulfilled cumulatively for that.66 
73. In Azeez Basha (supra), the Constitution Bench referred to the judgment in 
The Durgah Committee, Ajmer v. Syed Hussain Ali67, for the proposition 
that even if a minority established an educational institution, it may lose the 
concomitant right of administration in certain circumstances. The relevant 
observations are extracted below: 
“We should also like to refer to the observations in The Durgah 
Committee, Ajmer v. Syed Hussain Ali. In that case this Court 
observed while dealing with Art. 26(a) and (d) of the 
Constitution that even if it be assumed that a certain religious 
institution was established by a minority community it may 
lose the right to administer it in certain circumstances. We 
may in this connection refer to the following observations at p. 
414 for they apply equally to Art. 30(1): 
“If the right to administer the properties never 
vested in the denomination or had been validly 
surrendered by it or had otherwise been 
effectively and irretrievably lost to it, Art. 26 
cannot be successfully invoked.” 
 
66 See Section E(v) of this judgment for an expansive elucidation of the indicia. 
67 (1962) 1 S.C.P 383 

PART E 

74. In Azeez Basha (supra), in addition to determining if AMU was established 
by a Muslim minority, this Court also determined whether it was ever 
administered by them or if the administration was validly surrendered by them, 
on the basis of the above observations. 
75. The context of the above observations in Durgah Committee (supra) and its 
application to the interpretation of Article 30(1) needs to be clarified. In that 
case, the constitutional validity of the Durgah Khwaja Saheb Act 195568 was 
challenged by the Khadims of the tomb for violation of Article 26(c) and Article 
26(d) of the Constitution. To offer a brief background, Khwaja Saheb was a 
saint who came to India at the end of the 12th Century AD and settled in Ajmer. 
A tomb in the form of a kutcha structure was built immediately after his death. 
However, there were no endowments at this time. Akbar, the Mughal 
emperor, took interest in the tomb and rebuilt it. Documents also indicate that 
eighteen villages were endowed to the Durgah. During this period, a 
descendant of the Saint functioned as the Sajhadanashin and Mutawalli. 
During the rule of Shahjahan, the office of Sajhadanashin and Mutawalli were 
separated. The Mutawalli was solely made responsible for the management 
of the properties of the Durgah and was appointed by the Ruler. Over the 
years, this model was not altered. The Mutawalli was always appointed by the 
Government in power. 
76. Section 4(1) of the Durgah Act dealt with the appointment of a Committee in 
which the administration, control and management of the Durgah Endowment 
 
68 “Durgah Act” 

PART E 

would vest. The members of the Committee would be appointed by the 
Central Government. These two provisions were challenged on the ground 
they were ultra vires Article 26(c) and Article 26(d). In this context, the 
Constitution Bench observed that the denomination will not have a right to 
administer the property if it never had the right to administer it; if it had been 
surrendered; or if it had been irretrievably lost: 
“37. […] In other words, if the denomination 
never had the right to manage the properties 
endowed in favour of a denominational 
institution as for instance by reason of the 
terms on which the endowment was created, 
it cannot be heard to say that it has acquired 
the said rights as a result of Article 26(c) and 
(d)…If the right to administer the properties 
never vested in the denomination or had been 
validly surrendered by it or has otherwise been 
effectively and irretrievably lost to it Article 26 
cannot be successfully invoked. […]” 
77. On the facts of the case, the Constitution Bench observed that the 
endowments were made on such terms that did not confer the right to manage 
the properties to the denomination. This Court held that the right to administer 
the property could not be claimed if the terms of the endowment did not confer 
administration to the denomination. 
78. Azeez Basha (supra) relied on the decision of the Constitution Bench in 
Durgah Committee (supra) which dealt with clauses (c) and (d) of Article 26 
which guarantee the right of any religious denomination to own property and 
administer such property. They were not made in the context of Article 26(a) 
by which the right to establish and maintain institutions is conferred on 
religious denominations. 

PART E 

79. A parallel could have been drawn between the right guaranteed by Article 
26(a) and Article 30(1), which is what this Court in Azeez Basha (supra) 
attempted to do. However, a parallel cannot be drawn between clauses (c) 
and (d) of Article 26, and Article 30(1). The rights differ in nature and scope. 
Article 26(d) guarantees the right to administer property in ‘accordance with 
law’. The provision does not confer any special right to administration as in 
the case of minority educational institutions. iv. 
Applicability of Article 30 to a ‘University’ established before the 
commencement of the Constitution 
80. Mr Rakesh Dwivedi, senior counsel appearing for the respondents made two 
submissions on the application of Article 30 to educational institutions which 
were established before the commencement of the Constitution. First, he 
urged that the claimant must prove that they were a linguistic or religious 
minority when the institution was established and not when the Constitution 
commenced; and second, before the Constitution was adopted, Universities 
(unlike schools and colleges which could be established by persons) could 
only be established by the Imperial Government. Thus, Universities which 
could not have been established by persons before the Constitution was 
adopted cannot, according to the submission, claim a right under Article 30. 
The observations in re Kerala Education Bill69, Rev. Bishop SK Patro v. 
State of Bihar70 and St. Stephen’s (supra) that Article 30(1) applies to 
educational institutions which were established before the Constitution was 

70 (1969) 

PART E 

adopted were distinguished on the ground that those cases dealt with 
colleges and schools, and not Universities. The learned Attorney General also 
made a similar argument. He submitted that in the absence of a legal 
competence to establish a given class of institutions (that is, universities), the 
question of availing of all attendant rights and claims in relation to Article 30 
cannot arise. In the subsequent sections, we will answer the following two 
questions: 
a. 
Whether ‘universities’ established before the commencement of the 
Constitution are excluded from the purview of Article 30(1); and 
b. 
Whether those who established an educational institution have to prove 
that they were a minority at the time of establishment. a. 
Article 30(1) applies to educational institutions established before 
the commencement of the Constitution 
81. In re the Kerala Education Bill 1957 (supra), a seven-Judge Bench of this 
Court held that Article 30 applies to educational institutions which predate the 
Constitution. This Court held that the right to administer guaranteed by Article 
30(1) is wide enough to cover educational institutions established both before 
and after the Constitution was adopted: 
“22. … There is no reason why the benefit of 
Article 30(1) should be limited only to 
educational institutions established after the 
commencement of the Constitution. The 
language employed in Article 30(1) is wide 
enough to cover both pre-Constitution and 
post-Constitution institutions. It must not be 
overlooked that Article 30(1) gives the 

PART E 

minorities two rights, namely, (a) to establish, 
and (b) to administer, educational institutions 
of their choice. The second right clearly covers 
pre-Constitution schools just as Article 26 
covers the right to maintain pre-Constitution 
religious institutions. …” 
82. Although the opinion in that case was rendered in exercise of the advisory 
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 143, it has immense persuasive value.71 
The judgment in In re Kerala Education Bill (supra) has held the field for 
many decades. Subsequent decisions of this Court have also relied on it. The 
decision in Azeez Basha (supra) observed that Article 30 would be “robbed 
of much of its content” if it were held to apply only to educational institutions 
established after the commencement of the Constitution.72 The Constitution 
Bench in SK Patro (supra) also held the same. In that case, an educational 
institution which was established in 1854 received the protection of the rights 
guaranteed by Article 30(1).73 In St. Stephen’s (supra), a Constitution Bench 
held that St. Stephen’s College which was established in 1881 is a minority 
educational institution for the purposes of Article 30(1). 
83. A distinction between educational institutions established before and after 
the commencement of the Constitution cannot be made for the purposes of 
Article 30(1). Article 30 will stand diluted and weakened if it is to only apply 
prospectively to institutions established after the commencement of the 
Constitution. The protection and guarantee, if made applicable to only 
institutions established after the commencement of the Constitution, would 
 
71 In re Special Courts Bill, (1979) 
72 Azeez Basha [19] 
73 SK Patro [17] 

PART E 

debase and defile the object and purpose of the provision. The adoption of 
the Constitution reflects a break from the system of sovereign and potentate 
government under the colonial regime and the dawn of governance based on 
the rule of law. It secures to the minority educational institutions, rights under 
the Constitution from the date of its commencement. 
84. The Constitution annihilates the vestiges of colonial rule as reflected in Article 
395. Article 395 repeals the two enactments that established the system of 
governance in pre-independent India: the Indian Independence Act 1947 and 
the Government of India Act 1935. Article 395 repudiates the chain of 
colonial continuity and symbolises constitutional autochthony by repealing 
the Indian Independence Act 1947. At the same time, Article 372 
represents the thread of continuity even when a new system of governance 
is put in place. Article 372 stipulates that all laws which were in force in the 
territory of India before the commencement of the Constitution will continue 
in force. However, the only caveat was that the laws must not be inconsistent 
with the provisions of the Constitution. Laws that are violative of the provisions 
of Part III would be void to the extent of the inconsistency.74 It is crucial to 
note that Article 13(1) renders the laws to the extent of contravention void and 
not void ab initio. Thus, the Constitution does not fully overhaul the system of 
governance and administration. Rather, it only ensures that the governance 
is in accordance with the rules prescribed in the Constitution. To put it in legal 
terms, Article 13(1) has a retroactive effect and not a retrospective effect. A 
 
74 Constitution of India, Article 13(1) 

PART E 

provision is retrospective if it alters the position of law before its 
enactment/commencement. It is retroactive if it imposes new results for 
previous actions.75 Upon the commencement of the Constitution, citizens 
received the protective cover of Part III. Article 372 read with Article 13(1) 
stipulates that laws which pre-date the Constitution are unconstitutional if they 
contravene the fundamental rights.76 The provisions do not stipulate that laws 
which pre-date the Constitution cannot receive the additional protection which 
the fundamental rights offer. The right to administration in Article 30(1) is one 
such protection. 
85. What is the scope of Article 30 when read in the context of Article 372 read 
with Article 13? Any law enacted by the Imperial Legislature which 
discriminates against linguistic and religious minorities in the establishment 
and administration of educational institution would be void. This is the scope 
of the provision vis-à-vis Articles 372 and 13 when Article 30 is purely read as 
a negative right. But, this Court has also interpreted the Article as a ‘special 
rights’ provision guaranteeing additional protection to educational institutions 
established by minorities. Thus, educational institutions established by 
religious and linguistic minorities before the commencement of the 
Constitution will also receive the special protection guaranteed by Article 
30(1): the right to administration without the infringement of their minority 
character. 
 
75 SEBI v. Rajpur Nagpal,(2023) [99-102] 
76 See Keshavan Madhava Menon v. State of Bombay, AIR 1951 SC 128 

PART E 

86. If the argument as propounded is accepted, we will have two sets of minority 
educational institutions, one established before the commencement of the 
Constitution which is deprived of the guarantee given under Article 30(1), and 
those established after the commencement of the Constitution which are 
entitled to the benefit and guarantee given under Article 30(1). We do not 
think the Constitution envisages such incongruous and unpalatable 
differences in rights guaranteed under Article 30(1). b. 
There is no difference between ‘Universities’ and ‘colleges’ 
established before the commencement of the Constitution 
87. The next argument which needs to be addressed is whether ‘universities’ 
established before the commencement of the Constitution could receive the 
protection of Article 30(1). To recall, the petitioners argued that prior to the 
commencement of the Constitution, the law did not confer the power to 
establish a university on a person. It was argued that the power only vested 
in the Imperial Legislature and thus, no person could have “established” a 
university. 
88. The educational policy in pre-independent India must be referred to provide 
a brief context on the distinction between universities and colleges. One of 
the distinctions between a college and a university is the ability of the latter to 
confer degrees to students as evidence of their proficiency in subjects which 
they have studied and for which they are assessed. On 19 July 1854, the 
Court of Directors of the East India Company submitted a despatch77 to the 
 
77 “Woods Despatch” 

PART E 

Governor-General of India in Council on the subject of General Education in 
India. The despatch recommended the incorporation of Universities by Acts 
of the Legislative Council of India. The first University established in India 
was the University of Calcutta. It was established by Act No. II of 1857, passed 
by the Legislative Council of India. The preamble to the enactment provides 
that the University at Calcutta was to be established for the purpose of 
awarding academic degrees to persons who have acquired proficiency in 
subjects. Subsequently, the Legislative Council of India enacted Act No. XXII 
of 1857 to establish and incorporate the University at Bombay for the same 
purpose. In 1857, the University at Madras was established.78 In 1860, an Act 
was passed to give the Universities of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, the 
power of conferring degrees in addition to those degrees provided for in the 
earlier enactments. The Legislative Council of India passed sixteen other 
enactments79 for the establishment of universities before the commencement 
of the Constitution. 
89. The University Grants Commission Act 195680 was enacted a few years after 
the commencement of the Constitution. The UGC Act provides the power to 
confer degrees even to institutions which are not established by an 
enactment. Section 2(f) defines a University as educational institutions 
established or incorporated by or under a Central Act, a Provincial Act or a 
 
78 Act No. XXVII of 1987 
79 The Punjab University Act 1992, the Allahabad University Act 1887, The Mysore University Regulation 
1916, The Patna University Act 1917, The Firman of Osmania University 1918, The Lucknow University Act 
1920, The Delhi University Act 1922, The Nagpur University Act 1923, The Agra University Act 1926, The 
Annamalai University Act 1926, University of Tranvancore Promulgation Act 1937, The Utkal University Act 
1943, The Gauhati University Act 1947, The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda Act 1949, The Gujarat 
University Act 1949; The Visva-Bharati Act 1951; The Jadavpur University Act 1955. 
80 “UGC Act” 

PART E 

State Act, and includes any such institution as may, in consultation with the 
University concerned, be recognized by the Commission in accordance with 
the regulations made in that behalf under the Act. Section 3 states that the 
Central Government may, on the advice of the UGC, declare by notification 
that any institution for higher education shall be deemed to be a University for 
the purposes of the Act. All the provisions of the UGC Act would apply to 
deemed-to-be-Universities just as they apply to universities.81 Under the UGC 
Act, an institution (which is not a university or deemed-to-be university) can 
be specially empowered by an Act of Parliament to confer degrees.82 
90. Two facets emerge from the above discussion. First, only Universities can 
confer degrees83; and second, before the enactment of the UGC Act, the 
University had to necessarily be incorporated by a legislation for the degrees 
conferred by them to be recognised. Thus, the argument of the petitioners 
narrows down to one aspect. According to the submission, a member or 
community belonging to a minority despite making efforts through 
representation, mobilisation and participation to establish a University cannot 
be regarded to have ‘established’ a Minority educational institution for the 
purpose of Article 30(1) only because the University was incorporated through 
a legislation. A brief analysis of the nature of Universities is necessary to 
unravel this paradox. 
 
81 UGC Act, Section 3 
82 UGC Act, Section 22 
83 Also see St. David’s College, Lampeter v. Ministry of Education, 1951 All ER 559 

PART E 

91. The Wood despatch noted that the purpose of universities upon their 
establishment was to confer academic degrees on students as evidence of 
attainment of proficiency in the branch of study.84 Universities were instituted, 
“not so much to be in themselves places of instruction, as to test the value of 
the education obtained elsewhere”.85 Affiliated colleges and other institutions 
educated students and sent them to universities where their proficiency was 
to be tested.86 This limited role of Indian Universities upon their establishment 
was recognised in the statutory enactments which incorporated the first three 
Universities in India. The preamble to Act No. II of 1857 which established 
and incorporated the University at Calcutta, Act XXII of 1857 which 
established and incorporated the University at Bombay, and Act XXVII of 
1857 which established and incorporated the University at Madras stipulated 
that the Universities were established to ascertain (through an examination) 
those persons who had acquired proficiency in different branches. This was 
the only power conferred upon Universities.87 The enactments also provided 
that only candidates who were authorised through a certificate from one of 
the institutions authorized by them shall be a candidate for the degree.88 
However, the University at Punjab incorporated in 1882 had greater scope. In 
1869, an institution styled the Lahore University College (and the Punjab 
University College later) was established in pursuance of the wishes of the 
Chiefs, Nobles and influential classes of Punjab. Act XIX of 1882 incorporated 
 
84 Charles Wood, The despatch of 1854 on General education in India. [25]; 
85 Report of the Indian Universities Commission 1902 [ 7] 
86 Willium Hunter, Report of the Indian Education Commission 1882 [25-26] “ Hunter Commission” 
87 See Section XIII and XIV of the enactments; Also see Section 14 of Act No. XVIII of 1887 that established 
the University at Allahabad 
88 Section XII of the enactments. 

PART E 

the University at Punjab by which the college was converted into a University 
to confer degrees. The University at Punjab was, thus, the first teaching 
University in India. 
92. On 12 January 1902, the Government of India issued a resolution to appoint 
a commission to “inquire into the condition and prospects of the Universities 
established in British India; to consider and report upon any proposals […] for 
improving their constitution and working […]”. The Report of the Commission 
discussed the necessity of establishing teaching Universities, where better 
provision for advanced courses of study could be made.89 In 1904, Act No. 
VIII of 1904 was enacted to amend the law relating to the Universities at 
Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and Allahabad. Section 3 of the Act provided that 
the University shall have the power to make provision for, inter alia, the 
instruction of students and the power to appoint University professors and 
Lecturers. Universities that were incorporated subsequent to Act No. VIII of 
1904 had the power to instruct students in addition to conducting 
examinations to confer degrees.90 However, teaching universities also had to 
be incorporated through a legislative enactment because they would have the 
power to confer degrees recognised by the Government. 
93. It is in this background that we should decide if Universities established before 
the enactment of the UGC Act could be covered by Article 30(1). It is true that 
the intervention of the imperial legislature was necessary to incorporate a 
 
89 Report of the Indian Universities Commission 1902 [24, 25] 
90 See Section 4 of Osmania University Act, preamble and Section 4(1) of the Lucknow University Act 1920; 
preamble to the Delhi University Act 1922 which states that it established and incorporates a teaching and 
affiliating University; Section 4(1) of the Delhi University Act 1922; Section 4(1) of the Nagpur University Act 

PART E 

university before the commencement of the Constitution. The intervention of 
the State legislature was necessary after the commencement of the 
Constitution until the enactment of the UGC Act 91. The intervention of the 
legislative body was required to ‘incorporate’ universities because the 
degrees conferred by them would be recognised by the Government. This 
was required even for the incorporation of teaching universities. However, 
could it be argued that no person had the power to ‘establish’ a university 
merely because the intervention of the legislative body was required for the 
incorporation of the institution? Could it be argued that a university was 
‘established’ by the legislature merely because it enacted a legislation 
incorporating it? 
94. The 
words 
‘incorporation’ 
and 
‘establishment’ 
cannot 
be 
used 
interchangeably. They connote different meanings. ‘Incorporation’ signifies 
the legal existence of the institution.92 In contrast, ‘establishment’ signifies the 
founding or bringing into existence of the institution.93 The possibility of 
distinguishing the establishment and incorporation of universities arose with 
the advent of teaching Universities. Two kinds of institutions were 
incorporated as teaching universities. They consisted of institutions which 
were established and incorporated at the same time, and institutions in which 
the establishment of the institution predated its incorporation. Universities in 
the latter category, however, were teaching colleges converted into teaching 
 
91 See Entry 11 of List II to the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution prior to Constitution(Forty-second 
Amendment) Act 1976 
92 Oxford Dictionary defines the word ‘incorporated’ as formed into business company with legal status 
93 Oxford Dictionary defines establish as ‘to start or create an organization, a system.’ 

PART E 

universities. The University at Punjab is one such example. The Annamalai 
University would also fall in this category. In the case of Annamalai University, 
the Hon’ble Diwan Bahadur Sir S.R.M Annamalai Chettiyar had established 
and was maintaining colleges around Chidambaram in Tamil Nadu. The 
college was converted to a University through the enactment of Annamalai 
University Act 1928.94 The ‘establishment’ and ‘incorporation’ of these 
universities was distinct. The incorporation of the University was necessary 
to confer degrees recognised by the Government. However, there was an 
institution that pre-dated the incorporation of the University that continued to 
exist even after the incorporation. Thus, the instance of conversion of 
teaching collages to teaching universities elucidates the distinction between 
the “establishment” and “incorporation” of educational institutions. 
95. The word ‘establish’ as used in Article 30(1) cannot and should not be 
understood in a narrow and legalistic sense. The words used in clause (1) of 
Article 30 have to be interpreted in view of the object and purpose of the 
article, and the guarantee and protection it confers. The guarantee and 
protection are not dependent on the basis or the manner in which the legal 
requirements were/are complied with, rather it concerns the persons who 
have founded and created the establishment. The incorporation by a statute 
or the procedure and requirements in law are not determinative factors. The 
persons behind it, that is, the promoters and founder(s) are important. They 
should belong to a linguistic or a religious minority. There will always be 
 
94 See the preamble of the Annamalai University Act 1928 

PART E 

individuals and groups instrumental in catalysing and setting up the institution. 
Thus, giving a legal character to an educational institution through state or 
sovereign action, it does not ipso facto follow that the university so established 
deprives the group of persons/individuals the guarantee under clause (1) of 
Article 30 of the Constitution. Universities are as much educational institutions 
as schools and colleges. The interpretation in Azeez Basha (supra) confers 
a legalistic meaning to the word ‘established’, sans the context of clause (1) 
of Article 30. No distinction exists between universities and other educational 
institutions such as schools and colleges for the purpose of Article 30(1). 
96. The following conclusions emerge from the discussion above: 
a. 
The teaching universities and colleges serve the common function of 
educating students. No distinction between the two can be drawn for the 
purposes of Article 30(1) which guarantees minorities the right of greater 
autonomy in the administration of educational institutions to curate a 
model of education which best serves the interests of the community; 
and 
b. 
The submission that a person did not have the power to ‘establish’ a 
university before the enactment of the UGC Act is rejected. The words 
establishment and incorporation cannot be interchangeably used. They 
connote different meanings. The former refers to founding an institution, 
which in the case of teaching colleges that were converted to universities 
would refer to any person or community who undertook the efforts the 
establish the teaching college. 

PART E 

c. 
The minority character of the institution is not ipso facto 
surrendered upon the incorporation of the University 
97. The Solicitor General argued that Azeez Basha (supra) — correctly 
understood — holds that the Muslim minority surrendered its rights as a 
denominational institution before the Constitution was adopted by 
approaching the imperial legislature to recognise the degrees. He argued that 
the decision tacitly recognised the fact that two broad groups existed during 
the freedom struggle. The first of these groups was determined to conduct 
their affairs without assistance from or reference to the imperial legislature. It 
set up institutions which granted degrees which were not recognised by the 
imperial government. They did not seek recognition of the degrees granted 
by their institutions at that time. Instead, such institutions (and the degrees 
granted by them) were recognised post-independence. Examples of such 
universities include Shantiniketan; the predecessor of IIT Roorkee. In 
contrast, the second group chose to collaborate with the imperial government 
and sought recognition of the degrees awarded by its universities. Having 
approached the imperial government for such recognition, the second group 
surrendered their denominational status (comparable to minority status under 
Article 30). It was submitted that the founders of AMU formed a part of the 
second group. While MAO College may have been of a denominational 
character, it has been urged that the incorporation of the institute as AMU 
resulted in the surrender of rights. Since we are only dealing with the 
principles of law, we will address this argument without referring to the factual 
aspects submitted by the learned Solicitor General. In short, the argument is 

PART E 

that the minority character of an educational institution is surrendered upon 
the incorporation of the institution. 
98. The minority character of institutions cannot be rejected if they were conferred 
a legal character by a statute enacted prior to 1950. The enactment was 
necessary to award degrees recognized by the British government, allowing 
graduates to gain degree recognition and secure employment. The 
enactment of the statute is a ministerial and a legislative act, which confers 
juristic personality as well as legal rights in terms of the law in force. The 
statute grants the power to the educational institution to confer the degrees. 
The incorporation by way of statute is a legal requirement. That being the 
case, we will not accept the argument that compliance with legal requirement 
would tantamount to the ‘establishment’ of an institution by the Legislature, 
and thereby the linguistic and religious minority forgo the guarantees and 
protection under clause (1) of Article 30 of the Constitution. 
99. In the same vein, the state may also provide for the mode by which 
educational institutions may be set up or established. For instance, it may 
require that a society registered under the Societies Registration Act or a 
public trust constituted in accordance with law is a pre-requisite to 
establishing a school.95 The state may also issue a certificate of recognition 
 
95 See, for instance, Section 20A of the Andhra Pradesh Education Act 1982 read with Rule 14(4) of the 
Andhra Pradesh Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Rules 2010. 
Section 20A: “20-A. Prohibition of individual to establish institutions.—On and from the commencement of 
the Andhra Pradesh Education (Amendment) Act, 1987 no individual shall establish a private institution: 
Provided that this section shall not have any effect on any private institution established by an individual and 
recognized by the competent authority prior to such commencement].” 
Rule 14(4): “(4) The District Educational Officer, on being satisfied that the school fulfils the norms and 
standards prescribed under section 19 and section 25 of the Act, shall issue the recognition certificate in 
Form-2 as shown in the appendix. The certificate shall be for a period of three years and shall be issued 
within 30 days from the date of making application for recognition. The certificate of recognition shall be 

PART E 

to the school (or other educational institution) meeting the relevant criteria. It 
may also require schools to register with the authorities.96 Certain steps as 
mandated by law may be a sine qua non for setting up educational institutions. 
100. In the absence of these prerequisites (such as registration with the competent 
authorities), the educational institution will have no existence in the eyes of 
the law. It is only upon compliance with these requirements that the institution 
assumes the legal form mandated by the regulatory provisions of the law. 
101. It is true that many persons or groups founded universities which awarded 
degrees which were not recognised by the imperial government. The 
existence of this option and the fact that others chose this path in colonial 
times cannot shape the contours of the right under Article 30 in independent 
India. This is because the recognition of degrees was and is essential not only 
to the success of the university but more importantly, to the success of its 
graduates. Recognition of the degrees or qualifications held by persons who 
have completed courses from universities is essential to professional 
development. It is impossible to avail of employment opportunities if the 
degree that one holds is not recognised. 
102. This interpretation has also found support in numerous judgments of this 
Court. Judgments of this Court have previously expounded on the importance 
 
issued subject to following conditions: (a) The school is run by a society registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or a public trust constituted under any law for the time being in force; …” 
96 See, for instance, Section 30 of the Karnataka Education Act 1983: “30. Educational institutions to be 
registered.- (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, every local authority institution and every private 
educational institution established on or before the date of commencement of this Act or intended to be 
established thereafter, shall notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
be registered in accordance with this Act and the rules made thereunder. (2) No person or local authority 
shall establish or as the case may be, run or maintain an educational institution requiring registration under 
this section, unless such institution is so registered.” 

PART E 

of recognition or affiliation of a College. It is only with the affiliation of the 
college with the University that a student could be awarded a degree upon 
the completion of the course of study. The degree, beyond being a testament 
of a personal achievement, is necessary for their professional growth. In in re 
the Kerala Education Bill 1957 (supra), this Court expounded on the 
importance of recognition and observed as follows: 
“32. 
[…] 
Without 
recognition, 
therefore, 
the 
educational institutions established or to be 
established by the minority communities cannot fulfil 
the real objects of their choice and the rights under 
Article 30(1) cannot be effectively exercised. The 
right to establish educational institutions of their 
choice must, therefore, mean the right to establish 
real institutions which will effectively serve the needs 
of their community and the scholars who resort to 
their educational institutions. There is, no doubt, no 
such thing as fundamental right to recognition by the 
State but to deny recognition to the educational 
institutions except upon terms tantamount to the 
surrender 
of 
their 
constitutional 
right 
of 
administration of the educational institutions of their 
choice is in truth and in effect to deprive them of their 
rights under Article 30(1). We repeat that the 
legislative power is subject to the fundamental rights 
and the legislature cannot indirectly take away or 
abridge the fundamental rights which it could not do 
directly and yet that will be the result if the said Bill 
containing any offending clause becomes law.” 
103. In Rev. Sidhajbhai (supra), this Court reiterated that regulations which may 
impose conditions for the recognition of the educational institution must be 
directed towards making the institution effective, while retaining its character 
as a minority institution. The dual test laid down in this case to assess the 
validity of such regulations is that the regulations must be reasonable and 
regulate the educational character of the institution while being conducive to 
making it an effective vehicle of education. An educational institution does not 

PART E 

lose its minority character merely because it subjects itself to regulatory 
measures essential to avail the benefit of recognition/affiliation, or grant in aid, 
provided these controls are designed to maintain the standards of education 
and larger public interest. 
104. The decision of the seven Judge Bench in In re the Kerala Education Bill 
(supra) was followed by a six Judge Bench in Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai 
(supra). This aspect was overlooked in Azeez Basha (supra) which was 
decided by a bench of five judges. The importance of recognition and 
affiliation cannot be understated. The position of law even at the time of the 
decision in Azeez Basha (supra), as held in re the Kerala Education Bill 
1957 (supra), was that recognition on terms tantamount to the surrender of 
the right to administer the institution was a violation of Article 30(1). For Azeez 
Basha (supra) to hold that the minority character of the institution is 
surrendered upon enactment by central imperial legislation is to hold that the 
recognition of its degrees would result in the denial of the right under Article 
30, reducing the choice available to a religious or linguistic minority. This 
would be in the teeth of settled law on the subject as well as Article 30(1). 
Azeez Basha (supra) failed to notice this aspect of the decision in In re the 
Kerala Education Bill 1957 (supra) discussed above and the decision in 
Rev. Sidhajbhai (supra). 
105. Further, the decisions of this Court subsequent to Azeez Basha (supra) have 
not disturbed the relevant part of the precedents in In re the Kerala 
Education Bill 1957 (supra) and Rev. Sidhajbhai (supra). Azeez Basha 

PART E 

(supra) is the lone case which stands apart in the long line of cases on this 
subject. In St. Xavier’s (supra), the majority of the nine-Judge Bench held 
that an unconstitutional condition of surrendering the minority character in 
exchange for affiliation or recognition cannot be imposed. 
106. Presently, the decision of eleven Judges in TMA Pai (supra) holds the field 
on the subject and is binding on this Court. It, too, unequivocally affirms the 
proposition of law discussed above. One of the many relevant paragraphs in 
this regard is extracted below: 
“70. … The object of establishing an institution has 
thus been to provide technical or professional 
education to the deserving candidates, and is not 
necessarily a commercial venture. In order that this 
intention is meaningful, the institution must be 
recognized. At the school level, the recognition or 
affiliation has to be sought from the educational 
authority or the body that conducts the school-
leaving examination. … A college or a professional 
educational institution has to get recognition from the 
university concerned, which normally requires 
certain conditions to be fulfilled before recognition. It 
has been held that conditions of affiliation or 
recognition, which pertain to the academic and 
educational character of the institution and 
ensure uniformity, efficiency and excellence in 
educational courses are valid, and that they do 
not violate even the provisions of Article 30 of 
the Constitution; but conditions that are laid 
down for granting recognition should not be 
such as may lead to governmental control of the 
administration 
of 
the 
private 
educational 
institutions.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
107. Compliance with the legal requirement to secure a benefit provided by the 
State cannot be on terms that require the relinquishment of fundamental 
rights. An interpretation that leans towards this consequence must not be 

PART E 

adopted. Thus, the minority character of an educational institution could not 
have been denied merely because it was converted to a University through a 
legislative enactment. 
108. In Azeez Basha (supra), this Court recognised the efforts of the Muslim 
community towards the establishment of AMU’s predecessor, the MAO 
College, as well as towards the enactment of the AMU Act but held that the 
central imperial legislature established AMU, and not the Muslim community. 
In effect, it held that the enactment of the AMU Act rendered any previous 
action undertaken by the Muslim community towards the establishment of 
AMU irrelevant. 
109. The reasoning of the Court hinged on the fact that the Muslim minority could 
have established a university and awarded degrees but could not have 
insisted upon governmental recognition of its degrees. The Court held that 
the fact that AMU was brought into existence by a statute which mandated 
the recognition of its degrees meant that the central imperial legislature 
established it. Since the correctness of the reasoning of the Court is being 
considered in these proceedings, it is extracted below: 
“22. There was nothing in 1920 to prevent the Muslim minority, if it 
so chose, to establish a university; but if it did so the degrees of such 
a university were not bound to be recognised by Government. … 
The Aligarh University was also in the same way established by 
legislation and it provided under Section 6 of the 1920 Act that “the 
degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions granted or 
conferred to or on persons by the University shall be recognised by 
the Government as are the corresponding degrees, diplomas and 
other academic distinctions granted by any other university 
incorporated under any enactment”. It is clear therefore that even 
though the Muslim minority could have established at Aligarh in 
1920 a university, it could not insist that degrees granted by such a 

PART E 

university should be recognised by Government. Therefore when 
the Aligarh University was established in 1920 and by Section 6 its 
degrees were recognised by Government, an institution was brought 
into existence which could not be brought into existence by any 
private individual or body for such individual or body could not insist 
upon the recognition of the degrees conferred by any university 
established by it. The enactment of Section 6 in the 1920 Act is a 
very important circumstance which shows that the Aligarh University 
when it came to be established in 1920 was not established by the 
Muslim minority, for the minority could not insist on the recognition 
by Government of the degrees conferred by any university 
established by it. 
23. … There was no Aligarh University existing till the 1920 
Act was passed. It was brought into being by the 1920 Act and 
must therefore be held to have been established by the 
Central Legislature which by passing the 1920 Act 
incorporated it. The fact that it was based on the M.A.O. 
College, would make no difference to the question as to who 
established the Aligarh University. The answer to our mind as 
to who established the Aligarh University is clear and that is 
that it was the Central Legislature by enacting the 1920 Act 
that established the said University. As we have said already, 
the Muslim minority could not establish a university whose 
degrees were bound to be recognised by Government as 
provided by Section 6 of 1920 Act: that one circumstance 
along with the fact that without the 1920 Act the University in 
the form that it had, could not come into existence shows 
clearly that the Aligarh University when it came into existence 
in 1920 was established by the Central Legislature by the 
1920 Act. It may be that the 1920 Act was passed as a result 
of the efforts of the Muslim minority. But that does not mean 
that the Aligarh University when it came into being under the 
1920 Act was established by the Muslim minority.” 
110. In Azeez Basha (supra), this Court observed that the term ‘establish’ means 
‘to bring into existence’ and not any of the other dictionary meanings that is, 
to ratify, confirm, settle, found, or create. Adopting a formalistic interpretation, 
the Bench held that AMU was not established by the Muslim minority since it 
was brought ‘into existence’ by the Central Legislature. In Mother Provincial 
(supra), another Constitution Bench which was decided before Azeez Basha 
(supra) interpreted the word ‘establish’ to mean to found an institution, which 

PART E 

offers a broader interpretation.97 In our view, it is inconsequential whether the 
word means ‘to bring into existence’ or ‘to found’. We have held above that 
the enactment of a legislation to incorporate a university would not repudiate 
the minority character. The Court must pierce the veil of the statute to identify 
if the institution intended to retain its minority character even upon 
incorporation. 
111. The respondents further submitted that the long title and the preamble of the 
enactment must be used to determine if the minority established the 
institution. A comparison was drawn between the preamble of the AMU Act 
and statutes by which other universities were incorporated. For example, the 
preamble of the Annamalai University Act 1928 stipulates that the founder of 
the college, Shri Annamalai Chettiyar, handed over the college with the 
property and a fund of twenty thousand rupees to the local Government for 
the establishment of a University. The preamble also recognises that he and 
his heirs would be entitled to certain powers and privileges in the University. 
However, in contrast, the preamble of the AMU Act 1920 stated that it is an 
enactment to ‘establish’ and ‘incorporate’ a University. 
112. We do not agree with this submission. It cannot be argued that a university 
was established by Parliament merely because the long title and preamble of 
the statute incorporating the university states that it is an Act to establish and 
incorporate. If such a formalistic interpretation is adopted, fundamental rights 
 
97 8. […] Establishment here means the bringing of an institution and it must be by a minority community. It 
matters not if a single philanthropic individual with his own means, founds the institution or the community 
at large contributes the funds.” (emphasis supplied) 

PART E 

would be made subservient to legislative language. The preamble of the 
Annamalai University Act certainly provides context to the incorporation of the 
University and brings out the distinction between incorporation and 
establishment. However, the courts in the absence of such an elaborate 
preamble must not be ready to conclude that Parliament established the 
University. The courts must identify the circumstances surrounding the 
incorporation of the University (including through a reading of the statute) to 
identify who established the university. Formalism must give way to actuality 
and to what is real. 
113. The written submissions filed on behalf of the Union of India place reliance on 
Dalco Engg. (P) Ltd. v. Satish Prabhakar Padhye98 to argue that the term 
‘establish’ means “coming into existence by virtue of a statutory enactment”. 
It suggests that the institution owes its existence to the legislature if the long 
title to an enactment states that it is an act to “establish and incorporate”. 
114. In Dalco (supra), the question before this Court was whether companies 
incorporated in terms of the Companies Act 1956 were bound by the norm 
contained in Section 47 of the same enactment. Section 47 stipulated that an 
‘establishment’ shall not dispense with or reduce in rank an employee who 
acquires a disability during their service.99 Section 2(k) of the same statute 
defined ‘establishment’ in the following terms: 
 
98 (2010) 
99 Section 47, Companies Act 1956: “47. Non-discrimination in government employment.—(1) No 
establishment shall dispense with, or reduce in rank, an employee who acquires a disability during his 
service: 
Provided that, if an employee, after acquiring disability is not suitable for the post he was holding, could be 
shifted to some other post with the same pay scale and service benefits: 

PART E 

“2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context 
otherwise requires,— 
… 

‘establishment’ 
means 
a 
corporation 
established by or under a Central, Provincial or 
State Act, or an authority or a body owned or 
controlled or aided by the Government or a local 
authority or a government company as defined in 
Section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) 
and includes Departments of a Government;” 
(emphasis supplied) 
115. After analysing the precedents, this Court held that Section 2(k) referred to 
companies which owe their existence to a statute. It held that without such a 
statute, the company would not exist. It held that the term “established by or 
under” in Section 2(k) referred to companies which are created by statutes 
and not ones which are merely governed by statutes after coming into 
existence. This court, therefore, held that companies incorporated and 
registered under the Companies Act 1956 are not necessarily established by 
it. 
116. Dalco (supra) does not have a bearing on the interpretation of the term 
“establish” in Article 30 because it was concerned with the interpretation of 
the term “established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act” as it 
occurs in a parliamentary statute. The words “establish and incorporate” in 
 
Provided further that if it is not possible to adjust the employee against any post, he may be kept on a 
supernumerary post until a suitable post is available or he attains the age of superannuation, whichever is 
earlier. 
(2) No promotion shall be denied to a person merely on the ground of his disability: 
Provided that the appropriate Government may, having regard to the type of work carried on in any 
establishment, by notification and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in such notification, 
exempt any establishment from the provisions of this section.” 

PART E 

the long title of enactments must be read together holistically to understand 
the import of the expression. The other cases100 relied on by the Union of 
India in this respect are not applicable to the question before us for similar 
reasons. d. 
‘Minority’ as on the commencement of the Constitution 
117. Mr Dwivedi submitted that an educational institution to be a minority 
educational institution must have been established by a linguistic or religious 
minority at the time of establishment. He proposed that the following tests 
must be satisfied to determine if the community was a minority: 
a. 
The numerical test:101 Which community ruled the country when the 
university was established? Is the community which seeks to claim the 
right under Article 30 a minority compared to the former? b. 
The qualitative test of non-dominance:102 Even if the community which 
seeks to claim the right under Article 30 was in a numerical minority, was 
it in a non-dominant position in the state at the point of time at which the 
institution was established? c. 
The test of self-assessment: Did the specific persons who established 
the educational institute consider themselves to be a minority? 
 
100 Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi (1975); Vaish Degree College v. 
Lakshmi Narain (1976); S.S. Dhanoa v. MCD (1981) 
101 See opinion of Justice Ruma Pal in TMA Pai (supra) 
102 See opinion of Justice Quadri in TMA Pai (supra) 

PART E 

118. A preliminary question must be answered before addressing the feasibility 
and legality of adopting the above tests. What should be the relevant point to 
determine if the educational institution that was founded before the 
commencement of the Constitution was established by a minority? Should it 
be determined based on the time of establishment, the time of the 
commencement of the Constitution, or the time when the right was claimed. 
119. Before the commencement of the Constitution, there was no concept of 
minority institutions, both linguistic and religious. The guarantee and the 
protection given by the Constitution are applicable on the date when the 
Constitution was adopted. It is on this date that it must be determined if the 
right under Article 30 accrues. However, when the question of whether the 
educational institution was established by a linguistic or a religious minority 
arises, we will have to relate back to the point in time when the institution was 
established. It would be immaterial that back then the educational institution 
was not granted the status and treated as a linguistic or a religious minority 
institution. Thus, the details of the persons who had established the institution, 
though earlier in point of time, is relevant and determines the character of the 
institution. Such interpretation would do justice to Article 30(1) and not deny 
and rob minority educational institutions of constitutional guarantees. 
120. The question of whether they qualify as a ‘minority’ has to be answered with 
reference to the date of enforcement of the Constitution. The Constitution 
upon its adoption guaranteed fundamental rights to specific groups such as 
‘persons’, ‘citizens’, ‘religious and linguistic minorities’, ‘women’, ‘the 

PART E 

Scheduled Castes’ and ‘Scheduled Tribes’. These groups consist of such 
members as conceived by the Constitution. For example, Part II of the 
Constitution and provisions of the Citizenship Act 1955 enacted in pursuance 
of the power provided under Article 11 stipulate conditions for acquiring 
citizenship. Only those persons who satisfy the conditions prescribed can 
enforce the rights guaranteed to citizens as a class. Similarly, the President 
in exercise of the power under Article 341 may notify castes, tribes or groups 
that would be Scheduled Castes for the purposes of the Constitution. 
121. The only criteria that is prescribed for right-bearers under Article 30 is that 
they should be linguistic or a religious minorities. The courts have, however, 
specified what constitutes a minority. Chief Justice Kirpal, writing for the 
majority of the eleven-Judge Bench in TMA Pai (supra) observed that the 
minority must be determined based on the test of numerical minority within 
the State.103 If a group or community is required to prove that it was a religious 
or linguistic minority at the time of establishment of the institution (where the 
institution was established before the commencement of the Constitution), it 
would lead to a situation where the fundamental right is conferred upon a 
group other than the one intended by the Constitution. The demography of 
the Dominion of India underwent a drastic change upon partition. The 
Constitution, through Article 30(1), confers a right on those communities that 
were disadvantaged upon the commencement of the Constitution and not the 
group that was disadvantaged in pre-independent India. 
 
103 TMA Pai (supra) [81] 

PART E 

122. We reject the argument that the test of whether an educational institution is a 
minority institution must be examined based on whether the community or the 
group which had established the institution was a minority at the time of its 
establishment in pre-independent India. The purpose of the provision as 
highlighted in the preceding sections is to ensure that the minorities are able 
to preserve and promote their linguistic and religious culture. For this purpose, 
the status of the group/community, that had established the institution, on the 
date of commencement of the Constitution should be considered. The test of 
establishment will apply to future situations on the day when new educational 
institutions are established. The protection under clause (1) of Article 30 
cannot be denied to institutions established before the commencement of the 
Constitution for the reason that at the time of establishment in pre-
independent India, the founders were not aware that they would receive 
protection of Article 30(1). 
123. Having addressed the preliminary arguments on the applicability of Article 30, 
we will now proceed to formulate the indicia for the establishment of an 
educational institution. v. 
Indicia for the ‘establishment’ of a minority educational institution 
124. In this section of the judgment, we will answer two questions: (i) the indicia 
for ‘establishment’ of a minority educational institution; and (ii) the burden and 
degree of proof required to prove ‘establishment’ of a minority educational 
institution. 

PART E 

125. In SK Patro (supra), the question before the Constitution Bench was whether 
Church Missionary Society Higher Secondary School was a minority 
educational institution. It was contended that the school was established by 
the Church Missionary Society, London and not the local residents of 
Bhagalpur. The Bench relied on the following evidence to conclude that the 
School was established by the local Christians: 
a. 
The correspondence and resolutions indicated that a permanent home 
for the Boys School was set up on property acquired by local Christians 
and in buildings erected from funds collected by them104; 
b. 
The institution and the land on which it was built and the balance in the 
local fund were handed over to the Church Missionary Society105; and 
c. 
Though substantial assistance was obtained from the Church 
Missionary Society London, it could not be said that the school was not 
established by local residents only because of that106. 
126. In Mother Provincial (supra), this Court observed that the intention to found 
an institution for the benefit of the minority community must be present. In St. 
Stephen’s (supra), a Constitution Bench determined whether St. Stephen’s 
College is a minority educational institution. St Stephen’s College is a 
constituent college of Delhi University. The Bench held that the college was 
 
104 SK Patro (supra) [15] 
105 ibid [15] 
106 ibid [16] 

PART E 

established by the Indian Christian community based on the following 
material: 
a. 
The purpose of establishing the educational institution emerged from the 
Report of 1878 to the Cambridge Brotherhood. The purpose of founding 
the college was to ensure that graduates from St. Stephen’s Mission 
School could be given the benefit of Christian teachings in college107; 
b. 
The buildings depicted the Christian orientation of the college108 
c. 
The motto of the college is “Ad Dei Gloriam”, that is the glory of god109; 
d. 
There is a chapel in the college campus, where religious instruction is 
imparted110; 
e. 
The Constitution of the college reflects its Christian character. It states 
that the object of the college is, inter alia, to offer instruction on doctrines 
of Christianity111, the original members of the society were mostly 
Christians112, and the composition of the society reflects its Christian 
character where a large number of Christian members of the Church of 
North India are a part of it113; and 
f. 
The Governing Body has a distinct christian character. The Supreme 
Council comprises of members of the Church of North India. Their role 
 
107 St Stephen’s (supra) [30] 
108 Ibid [31-32] Foundation stone has the inscription:”to the glory of god, and the advancement of sound, 
learning and religious education”; a cross was placed in the new building. 
109 ibid [33] 
110 ibid [34] 
111 Memorandum of the Society and Rules, Clause 2 
112 Memorandum of the Society and Rules, Clause 4 
113 ibid [35] 

PART E 

is to look after the religious and moral instruction to students114. The 
administration vests with the Governing Body which predominantly 
consists of Christians. Though three of the thirteen members of the 
Governing Body may be non-Christians, that does not dilute the 
Christian character of the institution. 
127. The decisions in Mother Provincial (supra), SK Patro (supra) and St. 
Stephen’s (supra) emphasise that the indicia for establishment must 
elucidate the minority character of the educational institution. What is the 
meaning of the phrase ‘minority character’? Are special rights guaranteed by 
Article 30(1) only if educational institutions are established ‘for’ the minorities, 
towards the purpose of protecting minority interests? If yes, when can the 
courts be certain that the above two conditions are satisfied? That is, what 
are the ‘core essentials’ of minority character? We will answer this by referring 
to judicial decisions on four questions. Clarity over the essentials of the 
minority character will help us ascertain the indicia for ‘establishment’ of a 
minority educational institution. 
128. The first question that arose in earlier cases was whether a minority 
educational institution must be established towards the conservation of the 
distinct language, script or culture of linguistic and religious minorities 
protected by Article 29(1). In Rev. Father W. Proost v. The State of Bihar115, 
a Constitution Bench answered the question in the negative. The Bench held 
that Article 30(1) covers a minority educational institution which is established 
 
114 ibid [36] 
115 (1969) 

PART E 

to conserve culture and language. However, that need not be the only 
purpose for the establishment of the institution. This Court held that the scope 
of Article 30(1) cannot be restricted by Article 29(1).116 In St. Xavier (supra), 
the majority of the nine-Judge Bench approved this interpretation.117 
129. The second question that arose in earlier decisions was whether an 
educational institution would retain its minority character even if non-
minorities are admitted in it. Would a Muslim minority education institution 
retain its minority character when it admits students from other faiths in the 
institution? In re the Kerala Education Bill 1957 (supra), a seven-Judge 
Bench held that a minority educational institution would not lose its minority 
character by merely admitting students belonging to non-minorities and that 
the provision contemplates an institution with a ‘sprinkling of outsiders’.118 
This position was further fortified in TMA Pai (supra). In TMA Pai (supra), 
Article 29(2) and Article 30(1) were read harmoniously to hold that Article 
29(2) would apply to a limited extent to minority educational institutions as 
well.119 Thus, an aided minority educational institution is mandated to admit 
 
116 Rev. Father W Proost v. State of Bihar [5J] (1969); 
117 See footnote 30 of this judgment. 
118 “By admitting a non-member into it the minority institution does not shed its character and cease to be a 
minority institution. Indeed the object of conservation of the distinct language, script and culture of a minority 
may be better served by propagating the same amongst non-members of the particular minority community.” 
119 “149. […] As observed quite aptly in St. Stephen's case [(1992) ] (at SCC p. 608, para 85) “the 
fact that Article 29(2) applies to minorities as well as non-minorities does not mean that it was intended to 
nullify the special right guaranteed to minorities in Article 30(1)”. The word “only” used in Article 29(2) is of 
considerable significance and has been used for some avowed purpose. Denying admission to non-
minorities for the purpose of accommodating minority students to a reasonable extent will not be only on 
grounds of religion etc., but is primarily meant to preserve the minority character of the institution and to 
effectuate the guarantee under Article 30(1). The best possible way is to hold that as long as the minority 
educational institution permits admission of citizens belonging to the non-minority class to a 
reasonable extent based upon merit, it will not be an infraction of Article 29(2), even though the 
institution admits students of the minority group of its own choice for whom the institution was 
meant. What would be a reasonable extent would depend upon variable factors, and it may not be 
advisable to fix any specific percentage. The situation would vary according to the type of institution and 
the nature of education that is being imparted in the institution. Usually, at the school level, although it may 
be possible to fill up all the seats with students of the minority group, at the higher level, either in colleges or 

PART E 

students from other faiths and that in itself does not erode the minority 
character of the institution. 
130. The third question was whether a minority education institution would lose its 
minority character when secular education is taught. In In re Kerala 
Education Bill (supra) and St. Xavier’s (supra), this Court held that the word 
‘choice’ in Article 30(1) expands the scope of the provision to include not only 
religious but also secular education.120 
131. The fourth question was whether it is essential that religious instruction must 
be provided in a minority educational institution. In TMA Pai (supra), this 
Court held that Article 28 equally applies to minority educational 
institutions.121 Thus, if the minority institution has received aid from the State 
wholly or in part, no student can be forced to participate in religious 
 
in technical institutions, it may not be possible to fill up all the seats with the students of the minority group. 
However, even if it is possible to fill up all the seats with students of the minority group, the moment the 
institution is granted aid, the institution will have to admit students of the non-minority group to a reasonable 
extent, whereby the character of the institution is not annihilated, and at the same time, the rights of the 
citizen engrafted under Article 29(2) are not subverted. It is for this reason that a variable percentage of 
admission of minority students depending on the type of institution and education is desirable, and indeed, 
necessary, to promote the constitutional guarantees enshrined in both Article 29(2) and Article 30. [emphasis 
supplied] 
120 In re Kerala Education Bill (supra) [23] “23. […] the right conferred on such minorities is to establish 
educational institutions of their choice. It does not say that minorities based on religion should establish 
educational institutions for teaching religion only, or that linguistic minorities should have the right to establish 
educational institutions for teaching their language only. What the article says and means is that the religious 
and the linguistic minorities should have the right to establish educational institutions of their choice. There 
is no limitation placed on the subjects to be taught in such educational institutions. As such minorities will 
ordinarily desire that their children should be brought up properly and efficiently and be eligible for higher 
university education and go out in the world fully equipped with such intellectual attainments as will make 
them fit for entering the public services, educational institutions of their choice will necessarily include 
institutions imparting general secular education also.”; St. Xavier’s (supra) [Chief Justice Ray for himself and 
Justice Palekar, 8]; [Justice HR Khanna, 96]; [Justice Beg, 197]; [Justice Dwivedi, 236]; 
121 See TMA Pai (supra) [88-90;144]; “144 […] As in the case of a majority-run institution, the moment a 
minority institution obtains a grant of aid, Article 28 of the Constitution comes into play. When an educational 
institution is maintained out of State funds, no religious instruction can be provided therein. Article 28(1) does 
not state that it applies only to educational institutions that are not established or maintained by religious or 
linguistic minorities. Furthermore, upon the receipt of aid, the provisions of Article 28(3) would apply to all 
educational institutions whether run by the minorities or the non-minorities. […] Just as Articles 28(1) and (3) 
become applicable the moment any educational institution takes aid, likewise, Article 29(2) would also be 
attracted and become applicable to an educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of 
State funds.” 

PART E 

instruction. Similarly, a minority educational institution which is fully 
maintained out of State funds cannot provide religious instruction. Even here, 
a harmonious construction of Article 28 and Article 30(1) was adopted. 
132. The discussion above elucidates that the ‘minority character’ of the institution 
is not a rigid concept. The provision does not contemplate institutions which 
are exclusively for the benefit of members from the minority community. A 
minority institution established by a religious or linguistic minority need not be 
solely for their students or only for the purpose of teaching the tenets of their 
religion or language. The issue of whether an institution is a minority institution 
should not be determined purely on the basis of the number of their students 
or the teaching staff. Such an interpretation is contrary to precedent. 
133. A holistic and realistic view should be taken keeping in mind the objective and 
purpose of the provision. Based on the above principles laid down by Benches 
of co-equal strength and larger Benches of this Court on the components of 
the ‘minority character’, the following inferences can be drawn: 
a. 
The existence of a religious place for prayer and worship is not a 
necessary indicator of the minority character because institutions wholly 
maintained out of State funds are constitutionally barred from providing 
religious instructions; and 
b. 
The existence of religious symbols in the precincts of the educational 
institution are not necessary to prove the minority character because 
educational institutions could be established for minorities to provide 
secular education without imparting any lessons on religion. 

PART E 

134. As discussed above, ‘establishment’ or formation of an institution can be at 
any point of time and even before the commencement of the Constitution. If 
an institution was established before the commencement of the Constitution, 
the enquiry on the question of ‘establishment’ must relate back to the date 
when the institution was established or formed to ascertain whether it would 
qualify as a minority institution upon the commencement of the Constitution. 
135. To determine who established the institution, the Courts must consider the 
genesis of the educational institution. For this analysis, the Courts must trace 
the origin of the idea for the establishment of the institution. The Court must 
identify who was the brain behind the establishment of the educational 
institution. Letters, correspondence with other members of the community or 
with government/State officials and resolutions issued could be valid proof for 
establishing ideation or the impetus to found and establish. The proof of 
ideation must point towards one member of the minority or a group from the 
community.122 
136. The second indicia is the purpose for which the educational institution was 
established. Though it is not necessary that the educational institution must 
have been established only for the benefit of a religious or linguistic minority 
community, it must predominantly be for its benefit. It is not necessary that 
education must be provided in the language spoken by the minority or on the 
religion of the minority. For example, it is not necessary that an educational 
institution established for the Tamils in Uttar Pradesh must necessarily 
 
122 Mother Provincial (supra) 

PART E 

prescribe Tamil as the language of instruction. However, it must be proved 
that the institution was established for the benefit of the tamil-speaking 
community. This indicia could be proved by a reference to private 
communication or speeches about the necessity of establishing an 
educational institution for the community and a recognition of the educational 
difficulties faced by the community. 
137. The third test is tracing the steps taken towards the implementation of the 
idea. Information on who contributed the funds for its creation, who was 
responsible for obtaining the land, and whether the land was donated by a 
member of the minority community or purchased from funds raised by the 
minority community for this purpose or donated by a person from some other 
community specifically for the establishment of a minority educational 
institution are elements that must be considered. Similar questions must be 
asked of its other assets. Other important questions are: who took the steps 
necessary for establishing the institution (such as obtaining the relevant 
permissions, constructing the buildings, and arranging other infrastructure)? 
It is also important to note that the state may grant some land or other 
monetary aid during or after the establishment of the educational institution. 
If the land or monies were granted after the establishment, the grant would 
not have the effect of changing the minority character of the institution. 
Minority institutions are not barred from receiving aid save at the cost of their 
minority status.123 If the land or monies are granted at the time of 
 
123 TMA Pai (supra) [141] 

PART E 

establishment, the circumstances surrounding the establishment must be 
considered as a whole to determine who established the institution. The 
presence of a grant must not be automatically interpreted as leading to the 
erasure of a claim to minority status. 
138. The next question is whether the administrative structure of the educational 
institution is an indicia for the establishment of a minority educational 
institution. We have already held above that an educational institution is a 
minority educational institution if it is established by a religious or linguistic 
minority. We have clarified that it is not necessary to prove that administration 
vests with the minority to prove that it is a minority educational institution 
because the very purpose of Article 30(1) is to grant special rights on 
administration as a consequence of establishment. To do otherwise, would 
amount to converting the consequence to a pre-condition. The right to 
administer is guaranteed to minority educational institutions to enable them 
to possess sufficient autonomy to model the educational institution according 
to the educational values that the community wishes to emphasise. It is not 
necessary that the purpose can only be implemented if persons belonging to 
the community helm the administrative affairs. This is so particularly because 
a minority institution may wish to emphasise secular education. The founders 
or the minority community may choose to populate the managing board (or a 
comparable authority) responsible for the day-to-day administration of the 
institution with persons belonging to the same community. However, they are 
not compelled to do so. They may wish to appoint persons who do not belong 
to their community but who they deem fit for the proper administration of the 

PART E 

institution. This may be the case for professional colleges which offer 
specialised courses such as law, medicine, or architecture, where the 
founders may not possess the knowledge, experience, or insight necessary 
to manage or administer the institution personally. 
139. The test to be adopted by the Court is whether the administrative set up of 
the educational institution affirms the minority character of the institution. If 
the administrative structure of the educational institution does not reflect its 
minority character or when it does not elucidate that the educational institution 
was established to protect and promote the interests of the minority, it may 
be reasonably inferred that the purpose was not to establish an educational 
institution for the benefit of the minority community. 
140. We may specifically deal with a scenario of an educational institution 
established before the commencement of the Constitution. The test of 
administration should be evaluated in praesenti, that is, on the date of the 
commencement of the Constitution. An institution to be a minority institution 
must satisfy the criteria of being ‘administered’ as a minority institution on the 
date of commencement of the Constitution, and being a minority institution on 
the date of formation. Even if an educational institution was established by 
the minority for the purposes of the community, we must assess the impact 
of any subsequent events that altered the character of the institution before 
the commencement of the Constitution. We have in section E(iv)(c) held that 
the statutory incorporation of the institution does not ipso facto amount to a 
surrender of the minority character of the institution. We have held that the 

PART E 

Court must pierce the veil to identify if the University was established by a 
minority for the purpose of promoting the interest of the community. The Court 
may on a holistic reading of the statutory provisions relating to the 
administrative set-up of the educational institution deduce if the minority 
character or the purpose of establishment was relinquished upon 
incorporation. The question is whether the regulatory measures wrest the 
administrative control from the founders of the institution. This is a question 
of fact which must be determined on the facts of each case. The Court must 
make that determination upon a comprehensive analysis of the administrative 
framework which includes host of factors such as the representation of the 
interests of the community in the administrative set-up. 
141. Taken together, these are the main indicia which assist the Court in 
determining who established an educational institution under Article 30. 
However, the complex nature of establishing an educational institution is not 
lost on us. Undoubtedly, there can be no straitjacket formula which may be 
applied. The above indicia of establishment must be considered as a whole, 
along with any relevant facts which are available to the Court. The matter 
must be considered in totality and competing factors must be weighed against 
each other depending on the facts and circumstances of each institution. 
142. The above indicia must be proved through the submission of cogent material. 
Reliance must be placed on primary sources such as office documents, letters 
and resolutions or memorandums issued to implement the resolutions. 
Secondary sources must only be used to corroborate the primary sources. 

PART E 

The onus to prove that the educational institution was established by a 
minority is on the claimants. 
143. One of the questions referred to this Bench was whether Article 30(1) 
envisages an institution which is established by minorities alone without 
participation from any other community? This question was based on the facts 
as observed by this Court in Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya (supra) where some 
persons from communities other than the Muslim community had contributed 
to the establishment of the educational institution. That case has been finally 
adjudicated and the issues which arose in it do not survive. Nothing in Article 
30 prevents some persons from other communities in contributing to the 
establishment of an institution by a minority. There may be persons hailing 
from different communities who are concerned about the need for minority 
educational institutions and lend their assistance in some form – be it by 
contributing monies or otherwise. Their participation and involvement would 
not preclude Article 30 from being applicable to such institutions provided that 
the minority community continues to shoulder the core of the responsibility of 
establishing an educational institution. vi. 
Impact of Entry 63 of List I on the minority status of educational 
institutions 
144. Entry 63 of the Union List to the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution deals 
with the institutions known at the commencement of the Constitution as 
Benares Hindu University, Aligarh Muslim University and Delhi University. 
Notably, the entry also indicates that Parliament may enact laws which pertain 

PART E 

to any other institutions which are declared by law to be institutions of national 
importance.124 
145. Entry 63 of List I had its genesis in Entry 13 of List I to the Seventh Schedule 
to the Government of India Act 1935. Entry 13 read as “Benares Hindu 
University and the Aligarh Muslim University”. Entry 17 of List II read as 
“Educations including Universities other than those specified in paragraph 13 
of List I”. The Federal Legislature had the power to enact laws with respect to 
BHU and AMU while the Provincial Legislatures had the power to enact laws 
to establish new Universities and amend the legislation through which 
Universities were established and/or incorporated, except for the laws relating 
to AMU and BHU.125 
146. The Constitution of India adopted a similar model of division of legislative 
power as regards the subject at hand. The State Legislature had the power 
to enact laws with respect to education, including Universities by virtue of 
Entry 11 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. This power was 
subject to Entries 63,64 and 65 of List I and Entry 25 of List III. By the 
Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act 1973, Entry 63 was amended to 
include the University established in pursuance of Article 371-E126.127 
Subsequently, by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act 1976, 
 
124 Entry 63: “The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the Benares Hindu 
University, the Aligarh Muslim University and the Delhi University, and any other institution declared by 
Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance.” 
125 The Government of India Act 1935, Section 100 
126Article 371-A Establishment of Central University in Andhra Pradesh.- Parliament may by law provide for 
the establishment of a University in the State of Andhra Pradesh. 
127 Entry 63 subsequent to the enactment of the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act 1973: “The 
institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the Benares Hindu University, the Aligarh 
Muslim University and the Delhi University; the University established in pursuance of Article 371-E any other 
institution declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance.” 

PART E 

Entry 11 of List II was deleted and a similar subject was placed in Entry 25 of 
List III128. Both Entry 11 of List II (prior to its omission) and Entry 25 of List III 
(as it currently stands) were made subject to the provisions of Entries 63, 64 
and 65 of List I. The effect of this was that Parliament retained the exclusive 
power to legislate upon AMU, BHU and Delhi University in Entry 63 of List I 
and the subjects which fall within the scope of Entries 64 and 65 
notwithstanding the broader or more general entries in the Seventh Schedule 
which include Universities. 
147. In the Government of India Act 1935, the Federal Legislature only had the 
power to legislate upon AMU and BHU. However, the scope of Parliament’s 
legislative domain over education and Universities was enlarged in the 
Constitution of India. In addition to Entry 63, Parliament also has the power 
to legislate upon educational institutions which fall within the ambit of Entries 
64 and 65. Entry 64 deals with institutions of scientific or technical education 
financed by the Government of India wholly or in part and declared by 
Parliament by law to be institutions of national importance. Entry 65 deals with 
Union agencies and institutions for (i) professional, vocational or technical 
training, including the training of police officers; (ii) the promotion of special 
studies or research; and (iii) scientific or technical assistance in the 
investigation or detection of crime. Thus, Entries 64 and 65 deal with 
institutions which provide education in specific fields. Another crucial point is 
that by virtue of Entries 63 and 64, Parliament has the power to legislate upon 
 
128 Entry 25: “Education, including technical education, medical education and universities, subject to the 
provisions of Entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I; vocational and technical training of labour.” 

PART E 

institutions which are declared by law to be institutions of national importance. 
While Entry 64 provides broad criteria for declaring an institution to be of 
national importance, Article 63 does not contain similar indicia. 
148. The question is whether the inclusion of a University as an institution of 
‘national’ importance amounts to an abrogation of its minority character. The 
declaration of an institution as one of national importance does not amount to 
a change in the minority character of the institution. This is for multiple 
reasons. First, Entries in the Lists in the Seventh Schedule delineate the 
legislative competence of Parliament and of the legislatures of the States. As 
discussed in the preceding sections of this judgment, the State may regulate 
various aspects of education and educational institutions. The field of 
legislative competence over universities does not amount to a surrender of 
minority character. The distribution of legislative competence between 
Parliament and the State legislatures does not bear upon the minority 
character of the institution. Second, as a matter of principle, nothing prevents 
a minority educational institution from being an institution of national 
importance. The qualities denoted by the terms “national” and “minority” are 
not at odds with each other nor are they mutually exclusive. The former 
indicates that the institution has a pan-India or national character, as opposed 
to relatively more local or regional institutions. It is indicative of the importance 
of the institution on the national stage. The latter is evidence of the religious 
or linguistic background of the founders and the constitutional rights which 
vest in them. Each term indicates distinct attributes which are not antithetical 
to one another. A university may well be both national and ergo, of national 

PART E 

importance, as well as minority in character. There is no reason why a minority 
educational institution cannot also be an institution of national importance. 
Third, Entries 63 and 64 provide Parliament with the power to declare an 
institution to be of national importance. An interpretation that an institution of 
national importance cannot be a minority institution would amount to 
rendering the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 30(1) subservient to the 
legislative power of Parliament. Parliament can in terms of Entries 63 and 64 
declare any institution to be of national importance.129 If the submission of the 
respondents is accepted, such a declaration would automatically exclude the 
institution(s) from the scope of Article 30(1). vii. The decision of this Court in Prof. Yashpal 
149. Question (d) formulated in these proceedings requires the Court to assess 
whether the decision in Prof. Yashpal (supra) has a bearing on the other 
questions and if so, in what manner. It is therefore necessary to advert to the 
facts and decision in that case. Various writ petitions challenged certain 
provisions of the Chhattisgarh Niji Kshetra Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Aur 
Viniyaman) Adhiniyam 2002.130 Section 5 of this statute empowered the state 
government to incorporate and establish a university by issuing a notification 
in the Gazette. Section 6 permitted such a university to affiliate any college or 
other institution or to set up more than one campus with the prior approval of 
 
129 See The Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry Act 2008; 
The Institutes of Technology Act 1961; The Indian Institutes of Management Act 2017; National Institutes of 
Technology, Science, Education and Research Act 2007; The Indian Institutes of Information Technology 
Act 2014; See https://www.education.gov.in/institutions-national-importance 
130 “Chhattisgarh Act” 

PART E 

the state government. The state government established more than a 
hundred universities under the Chhattisgarh Act. 
150. The petitioners in that case submitted that: 
a. 
The universities established under the Chhattisgarh Act had no buildings 
or campuses and were running from tenements consisting of a single 
room or a single floor in a building. Basic infrastructure (such as 
classrooms, libraries, and laboratories) was absent. Despite this, the 
universities were empowered to award degrees; 
b. 
The state government did not exercise any supervision over these 
universities and was establishing them in a mechanical manner, without 
assessing the infrastructure, teachers, or other resources of each of 
them; 
c. 
The UGC was unable to exercise any control over these universities due 
to the scheme of the Chhattisgarh Act and was made a redundant body; 
d. 
These universities were offering courses and degrees which were not a 
part of the Schedule to the UGC Act. This was in violation of Section 22 
of the UGC Act as well as the Schedule; 
e. 
These universities were offering professional courses without obtaining 
permission or approval from regulatory bodies such as the All India 
Council of Technical Education, Medical Council of India and Dental 
Council of India; and 

PART E 

f. 
These universities conferred degrees without obtaining the requisite 
permission from statutory bodies. These degrees would not be 
recognised by professional organisations or other employers. The 
students who were awarded such degrees would therefore not only 
suffer financially but would also have lost the time spent completing 
these courses. 
151. In response, the State of Chhattisgarh submitted that it was competent to 
enact the statute under challenge in view of Entry 32 of List II of the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution131. It argued that the universities were 
established on the basis of the representations made by the sponsoring body 
as set out in the project reports. However, it admitted that some of these 
universities did not meet the minimum standards expected of educational 
institutions, giving rise to serious concerns about the academic interest of the 
students. It stated that it therefore amended the Chhattisgarh Act in 2004. 
After the amendments, a large number of universities were de-notified 
because they failed to comply with the amended statute. Finally, it argued that 
the writ petitions ought to be dismissed because the concerns raised in them 
no longer subsisted after the amendments in 2004 and the consequent 
denotification of many universities. 
152. This Court analysed the relevant entries in the Lists of the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constitution as well as the UGC Act and held that Sections 5 and 6 of 
 
131 “32. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, other than those specified in List I, and 
universities; unincorporated trading, literary, scientific, religious and other societies and associations; co-
operative societies.” 

PART E 

Chhattisgarh Act were ultra vires the Constitution and liable to be struck down 
for the following reasons: 
a. 
The term “university” occurring in the three Lists of the Seventh 
Schedule must mean an institution with adequate facilities and 
resources for advanced learning and research. The standard of teaching 
and education must be such as would befit a university. The power 
conferred on state legislatures with respect to the incorporation of 
universities must be exercised only with respect to institutions which 
would in substance amount to universities. The Chhattisgarh Act did not 
provide for the establishment of universities in the true sense. Rather, it 
conferred the legal status of a university to mere institutions or project 
reports and permitted them to issue degrees. In doing so, it clothed an 
institute which is not a university and cannot amount to a university 
(because of a lack of infrastructure and resources) with the juristic 
personality of a university. This is not contemplated either by Entry 32 of 
List II or Entry 25 of List III. Sections 5 and 6 of the Chhattisgarh Act 
were a fraud on the Constitution; 
b. 
Although Entry 32 of List II and Entry 25 of List III empower the state 
legislatures to enact laws concerning the incorporation of universities, 
the whole gamut of the university including teaching, quality of 
education, curriculum and examinations, would not come within the 
purview of the state legislature because of Entry 66 of List I. Entry 66 of 
List I concerns the coordination and determination of standards in 

PART E 

institutions for higher education or research and scientific and technical 
institutions. Parliament alone is competent to enact legislation which 
pertains to Entry 66 of List I. The UGC Act was enacted in pursuance of 
this entry; 
c. 
A statute enacted by the state legislature which stultifies or has the effect 
of nullifying a statute validly enacted by Parliament would be ultra vires. 
The Chhattisgarh Act made it impossible for the UGC to perform its 
duties and to ensure the coordination and determination of standards in 
terms of the UGC Act; and 
d. 
The expression “established or incorporated” in Sections 2(f), 22 and 23 
of the UGC Act must be read as “established and incorporated” insofar 
as private universities are concerned. This is necessary in order to give 
effect to the purpose of the UGC Act. 
153. The decision of this Court in Prof. Yashpal (supra) will not have a bearing on 
this case for the following reasons: 
a. 
The interpretation of a statutory provision cannot influence the 
interpretation of a provision of the Constitution. The Constitution is the 
basic or fundamental law of the country. It controls all other laws; 
b. 
The decision in Prof. Yashpal (supra) was rendered in the context of 
institutions which were given the status of universities by the operation 
of law but which existed only on paper, without any facilities, and offered 
some courses which were not approved by the relevant authorities. The 

PART E 

purpose of this Court reading “established or incorporated” as 
“established and incorporated” was to prevent such institutions from 
being given the status of universities in the absence of essential features 
of universities. It was to ensure that institutions which were accorded the 
status of universities existed in actuality; and 
c. 
The distinction between the meaning of the term ‘establish’ and that of 
the term ‘incorporate’ was not effaced by this interpretation. Article 30 
uses the word ‘establish.’ The indicia for determining whether an 
institution is a minority educational institution for the purposes of Article 
30 would depend only upon whether the minority community in question 
established the educational institution. viii. The amendment of the NCMEI Act in 2010 
154. The NCMEI Act was enacted in 2004 to constitute a National Commission for 
minority educational institutions and to provide for matters connected or 
incidental to it. Section 3 mandates the constitution of the National 
Commission For Minority Educational Institutions.132 Section 11 details the 
functions of the Commission which include advising the Central or State 
governments on questions related to the education of minorities which may 
be referred to it; suo motu enquiries or enquiries based on petitions instituted 
by minority educational institutions; and intervening in proceedings before 
courts (with the leave of the court) which concern the deprivation or violation 
of the educational rights of minorities. Section 12 empowers the Commission 
 
132 “Commission” 

PART E 

to adjudicate disputes between a minority educational institution and 
university regarding affiliation and confers upon it the power of a civil court 
trying a suit in certain matters. Section 12B empowers the Commission to 
hear appeals against orders of authorities established by the Central or State 
governments, which reject applications for the grant of minority status filed by 
educational institutions. The Commission also has other powers.133 Section 
10 prescribes the procedure to establish a minority educational institution. In 
terms of the provision, any person who desires to establish a minority 
educational institution has to apply to the competent authority for the grant of 
a no objection certificate for the purpose. The competent authority would upon 
the perusal of documents, affidavits or other evidence and after giving the 
applicant an opportunity to be heard either allow or reject the application. 
155. The NCMEI Act was amended in 2010.134 
156. Section 2(g) defined a ‘minority educational institution’ as reproduced below: 
“(g) “Minority educational institution” means a 
college or institution (other than a University) 
established or maintained by a person or group of 
persons from amongst the minorities;” 
In 2010, Section 2(g) was amended to read as follows: 
“(g) “Minority educational institution” means a 
college or an educational institution established and 
administered by a minority or minorities;” 
 
133 Sections 12D and 12E, NCMEI Act. 
134 See the National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions (Amendment) Act 2010. 

PART E 

157. Two material changes were made to Section 2(g) in 2010. The first was the 
removal of the words “other than a University” from the definition. The NCMEI 
Act did not extend to universities prior to 2010. The amendment in that year 
widened the ambit of the Act and made its provisions applicable to minority 
universities as well. The second change was the replacement of the term 
“established or maintained” with “established and administered.” The 
amendment in 2010 to the definition of a minority educational institution in 
Section 2(g) cannot impact the interpretation of Article 30(1). In the preceding 
sections, we have held that establishment by a minority is the only indicia for 
a minority educational institution. Section 10 of the NCMEI Act recognises this 
by prescribing the procedure to ‘establish’ a minority educational institution. 
The amendment to the definition of a minority educational education in 
Section 2(f) only recognises the right guaranteed by Article 30(1). It 
recognises that a minority educational institution once established is also 
administered by them. ix. 
Registration under the Societies Registration Act 
158. The question is whether a minority educational institution which is registered 
as a society under the Societies Registration Act soon after its establishment 
loses its status as a minority educational institution by virtue of such 
registration. 
159. As discussed in Section B of this judgment, this question was referred to a 
larger Bench by this Court in Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya (supra). This question 
was referred because the institution in that case was founded in 1938 and 

PART F 

was registered under the Societies Registration Act in 1940. The judgment in 
Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya (supra) has been rendered and the case has been 
disposed of. This judgment will therefore not have a bearing on that case. 
Moreover, the parties in the present proceedings have not addressed this 
Court as to question (c) nor does the question have a bearing on the other 
questions referred. In these circumstances, we are of the opinion that this 
question is not required to be answered. 
F. 
Conclusion 
160. In view of the above discussion, the following are our conclusions: 
a. 
The reference in Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya (supra) of the correctness of 
the decision in Azeez Basha (supra) was valid. The reference was within 
the parameters laid down in Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra 
Community (supra); 
b. 
Article 30(1) can be classified as both an anti-discrimination provision 
and a special rights provision. A legislation or an executive action which 
discriminates against religious or linguistic minorities in establishing or 
administering educational institutions is ultra vires Article 30(1). This is 
the anti-discrimination reading of the provision. Additionally, a linguistic 
or religious minority which has established an educational institution 
receives the guarantee of greater autonomy in administration. This is the 
‘special rights’ reading of the provision; 

PART F 

c. 
Religious or linguistic minorities must prove that they established the 
educational institution for the community to be a minority educational 
institution for the purposes of Article 30(1); 
d. 
The right guaranteed by Article 30(1) is applicable to universities 
established before the commencement of the Constitution; 
e. 
The right under Article 30(1) is guaranteed to minorities as defined upon 
the commencement of the Constitution. A different right-bearing group 
cannot be identified for institutions established before the adoption of the 
Constitution; 
f. 
The incorporation of the University would not ipso facto lead to 
surrendering of the minority character of the institution. The 
circumstances surrounding the conversion of a teaching college to a 
teaching university must be viewed to identify if the minority character of 
the institution was surrendered upon the conversion. The Court may on 
a holistic reading of the statutory provisions relating to the administrative 
set-up of the educational institution deduce if the minority character or 
the purpose of establishment was relinquished upon incorporation; and 
 
g. 
The following are the factors which must be used to determine if a 
minority ‘established’ an educational institution: 
i. 
The indicia of ideation, purpose and implementation must be 
satisfied. First, the idea for establishing an educational institution 

PART F 

must have stemmed from a person or group belonging to the 
minority community; second, the educational institution must be 
established predominantly for the benefit of the minority 
community; and third, steps for the implementation of the idea must 
have been taken by the member(s) of the minority community; and 
ii. 
The administrative-set up of the educational institution must 
elucidate and affirm (I) the minority character of the educational 
institution; and (II) that it was established to protect and promote 
the interests of the minority community. 
161. The view taken in Azeez Basha (supra) that an educational institution is not 
established by a minority if it derives its legal character through a statute, is 
overruled. The questions referred are answered in the above terms. The 
question of whether AMU is a minority educational institution must be decided 
based on the principles laid down in this judgment. The papers of this batch 
of cases shall be placed before the regular bench for deciding whether AMU 
is a minority educational institution and for the adjudication of the appeal from 
the decision of the Allahabad High Court in Malay Shukla (supra) after 
receiving instructions from the Chief Justice of India on the administrative 
side. 

PART F 

162. The reference is disposed of in the above terms. 
163. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 

…….……………………………………CJI 
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 

….….………………………………………J 
[Sanjiv Khanna] 

….….………………………………………J 
[J B Pardiwala]..….…………………………………………J 
[Manoj Misra] 

New Delhi; 
November 8, 2024 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
ORIGINAL AND CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY 

 … APPELLANT (S) Civil Appeal No. 2286 
of 2006

VERSUS 
NARESH AGARWAL AND OTHERS 

… RESPONDENT (S) 
 
WITH 

CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
( SLP No. 32490 of 2015) 
WP(C) NO. 272 OF 2016 
T.C. (C) No. 46 of 2023 
 
JUDGEMENT 
 
SURYA KANT, J. 
 
Table of Contents 
 
I. 
Background... 4 
A. History of minority rights... 4 
B. The Constitutional scheme... 14 
C. Brief history of AMU... 19 
D. Challenge to the constitutionality of the 1951 and 1965 Amendment 
Acts... 29 

E. History of discordance with Azeez Basha... 37 
II. Contentions of the parties... 41 
III. Issues for determination... 45 
IV. Analysis... 47 
F. 
Issue I: What are the requisite parameters of reference to a larger 
bench?... 47 
G. Issue II: Whether the Appellant has the locus standi to bring the 
present challenge?... 55 
H. Issue III: What are the tests to seek protection under Article 30?... 62 
I. 
Issue IV: What is the meaning of ‘establish’ in Art. 30?... 66 
J. 
Issue V: What is the meaning of ‘administer’ in Article 30?... 84 
K. Issue VI: Whether the Union of India is obligated to defend the AMU 
Amendment Act, 1981?... 90 
V. Areas of divergence... 91 
VI. Conclusion... 100 

1. 
A three-judge bench presided over by the then Chief Justice of India 
vide order dated 12.02.2019, passed in Aligarh Muslim University v. 
Naresh Agarwal,1 (2019 Reference Order) made this reference to a 
Bench of Seven Judges, with a view to: 
i. 
To determine the correctness of the question arising from the 
decision of this Court in S. Azeez Basha v. Union of India,2 
which had ruled against the minority status sought to be accorded 
to the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU). ii. 
To determine question 3(a) formulated in TMA Pai Foundation 
v. State of Karnataka,3 which postulates that: 
 
“Q. 3. (a) What are the indicia for treating an educational 
institution as a minority educational institution? Would an 
institution be regarded as a minority educational institution 
because it was established by a person(s) belonging to a 
religious or linguistic minority or its being administered by a 
person(s) belonging to a religious or linguistic minority? 
This question need not be answered by this Bench, it will be 
dealt with by a regular Bench.”; and 
 
iii. 
Whether the decision of this Court in Prof. Yashpal v. State of 
Chhattisgarh,4 and the amendment in 2010 to the National 
Commission for Minority Educational Institutions Act, 2004 
(NCMEI Act) have any bearing on the aforesaid questions 
formulated? 
 
2. 
The fulcrum of this reference revolves around the interpretation of 
Article 30 of the Constitution of India, which deals with the right of 
minorities to set up educational institutions. We have had the benefit of 
perusing the erudite opinion authored by Hon’ble the Chief Justice Dr. 
D.Y. Chandrachud. While the said opinion comprehensively addresses 
each issue with depth and clarity, we have expressed a differing view on 
 
1 Aligarh Muslim University v. Naresh Agarwal, (2020). 
2 S. Azeez Basha v. Union of India, (1968). 
3 TMA Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka, (2002), para 18. 
4 Prof. Yashpal and Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh and Ors., (2005). the interpretation of certain aspects, given the significant constitutional 
implications involved. Recognizing the weight of these issues, we have 
chosen to offer our own perspective, though we acknowledge the 
thoroughness and diligence with which Hon’ble the Chief Justice has 
approached this complex matter. 
 
3. 
Before we lay down the indicia under Article 30 to determine whether 
an institution has a minority character and ought to be afforded 
protection, we deemed it appropriate to embark on a substantive 
analysis of the issues involved, and will begin by undertaking a 
comprehensive examination of the multifaceted nature of minority 
rights, both in India and internationally. 
 
I. 
BACKGROUND 
A. 
History of minority rights 
4. 
The basis of defining the term ‘minorities’ and bestowing associated 
rights on them have varied significantly across different eras and 
regions. Indicators such as religion, nationality, ethnicity, and race 
frequently emerge as markers of minority status across the world. In 
contrast, the Indian perspective on minorities is broadly categorized as 
religious and linguistic minorities. 
 
A.1. Global history of minority rights 
 
5. 
The idea of minority rights can generally be traced back to the ‘Peace of 
Westphalia’, a set of treaties concluded in the mid-17th century, which 
sought to give rights to certain religious minorities in newly ceded 
territories post-war.5 Hence, globally, the concept of minority rights 
broadly emerged along the fault lines of religion. 

5 Jennifer Jackson Preece, “Minority rights in Europe: from Westphalia to Helsinki” Review of 
International Studies (1997), Vol. 23, pp. 75–92; Joseph B. Kelly, “National Minorities in 
International Law”, Denv. J. Int'l L. & Pol'y, (1973) Vol. 3, pp. 253; Liebich, Andre. “Minority 
as Inferiority: Minority Rights in Historical Perspective” Review of International Studies, 
(2008) Vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 243–63. 

6. 
However, the focus on religion changed subsequently with the rise of 
nationalism in Europe. Since national identities emerged as the 
primary means of distinguishing insiders from outsiders, the concept of 
minorities in different instruments—such as the 1815 Final Act of 
Congress of Vienna—was defined in terms of national groups.6 
 
7. 
As national identities began to take shape, the notion of minority rights 
became increasingly intertwined with the quest for international 
legitimacy. By the time of the 1878 Congress of Berlin, the question of 
minorities had become a crucial factor in the emergence of new nation-
states beyond Western Europe. These States, requiring international 
recognition, were accordingly required to demonstrate a willingness to 
comply with a ‘standard of civilization’, which included the protection of 
minority rights.7 This was not merely a moral obligation but a strategic 
tool for gaining acceptance within the global community. Nations such 
as Greece, for example, were compelled by powers like France, Great 
Britain, and Russia to uphold minority rights as a condition for their 
recognition and support.8 
 
8. 
This momentum of bestowing rights to minorities continued to gain 
further traction across Europe. For instance, Hungary's Parliament first 
proclaimed minority rights in July 1849,9 followed by their formal 
codification into Austrian law in 1867. Similarly, Belgium joined the 
movement in 1898. Although this era did not achieve universal respect 
for minority rights, it marked a pivotal shift, with these categories of 
rights increasingly taking centre stage in international negotiations and 
settlements, particularly in the aftermath of conflicts. 

6 Ibid. 
7 G. Gong, “The Standard of Civilization in International Society” Oxford University Press, 
(1984). 
8 Greece Liberated– London Protocol, (United Kingdom, France & Russia) (adopted on 03 
February, 1830). 
9 Mazohl, Brigitte, '‘Equality among the Nationalities’ and the Peoples (Volksstämme) of the 
Habsburg 
Empire”, 
Constitutionalism, 
Legitimacy, 
and 
Power: 
Nineteenth-Century 
Experiences Chapter 9, Oxford University Press (2014). 

9. 
The mid-19th century also witnessed the gradual upliftment of 
historically-oppressed groups, such as the African-Americans, who 
constituted the largest minority in the United States. The American 
Civil War of the 1860s culminated in the issuance of the Emancipation 
Proclamation by Abraham Lincoln in 1863. This landmark decree 
effectively abolished slavery and guaranteed freedom to all African-
Americans. This progress was further bolstered by the 14th Amendment 
of 1868, which granted various civil rights to all citizens.10 
 
10. This trajectory of liberation extended into the early 20th century, with 
the League of Nations making the establishment of a minority state 
system one of its key priorities. The new Nation-States that emerged in 
East-Central Europe post-1919 were so ethnographically diverse that 
recognising minority rights became essential. The victorious powers 
understood that ethnic dissatisfaction with the territorial status quo 
could potentially escalate into domestic and even international violence. 
Thus, the rights of minorities became a prerequisite for independence, 
as well as a condition for war reparations or admission into the League 
of Nations. A notable example is the Polish Minority Treaties of 1918, 
which granted special and presumably temporary rights in areas such 
as education, allowing minorities to read and learn their preferred 
languages.11 
 
11. The growing significance of minority rights during this period is further 
exemplified 
by 
several 
cases 
before 
the 
Permanent 
Court 
of 
International Justice (PCIJ). In a 1923 case of the Rights of Minorities 
in Upper Silesia, the PCIJ affirmed that individuals should have the 
autonomy to decide their minority affiliation.12 Similarly, in the 1930 
Greco-Bulgarian communities case, the PCIJ emphasized the rights 
 
10 Holloway, Jonathan Scott, “Civilization, race, and the politics of uplift”, African American 
History: A Very Short Introduction, Chapter 4, (Oxford University Press) (2023). 
11 Treaty of Peace with Poland [Polish Minorities Treaty], (adopted on 28 June 1919). 
12 Rights of Minorities in Upper Silesia (Germ. v. Pol.), 1928 P.C.I.J. (ser. A) No. 15 (Apr. 26) 
(Permanent Court of International Justice). of minorities to uphold and preserve their traditions, clarifying that a 
‘community’ under the subject-Convention referred to a group united 
by race, religion, language, and traditions, and that such a community 
could possess property distinct from any individual comprising it.13 
Further, in Minority Schools in Albania, decided in 1935, the PCIJ 
explored the interrelation between minority status and cultural identity 
while addressing the religious and educational autonomy enjoyed by 
the Greek communities of Albania.14 The PCIJ concluded that the 
essence of minority treaties was to ensure de facto equality for 
minorities, 
thus 
enabling 
them 
to 
maintain 
their 
cultural 
distinctiveness through a specialized minority regime. 
 
12. In this manner, the historical development of minority rights from the 
16th to 20th centuries illustrates a progressively advancing standard of 
rights accorded to these groups. Initially, minority status was primarily 
defined by religious affiliation; however, over time, nationality and 
linguistic identity became key criteria. This evolution reflects a broader 
international understanding of minority groups. There have been 
instances where the dominant majority has also actively sought to 
empower these minorities, highlighting the complex interplay between 
oppression and advocacy throughout history. 
 
A.2. Minority rights in India 
13. The trailing analysis put forth hereinabove sets the context to hereafter 
understand the Indian experience with minority rights. However, any 
discussion of minority rights in India must begin with appreciating its 
unique and vibrant nature, characterized by its rich mosaic of cultures, 
religions, and languages. 

13 Greco-Bulgarian "Communities", Advisory Opinion, PCIJ Series B. No 17 (Permanent Court 
of International Justice, 1928). 
14 Minority Schools in Albania, Advisory Opinion, PCIJ Series A/B no 64, ICGJ 314 
(Permanent Court of International Justice, 1935). 

14. As a melting pot of cultures, India is home to a diverse array of different 
communities. One such example is the Parsis, who came to India from 
Persia—escaping persecution by the then Arab conquerors—and have 
since established themselves as one of the most prosperous 
communities in India.15 Another important minority is the Sikhs, who 
follow Sikhism, which “is believed to be a deep synthesis of divine 
virtues, ceaseless, remembrance, relentless service of mankind, equality 
of mind, and ephemeral nature of the world besides the defiance of 
tyranny and fighting for righteousness”.16 These instances, among 
others, provide ample historical evidence supporting India’s tradition of 
tolerance, as embodied in the notion of 'Vasudeva Kutumbakam’,17 
where all communities have flourished and seamlessly integrated into 
Indian culture. 
 
15. It was only with the advent of British rule in India that longstanding 
religious, caste, linguistic and regional ethnic tribal entities that had 
existed in India for centuries began to receive renewed scrutiny.18 The 
late 19th century, particularly after the Revolt of 1857, saw an 
increasing incorporation of Indians into the colonial government. This 
increasing 
inclusion 
of 
Indians 
in 
British 
institutions 
forced 
imperialists to address how Indians were to be represented, leading to 
the concept of group-based representation.19 They were initially defined 
by religious terms—evident in the first Indian Census of 1872, which 
classified Indians by religion—the representation later expanded to 
include caste and racial categories. Subsequent censuses further 
 
15 Dosabhoy Framjee, “History of the Parsis: including their manners, customs, religion and 
present position” Volume 2, Discovery Publishing House, (1986). 
16 Sehajdhari Sikh Federation v. Union of India and others, 2011 SCC Online P&H 17374. 
17 Justice R. A. Jahagirdar (Retd.), “Secularism: the Road Behind and the Road Ahead,” 
Secularism: Collected Works, Rationalist Foundation, pp. 9. 
18 Rochana Bajpai, “Debating Difference: Group Rights and Liberal Democracy in India, 
Oxford University Press, (2011). 
19 Ibid. sought to amalgamate oppressed castes of India into a single all-India 
category of ‘Depressed Classes’.20 
 
A.2.1. The concept of linguistic minorities 
16. History indicates that during the British Rule, Hindi was sought to be 
projected as the language of the majority community.21 In this vein, the 
British decided to introduce the permissive use of the Devanagari script 
in the Courts of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, with a view to 
undermine the influence of the Mughal elites.22 From the late 19th 
century onwards, there seemed to be murmurs against the perceived 
imposition of Hindi language, in regions where other languages were 
spoken. These concerns were endeavoured to be redressed by 
reorganising and carving out new States, predominantly on linguistic 
considerations, such as, for instance, the division of the States of Bihar 
and Odisha.23 
 
17. The reorganization of the States based on linguistic differences gained 
momentum with the appointment of the Indian Statutory Commission, 
and subsequently, in April 1938, when a resolution was passed by the 
Madras 
Legislative Assembly, 
unsuccessfully 
recommending 
the 
establishment of four new Provinces from the former Madras 
Presidency. Ultimately, the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 enabled the 
division of States on a linguistic basis, aligning administrative 
boundaries with the linguistic identities of the population. 

20 Sumit Mukherjee, “Conceptualisation and Classification of Caste and Tribe by the Census 
of India,” Journal of the Anthropological Survey of India, (2013), Vol. 62 no. 2 pp.807. 
21 Tariq Rahman, “Punjabi Language during British Rule,” International Journal of Punjab 
Studies (2007). 
22 Amit Ranjan, “How Hindi came to dominate India” The Diplomat, (06 May, 2017) available 
at https://thediplomat.com/2017/05/how-hindi-came-to-dominate-india/. 
23 Fazal Ali, Report of the States Reorganisation Committee (1955), available at 
https://www.mha.gov.in/sites/default/files/State%20Reorganisation%20Commisison%20
Report%20of%201955_270614.pdf. 

A.2.2. The concept of religious minorities 
18. In addition to linguistic minorities, the question of rights and privileges 
for religious minorities also gained prominence. The genesis of this 
category of minority rights in India can be traced back to the 1909 
Morley-Minto Constitutional Reforms, which introduced separate 
electorates and reserved quotas to protect the interests of one of the 
minority communities within the evolving political framework.24 
Following this development, the British government extended similar 
provisions to other communities, as well as the Depressed Classes, 
thereby institutionalizing measures for their representation and 
protection.25 
 
19. Subsequently, political organisations seeking to leverage the 1919 
Montagu-Chelmsford reforms played a crucial role in consolidating 
minority identities.26 The principle that eventually emerged for Indian 
representation in colonial institutions was that minority groups should 
be represented in proportion to their population size.27 The primary 
demand of these groups was to secure safeguards against potential 
dominance by the Congress or the majority community in Indian 
politics. 
 
20. The 1928 Simon Commission further solidified the foundation of 
minority rights by recommending the continuation of separate 
electorates.28 At the same time, the 1928 Nehru Report, which 
influenced the framing of a Constitution for India, laid great emphasis 
on the safeguards of minorities.29 However, in a significant departure 
 
24 Meetika Srivastava, “Evolution of the System of Public Administration in India from the 
Period 1858- 1950: A Detailed Study Highlighting the Major Landmarks in Administrative 
History Made During this Period” (2009), available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=1482528. 
25 Dick Kooiman, “Communalism and Indian Princely States: A Comparison with British 
India” Economic and Political Weekly (1995) Vol. 30 No. 34 pp. 2123-2133. 
26 Ibid. 
27 Francesca R. Jensenius, “Mired in Reservations: The Path-Dependent History of Electoral 
Quotas in India” The Journal of Asian Studies (2015) Vol. 74 No. 1. 
28 McMillan, Alistair, “Standing at the Margins: Representation and Electoral Reservations in 
India” Oxford University Press (2005). 
29 Ibid. from the 1916 Lucknow Pact,30 the Committee rejected the Muslim 
League’s demands for separate electorates, noting that communal 
protection was no longer necessary for Hindus and Muslims.31 
 
21. Historical events reveal that after the failure of Round Table Conference 
of 1930 and 1932, the Colonial Government firstly proposed the 
Communal Award followed by the Government of India Act, 1935, 
which was the last major colonial constitutional exercise prior to 
Independence. This Act reserved seats in Provincial Legislatures for a 
total of thirteen communal and socio-economic categories.32 The 1940s 
then witnessed intense political debates centred on the ‘minority 
question,’ with various parties negotiating the extent of concessions to 
be granted to minority communities.33 
 
A.2.3. Deliberations by the Constituent Assembly of India 
22. The developments of the last few decades of British rule in India vis-à-
vis minority rights directly contributed to the discussions in the 
Constituent Assembly Debates and the formalisation of safeguards for 
minorities within the Indian Constitution.34 In fact, it strengthened the 
belief of the makers of the Indian Constitution that the Indian State 
must be formally committed to protecting the distinct cultural, 
linguistic and religious practices of various communities.35 
 
23. Thus, to streamline the complex task of drafting the Indian 
Constitution, the Constituent Assembly decided to work through 
specialized committees. Among these, the Advisory Committee on 
Fundamental Rights, Minorities, etc., was formed under the leadership 
 
30 Owen, Hugh “Negotiating the Lucknow Pact”, Journal of Asian Studies, (1972) Vol. 31 No. 
3 pp. 561–87. 
31 Proceedings of the Indian Round Table Conference (12th November, 1930–19th January, 
1931). 
32 Rochana Bajpai, supra note 18. 
33 Krishna, K.B., The Problem of Minorities in India or Communal Representation in India, 
G. Allen and Unwin, (1939). 
34 Rochana Bajpai, “Constituent Assembly Debates and Minority Right” Economic and 
Political Weekly, (2000) Vol. 35 No. 21-22. 
35 Ibid. of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, having proportional representation from all 
major minority groups.36 Given the broad mandate of this Committee, it 
was further divided into five Sub-Committees, one of which was the 
Minorities Sub-Committee, chaired by Dr. H.C. Mookherjee, a 
prominent Christian leader.37 
 
24. Soon after, the Advisory Committee prepared the ‘Report on Minority 
Rights’, which recommended that elections to all legislatures be 
conducted on the basis of joint electorates, with reservations for 
specified 
minorities.38 
Additionally, 
the 
Report 
also 
proposed 
reservation 
in 
recruitment 
for 
minorities. 
The 
Report 
further 
incorporated 
suggestions 
for 
establishing 
Constitutional 
and 
Administrative mechanisms to address the challenges faced by 
minorities in India. 
 
25. The discussions on the Draft Constitution, initiated by Dr. Ambedkar 
on 21.02.1948, intended to give special attention to minority rights.39 
This then led to the insertion of ‘Special Provisions Relating to 
Minorities’ (Part XIV – Articles 292 to 301) into the Draft Constitution. 
This was in addition to the protections granted to all citizens under the 
Chapter of Fundamental Rights.40 The proposed Part XIV instead 
intended to provide political reservations for Muslims, Indian-
Christians, Anglo-Indians, Scheduled Castes, and Scheduled Tribes. 
Additionally, it envisioned special protection for Anglo-Indians with 
respect to educational institutions and also addressed minority claims 
in the realm of public recruitment.41 Finally, it sought to include 
 
36 Navin Pal Singh, Dr. Balvinder Singh Slathia, “Intricacies of Educational and Cultural 
Rights of Minorities in India: Efficacy of Constitutional Safeguards” UGC Care Journal (2020) 
Vol. 43, no.4. 
37 Ibid. 
38 Rochana Bajpai, supra note 18. 
39 Rochana Bajpai, supra note 34. 
40 Kamlesh Kumar Wadhwa, Minority Safeguards in India, Thomas Press (India) Limited, 
(1975). 
41 Ibid. administrative checks to ensure the effective implementation and 
functioning of these constitutional safeguards. 
 
26. However, these provisions sought to be incorporated under Part XIV 
were short-lived. The harsh realities of the communal violence following 
the partition of the Indian subcontinent into India and Pakistan greatly 
impacted one and all. The conflicts, violence, exploitation, general 
public disorder and lawlessness during the migration exercise resulted 
in the deaths of almost one million people, with an estimated 
displacement of approximately ten to twenty million people.42 
 
27. Naturally, the aftermath of these events sent shockwaves throughout 
the country. It profoundly affected the Constituent Assembly and the 
Drafting Committee, particularly in regard to the recognition of 
communal minority rights.43 Prior to the Partition, the Assembly had 
granted religious reservations in legislative bodies. However, these 
reservations were done away with post-Partition.44 The prevailing 
sentiment was that such measures could foster separatist tendencies 
and were inconsistent with the principles of a Secular Democratic 
State. This view was also supported by various Muslim members of the 
Constituent Assembly.45 For instance, Mohammad Ismail Khan 
stated:46 
“[…] Because this reservation of seats would only keep 
alive Communalism and would be ineffectual as a 
safeguard for the Muslim minorities or for the matter 
of that for any other minorities. I congratulate the 
majority community, that they have not taken advantage of 
their superiority in numbers, by utilising this device for their 
 
42 “Partition of 1947 Continues to Haunt India, Pakistan” Stanford Report (2019) available at 
https://news.stanford.edu/stories/2019/03/partition-1947-continues-haunt-india-
pakistan-stanford-scholar-says. 
43 B Shiva Rao (ed), The Framing of India's Constitution, Vol. I-V, Indian Institute of Public 
Administration, (1967). 
44 Ibid. 
45 Christina George, “Begum Aizaz Rasul: The only Muslim Woman to oppose minority 
reservations in the Constituent Assembly” The Indian Express, (14 February, 2018), 
available 
at 
https://indianexpress.com/article/gender/begum-aizaz-rasul-the-only-
muslim-woman-to-oppose-minority-reservations-in-the-constituent-assembly-5057096/. 
46 Constituent Assembly Debate, Speech by Mohammad Ismail Khan, (26 May 1949). own purposes. The Muslims have been thinking for 
some 
time 
that 
this 
reservation 
was 
wholly 
incompatible with responsible Government and I may 
say that when Provincial autonomy was introduced in the 
provinces for the first time the Muslims soon began to realize 
the separate representation was not going to be an effective 
safeguard for the protection of their interests […]” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
28. Similarly, Tajamul Hussain also emphatically voiced: 47 
"Mr. President, Sir, reservation of seats in any shape or 
form and for any community or group of people is, in 
my opinion, absolutely wrong in principle. Therefore I 
am strongly of opinion that there should be no 
reservation of seats for anyone and I, as a Muslim, 
speak for the Muslims. There should be no reservation 
of seats for the Muslim community. (Hear, Hear). I would 
like to tell you that in no civilised country where there is 
parliamentary system on democratic lines, there is any 
reservation of seats. […]” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
29. Eventually, the Constituent Assembly dropped the proposals to grant 
varied rights to linguistic and religious minorities, and retained only 
Articles 29 and 30 to assuage their concerns. These two Fundamental 
Rights under Part III nonetheless represent a watershed moment in the 
jurisprudence of minority rights worldwide. 
 
B. 
The Constitutional scheme 
30. The majority of minority rights within the Indian Constitution are 
encapsulated in Part III under the sub-section on ‘Cultural and 
Educational Rights’. This section includes: (i) the right of any section 
of citizens with a distinct language, script, or culture to conserve the 
same under Article 29; and (ii) the right of linguistic and religious 
minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their 
choice under Article 30. 

47 Constituent Assembly Debate, Speech by Tajamul Hussain, (26 May 1949). 

31. This focus on cultural and educational rights does not diminish the 
broader protections offered by the Constitution, which includes positive 
discrimination and affirmative action. Notable amongst these are 
Articles 15 and 16, which provide reservations to ensure equality of 
opportunity, and Articles 25 to 28, for the safeguard of religious 
freedoms. In addition, Articles 350A and 350B were incorporated 
shortly after independence in 1956 to further protect linguistic 
minorities. These provisions established administrative shields to 
support language rights and ensure their preservation within the 
broader framework of the Indian State. 
 
32. Given this context, Article 29 protects linguistic minorities and their 
right to conserve their languages, and Article 30 bestows positive rights 
to religious and linguistic minorities, allowing them to establish and 
administer educational institutions. These provisions read as follows: 
“29. Protection of interests of minorities.— 
(1) Any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India 
or any part thereof having a distinct language, script or culture 
of its own shall have the right to conserve the same. 
(2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational 
institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State 
funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any 
of them.” 

“30. Right of minorities to establish and administer 
educational institutions.— 
(1) All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall 
have the right to establish and administer educational 
institutions of their choice. 
(1A) In making any law providing for the compulsory 
acquisition of any property of any educational institution 
established and administered by a minority, referred to in 
clause (1), the State shall ensure that the amount fixed by or 
determined under such law for the acquisition of such 
property is such as would not restrict or abrogate the right 
guaranteed under that clause. 
(2) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational 
institutions, discriminate against any educational institution 
on the ground that it is under the management of a minority, 
whether based on religion or language.” 

33. Other provisions in the Constitution of India, such as Article 19, for 
instance, also provide a similar freedom to establish educational 
institutions. However, the distinguishing and unique nature of Article 
30 lies in its broader protection against State intervention. The 
interplay of these Articles has been thoroughly examined by an eleven-
judge bench of this Court in TMA Pai (supra): 
 
“18. With 
regard 
to 
the 
establishment 
of 
educational 
institutions, three articles of the Constitution come into play. 
Article 19(1)(g) gives the right to all the citizens to practise any 
profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or business; 
this right is subject to restrictions that may be placed under 
Article 19(6). Article 26 gives the right to every religious 
denomination to establish and maintain an institution for 
religious purposes, which would include an educational 
institution. Article 19(1)(g) and Article 26, therefore, confer 
rights on all citizens and religious denominations to establish 
and maintain educational institutions. There was no serious 
dispute that the majority community as well as linguistic and 
religious minorities would have a right under Articles 19(1)(g) 
and 26 to establish educational institutions. In addition, 
Article 30(1), in no uncertain terms, gives the right to the 
religious and linguistic minorities to establish and administer 
educational institutions of their choice.” 
 
34. The distinction between broader rights such as Article 19 and Article 
30, is thus clearly visible. Though Article 19 grants all citizens the right 
to establish institutions, it does not indemnify these institutions from 
State intervention in their administration and allows reasonable 
restrictions in the interests of the public. In contrast, Article 30 
provides a specific right for religious minorities to establish and 
administer 
educational 
institutions 
without 
significant 
State 
interference. Additionally, whereas Articles 25 to 28 grant general 
rights to religious denominations, Article 30 specifically protects the 
rights of religious minorities. 

B.1. Relevant case laws on the interpretation of Article 30 
35. While the judicial interpretation of the scope and nuances of Article 30 
will be discussed later in relevant parts of the judgement, a brief note of 
the landmark edicts that have been enumerated on this provision can 
be laid out. Over the course of several decades, through multiple 
judicial pronouncements and interpretations, the Supreme Court has 
held that the right provided under Article 30 is not absolute. An eleven-
judge bench in TMA Pai (supra) and a seven-judge bench in P.A. 
Inamdar v. State of Maharashtra,48 have held that while the 
minority community possesses the right to administer the educational 
institutions, the State may impose reasonable regulations for the 
benefit of these institutions. Similarly, five-judge benches in Islamic 
Academy of Education v. State of Karnataka49 and St. Stephen's 
College v. University of Delhi50 have held that the State can prescribe 
general rules regarding merit in admissions. This view was seconded in 
Secy., Malankara Syrian Catholic College v. T. Jose,51 which held 
that general regulations regarding service conditions of employees 
could also be imposed. 
 
36. In that sense, several judicial pronouncements have sought to explain 
the scope of Article 30 and clarify the extent of the protection granted. 
 
B.2. Statutory Scheme 
37. Apart from constitutional guarantees and rights, the Indian Parliament 
has also adopted several legislations to protect the rights of minorities. 
The National Commission for Minorities was established as a statutory 
body under the aegis of the National Commission for Minorities Act, 
1992. Section 9(1) of the Act mandates the Commission to perform 
various functions, including, but not limited to, monitoring the 
implementation of safeguards for minorities, as provided in the 
 
48 P.A. Inamdar v. State of Maharashtra, (2005). 
49 Islamic Academy of Education and Anr. v. State of Karnataka and Ors., (2003). 
50 St. Stephen's College v. University of Delhi, (1992). 
51 Secy., Malankara Syrian Catholic College v. T. Jose & Ors., (2007). 

Constitution, and laws enacted by Parliament and State Legislatures. 
The Commission is also responsible for making recommendations to 
the Central and State Governments for the effective implementation of 
these safeguards to protect minority interests. Additionally, it is tasked 
with addressing specific complaints regarding the deprivation of 
minority rights and safeguards and addressing such matters with the 
appropriate authorities. 
 
38. A significant development which flows from Article 30 is also the 
enactment of the NCMEI Act, which governs minority educational 
institutions. The NCMEI Act was enacted in 2005 to, inter alia, 
engender the rights of a minority educational institution to seek 
recognition as an affiliated college to a Scheduled University and to 
provide a forum for dispute resolution. In this manner, the NCMEI Act 
gave 
greater 
credence 
to 
Article 

and 
aided 
its 
efficient 
implementation. 
 
39. In 2006, the NCMEI Act was amended, and the scope of the 
Commission was expanded further. In addition to protecting the rights 
of minority educational institutions, the Commission was now endowed 
with the power to determine and declare whether an institution is a 
minority institution. Under Section 2(f), minorities have been defined in 
the NCMEI Act as: “a community notified as such by the Central 
Government.” Employing this definition, the Central Government has so 
far notified Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists, Parsis and Jains as 
minority communities.52 
 
40. Having examined the development of minority rights, as well as the 
Constitutional and Statutory scheme, it is pertinent at this juncture, to 
 
52 Ministry of Human Resource Development, No. F.7-5/2005-MC(P) (Notified on 18 
January, 2005) available at 
https://www.education.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/Notification18012005.pdf; 
Ministry of Minority Affairs, S.O. 267(E) (Notified on 27 January, 2014) available at 
https://ncm.nic.in/legislations/Gazette_JainInclusion_27Jan2014.pdf. briefly touch upon the history of AMU and analyze the events leading to 
the instant matter. 
 
C. 
Brief history of AMU 
41. The history of AMU begins after the founding of the Muhammaden 
Anglo-Oriental (MAO) College at Aligarh in 1875 by Sir Syed Ahmad 
Khan. It seems that by the year 1895, MAO College had begun to 
experience considerable decline. It faced governmental pressure to 
increase student fees and make examinations more difficult, leading to 
a decrease in student enrolment and endowments.53 The death of Sir 
Syed in 1898 further intensified the situation, creating a sense of 
distrust among the benefactors of the college and a power vacuum.54 
 
42. History further suggests that in 1898, the Sir Syed Memorial Fund was 
created with the goal of raising funds to pay off the debts of the College 
and to create an endowment to establish a university. The then 
Lieutenant Governor of the North-Western Provinces is said to have 
promised aid and support in the management of the College, provided 
that there was a stable governing body for the same directly under 
government supervision. The record further indicates that, by 1903, the 
fund collection drive had raised enough money to meet the College’s 
needs and restore its stability.55 
 
43. At the ‘All India Muhammadan Educational Conference’ in Calcutta, the 
idea of establishing a university in Aligarh sparked significant 
deliberations and gained momentum. Some proposed a pan-India, 
affiliating university,56 while others advocated for a university 
 
53 Theodore Beck, “The Principal's Annual Report for 1898—99” ('Principal's Report), 
(1898—99), Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College Magazine (Aligarh) (MAOCM), and Aligarh 
Institute Gazette (Aligarh) (AIG), New Series VII, No. 11 (15 July 1899) (At this time the two 
journals were temporarily merged). 
54 Shamim Akhtar, “Aligarh: From College to University” Proceedings of the Indian History 
Congress (2018-19) Vol. 79, pp. 623. 
55 Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College Magazine (Aligarh) MAOCM, VII, (January 1899), pp. 
15-21. 
56 Rafiuddin Ahmad, 'The Proposed Muslim University in India', The Nineteenth Century, 
XLIV (1898), 915-21. completely in line with Muslim ideals, with mandatory religious 
instruction and administration in consonance with Islamic principles.57 
 
44. However, nothing tangible happened on the ground 
level for 
multifarious reasons. In early 1910, efforts to establish a university at 
Aligarh resurfaced. Once the requisite funds had been collected, a 
committee was established to draft the constitution for the proposed 
university, designating the Viceroy as the chancellor and placing 
governance in the hands of a Muslim Court of Trustees. The matter of 
affiliation was cursorily mentioned only in the context of the powers of 
approval by various authorities. 
Finally, after long 
drawn-out 
negotiations between relevant stakeholders, in September 1920, the 
Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920 (AMU Act, 1920) was passed by 
the Central Legislature of British India. 
 
C.1. Features of the AMU Act, 1920 
45. The AMU Act, 1920 which came into force with effect from 29.07.1920, 
comprising 40 sections and 23 statutes, was a comprehensive piece of 
legislation that meticulously regulated various aspects of AMU. The 
Statement of Objects and Reasons accompanying the Act clearly 
articulated its purpose: “to incorporate this University, to indicate its 
functions, to create its governing bodies and to define their functions.” In 
essence, the AMU Act, 1920 was focused on establishing the University 
and making it operational by setting up its Governing Bodies and 
outlining their respective functions. 
 
46. Broadly, there were four important Governing Bodies, i.e., the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Court, and other Officers 
such as the Lord Rector, Vice Chancellor, Pro-Vice Chancellor, etc. 

57 Theodore Beck, supra note 53; MAOCM and AIG, supra note 53. 

47. Without expressing any opinion on the interpretation of its provisions 
or the legislative policy of the AMU Act, 1920, we deem it fit to 
encapsulate some relevant provisions. 
 
48. In this light, the role and authority of the Lord Rector was delineated in 
Section 13, which states as follows: 
“13. (1) The Governor General shall be the Lord Rector of the 
University. 
(2) The Lord Rector shall have the right to cause an inspection 
to be made by such person or persons as he may direct, of the 
University, its buildings, laboratories, and equipment, and of 
any institution maintained by the University, and also of the 
examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done by 
the University, and to cause an inquiry to be made in like 
manner in respect of any matter connected with the 
University. The Lord Rector shall, in every case, give notice to 
the University of his intention to cause an inspection or inquiry 
to be made and the University shall be made entitled to be 
represented thereat. 
(3) The Lord Rector may address the Vice-Chancellor with 
reference to the result of such inspection and inquiry, and the 
Vice-Chancellor shall communicate to the Court the views of 
the Lord Rector with such advice as the Lord Rector may be 
pleased to offer upon the action to be taken thereon. 
(4) The Court shall communicate through the Vice-Chancellor 
to the Lord Rector such action, if any, as it is proposed to take 
or has been taken upon the result of such inspection or 
inquiry. 
(5) Where the Court does not, within reasonable time, take 
action to the satisfaction of the Lord Rector, the Lord Rector 
may, 
after 
considering 
any 
explanation 
furnished 
or 
representation made by the Court issue such directions as he 
may think fit, and the Court shall comply with such 
directions.” 
 
49. Similarly, the authority and responsibility of the AMU Court was stated 
under Section 23: 
“23. (1) The Court shall consist of the Chancellor, the Pro-
Chancellor and the Vice Chancellor for the, time being, and 
such other persons as may be specified in the Statutes: 

Provided that no person other than a Muslim shall be a 
member thereof. 
 
(2) The Court shall be the supreme governing body of the 
University and shall have the power to review the acts of the 
Executive and the Academic Councils (save where such 
Councils have acted in accordance with powers conferred on 
them under this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances) and shall 
exercise all the powers of the University not otherwise 
provided for by this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances and 
the Regulations. 
 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall 
exercise the following powers and perform the following 
duties, namely:— 
(a) of making Statutes and of amending or repealing the same; 
(b) of considering Ordinances; 
(c) of considering and passing resolutions on the annual 
report, the annual accounts and the financial estimates; 
(d) of electing such persons to serve on the authorities of the 
University and of appointing such officers as may be 
prescribed by this Act or the Statutes; and 
(e) of exercising such other powers and perform such other 
duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by this Act or 
the Statutes.” 
 
50. The Executive Council, under Section 24, was touted to be the 
executive body of the University. With its constitution, term of office of 
members and powers and duties prescribed by the AMU Statutes. 
Similarly, the Academic Council, being the academic body of AMU, 
would have the control and general regulation and be responsible for 
the maintenance of standards of instruction and for the education, 
examination, discipline and health of students, apart from the 
conferment of degrees. 
 
51. The power to make the AMU Statutes was set out in the following 
manner under Section 27: 
“27. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: - 
(a) The conferment of honorary degrees and the appointment 
of Patrons, Vice-patrons and Rectors; 

(b) The institution of Fellowships, Scholarships, Exhibitions, 
Medals and Prizes; 
(c) The terms of office, and the method and conditions of 
appointment of the officers of the University; 
(d) The designations and powers of officers of the University; 
(e) The constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the 
University; 
(f) The classification and mode of appointment of teachers of 
the University; 
(g) The institution and maintenance of Halls; 
(h) The constitution of Provident and Pension Funds for the 
benefit of the officers, teachers and servants of the University; 
(i) The maintenance of a register of registered graduates; 
(j) The instruction of Muslim students in the Muslim religion 
and theology; 
(k) The establishment of Intermediate colleges and schools; 
and 
(l) All matters which by this Act are to be or may be prescribed 
by Statutes.” 
 
52. In similar parlance, the power to make Ordinances was incorporated 
within Section 29: 
“29. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters 
namely: - 
(a) The courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, 
diplomas and certificates of the University; 
(b) The conditions of the award of fellowships, scholarships, 
studentships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; 
(c) The conditions under which students may be admitted to 
the degree or diploma courses and to the examinations of the 
University and shall be eligible for degrees and diplomas; 
(d) The admission of students to the University; 
(e) The terms of office and terms and management of 
appointment and duties of Examining Bodies, Examiners, and 
Moderators and the conduct of examinations; 
(f) The conditions of residence of students of the University, 
and the levying of fees for residence in Halls; 
(g) The conditions under which women may be exempted from 
attendance at lectures and tutorial classes; 
(h) The fees to be charged for courses of study in the 
University and for admission to the examinations, degrees, 
and diplomas of the University; 
(i) The maintenance of discipline among the students of the 
University; 

(j) The regulation and management of any Intermediate 
colleges and schools maintained under Section 12; and 
(k) All matters which by this Act or the Statutes are to be or 
may be provided for by the Ordinances.” 
 
C.2. Features of the 1951 Amendment Act 
53. With the dawn of independence, the AMU Act was amended in 1951 
through Act No. LXII of 1951 (1951 Amendment Act). A significant 
change was the replacement of the Lord Rector, previously held by the 
Governor General, with the position of ‘Visitor’. At that time, the term 
‘Governor General’ had pertinently been substituted by ‘President of 
India’ vide the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Section 13 delineated 
the authority of the Visitor, and was thus amended as follows: 
“13. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the 
University. 
(2) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be 
made by such person or persons as he may direct, of the 
University, its buildings, laboratories, and equipment, and of 
any institution maintained by the University, and also of the 
examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done by 
the University, and to cause an inquiry to be made in like 
manner in respect of any matter connected with the 
University. 
(2A) The Visitor shall in every case give notice to University of 
his intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made, and 
the University be entitled to appoint representative who shall 
have the right to be present and be heard at such inspection 
or inquiry.; and 
(3) The Visitor may address the Vice-Chancellor with reference 
to the result of such inspection and inquiry, and the Vice-
Chancellor shall communicate to the Executive Council the 
views of the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may be 
pleased to offer upon the action to be taken thereon. 
(4) The Executive Council shall communicate through the Vice-
Chancellor to the Visitors such action, if any, as it is proposed 
to take or has been taken upon the result of such inspection or 
inquiry. 
(5) Where the Executive Council does not, within reasonable 
time, take action to the satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor 

may, 
after 
considering 
any 
explanation 
furnished 
or 
representation made by the Executive Council issue such 
directions as he may think fit, and the Executive Council shall 
comply with such directions. 
(6) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions section, the 
Visitor may, by order in writing, annul any proceeding of the 
University which is not in conformity with this Act, the 
Statutes or the Ordinances: Provided that before making any 
such order, shall call upon the University to show cause why 
such an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown 
within a reasonable time, shall consider the same.” 
 
54. The AMU Court under Section 23 embodied the following: 
“23. (1) The Court shall consist of the Chancellor, the Pro-
Chancellor and the Vice Chancellor and the Pro-Vice 
Chancellor (if any) for the, time being, and such other persons 
as may be specified in the Statutes. 
(2) The Court shall be the supreme governing body of the 
University and shall have the power to review the acts of the 
Executive and the Academic Councils (save where such 
Councils have acted in accordance with powers conferred on 
them under this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances) and shall 
exercise all the powers of the University not otherwise 
provided for by this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances and 
the Regulations. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall 
exercise the following powers and perform the following 
duties, namely:— 
(a) of making Statutes and of amending or repealing the same; 
(b) of considering Ordinances; 
(c) of considering and passing resolutions on the annual 
report, the annual accounts and the financial estimates; 
(d) of electing such persons to serve on the authorities of the 
University and of appointing such officers as may be 
prescribed by this Act or the Statutes; and 
(e) of exercising such other powers and perform such other 
duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by this Act or 
the Statutes.” 
55. It would be relevant to also note the amendment made to Statute 
making power under Section 27: 
“27. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: 

(a) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the 
University; 
(b) the election and continuance in office of the members of the 
said authorities, including the continuance in office the filling 
of vacancies of members, and all other matters relative to 
those authorities for which it may be necessary or desirable to 
provide; 
(c) the appointment, powers, and duties of the officers of the 
University; 
(d) the constitution of a pension or provident fund and the 
establishment of an insurance scheme for the benefit of the 
officers, teachers and other employees of the University; 
(e) the conferment of honorary degrees; 
(f) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships 
exhibitions, medals and prizes; 
(g) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other 
academic distinctions; 
(h) the establishment and abolition of Faculties, Departments, 
Halls, Colleges and other institutions; 
(i) the conditions under which Colleges and institutions. may 
be admitted to privileges of the University and for the 
withdrawal of such privileges; 
(j) the establishment of High Schools and other institutions in 
accordance with the provisions of section 12; and all other 
matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided by the 
Statutes.” 
 
56. Similar amendment was carried out to the Ordinance making power 
under Section 29, which was to the following effect: 
“29. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, 
the Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely: 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their 
enrolment as such; 
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, 
diplomas and certificates of the University: 
(c) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other 
academic distinctions, the qualifications for the same and the 
means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the 
same; 
(d) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University 
and for admission to the examinations, degrees, diplomas of 
the University; and 
(e) the conditions of the award of fellowships, scholarships, 
studentships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; 

(f) the conduct of examinations, including the terms of office 
and manner of appointment and the duties of examining 
bodies. examiners and moderators: 
(g) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the 
University: 
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the 
University; 
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for 
the residence, discipline and teaching of women students and 
the prescribing for them of special courses of studies; 
(j) the giving of religious instruction; 
(k) the emoluments and the terms and conditions of service of 
teachers of the University; 
(l) the maintenance of High Schools and other institutions in 
accordance with the provisions of section 12; 
(m) the supervision and inspection of Colleges and other 
institutions admitted to the privileges of the University under 
section 12A; and 
(n) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, are to 
be or may be provided for by the Ordinances. 

The 
Ordinances 
in 
force 
immediately 
before 
the 
commencement. of the Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) 
Act, 1951, may be amended, repealed or added to at any time 
by the Executive Council provided that- 
(i) No ordinance shall be made affecting the conditions of 
residence or discipline of students except after consultation 
with the Academic Council; 
(ii) No ordinance shall be made- 
(a) affecting the admission or enrolment of students or 
prescribing examinations to be recognised as equivalent to the 
University examinations, or 
(b) affecting the conditions, mode of appointment or duties of 
examiners or the conduct or standard of examinations or any 
course of study, - 
unless a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed by the 
Academic Council. 
 
(3) The Executive Council shall not have the power to amend 
any draft proposed by the Academic Council under the 
provisions of sub section (2) but may reject the proposal or 
return the draft to the Academic Council for reconsideration, 
either in whole or in part together with any amendments 
which the Executive Council may suggest. 
 
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected the draft of 
Ordinance proposed by the Academic Council, the Academic 
Council may appeal to the Central Government and the 
Central Government may, by order, direct that the proposed 

Ordinance shall be laid before the next meeting of the Court 
for its approval and that pending such approval it shall have 
effect from such date as may be specified in the order: 
Provided that if the Ordinance is not approved by the Court at 
such meeting, it shall cease to have effect. 
 
(5) All Ordinances made by the Executive Council shall be 
submitted as soon as may be, to the Visitor and the court, and 
shall be considered by the Court at its next meeting and the 
Court shall have power, by a resolution passed by a majority 
of not less than two-thirds of the members voting, to cancel 
any Ordinance made by the Executive Council, and such 
Ordinance shall, from the date of such resolution. cease to 
have effect, 
 
(6) The Visitor may, by order, direct that the operation of any 
Ordinance shall be suspended until he has had an 
opportunity of exercising his powers of disallowance, and any 
order of suspension under this sub-section shall cease to have 
effect on the expiration of one month from the date of such 
order or on the expiration of fifteen. days from the date of 
consideration of the Ordinance by the Court, whichever period 
expires later. 
 
(7) The Visitor may, at any time after an Ordinance has been 
considered by the Court, signify to the Executive Council his 
dis-allowance of such Ordinance, and from the date of receipt 
by the Executive Council of intimation of such disallowance, 
such Ordinance shall cease to have effect.” 
 
C.3. Features of the 1965 Amendment Act 
57. The Act was further amended by the Act No. 19 of 1965 (1965 
Amendment Act). Most significantly, it revised the powers of the Court. 
Section 23 was accordingly amended as follows: 
“23. (1) The Court shall consist of the Chancellor, the Pro-
Chancellor and such other persons as may be specified in the 
Statutes: 
(2) The functions of the Court shall be- 
(a) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be 
referred to the Court for advise; 
(b) to advise any other authority of the University in respect of 
any matter; 
(c) to perform other such duties and exercise such other 
powers as may be assigned to it by the Visitor or under this 
Act.” 

58. Further, Section 28 was amended in terms of a shift in Statute making 
power: 
“286. (1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule. 
 
(2) The Executive Council may make new or additional 
Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes; but every new 
Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or 
repeal of a Statute shall require the previous approval of the 
Visitor who may sanction or disallow it or return it to the 
Executive Council for further consideration.” 
 
59. Having now outlined the legal history of the AMU Act, 1920 as amended 
till 1965 and the sequence of relevant events, we now turn to the 
verdict rendered by the five-judge Constitution Bench in Azeez Basha 
(supra), which constitutes the sine qua non of the present reference. 
 
D. 
Challenge to the constitutionality of the 1951 and 1965 
Amendment Acts 
60. Shortly after the amendment in 1965, the constitutionality of the 1951 
and 1965 Amendment Acts was challenged before this Court, which led 
to the decision in Azeez Basha (supra). The constitutionality of these 
statutory enactments was primarily examined on the anvil of Article 30 
of the Constitution of India, to determine whether AMU could fulfil the 
litmus test of being a minority educational institution. 
 
D.1. Contentions proffered by the parties therein 
D.1.1. Contentions of the Petitioners 
61. Briefly, the Petitioners in Azeez Basha (supra) contended that: 
a. 
AMU was established by the Muslim minority and therefore, the 
Muslims had the right to administer it. Insofar as the 1951 and 
1965 Amendment Acts take away or abridge any part of that right, 
they are ultra vires Article 30(1). b. 
Article 26 would not apply to educational institutions for there is 
a specific provision in Article 30(1) with respect to educational 
institutions and therefore, institutions for charitable purposes in 
Article 26 (a) refer to institutions other than educational ones. c. 
Article 14 of the Constitution was violated because the terms of the 
Act establishing Benares Hindu University (BHU) were not the 
same as the terms of the AMU Act, 1920. Further, other 
universities, such as Delhi, Agra, Allahabad, Patna, and Benares, 
have a certain elective element, unlike AMU. d. 
Article 19 of the Constitution was violated because the 1965 
Amendment Act deprived Muslims of their right to manage AMU 
and of the right to hold the property vested in AMU by the AMU 
Act, 1920. e. 
Vide the 1965 Amendment Act, the Muslim minority was deprived 
of their property, under Article 31(1), as the composition of the 
Court was changed from the terms of the 1920 Act. f. 
The 1951 and 1965 Amendment Acts violated Articles 25 and 29 of 
the Constitution. 
 
D.1.2. Contentions of the Respondents 
62. Conversely, the Respondents submitted that: 
a. 
AMU was established in 1920 by the AMU Act, 1920 and this 
establishment was not by the Muslim minority, but by the 
Government of India (GoI) by virtue of a Statute. Thus, the Muslim 
minority could not claim any Fundamental Right to administer 
AMU under Article 30(1). b. 
Since AMU was established by the GoI, the Parliament had the 
right to amend that Statute as it thought fit. There was no 
question of taking away the right to administer under the 1951 
and 1965 Amendment Acts, as the Muslim minority never had the 
right of administration. c. 
Though the Court of AMU was to be composed entirely of Muslims, 
under the AMU Act, 1920, they were not given the right to 

administer the university. It was to be administered by the 
authorities established under the AMU Act, 1920. 
 
D.2. Issues formulated 
63. While this Court in Azeez Basha (supra) did not explicitly outline the 
issues, a plain reading of the decision reveals the following key issues 
that were broadly addressed: 
a. 
Whether a ‘university’ established prior to the Constitution coming 
into force could be construed to be an educational institution 
included within the ambit of Article 30? b. 
What is the meaning of the term ‘establish’ in Article 30 and 
whether AMU was established by the Muslim minority? c. 
Whether AMU was administered by Muslims? d. 
Whether the 1951 and 1965 Amendment Acts were violative of 
other Articles contained in Part III of the Constitution? 
 
D.3. Key holdings in Azeez Basha (supra) 
64. In the decision of Azeez Basha (supra), the Constitution Bench 
adjudicated that AMU was not a minority institution for the purposes of 
Article 30(1) of the Indian Constitution. Since the conclusion of this 
case forms the bedrock of the present challenge, it is essential to 
discuss the key holdings of this judgment. 
 
65. In this regard, the Court held that to be a minority institution under 
Article 30, such an institution must have been both established and 
administered by the minority community. In other words, it noted that 
the test provided under Article 30 is conjunctive, and an institution 
cannot enjoy autonomy to such an extent unless it satisfies both the 
prongs of establishment as well as administration by the minority 
community. This Court thus opined that: 
“19. […] The Article in our opinion clearly shows that the 
minority will have the right to administer educational 
institutions of their choice provided they have established 

them, but not otherwise. The article cannot be read, to mean 
that even if the educational institution has been established 
by somebody else, any religious minority would have the right 
to administer it because, for some reason or other, it might 
have been administering it before the Constitution came into 
force. The words “establish and administer” in the article 
must be read conjunctively and so read it gives the right to the 
minority to administer an educational institution provided it 
has been established by it […]” 
 
66. Having held so, this Court then proceeded to analyze each issue 
separately. 
 
D.3.1 Whether universities established pre-Constitution could be included 
within the ambit of Article 30? 
67. This Court in Azeez Basha (supra) firstly observed that the term 
‘educational institution’ in the Constitution had a wide expanse, and 
that universities, which would be institutions that could confer degrees, 
would be covered under the wide import of this term. It further 
observed that though some private universities in pre-Constitution 
India did not have government recognition, this would not disentitle 
them from being covered under the category of an ‘educational 
institution’. 
 
68. Further, relying on the decision in In re the Kerala Education Bill,58 
it held that if Article 30 were to be interpreted such that it covered only 
educational institutions established after the coming into force of the 
Constitution, it would rob Article 30 of its very meaning. In this vein, it 
held as follows: 

“19. … The words “establish and administer” in the article 
must be read conjunctively and so read it gives the right to the 
minority to administer an educational institution provided it 
has been established by it. In this connection our attention 
was drawn to In re; The Kerala Education Bill, 1957 where, it 
is argued, this Court had held that the minority can 
administer an educational institution even though it might not 
 
58 In re the Kerala Education Bill, 1957,. have established it. In that case an argument was raised 
that under Article 30(1) protection was given only to 
educational 
institutions 
established 
after 
the 
Constitution came into force. That argument was 
turned down by this Court for the obvious reason that if 
that interpretation was given to Article 30(1) it would be 
robbed of much of its content. … It is true that at p. 1062 
the Court spoke of Article 30(1) giving two rights to a minority 
i.e. (i) to establish and (ii) to administer. But that was said 
only in the context of meeting [t]he argument that educational 
institutions established by minorities before the Constitution 
came into force did not have the protection of Article 30(1). We 
are of opinion that nothing in that case justifies the contention 
raised of behalf of the petitioners that the minorities would 
have the right to administer an educational institution even 
though the institution may not have been established by them. 
…” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
D.3.2 What is the meaning of the term ‘establish’ and whether AMU was 
‘established’ by the Muslim community? 
69. The Court in Azeez Basha (supra) interpreted the term ‘establish’ in 
Article 30 to mean ‘to bring into existence.’ To determine whether AMU 
was established by the Muslim community, the Court examined the 
legal framework for the establishment of a university. It was found that 
prior to independence, a private individual could create a university 
independently, with State intervention only required for the purposes of 
recognition of the degree conferred. In this context, it observed that 
though Muslims had the option to establish a university without any 
state involvement, they opted for State intervention to secure degree 
recognition. Consequently, this Court concluded that AMU was 
established vide the AMU Act, 1920, which was enacted by the then 
Parliament. It therefore held that AMU was established by an act of the 
Central Legislature and not by the Muslim community: 
 
“22. There was nothing in 1920 to prevent the Muslim 
minority, if it so chose, to establish a university; but if it did so 
the degrees of such a university were not bound to be 
recognised by Government. It may be that in the absence of 
recognition of the degrees granted by a university, it may not 

have attracted many students, and that is why we find that 
before the Constitution came into force, most of the 
universities in India were established by legislation. […] It is 
clear therefore that even though the Muslim minority could 
have established at Aligarh in 1920 a university, it could not 
insist that degrees granted by such a university should be 
recognised by Government. Therefore, when the Aligarh 
University was established in 1920 and by Section 6 its 
degrees were recognised by Government, an institution was 
brought into existence which could not be brought into 
existence by any private individual or body for such individual 
or body could not insist upon the recognition of the degrees 
conferred by any university established by it. The enactment 
of Section 6 in the 1920. Act is a very important circumstance 
which shows that the Aligarh University when it came to be 
established in 1920 was not established by the Muslim 
minority, for the minority could not insist on the recognition by 
Government of the degrees conferred by any university 
established by it.” 
 
“26. […] But if the M.A.O. College was to be converted into a 
university of the kind whose degrees were bound to be 
recognised by Government, it would not be possible for those 
who were in-charge of the M.A.O. College to do so. That is 
why the three institutions to which we have already referred 
approached the Government to bring into existence a 
university 
whose 
degrees 
would 
be 
recognised 
by 
Government. The 1920 Act was then passed by the Central 
Legislature and the university of the type that was 
established thereunder, namely, one whose degrees would be 
recognised by Government, came to be established. It was 
clearly brought into existence by the 1920 Act for it 
could not have been brought into existence otherwise. It 
was thus the Central Legislature which brought into 
existence the Aligarh University and must be held to 
have established it. It would not be possible for the Muslim 
minority to establish a university of the kind whose degrees 
were bound to be recognised by Government and therefore it 
must be held that the Aligarh University was brought into 
existence 
by 
the 
Central 
Legislature 
and 
the 
Government of India. If that is so, the Muslim minority 
cannot claim to administer it, for it was not brought 
into existence by it. […]” 
[Emphasis supplied] 

D.3.3 Whether AMU was ‘administered’ by the Muslim community? 
70. This Court in Azeez Basha (supra) then examined the AMU Act, 1920 
in greater detail and determined that the Act did not grant 
administrative control of the University to the Muslim community. It 
observed that members of the AMU Court were elected by individuals 
who made donations exceeding INR 500, a category which included 
non-Muslims as well. Furthermore, the Lord Rector, who was the 
Governor-General, held overriding powers concerning administrative 
matters. Additionally, various bodies, such as the Executive Council 
and the Academic Council, possessed significant authority over the 
University's affairs. Based on this analysis, the Court concluded that 
AMU did not meet the administrative criteria required by Article 30 
and, therefore could not be recognized as a minority institution: 
 
“28. It appears from para 8 of the Schedule that even though 
the members of the Court had to be Muslims, the electorates 
were not exclusively Muslims. For example, sixty members of 
the Court had to be elected by persons who had made or 
would make donations of five hundred rupees and upwards to 
or for the purposes of the University. Some of these persons 
were and could be non-Muslims. Forty persons were to be 
elected by the Registered Graduates of the University, and 
some of the Registered Graduates were and could be non-
Muslims, for the University was open to all persons of either 
sex and of whatever race, creed or class. Further fifteen 
members of the Court were to be elected by the Academic 
Council, the membership of which was not confined only to 
Muslims.” 
“29. Besides there were other bodies like the Executive 
Council and the Academic Council which were concerned with 
the administration of the Aligarh University and there was no 
provision in the constitution of these bodies which confined 
their members only to Muslims. It will thus be seen that 
besides the fact that the members of the Court had to be 
all Muslims, there was nothing in the Act to suggest 
that the administration of the Aligarh University was in 
the Muslim minority as such. Besides the above, we 
have already referred to Section 13 which showed how 
the Lord Rector, namely, the Governor-General had 
overriding powers over all matters relating to the 
administration of the University. Then there was 
Section 14 which gave certain over-riding powers to the 

Visiting Board. The Lord Rector was then the Viceroy 
and the Visiting Board consisted of the Governor of the 
United Provinces, the members of his Executive Council, 
the Ministers, one member nominated by the Governor 
and one member nominated by the Minister in charge of 
Education. These people were not necessarily Muslims 
and they had overriding powers over the administration 
of the University. Then reference may be made to Section 
28(2)(c) which laid down that no new statute or amendment or 
repeal of an existing statute, made by the University, would 
have any validity until it had been approved by the Governor-
General-in-Council who had power to sanction, disallow or 
remit it for further consideration. Same powers existed in the 
Governor-General-in-Council with respect to ordinances. Lastly 
reference may be made to Section 40, which gave power to the 
Governor-General-in-Council to remove any difficulty which 
might arise in the establishment of the University. These 
provisions in our opinion clearly show that the 
administration was also not vested in the Muslim 
minority; on the other hand it was vested in the 
statutory bodies created by the 1920 Act, and only in 
one of them, namely, the Court, there was a bar to the 
appointment of any one else except a Muslim, though 
even there some of the electors for some of the members 
included non-Muslims. We are therefore of opinion that 
the Aligarh University was neither established nor 
administered by the Muslim minority and therefore 
there is no question of any amendment to the 1920 Act 
being unconstitutional under Article 30(1) for that 
Article does not apply at all to the Aligarh University.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
D.3.4 Whether any other Articles of Part III were violated? 
71. This Court analysed the 1951 and 1965 Amendment Acts in 
consonance with other Articles enshrined in Part III of the Constitution, 
and arrived at the following conclusions: 
a. 
Article 26(a) also bestows the right to ‘establish and maintain’. 
However, since AMU was not established by the minority, the right 
to maintain does not arise. b. 
 Article 26 (c) and (d) provides the right to acquire and keep assets. 
However, the assets of AMU vest in the University and not in the 
Muslim minority, following the passing of the AMU Act, 1920. c. 
Articles 25 and 29 are not affected in any manner by either of the 
Amendment Acts. d. 
Article 14 of the Constitution is not violated as there exists a 
difference in the administrative structure of one university when 
compared with another. This cannot be construed to be 
discriminative and is a matter of legislative policy. e. 
The right to form associations as espoused under Article 19 is not 
affected by the Amendment Acts. f. 
Article 31(1) is also not violated, since the property vested in AMU 
is not the property of the Muslim minority. It was voluntarily 
vested in AMU by MAO College and the Muslim University 
Association. The money of the Muslim University Foundation 
Committee was also voluntarily surrendered to the Government to 
facilitate the establishment of AMU through the AMU Act, 1920. 
Thus, at the time of coming into force of the Constitution, no right 
of the Muslim minority existed in property vested with AMU, and it 
cannot be said that the Amendments deprived the Muslim 
minority of the same. 
 
E. 
History of discordance with Azeez Basha 
72. Having analysed Azeez Basha (supra), it is imperative to also take into 
account the decisions proffered by this Court in other relevant cases to 
holistically understand the background of the reference before this 
Court. Post the decision in Azeez Basha (supra) came the 1972 
Amendment Act vide Act No. 34 of 1972 (1972 Amendment Act), 
introducing several significant changes. 
 
73. Thereupon, the first discordant note was struck by a two-judge bench 
of this Court in Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya v. District Inspector of 
Schools.59 That was a case where this Court was considering the 
minority status of an institution established by a society registered 
under the Societies Registrations Act, 1860. The question raised therein 
 
59 Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya v. District Inspector of Schools, W.P.(C) No. 54-57 of 1981. pertained to whether such registration would be determinative against 
the minority status of this institution. In this regard, this Court broadly 
formulated the following two issues for adjudication: 
 
i. 
Whether Article 30(1) of the Constitution envisages an institution 
which is established by minorities alone without the participation 
for the factum of establishment from any other community? ii. 
Whether soon after the establishment of the institution if it is 
registered as a society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, 
its status as a minority institution changes in view of the broad 
principles laid down in Azeez Basha (supra)? 
 
74. The Court then doubted the correctness of Azeez Basha (supra) and 
referred the case to the Chief Justice for placement before a seven-
judge bench, as several jurists including Mr. Seervai had expressed 
their doubts on the correctness of the said decision. The bench 
considered it appropriate, in a way, to direct constituting of a larger 
bench to consider the entire aspect fully. 
 
75. The issue pertaining to the correctness of such reference made by the 
two-judge bench, has been dealt with greater detail in paragraphs 83 to 
99 of this judgement. Almost immediately thereafter, came the 1981 
Amendment Act, through Act No. 62 of 1981 (1981 Amendment Act), 
which finalized the current framework of the AMU Act and reversed 
some of the changes introduced by the 1972 Amendment Act. 
 
76. Almost two decades after the reference in Anjuman (supra), came the 
magnum opus decision of the eleven-judge bench of this Court in TMA 
Pai (supra). In this case, the Court was tasked with analysing the 
different facets of Article 30, including the extent of intervention 
permissible by the State and the meaning of the term ‘minority’. 
Notably, the Court framed a question similar to the reference in 

Anjuman (supra) but held that the question is to be decided by a 
regular bench: 
 
“Q. 3. (a) What are the indicia for treating an educational 
institution as a minority educational institution? Would an 
institution be regarded as a minority educational institution 
because it was established by a person(s) belonging to a 
religious or linguistic minority or its being administered by a 
person(s) belonging to a religious or linguistic minority? 
This question need not be answered by this Bench, it will be 
dealt with by a regular Bench.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
77. Soon thereafter, vide an order dated 11.03.2003, a two-judge bench 
finally disposed of the petitions that remained pending in Anjuman 
(supra), with the broad directions that: 
 
“These matters are covered by the decision of a Constitution 
Bench of this Court in -T.M.A. Pai 
Foundation & Ors. Etc. Vs. State of Karnataka & Ors. Etc. and connected batch decided on 3·1 11 October, 2002. 
All statutory enactments, orders, schemes, regulations will 
have to be brought in conformity with the decision of the 
Constitution Bench of this court in T.M.A. Pai Foundation's 
case decided on 31.10.2002. As and when any problem 
arises the same can be dealt with by an appropriate Forum 
in an appropriate proceeding. 
The Writ Petitions are disposed of according[ly].” 
 
78. Hence, though Anjuman (supra) was disposed of, the correctness of 
Azeez Basha (supra) was left to be answered. Ultimately, the question 
of the minority status of AMU was raised again in the present batch of 
appeals in the 2019 Reference Order, which arose out of a challenge 
laid to different judgements rendered by the High Court of Judicature 
at Allahabad, holding that in view of Azeez Basha (supra) AMU is not a 
minority institution. A three-judge bench of this Court therefore 
examined the trajectory of judicial decisions and noted that the 
correctness of Azeez Basha (supra) remains undecided. This Court 
also noted that apart from Azeez Basha (supra), two other aspects 
required an authoritative pronouncement: (i) The decision in Prof. 

Yashpal (supra), wherein this Court had held that a private university 
can only be established by a separate Act or by a compendious Act 
where the legislature specifically provides for the establishment of the 
said university; and (ii) The 2010 Amendment of the NCMEI Act, prior 
to which, the definition of minority educational institutions excluded a 
university. However, the 2010 Amendment thereafter deleted this 
exclusion. Accordingly, for an authoritative pronouncement of these 
issues, the case was referred to the present seven-judge bench of this 
Court. The relevant part of the 2019 Reference Order is extracted 
below: 
“8. The said facts would show that the correctness of the 
question arising from the decision of this Court in S. Azeez 
Basha (supra) has remained undetermined. 
 
9. That apart, the decision of this Court in Prof. Yashpal and 
another vs. State of Chhattisgarh and others2 and the 
amendment of the National Commission for Minority 
Educational Institutions Act, 2004 made in the year 2010 
would also require an authoritative pronouncement on the 
aforesaid question formulated, as set out above, besides the 
correctness of the view expressed in the judgment of this 
Court in S. Azeez Basha (supra) which has been extracted 
above. 
 
10. Ordinarily and in the normal course the judicial 
discipline would require the Bench to seek a reference of this 
matter by a Five Judges Bench. However, having regard to 
the background, as stated above, when the precise question 
was already referred to a Seven Judges Bench and was, 
however, not answered, we are of the view that the present 
question, set out above, should be referred to a Bench of 
Hon’ble Seven Judges. 
 
11. Consequently, and in the light of the above, place these 
matters before the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India on the 
administrative side for appropriate orders.” 
 
79. Having understood the background of the challenge and the reference 
before this seven-judge bench, we shall now turn to the submissions 
made by the parties in support of their stance on the matter. 

II. 
CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES 
Appellant’s submissions: 
80. Dr. Rajeev Dhavan, Mr. Kapil Sibal, Mr. Salman Khurshid, Mr. Nikhil 
Nayyar, and Mr. Shadan Farasat, Learned Senior Advocates, appeared 
for AMU. Their contentions are detailed hereinbelow: 
 
a. 
In the context of Article 30, the term ‘minority’ means a 
community that constitutes less than fifty percent of the 
population in the State where the educational institution is 
situated. This standard was laid down in TMA Pai (supra). Per 
this standard, Muslims are a minority in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh. Moreover, the status of Muslims as a minority was 
evident even before the Constitution came into force, as they were 
already being afforded reservation in legislative organs. b. 
To claim protection under Article 30, the minority community is 
only required to prove that it established the institution. The 
question of administration, on the other hand, is not relevant in 
determining the minority character of an institution. It is a right 
that flows once the institution is established as a minority 
institution, thus making it a consequence and not a pre-requisite. 
In other words, the test under Article 30 is not conjunctive, and 
the claimant is not required to necessarily prove that the 
institution was being administered by the minority community. c. 
The word ‘establish’ should be interpreted widely since it is the 
only protection available to minorities. ‘Establishment’, under 
Article 30, is the meeting of minds of the community for the 
purpose of taking forward the idea that ultimately results in the 
university being set up. Thus, the genesis of the institution must 
be considered while examining the word ‘established.’ In contrast, 
the word ‘established’ used in the AMU Act, 1920 refers to 

recognition for incorporation and is not the same as the term 
‘establish’ used in Article 30. d. 
The term ‘administration’ does not mean cent percent control over 
the institution by the minority community. The State can prescribe 
reasonable 
regulations 
for 
the 
management 
of 
minority 
institutions. Administration merely requires overall control. The 
minority community, in this regard, has the choice to ask others to 
administer on their behalf. e. 
Under Article 30, the term ‘establish’ requires the genesis of the 
institution to be linked to the minority community. AMU meets 
this criterion since it originated as MAO College, which was 
established and administered by Muslims. The desire to convert 
MAO College to AMU came from the Muslim community, having 
gathered funds from the Muslim community. Further, AMU was 
established with the desire of the Muslim community to have their 
own university. Therefore, AMU can be said to have been 
established by the Muslim community. f. 
The establishment of AMU was an exercise completed by the 
Muslim community, and the AMU Act, 1920 merely conferred 
statutory recognition to such an establishment. It was not a 
creation of the Statute but was rather an acknowledgement by a 
Statute. Merely because a university was incorporated through 
State action cannot confer or take away from its nature, as every 
juristic entity is a creation of State action. g. 
The administration of AMU was also under the control of Muslims. 
All members of the AMU Court were required to be Muslims, and 
its powers were further strengthened by the 1981 Amendment Act. 
The administration, which entails overall control, remains with the 
Muslim community. Even if it were determined that external 

members had administrative roles, it would not jeopardize the 
university's minority status. This is because the Muslim 
community retains the right to reclaim administrative control, as 
Fundamental Rights cannot be waived. h. 
Lastly, the Union of India (UOI) cannot be allowed to challenge its 
own statutory enactment, i.e., 1981 Amendment Act. Such a 
summersault in its stance cannot be permitted merely because of 
a change in the political regime. Furthermore, the UOI has not 
substantiated the reason for such a volte-face. Thus, its approach 
lacks bona fides, and the UOI, particularly the Attorney General 
for India, is obligated to defend such an act of Parliament. Hence, 
it cannot take a stand against the minority status of AMU. 
 
Respondents’ submissions: 
81. Mr. R. Venkataramani, Learned Attorney General for India, Mr. Tushar 
Mehta, Learned Solicitor General of India, Mr. K. M. Nataraj and Mr. 
Vikramjit Banerjee, Learned Additional Solicitor Generals of India, Mr. 
Rakesh Dwivedi, Mr. N. K. Kaul, Mr. G. K. Kumar, Mr. Vinay Navare, 
Mr. Sridhar Potaraju and Ms. Archana P. Dave Learned Senior 
Advocates, appeared on behalf of the Respondents. Their arguments are 
detailed hereinbelow: 
 
a. 
A bench of two judges could not have directly referred the matter 
to a bench composed of seven judges in Anjuman (supra) and as 
such, the reference itself ought to be construed as bad in law. 
Further, the reference only sought clarity on the definition of a 
minority institution under Article 30 of the Constitution and did 
not include examination of whether AMU is a minority educational 
institution. b. 
Challenging the locus standi of the Appellant, it was argued that 
Muslims do not constitute a minority community. For a 

community to be a minority, it should not just be numerically less 
than the majority but should also be politically non-dominant. Per 
this test, Muslims were a numerically larger group than the pre-
independence dominant class, i.e., Christians. Hence, Muslims do 
not have the locus to invoke Article 30. In any case, the 
institutions that were formed prior to the coming of the 
Constitution cannot claim minority status because there was no 
such Fundamental Right when such institutions were created. c. 
To claim protection under Article 30, the minority community 
must prove that the institution was both established and is being 
administered by the community. Merely proving that the minority 
community established the institution is not enough to claim the 
status of a minority institution. d. 
The word ‘establish’ in Article 30 means bringing an institution 
into existence. For this, the Court must see if the institution in its 
legally operational form could have existed ‘but for’ the Statute. If 
the Statute accorded legal operationalization to the institution, the 
establishment would be attributed to the legislature and not the 
minority community. e. 
The de facto position of the minority’s role in administration is 
irrelevant to determining administration by a minority. The Court 
must see various relevant indicia of administrative control, 
including who controls the decisions regarding admission, levy of 
fees, governing council, the appointment of staff, disciplinary 
powers, and ordinances and statutes. f. 
The meaning of ‘establish’ in Article 30 is bringing an institution 
into existence. AMU was brought into existence by the then 
Central Legislature, through the AMU Act, 1920. The Constituent 
Assembly Debates also do not expressly identify AMU as a minority 

institution within the ambit of Article 30. This indicates that the 
drafters intended to establish the university’s national character. 
To this day, the UOI contributes over a thousand crores to AMU, 
which has resulted in a complete metamorphosis of the university. 
Finally, the Preamble to the AMU Act, 1920 reflects that AMU was 
brought into existence by the Act and not by the Muslim 
community. g. 
The AMU Court only has residuary powers, not administrative 
powers. There is no majority of Muslims in the AMU Court, as only 
32 out of 180 or more members are Muslims. Except for the AMU 
Court, no other body or authority is required to be Muslim. 
Moreover, various administrative functions are vested with bodies 
such as the Executive and Academic Councils and the Visitor, 
which are characteristically governmental or external. Even if there 
are a few Muslim members present in any of the bodies, it was 
simply an initiative by the State to instil confidence in the 
community and to ensure their participatory role without giving 
them 
any 
significant 
control. 
Hence, 
AMU 
is 
not 
being 
administered by the Muslim community. h. 
The contention that the Attorney General for India must defend 
the 1981 Amendment Act is flawed, especially when the same does 
not exist in the eyes of law—the same having been struck down by 
the Allahabad High Court. Regardless, the present dispute is not 
limited to inter se the parties, but involves questions of 
constitutional interpretation and national importance. Hence, the 
primary duty of the UOI is to assist the Court and not to defend an 
amendment in the Act, which is per se unconstitutional. 
 
III. 
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION 
82. Thus, in our considered opinion, the instant reference, based on the 
question of the tests required to be fulfilled by an institution, for 

seeking protection under Article 30 of the Constitution of India, can be 
broken down into the following segmented questions of law and fact: 
 
Prefatory issues 
 
I. 
What are the requisite parameters of reference to a larger bench? 
 
What matters were intended to be addressed by the larger bench, in 
Anjuman (supra); What are the facets required to be considered by 
a regular bench for making a reference is made to a larger bench; 
What are the powers entrusted to the Chief Justice of India in such 
circumstances? 
 
II. 
Whether Appellant has the locus standi to bring the present 
challenge? 
 
It is essential to examine whether the Appellant can invoke Article 
30 in the first place. In this regard, various sub-issues that may 
arise are: (a) Can Article 30 be invoked by institutions set up before 
the Constitution?; (b) Is it necessary for the whole of the minority 
community to file the claim, or can an individual or group of 
individuals also bring a claim?; and (c) Would Muslims be 
considered a ‘minority’? 
 
Questions on constitutional interpretation 
 
III. What are the tests to seek protection under Article 30 of the 
Constitution? 
 
It is necessary to examine the requirements that must be met for 
claiming protection under Article 30. The relevant question in this 
regard 
is 
whether 
the 
expressions 
‘establishment’ 
and 
‘administration’ should be read conjunctively or disjunctively? 

IV. What is the meaning of the term ‘establish’ in Article 30? 
 
Article 30 does not define the term ‘establish’. The pertinent 
questions are: (a) What is the scope and meaning of this term?; (b) 
Can a university be established without statutory intervention? If 
not, whether the recognition of a university by a Statute amounts to 
establishment by the Legislature? and (c) Is there any conflict in the 
opinions of this Court in Azeez Basha (supra) vis-à-vis Prof. 
Yashpal (supra) and the provisions of the NCMEI Act? 
 
V. 
 What is the meaning of the term ‘administer’ in Article 30? 
 
Akin to the term ‘establish’, the term ‘administer’ is also not defined. 
It is necessary to understand its meaning, along with its scope. In 
other words, the question is whether the presence of members of the 
non-minority community within the management would necessarily 
mean that the minority community is not administering the 
institution? 
 
VI. Whether AMU satisfies the test of ‘establish’ and ‘administer’ and 
is thus entitled to the protection under Article 30? 
 
VII. Whether the Union of India is obligated to defend the AMU 
Amendment Act, 1981? 
 
IV. 
ANALYSIS 
Prefatory Issues 
 
F. 
Issue I: What are the requisite parameters of reference to a larger 
bench? 
83. The issue concerning the power of a regular bench to refer a matter to a 
larger bench must be examined in light of the order passed in Anjuman 

(supra), 
which 
opined 
that 
Azeez 
Basha 

required 
reconsideration by a larger bench and proceeded to refer it to a seven-
judge bench. To this end, the Respondents have vehemently contended 
that such reference was bad in law and should be declared so. 
 
84. In this vein, we have identified two key aspects of this issue: (i) what 
were the issues identified in Anjuman (supra) which were intended for 
the larger bench to address; and (ii) whether the manner of making 
such a reference was legally sound. 
 
F.1. Issues that were intended to be addressed by the larger bench 
85. At the outset, it is crucial to determine whether the bench in Anjuman 
(supra) intended to restrict the reference in such a way that the seven-
judge bench would only analyse the criteria necessary for an institution 
to qualify as a minority institution under Article 30 of the Constitution. 
For the sake of clarity and despite the risk of repetition, we find it 
essential to put forth the relevant extract from the observations made 
in Anjuman (supra): 
 
“After hearing counsel for the Parties, we are clearly of the 
opinion that this case involves two substantial questions 
regarding 
the 
interpretation 
of 
Article 
30(1) 
of 
the 
Constitution of India. The present institution was founded in 
the 
year 

and 
registered 
under 
the 
Societies 
Registration Act in the year 1940. The documents relating to 
the time when the institution was founded clearly shows 
that while the institution was established mainly by the 
Muslim community but there were members 5 from the non-
Muslim 
community 
also 
who 
participated 
in 
the 
establishment process. The point that arises is as to whether 
Act. 30(1) of the Constitution envisages an institution which 
is established by minorities alone without the participation 
for the factum of establishment from any other community. 
On this point, there is no clear decision of this court. There 
are some observations in S. Azeez Basha & ors. Vs. Union of 
India 1968(1) SCR 333, but these observations can be 
explained away: Another point that arises is whether soon 
after the establishment of the institution if it is registered as 
a Society under the Society Registration Act, its status as a 
minority institution changes in view of the broad principles 

laid down in S. Azeez Basha's case. Even as it is several 
jurists including Mr. Seervai have expressed about the 
correctness of the decision of this court in S. Azeez 
Basha's case. Since the point has arisen in this case 
we think that this is a proper occasion when a larger 
bench can consider the entire aspect fully. We, 
therefore, direct that this case may be placed before 
Hon. The Chief Justice for being heard by a bench of 
at least 7 judges so that S. Azeez Basha's case may 
also be considered and the points that arise in this 
case directly as to the essential conditions or 
ingredients of the minority institution may also be 
decided once for all. A large number of. jurists including 
Mr. Seervai, learned counsel for the petitioners Mr. Garg and 
learned counsel for respondents and interveners Mr. Dikshit 
and 
Kaskar 
have 
stated 
that 
this 
case 
requires 
reconsideration. In view of the urgency it is necessary that 
the matter should be decided as early as possible we give 
liberty to the counsel for parties to mention the matter before 
Chief Justice.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
86. A plain reading of these observations reveals that the two-judge bench 
in Anjuman (supra) doubted the correctness of the decision in Azeez 
Basha (supra) and the principles enunciated therein. The bench while 
questioning the holding in Azeez Basha (supra), also borrowed 
strength from the views expressed by some jurists. 
 
87. In Azeez Basha (supra), the issue pertained to the constitutional 
validity of the AMU 1951 and 1965 Amendment Acts. While questioning 
the correctness of the decision in Azeez Basha (supra), it is evident 
that the reference in Anjuman (supra) also insinuated that potential 
errors may have occurred in the analysis of the constitutionality of 
those enactments. The reference seeking to re-open the issues settled 
in Azeez Basha (supra), thus, necessarily means not only to re-
examine the correctness of that decision but also an attempt to revisit 
the constitutionality of the AMU 1951 and 1965 Amendment Acts. 
 
88. Importantly, the key term used in the reference order in Anjuman 
(supra) is ‘and’, which is clearly used to state that both ‘Azeez Basha's 

case may also be considered’ and ‘the ingredients of a minority 
institution’ should be examined definitively. Such an analysis would 
also have to consider the question posed in TMA Pai (supra) under 3(a) 
regarding the criteria required for an institution to qualify as a ‘minority 
institution’ under Article 30 of the Constitution, and consequently, as 
to whether, AMU fulfils such criteria or not. 
 
89. We therefore find it difficult to align ourselves with the opinion 
expressed by Hon’ble the Chief Justice, according to which the 
reference before us was limited to determining only the criteria an 
educational institution must meet under Article 30 of the Constitution. 
However, given the Hon’ble Chief Justice’s decision to further refer the 
matter pertaining to AMU to a regular bench, we have confined our 
views to discerning the relevant indicia under Article 30, so as to avoid 
binding or influencing the regular bench that will ultimately decide the 
factual issues. 
 
F.2. Manner of making reference to a larger bench 
90. The two-judge bench in Anjuman (supra), after expressing doubt about 
the correctness of Azeez Basha (supra) and its principles, referred the 
matter for reconsideration to a larger bench. Additionally, the bench in 
Anjuman (supra) specifically stated that the larger bench reviewing 
Azeez Basha (supra)—a decision by a five-judge bench—should 
consist of seven judges. The decision further directed that the matter be 
placed before the Hon’ble Chief Justice for appropriate directions. 
 
91. Such a reference, to our mind, is not consistent with the established 
norms of judicial propriety. There are several reasons which 
substantiate this school of thought. For instance, Order VII Rule 2 of 
the Supreme Court Rules, 1966 as applicable during the time of the 
reference stated: 
“Where in the course of the hearing of any cause, appeal or 
other proceeding, the Bench considers that the matter should 
be dealt with by a larger Bench, it shall refer the matter 

to the Chief Justice, who shall thereupon constitute 
such a Bench for the hearing of it.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
92. In this regard, it is imperative to refer to the findings of the 
Constitution Bench in Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community 
and another v. State of Maharashtra and another,60 which while 
adjudicating the correctness of previous decisions on the Bombay 
Prevention of Excommunication Act (Act 42 of 1949), also laid down 
pertinent principles on the procedure for making references. The 
decision in Dawoodi Bohra (supra) essentially clarified the framework 
concerning how a reference should be made, particularly when a bench 
of lesser strength doubts the correctness of a decision by a larger or co-
equal bench. It held that: 
 
“12. Having carefully considered the submissions made by 
the learned senior counsel for the parties and having 
examined the law laid down by the Constitution Benches in 
the abovesaid decisions, we would like to sum up the legal 
position in the following terms:- 
 
(1) The law laid down by this Court in a decision 
delivered by a Bench of larger strength is binding on 
any subsequent Bench of lesser or co-equal strength. 
 
(2) A Bench of lesser quorum cannot doubt the 
correctness of the view of the law taken by a Bench of 
larger quorum. In case of doubt all that the Bench of 
lesser quorum can do is to invite the attention of the 
Chief Justice and request for the matter being placed 
for hearing before a Bench of larger quorum than the 
Bench whose decision has come up for consideration. 
It will be open only for a Bench of coequal strength to 
express an opinion doubting the correctness of the 
view taken by the earlier Bench of coequal strength, 
whereupon the matter may be placed for hearing 
before a Bench consisting of a quorum larger than the 
one which pronounced the decision laying down the 
law the correctness of which is doubted. 
 
(3) The above rules are subject to two exceptions: 
 
60 (2005). 

(i) The abovesaid rules do not bind the discretion of the 
Chief Justice in whom vests the power of framing the 
roster and who can direct any particular matter to be 
placed for hearing before any particular Bench of any 
strength; and 
 
(ii) In spite of the rules laid down hereinabove, if the matter 
has already come up for hearing before a Bench of larger 
quorum and that Bench itself feels that the view of the law 
taken by a Bench of lesser quorum, which view is in doubt, 
needs correction or reconsideration then by way of exception 
(and not as a rule) and for reasons given by it, it may 
proceed to hear the case and examine the correctness of the 
previous decision in question dispensing with the need of a 
specific reference or the order of Chief Justice constituting 
the Bench and such listing. Such was the situation in 
Raghubir Singh and Ors. and Hansoli Devi and Ors. (supra)” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
93. The principles enunciated in Dawoodi Bohra (supra) re-enforce the 
provisions of the Supreme Court Rules referred to earlier, and also 
reiterate the well-established principles based upon doctrines of 
predictability, consistency, finality and the principle of stare decisis. 
The two-judge bench in Anjuman (supra), ought to have understood 
and applied the law, consistent with these principles. The two-judge 
bench in Anjuman (supra) being of lesser strength than the five-judge 
bench in Azeez Basha (supra), lacked the authority to explicitly 
question the correctness of Azeez Basha (supra) and refer the matter 
to a seven-judge bench. 
 
94. In Anjuman (supra), the bench not only referred the matter but also 
specified the numerical strength of the bench to which it should be 
referred, with a further direction that the matter be placed before the 
Chief Justice for the limited purpose of notifying the composition of the 
seven-judge bench. With utmost respect at our command, we do not 
appreciate as to how a two-judge bench could dictate its viewpoint to 
the Chief Justice of India. This, to our mind, effectively impaired the 
Chief Justice's authority as the master of the roster. Allowing such a 
practice would enable benches of lesser strength, such as a two-judge 

bench, to undermine the decisions of larger benches, potentially even 
an eleven-judge bench. This would also place the Chief Justice in an 
untenable position, who would be bound by a judicial order while 
acting in an administrative role, leading to procedural complications 
and embarrassment. 
 
95. We reiterate that such actions completely undermine the principle of 
stare decisis, a well-established doctrine that mandates the consistent 
application of legal principles once pronounced by authoritative courts. 
This principle is rooted in the idea that once a court has determined a 
rule applicable to a specific set of circumstances, it should be followed 
in all future cases involving substantially similar facts.61 Stare decisis 
et non quieta movere—which means to stand by things decided and not 
disturb settled matters. Accordingly, the importance of precedents and 
stare decisis as fundamental features of our legal system requires that 
law laid down by higher courts be followed by coordinate or co-equal 
benches, and most certainly by smaller benches and subordinate 
courts. 
 
96. The very purpose of these principles is to ensure predictability and 
stability in judicial decisions, thereby upholding the Rule of Law. It is 
trite law that when legal precedents are consistently followed, the law 
remains stable and strengthened, rather than being disrupted at every 
opportunity.62 Consistency and finality in judicial orders foster greater 
confidence and trust in the judicial system, which is the need of the 
hour. The mere fact that another interpretation may be possible does 
not warrant unsettling well-established law that has long governed the 
field.63 Deviation from these long-settled principles, leads to a situation 
marred by uncertainty and instability, vitiating any sense of finality. 

61 Krishen Kumar v. Union of India, (1990). 
62 State of Uttar Pradesh v. Ajay Kumar Sharma, (2016). 
63 Shanker Raju v. Union of India, (2011). 

97. In this light, we respectfully disagree with the opinion of Hon’ble the 
Chief Justice that the reference in Anjuman (supra) passes muster. 
Such a reading risks opening the floodgates to further complexity and 
disruption, where smaller benches could disregard established 
principles and overturn decisions of larger benches. This would erode 
the concept of well-settled principles and destabilize the legal 
framework, as each judgment would strive to chart new directions, 
undermining legal certainty and continuity. Ironically, the reference in 
Anjuman (supra) strikes through the very core of Dawoodi Bohra 
(supra) and the law laid therein. 
 
98. We thus have no hesitation in holding that it is the Chief Justice of 
India alone, who is the custodian of the authority to determine the 
composition of benches, and, in public or national interest, place a 
matter before any bench he deems appropriate, even in the absence of 
any reference. That being so, the 2019 Reference Order issued by a 
three-judge bench, which included the then Chief Justice of India, 
cannot be faulted. Consequently, based on that order, we consider it 
appropriate to proceed with the determination of some of the issues 
concerning the constitutional challenge. 
 
99. We also respectfully disagree with the opinion of Hon’ble the Chief 
Justice in paragraph 39 of his draft judgement, according to which, 
Anjuman (supra) has merely ‘doubted’ and not ‘disagreed’ with Azeez 
Basha (supra). It seems to us that the terms ‘doubt’ and ‘disagree’ 
broadly carry similar connotations. It is difficult to doubt a judicial 
opinion unless we disagree with the correctness of its contents and 
substance. Similarly, a disagreement would originate only when such 
opinion is shrouded with doubts on law or on facts. 

G. 
Issue II: Whether the Appellant has the locus standi to bring the 
present challenge? 
100. The Respondents have countered the Appellant’s locus standi to invoke 
Article 30. They have argued that there was no such Fundamental 
Right available at the time when AMU was established. It is their 
assertion that since Fundamental Rights are not retrospectively 
applicable, 
and 
considering 
AMU 
was 
established 
before 
the 
Constitution, it cannot claim protection under Article 30. In addition, 
the Respondents have challenged the Appellant’s locus on the ground 
that Muslims did not constitute a ‘minority’ in 1920. 
 
101. The Appellant has controverted the Respondents’ objections by arguing 
that even pre-Constitution institutions can invoke the right under 
Article 30 and that Muslims did indeed constitute a minority in the 
State of Uttar Pradesh at the relevant time because they were 
numerically lesser when compared to other communities. Accordingly, 
the Appellant contended that it has the locus standi to enforce the right 
granted by Article 30. 
 
102. These contentions thus merit a determination as to whether a claim 
can be brought under Article 30 in the first place. 
 
G.1. Locus of pre-Constitution institution 
103. It is a settled principle of law that Fundamental Rights are not 
retrospectively applicable.64 The Constitution of India was framed in a 
social context that marked a significant departure from an exacting 
colonial regime to a system based on rights and self-governance. Hence, 
the legal milieu in these two regimes inevitably differed, with the 
Constitution imposing more stringent restrictions on governmental 
actions. Consequently, if the previous actions of the colonial 
 
64 Sushila Rao, “The Doctrine of Eclipse in Constitutional Law: A Critical Reappraisal of its 
Contemporary Scope and Relevance” National Law School of India Review, (2006) Vol. 18 No. 
1 pp. 49. government were to be tested on the touchstone of the Constitution, 
nearly all such acts would need to be overturned. 
 
104. Such a wholesale invalidation of past actions would have far-reaching 
consequences. It could undermine the stability of the legal system, as 
people’s lives and rights—such as property rights, contractual 
relationships, etc.—have been shaped by those earlier actions. Hence, 
the social and economic disruption resulting from such a scenario 
would be severe. Furthermore, the retrospective application of 
Fundamental Rights could also lead to a legal quagmire, where Courts 
would be crippled with cases in which relevant documents and evidence 
might no longer be available. Moreover, such an unscrambling of the 
egg might nearly be impossible in some instances, such as cases of 
criminal convictions from decades ago. 
 
105. The non-retrospective application of Fundamental Rights therefore is a 
pragmatic principle aimed at ensuring effective governance in society 
without being hindered by ghosts from the past. 
 
106. At this point, it is essential to distinguish between retrospective and 
retroactive laws. A retrospective law imposes new obligations or rights 
on transactions that have already been completed. In contrast, 
retroactive legislation applies to ongoing transactions, affecting 
obligations that arise after the law’s enactment, even if the transactions 
began beforehand.65 For example, if a law prohibits houses from having 
more than two floors and requires existing houses exceeding this limit 
to be demolished, it is retrospective. If the law only affects houses 
under construction when it comes into force, it is retroactive. 
 
107. While the retrospectivity of Fundamental Rights is generally restricted, 
their application on transactions that arose before and continued post-
1950 are not. The temporal boundary in the application of 
 
65 SEBI v. Rajkumar Nagpal, (2023), para 98-102. 

Fundamental Rights prevents pre-Constitution violations from being 
agitated, and it does not proscribe institutions created before the 
Constitution to plead their rights post its enactment. If we were to hold 
otherwise, it would lead to an untenable situation where a significant 
portion of the population or institutions with a long history would be 
excluded from the protection of Fundamental Rights simply because 
they existed before 1950. 
 
108. Similarly, practices prevailing before 1950 but prohibited afterwards 
must be struck down if it does not align with the constitutional ethos. 
The significance of 26.01.1950 lies in its role as a golden date for 
eradicating unconstitutional practices and safeguarding the rights 
guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution. It would then accordingly 
follow that if an institution was established and administered by 
minorities as on 26.01.1950, such an institution would be entitled to 
seek protection under Article 30. 
 
109. We cannot therefore accept the Respondent’s contention that the 
Appellant’s claim should be disallowed merely because Article 30 did 
not exist at the time AMU was established. Applying such an 
interpretation would be absurd and legally unjust. While certain 
institutions might have been set up during the pre-Constitutional era, 
the Court cannot turn a blind eye to their rights that are duly protected 
by the Constitution. 
 
110. In this regard and especially in the context of Article 30, we find more 
than adequate support from a five-judge bench decision of this Court in 
Right Rev. Bishop S.K. Patro v. State of Bihar,66 which relied on the 
opinion proffered by the seven-judge bench in Kerala Education Bill 
(supra) and held: 
“7. […] The guarantee of protection under Article 30 is 
not restricted to educational institutions established 
after the Constitution: institutions which had been 
 
66 Right Rev. Bishop S.K. Patro v. State of Bihar, (1969). established before the Constitution and continued to 
be administered by minorities either based on religion 
or language qualify for the protection of the right of 
minorities 
declared 
by 
Article 

of 
the 
Constitution. In Re the Kerala Education Bill, 1957 [(1959) 
SCR 995] Das, C.J., observed at p. 1051: 
 
“There is no reason why the benefit of Article 30(1) 
should be limited only to educational institutions 
established 
after 
the 
commencement 
of 
the 
Constitution. The language employed in Article 30(1) is 
wide enough to cover both pre-constitution and post-
constitution institutions. It must not be overlooked that 
Article 30(1) gives the minorities two rights, namely, (a) to 
establish, and (b) to administer, educational institutions of 
their choice. The second right clearly covers pre-constitution 
schools just as Article 26 covers the right to maintain pre-
constitution religious institutions.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
111. In 
conclusion, 
while 
Fundamental 
Rights 
cannot 
be 
applied 
retrospectively to disrupt pre-constitutional practices, the Appellant is 
not barred from asserting a claim under Article 30 as long as the 
necessary conditions of this provision are met. Individuals or 
institutions who qualify to be protected through a Fundamental Right 
as of 26.01.1950 are entitled to enforce these rights under Article 32. 
Therefore, the Appellant's locus standi cannot be dismissed on this 
basis. 
 
112. In addressing the issue of locus, two more key questions arise: (i) 
whether a small group of individuals from a community can bring a 
claim under Article 30, as opposed to requiring the entire community to 
assert the claim collectively?; and (ii) whether the Muslim community 
in the present case were presumed to be a 'minority' at the time AMU 
was established? Each of these points are analysed separately below. 
 
G.2. Locus of individuals from the minority community 
113. The Respondents have countered the Appellant’s locus on the ground 
that they cannot plead the right under Article 30 since they are not the 

representative of the entire Muslim community. Hence, it is essential to 
analyse whether Article 30 can be invoked by a few individuals of the 
minority community. 
 
114. Under the Indian Constitution, the framework of rights can be broadly 
divided into three classes based on who holds the right and who can 
exercise it: 
a. 
The first category, known as ‘individual rights’, encompasses rights 
available to all individuals and can be claimed by them. An 
example of such a right is the right to privacy, which pertains to 
all individuals and can be asserted by any individual. b. 
The second category, termed ‘group rights’ in India, consists of 
rights available to individuals, provided they belong to a specified 
group. An example of such a right could be the right of reservation 
provided to individuals belonging to certain classes. In this regard, 
this Court has held: 
“407. Unless the creamy layer is removed, OBCs cannot 
exercise their group rights. The Union of India and other 
respondents argued that creamy layer exclusion is wrong 
because the text of the Ninety-third Amendment bestows a 
benefit on “classes”, not individuals. While it is a group 
right, the group must contain only those individuals 
that belong to the group. I first take the entire lot of 
creamy and non-creamy layer OBCs. I then remove the 
creamy layer on an individual basis based on their income, 
property holdings, occupation, etc. What is left is a group 
that meets constitutional muster. It is a group right that 
must also belong to individuals, if the right is to have 
any meaning. If one OBC candidate is denied special 
provisions that he should have received by law, it is 
not the group's responsibility to bring a claim. He 
would be the one to do so. He has a right of action to 
challenge the ruling that excluded him from the 
special provisions afforded to OBCs. In this sense, he 
has an individual right. Group and individual rights 
need not be mutually exclusive. In this case, it is not 

one or the other but both that apply to the impugned 
legislation.”67 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
As elucidated in the extract above, such group rights are 
possessed by an individual, and such individual can assert their 
claim to exercise these rights. The individual does not need to 
demonstrate that the group as a whole is affected and may 
exercise such rights in their singular capacity. c. 
The third category, which we would like to refer to as collective 
rights, includes rights that belong to groups as a whole and can 
only be exercised by those groups collectively. An example of such 
a right could be the right of a country to vote in the UN General 
Assembly.68 Such rights belong to the entire nation as a 
community and are not contingent on whether individual citizens 
of the nation are individually exercising this right. Another 
example of such a category is the right of a country to be free from 
intervention by other countries, which also belongs to and is to be 
exercised by the nation as a whole.69 Unlike the previous two 
categories, the bearer of these rights is a collective unit and not 
individual constituents. Accordingly, the right can be claimed by 
the community at large or by an individual representing the entire 
community. 
 
115. Based on the foregoing discussion, we believe that the right ensconced 
under Article 30 belongs to the second category, namely, it is granted to 
a minority community at large but can be exercised by an individual or 
a group of individuals. This right does not fit into the first category 
because Article 30 specifically aims to uplift and protect certain 
minority communities, making membership in such a community a 
necessary pre-condition. At the same time, however, it is also distinct 
 
67 Ashoka Kumar Thakur v. Union of India, (2008), para 407. 
68 Charter of United Nations (signed on 26 June, 1945) Art. 27. 
69 Lukas Meyer et. Al. (ed.), Rights, Culture, and the Law, Oxford University Press (2003) 
pp. 181. from the third category because the protection envisaged in Article 30 is 
toward individuals belonging to such a community and not the entire 
community as one single entity. Thus, while the right exists for the 
benefit of the whole community, it can be exercised qua its individual 
members rather than requiring collective action by the whole 
community.70 
 
116. Having said that, it is important to emphasize that the technical issue 
of who can invoke Article 30 should not be used to oust the claim at the 
threshold. Procedure, ultimately, is the handmaiden of justice. This is 
especially true for contentions regarding locus and who can invoke a 
particular provision, especially when there is public interest at stake. 
Unless there is a risk of collusion between the parties or the Court 
believes that the interest of all the stakeholders might not be 
adequately represented and there might be some ‘invisible victims’, the 
Court typically refrains from scrutinizing who has invoked the 
constitutional provision and whether the claimant represents the entire 
community. Constitutional Courts are envisaged as liberal platforms 
where vital questions regarding the violation of Fundamental Rights 
can 
be 
analysed 
without 
being 
bogged 
down 
by 
procedural 
technicalities. In that sense, the substance of the claim usually takes 
precedence over its form, instead of the form foreclosing the substance 
at the very outset. 
 
117. The locus standi of the Appellant is thus not undermined on this count 
as well. 
 
G.3. What is a ‘minority’ community? 
118. Since during the course of hearing, or otherwise, the Respondents have 
not provided any reliable figures or substantial evidence to counter the 
Appellant's position, it appears that it is not necessary to determine 
this issue at this stage, when only legal issues are being resolved. 
 
70 Right Rev. Bishop S.K. Patro, supra note 66. 

119. Having answered the prefatory issues of locus and maintainability, we 
now proceed to delve into the contours of Article 30 of the Constitution 
and make an endeavor to explain the true meaning of the expressions 
‘establish’ and ‘administer’. 
 
Questions regarding constitutional interpretation 
 
H. 
Issue III: What are the tests to seek protection under Article 30? 
120. When posed with the question of whether the prongs of ‘establishment’ 
and 
‘administration’ 
ought 
to 
be 
construed 
conjunctively 
or 
disjunctively in determining whether it is a minority institution, the 
Appellant sought to contend that minority administration of their 
institution is merely discretionary and that they are not bound to 
satisfy the twin test. They instead urged that the prong of 
administration, would not be a prerequisite for determining the 
minority status of an educational institution. 
 
121. The Respondents, on the other hand, assailed that for an institution to 
claim the protection proffered under Article 30, the minority community 
would have to demonstrate the two prongs of ‘establishment’ and 
‘administration’ of the institution conjunctively. 
 
122. Having considered the rival submissions tendered by the parties as well 
the language of the provision itself, it is evident that ‘establishment’ 
and ‘administration’ are qualitatively distinct: while the former deals 
with the history of the institution, the latter deals with the control over 
the institution, at present. Accordingly, ‘establishment’ is temporally 
fixated, while ‘administration’ requires analysis over a continuous span 
of time, both during and post-establishment. 
 
123. Of these two aspects, the necessity of the prong of establishment is not 
in dispute. Both parties agree that an institution must be established 

by the minority community. This issue is also largely settled by various 
judicial precedents of this Court, which have held that establishment 
by minority is a necessary pre-requisite for claiming the right under 
Article 30.71 The question, however, has been raised in regard to the 
administration prong. The Respondents have argued it to be a pre-
requisite for invoking Article 30, while the Appellant has argued it to be 
the result of such an invocation. 
 
124. We find that both the Appellant and Respondents are right, but only to 
the extent that administration is both a pre-requisite and the result. In 
this respect, it mirrors its counterpart, Article 29, under the section 
‘Cultural and Educational Rights’. Article 29 makes the distinctiveness 
of culture a pre-requisite for invoking its provision, and once invoked, it 
bestows the right to conserve such distinctiveness. Similarly, Article 30 
outlines administration by the minority community as a pre-requisite 
for invoking the provision, ultimately granting the right to continue 
such administration free from unreasonable government interference. 
 
125. There are multifarious reasons behind upholding administration as a 
pre-requisite rather than merely a right or result. First, if Article 30 
were contingent only on the establishment by the minority community, 
it would render the provision susceptible to significant misuse. In a bid 
to attain special protection under Article 30, majority communities 
could purchase or takeover institutions established by minorities and 
then administer such institutions with reduced State interference in 
perpetuity. This will potentially lead to all communities ultimately 
enjoying the special right guaranteed by Article 30, denuding the very 
purpose of this Article. 

71 Kerala Education Bill, 1957, supra note 58; State of Kerala vs. Very Rev. Mother Provincial, 
(1970), para 8; S.P. Mittal vs. Union of India, (1983), para 137; 
Dayanand Anglo Vedic (DAV) College Trust and Management Society v. State of Maharashtra, 
(2013). 

126. Second, it is clear that Article 30 carves out an exception to the general 
power of the Government to regulate and intervene in educational 
institutions. It has also been defined broadly, extending to all religious 
and linguistic minorities, potentially encompassing a significant portion 
of India’s population. If not interpreted narrowly, Article 30 would 
undermine governmental control over educational institutions and 
compromise the quality of higher education. 
 
127. Therefore, if the institutions not administered by minorities were also 
brought under the purview of Article 30, it could face misuse by 
institutions camouflaging as minority institutions when, in reality, they 
are not. I find support to this view in A.P. Christian Medical 
Educational Society v. Govt. of A.P.,72 which held: 
 
“8. […] The government, the University and ultimately 
the court have the undoubted right to pierce the 
‘minority veil’ — with due apologies to the corporate 
lawyers — and discover whether there is lurking 
behind it no minority at all and in any case, no 
minority institution. The object of Article 30(1) is not 
to allow bogies to be raised by pretenders but to give the 
minorities ‘a sense of security and a feeling of confidence’ 
not merely by guaranteeing the right to profess, practise 
and propagate religion to religious minorities and the right 
to conserve their language, script and culture to linguistic 
minorities, but also to enable all minorities, religious or 
linguistic, 
to 
establish 
and 
administer 
educational 
institutions of their choice. These institutions must be 
educational institutions of the minorities in truth 
and reality and not mere masked phantoms […] What 
is Important and what Is imperative is that there must 
exist some real positive index to enable the institution to be 
identified as an educational institution of the minorities 
[…].” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
128. Several other existing case laws support the notion that administration 
too, ought to be regarded as a pre-requisite. For instance, In St. 
 
72 A.P. Christian Medical Educational Society v. Govt. of A.P & Anr., (1986), para 
8. 

Stephen's College (supra), a five-judge bench of this Court analysed 
the facets regarding both establishment and administration of St. 
Stephen’s College under the Delhi University Act, to conclude whether 
it could be characterised as a minority institution. In DAV College 
(supra) a two-judge bench reiterated the principle that administration 
has to be exercised by the minority community. This view was also 
reinforced by another two-judge bench in T. Varghese George v. Kora 
K. George.73 Similarly, in Manager, Rajershi Memorial Basic 
Training School v. State of Kerala,74 the Kerala High Court held that 
an institution merely being founded by a member of a minority 
community is insufficient, and it has to be administered by the 
minority community in question. 
 
129. All of these cases support the legal principle that for an institution to 
claim protection under Article 30, it should have a ‘real positive indicia’ 
and must not be a mere sham. It is, therefore, permissible to ‘pierce the 
veil’ in order to ascertain the real character of the institution, as the 
minority status cannot be bestowed on illusionary claims. 
 
130. Lastly, it is an established principle of statutory interpretation that a 
provision has to be read as a whole, and the accompanying text may be 
employed in interpreting the meaning of another clause.75 This 
principle is particularly relevant in the present case, as Article 30(1A) 
specifically defines an institution “referred to in Clause 1” and mentions 
it to be an institution that is both established ‘and’ administered by a 
minority: 
“(1A) In making any law providing for the compulsory 
acquisition of any property of an educational institution 
established and administered by a minority, referred 
to in clause (1), the State shall ensure that the amount 
fixed by or determined under such law for the acquisition 
 
73 Dr. T. Varghese George v. Kora K. George and Ors., (2012). 
74 Manager, Rajershi Memorial Basic Training School v. The State of Kerala and Anr., 1972 
SCC OnLine Ker 111, para 4. 
75 Justice GP Singh, Principles of Statutory Interpretation, Lexis Nexis (2016), 14th edn. of such property is such as would not restrict or abrogate 
the right guaranteed under that clause.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
131. Since the term ‘and’ has been consciously employed instead of ‘or’, it is 
clear that the text of the provision itself envisages the conditions to be 
read conjunctively. To hold to the contrary would require reading down 
an original provision of the Constitution, which the Court must refrain 
from doing. 
 
132. Considering that institutions claiming any benefit under Article 30 
must satisfy this two-pronged test, it is trite to say that the terms 
‘establishment’ and ‘administration’ under Article 30 are conjunctive. 
 
I. 
Issue IV: What is the meaning of ‘establish’ in Art. 30? 
133. The Appellant has argued that the term ‘establish’ in Article 30 means 
who ‘founded’ the institution. It is their assertion that if the genesis of 
the institution can be traced back to the minority community, the 
institution would satisfy the test of being a minority institution. 
 
134., the Respondents ascribe a different meaning to the term 
‘establish’ and argue that the Court must evaluate as to who created 
the institution. If the institution owes its existence to the Statute, then 
it would mean that the institution was established by the Legislature 
and not by the minority community. 
 
135. In due consideration of these opposing views, the central issue for our 
determination, therefore would be to ascertain the meaning of the term 
‘establish’ in Article 30 and determine what the relevant indicia should 
be, in order to determine on facts as to whether or not an institution is 
established by the minority community. 

136. Previously, a six-judge bench of this Court had conducted a similar 
exercise in State of Kerala v. Very Rev. Mother Provincial76 and 
defined the term establish as the ‘bringing into being of an institution’: 
 
“8. Article 30(1) has been construed before by this Court. 
Without referring to those cases it is sufficient to say that the 
clause contemplates two rights which are separated in point 
of time. The first right is the initial right to establish 
institutions of the minority's choice. Establishment here 
means the bringing into being of an institution and it 
must be by a minority community. It matters not if a 
single philanthropic individual with his own means, founds 
the institution or the community at large contributes the 
funds. The position in law is the same and the 
intention in either case must be to found an institution 
for the benefit of a minority community by a member of 
that community. It is equally irrelevant that in addition to 
the 
minority 
community 
others 
from 
other 
minority 
communities or even from the majority community can take 
advantage of these institutions. Such other communities 
bring in income and they do not have to be turned away to 
enjoy the protection” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
137. Hence, as rightly held by this Court, the term ‘establish’ means 
bringing the institution into existence for the benefit of the minority 
community. However, we must ask ourselves as to when an institution 
can be said to have come into existence, and what it means to establish 
it for the benefit of the community. Each of these prongs have been 
analysed separately below. 
 
I.1. Bringing into existence—meaning and factors 
138. In this regard, the Appellant and Respondents both suggested that an 
institution comes into existence at a single point in time but disagreed 
on what that exact point should be. The Appellant suggested looking 
back into the genesis of the institution to determine when it was 
‘founded’ or when the idea was conceived. In contrast, the Respondents 
argued against going back in time and instead urged that the 
 
76 Mother Provincial, supra note 71, para 8. institution should be considered established the moment it was 
operationalized. 
According 
to 
them, 
if 
the 
institution 
was 
operationalized by virtue of a statute, then it was established at that 
specific point by the Legislature. 
 
139. To clarify these divergent views, it might be helpful to consider 
analogous situations. For instance, if the question is about when a 
photograph taken with an analogue camera comes into existence, one 
perspective would argue that it is created when the photograph is 
clicked, while the other would assert that it only exists when the photo 
is finally printed on paper. Similarly, in the context of a melody, one 
side might argue that it comes into existence when it is composed, 
whereas the other side could contend that it only comes into being 
when it is finally performed. Or in the context of art, one perspective 
could be that a painting comes into existence when the idea is 
conceived, and the other side could be that it is only when it is fully 
completed. 
 
140. We believe that both sides are partly right and partly wrong. They are 
right in considering both the genesis of the institution and the point of 
sanction by the statute for operationalizing the institution as relevant 
factors to determine establishment. However, they are incorrect in 
asserting that coming into existence is an event frozen at a single point 
in time. Instead, we believe that coming into existence operates in a 
continuum, which requires the analysis of the entire gamut of relevant 
factors that brought the institution into being. The essence of 
existence—be it that of an educational institution or a photograph, 
melody, or an art as instantiated above—is a multi-faceted and an 
ontological question that cannot be answered by artificially fixating it at 
a specific time with a bright-line test. Since there are several factors 
that contribute towards the existence of the educational institution, at 
no point can we say that the institute came into existence as soon as 
one specific factor was fulfilled. Such an exercise would highlight one 

factor while discounting the importance of others, which would be 
arbitrary and irrational. Instead, the correct approach requires an 
appraisal of the entirety of facts—i.e., the origin, the point of finality, 
and the whole process in between—to reach an understanding about 
the establishment. 
 
141. Hence, while the parties are right in pointing out the relevant factors of 
genesis and the statutory sanction, the analysis of who establishes the 
educational institution has to go beyond them to cover all aspects 
holistically. Since these factors would be a question of fact that would 
differ from case to case, giving a laundry list of all such aspects would 
be erroneous in law. However, to determine whether the minority 
community has established the institution or not, a few illustrative 
factors that the Courts have considered in the past include: 
a. 
The genesis of the institution and who conceptualized the idea; 
 
b. 
The gathering of resources and who provided the requisite finances 
for creating the institution;77 
 
c. 
Who contributed towards the infrastructure of the institution to 
provide it with a physical existence;78 
 
d. 
The framing of charter documents and who imparted the purpose 
to the institution;79 
 
e. 
In case government approvals were required, who made the initial 
efforts in taking those permissions and fulfilling the necessary 
compliances; and 
 
f. 
Post the approval of the government, who undertook the initial 
steps in forming the administrative bodies,80 hiring teachers, 
 
77Right Rev. Bishop S.K. Patro, supra note 66, para 15-16. 
78 St. Stephen's College, supra note 50, para 31. 
79 Ibid, para 35. admitting students, passing the first statutes and ordinances, 
ensuring regular compliances, etc., for operationalizing the 
institution. 
 
I.1.1. Caveat to these factors 
142. In regard to these factors and any additional ones that may be relevant 
based on the specifics of each case, there are two important 
qualifications to note. First, as was previously stated, none of these 
factors individually would be determinative of the minority status; the 
analysis must be holistic, and the factum of existence must be seen in 
a continuum instead of fixating on one factor and point of time. In 
several instances, Courts have clarified that the absence of certain 
factors, such as the institution not being constructed by the minority 
community81 or receiving external financial assistance,82 does not 
negate the minority character of the institution. These decisions 
reiterate that the presence or absence of a single factor should not alter 
the Court’s overall conclusion. 
 
143. Second, the analysis concerning who fulfils each individual factor 
should not aim at creating absolutes, i.e., the Court must not mandate 
that the minority community must be single-handedly responsible for 
fulfilling the role prescribed by that factor. It could be the case that the 
community takes aid of external parties for setting up the institution, 
but still takes the lead role in such establishment. If we were to hold 
that such aid would take away the minority character of the institution, 
we would, in effect, be laying down a requirement that the community 
must work in silos and that no member belonging to any other 
community should provide any assistance in achieving its purpose. 
This would squarely contravene the very spirit of our Constitution, 
 
80 Ibid, para 35-40. 
81 Rt. Rev. Dr. Aldo Maria Patroni v. Assistant Educational Officer, 1973 SCC OnLine Ker 60, 
para 7; A. Raju and Ors. v. Manager, Nallor Narayana L.P. Basic School & Ors., 2019 SCC 
OnLine Ker 16483, para 6-7; T.M.A. Pai, supra note 3, para 11. 
82 Right Rev. Bishop S.K. Patro, supra note 69, para 16; Dipendra Nath Sarkar v. State of 
Bihar & Ors., 1960 SCC OnLine Pat 205, para 14. which permits—or rather encourages—other communities to work in 
tandem with minority communities for their upliftment. In a cohesive 
society like ours, cooperation for mutual development is a shared moral 
responsibility. Hence, the mere presence of external aid is a factor 
which would not obviate the minority character of the institution. 
 
144. That being said, the converse must also hold true. If the leading role in 
establishing an institution is played by an external party, mere 
contributions from a member of the minority community would not be 
sufficient to attribute the establishment itself to the minority. To hold 
otherwise would expose the protection given under Article 30 to 
potential misuse, allowing institutions established by the majority 
community to claim minority status based on some insignificant 
contribution from the minority community. The test should therefore 
rather focus on who takes a leading and decisive role in fulfilling the 
relevant criteria for establishing an institution. 
 
145. To determine whether the minority community established the 
institution, the Court should thus examine whether it was indeed that 
community which brought the institution into existence. This involves 
assessing who played the leading role from the institution's inception, 
through the process of making its creation a reality, and finally, in 
making it operational. 
 
146. Having understood the meaning of ‘bringing into existence’, we shall 
now revisit the Respondent’s argument that if an institution is being 
created by Statute, then it cannot be said to have been brought into 
existence by the minority community since in that, case it is the 
Legislature which establishes the university. This particular element 
requires some detailed analysis, not only because it was vehemently 
argued by both sides but also because, as confirmed by this Court in 
Prof Yashpal (supra), a University can only be created by or under a 
Statute. 

147. Having said that, if we were to hold that statutory intervention means 
that the Parliament ‘establishes’ the university and not the minority 
community (as was held in Azeez Basha (supra)), it would mean that 
the minority community would never be able to qualify the 
‘establishment’ prong under Article 30. This would concomitantly lead 
to the conclusion that minorities can never establish a university under 
this provision. Such a conclusion would run contrary to the 
amendment to the NCMEI Act, which includes universities also under 
the ambit of minority educational institutions. Therefore, to render 
quietus to this issue, we shall discuss whether the Statute does, in fact, 
bring an institution into existence. 
 
I.1.2. Statutory intervention and establishment of an institution 
148. In this regard, it is important to note that statutory intervention exists 
as a sliding scale, which can differ based on the kind of institution. 
Broadly, there are three such categories of institutions: first, those 
which are ‘registered in accordance’ with the statute; second, which are 
‘recognized’ by the statute; and third, which are ‘created by’ the statute. 
Each of these are analysed separately below. 
 
I.1.2.1. Registered in accordance with the statute 
149. To establish an institution as a juristic entity, it is possible that the 
minority community uses a form of organization provided under a 
statutory framework. For instance, to establish an institution as a 
company, the community might utilize the provisions of the Companies 
Act, 2013; for a society, it would perhaps be the Cooperative Societies 
Act, 1912, and so on. In case such a statutory framework is used by 
the community, the question arises who truly brings the institution into 
existence—the community or the statute that is used to create the 
institution? 

150. This question is no longer res integra and has been effectively answered 
in Dalco Engg. (P) Ltd. v. Satish Prabhakar Padhye,83 wherein this 
Court held: 
“20. A “company” is not “established” under the 
Companies Act. An incorporated company does not 
“owe” 
its 
existence 
to 
the 
Companies 
Act. 
An 
incorporated company is formed by the act of any seven or 
more persons (or two or more persons for a private company) 
associated for any lawful purpose subscribing their names to 
a memorandum of association and by complying with the 
requirements of the Companies Act in respect of registration. 
Therefore, a “company” is incorporated and registered 
under the Companies Act and not established under 
the Companies Act., the Companies Act itself 
establishes the National Company Law Tribunal and the 
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal, and these two 
statutory authorities owe their existence to the Companies 
Act.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
151. Hence, as rightly held in the aforementioned case, using a statutory 
framework does not necessarily mean that the organization is 
established by the statute. If that were so, all companies under 
Companies Act, 2013 would become government companies, leading to 
an absurd consequence that does not hold water. 
 
152. The Statutes that are used merely as a tool by the minority community 
to register their institution under the statutory framework do not thus 
take away the community’s role in bringing the institution into 
existence. 
 
I.1.2.2. Recognized under the Statute 
153. The second kind of Statutes are those that provide recognition to 
already existing institutions. This is usually true for Statutes providing 
affiliation to colleges with universities. Once the college affiliates itself 
to a university, it will have to fulfil the statutory requirements 
prescribed under the relevant statute of the university. Would such a 
 
83 Dalco Engg. (P) Ltd. v. Satish Prabhakar Padhye and Ors., (2010), para 20. statutory intervention then mean that the institution has been brought 
into existence by that Statute? 
 
154. This question has also been lucidly answered by this Court in 
Executive Committee of Vaish Degree College v. Lakshmi Narain,84 
where a similar contention was raised that after being affiliated with the 
university, Vaish Degree College became a statutory body that was 
created by the statute. Rejecting this view, the Court held that: 
“Here 
a 
distinction 
must 
be 
made 
between 
an 
institution which is not created by or under a statute 
but is governed by certain statutory provisions for the 
proper 
maintenance 
and 
administration 
of 
the 
institution. There have been a number of institutions which 
though not created by or under any statute have adopted 
certain statutory provisions, but that by itself is not, in our 
opinion, sufficient to clothe the institution with a statutory 
character. […] 
 
It is, therefore, clear that there is a well-marked distinction 
between a body which is created by the statute and a body 
which after having come into existence is governed in 
accordance with the provisions of the statute. In other 
words the position seems to be that the institution 
concerned must owe its very existence to a statute 
which would be the fountainhead of its powers. The 
question in such cases to be asked is, if there is no 
statute would the institution have any legal existence. 
If the answer is in the negative, then undoubtedly it is 
a statutory body, but if the institution has a separate 
existence of its own without any reference to the 
statute concerned but is merely governed by the 
statutory provisions it cannot be said to be a statutory 
body […].” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
155. Hence, if an institution possesses legal existence independent of the 
statute, then the Statute merely recognizes an existing institution and 
does not ‘establish’ it. This kind of Statute also does not take away the 
role of the minority community in bringing the institution into 
 
84 Executive Committee of Vaish Degree College and Anr. v. Lakshmi Narain and Ors. (1976), para 10. existence. Accordingly, just because a college is affiliated with a 
university and follows its statutory requirements, it would not deprive 
the institution of its minority character. This was also stated in St. 
Stephens (supra), where this Court held: 
“41. It was contended that St. Stephen's College after 
being affiliated to the Delhi University has lost its 
minority character. The argument was based on some 
of the provisions in the Delhi University Act and the 
Ordinances made thereunder. It was said that the 
students are admitted to the University and not to the 
College as such. But we find no substance in the 
contention. In the first place, it may be stated that the State 
or any instrumentality of the State cannot deprive the 
character of the institution, founded by a minority community 
by compulsory affiliation since Article 30(1) is a special right 
to minorities to establish educational institutions of their 
choice […]” 
 
“45. From these and other relevant provisions of the Act and 
Ordinances, we have not been able to find any indications 
either in the general scheme or in other specific provisions 
which would enable us to say that the College is legally 
precluded from maintaining its minority character. That in 
matters of admission of students to Degree courses including 
Honours courses, the candidates have to apply to the College 
of their choice and not to the University and it is for the 
Principal of the College or Dean of Faculties concerned to take 
decision and make final admission. It is, therefore, wrong to 
state that there is no admission to the College but only for the 
University. The procedure for admission to Post Graduate 
courses is of course, different but we are not concerned with 
that matter in these cases.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
156. It may also be relevant at this stage to examine instances of such 
universities, which, under law, are mandated to be operationalized by a 
Statute. We may, in this regard, usefully refer to the University Grants 
Commission Act, 1956 (UGC Act) which provides as follows: 
“22. Right to confer degrees— 
(1) The right of conferring or granting degrees shall be 
exercised 
only 
by 
a 
University 
established 
or 
incorporated by or under a Central Act, a Provincial 
Act or a State Act or an institution deemed to be a 
University under Section 3 or an institution specially 

empowered by an Act of Parliament to confer or grant 
degrees. 
(2) Save as provided in sub-section (1), no person or authority 
shall confer, or grant, or hold himself or itself out as entitled 
to confer or grant, any degree. 
(3) For the purposes of this section, “degree” means any such 
degree as may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, be specified in this behalf by the Commission 
by notification in the Official Gazette. 
 
23. Prohibition of the use of the word “University” in certain 
cases.— 
No institution, whether a corporate body or not, other 
than a University established or incorporated by or 
under a Central Act, a Provincial Act or a State Act 
shall be entitled to have the word “University” 
associated with its name in any manner whatsoever: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall, for a period of two 
years from the commencement of this Act, apply to an 
institution which, immediately before such commencement, 
had the word “University” associated with its name.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
157. Since the UGC Act mandates that degrees can be conferred only by 
those universities that are established ‘by or under’ a statute, it is a 
necessary corollary that the university must be operationalized by a 
statute itself in order to validly confer the degrees. Given that the legal 
existence in this context flows directly from the statute, the question 
thus arises: does this mean that the minority community does not 
bring such universities into existence, and that they are instead 
established by the legislature? Indeed, Azeez Basha (supra) says so. 
Contrarily, the NCMEI Act, as amended from time to time, enables a 
minority community to establish a university on its own. There being 
an apparent inconsistency between the two, the question that arises for 
further consideration is as to which perspective accurately reflects the 
correct position—Azeez Basha (supra) or the NCMEI Act? 

Azeez Basha (supra) v. the NCMEI Act: The curious case of bringing 
universities into existence 
158. In this regard, one needs to note the nuance between legal recognition 
and other facets of existence. As was discussed before, existence covers 
other aspects apart from legal sanction. Especially for universities, this 
Court, in the case of Prof. Yashpal (supra), held that the Statute shall 
not give legal sanction unless it is satisfied that there exist enough 
infrastructural facilities within the institution: 
 
“44. […] When the Constitution has conferred power on 
the State to legislate on incorporation of university, 
any Act providing for establishment of the university 
must make such provisions that only an institution in 
the sense of university as it is generally understood 
with all the infrastructural facilities, where teaching 
and research on a wide range of subjects and of a 
particular level are actually done, acquires the status 
of a university. […]” 
 
45. The State Legislature can make an enactment providing 
for incorporation of universities under Entry 32 of List II and 
also generally for universities under Entry 25 of List III. The 
subject “university” as a legislative head must be 
interpreted in the same manner as it is generally or 
commonly understood, namely, with proper facilities 
for teaching of higher level and continuing research 
activity. An enactment which simply clothes a proposal 
submitted by a sponsoring body or the sponsoring body 
itself with the juristic personality of a university so as 
to take advantage of Section 22 of the UGC Act and 
thereby acquires the right of conferring or granting 
academic 
degrees 
but 
without 
having 
any 
infrastructure or teaching facility for higher studies or 
facility for research is not contemplated by either of 
these entries. Sections 5 and 6 of the impugned enactment 
are, therefore, wholly ultra vires, being a fraud on the 
Constitution.” 
 
46. […] In the absence of any campus and other 
infrastructural facilities, UGC cannot take any measures 
whatsoever to ensure a proper syllabus, level of teaching, 
standard of examination and evaluation of academic 
achievement of the students or even to ensure that the 

students have undergone the course of study for the 
prescribed period before the degree is awarded to them.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
159. Similarly, while Regulation 3.1 of the University Grants Commission 
(Establishment 
of 
and 
Maintenance 
of 
Standards 
in 
Private 
Universities) Regulations, 2003 also states that universities have to be 
established by a statute, the very definition of the term ‘private 
university’ in Regulation No. 2.1 clarifies that the university is 
established albeit ‘through’ the legislation, but ‘by’ a private body: 
 
“3.1. Each private university shall be established by a 
separate State Act and shall conform to the relevant 
provisions of the UGC Act, 1956, as amended from time to 
time.” 
 
“2.1. "Private university" means a university duly 
established through a State / Central Act by a 
sponsoring body viz. a Society registered under the 
Societies Registration Act 1860, or any other corresponding 
law for the time being in force in a State or a Public Trust or a 
Company registered under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 
1956.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
160. In addition to these provisions, it is also imperative to take into 
consideration that the role of sponsoring bodies is explicated in further 
detail in various state legislations. For instance, the Uttar Pradesh 
Private Universities Act, 2019, sets out in detail the steps that the 
sponsoring body must take to receive sanction for establishing a 
university. The body is required to create an endowment fund, possess 
certain specified areas of land, construct buildings, install equipment, 
appoint professors, plan curriculum and other activities, make rules for 
the functioning of the university, and comply with other norms.85 
Subsequently, such a body is then required to apply for the sanction by 
 
85 Uttar Pradesh Private Universities Act, 2019, Section 3. furnishing the requisite details.86 Only once the government is satisfied 
with the necessary compliances by the sponsoring body, does it grant 
the sanction and incorporates it under the statute.87 Therefore, even 
though the final legal existence is sanctioned through the statute, it is 
the private body which initiates and fulfils other essential roles. 
 
161. A similar situation existed in India prior to independence. During this 
pre-independence era, the very nature of universities was in a state of 
flux. Up until the 1920s, universities primarily functioned as 
administrative units rather than teaching institutions. Accordingly, 
they were established by the State as government bodies to exercise 
control over all the colleges in the respective provinces. This factum is 
acknowledged by the Saddler Commission of 1917-19, which noted: 
 
“These territorial limits have been deemed necessary in the 
past, mainly for the following reasons. In the first place, the 
functions of the older universities in India have demanded 
them. So long as each of these universities is engaged, 
subject to Government control, in administrative rather 
than teaching functions, it necessarily follows that its 
boundaries should be as far as possible co-terminous 
with those of a province […] The self-contained 
provincial 
university affords some 
administrative 
conveniences. Because it exercises direct control over 
Government colleges, gives grants-in-aid to others, and 
is deeply interested in the secondary school system, 
Government is necessarily hampered in carrying out 
these duties if the affiliation and inspection of colleges 
within its area and the recognition of schools situated 
within its territorial jurisdiction are in any respect 
under the authority or in the hands of another 
Government and university.”88 
[Emphasis supplied] 
162. However, in order to expand the scope of education and to 
accommodate growing demand, there was a legitimate need to change 
the role of the university from mere administrative bodies to 
 
86 Ibid, Section 4. 
87 Ibid, Section 7. 
88 M.E. SADLER, Calcutta University Commission 1917-1919, Chapter XXIX. institutions of learning. Hence, while there was hitherto monopoly 
exercised by government universities,89 it permitted private players to 
approach the government and seek the setting up of a university. As 
recognized by the Saddler Commission, BHU was the first of its kind. 
 
163. In due parlance, the University Commission Report of 1929 also 
acknowledged this change, and it was noted that various learning 
universities had come into being.90 In order to establish a university 
whose degree would be recognized by the government, they were 
required to be established through a statute.91 Universities that were 
established in native states were also created through the sanction of 
the ruler.92 Even though some native groups did establish universities 
without the statute, their degrees were not recognized, consequently 
leading to them being less attractive centres of learning.93 
 
164. That means that while universities were still required to seek a 
government’s sanction for recognition of degrees, the statutes were 
limited to their legal existence. There are other essential components as 
well, to determine the status of a university. As was also briefly 
explicated in Prof. Yashpal (supra),94 a university in essence, is also 
an organized body that serves as a centre of higher education by linking 
students and teachers. For it to exist in that form, it is necessary for 
someone to ideate, plan, gather the resources, take approvals, and 
 
89 Henry Sharp, “The Development of Indian Universities” JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF 
ARTS, (1925), Vol. 73, No. 3778 pp. 523. 
90 INDIAN STATUTORY COMMISSION, Interim Report- Review of Growth of Education in British 
India, Calcutta, Government of India, central Publication Branch (1929) pp. 123, available 
at https://archive.org/details/dli.csl.1000/page/n157/mode/2up?view=theater 
91 Dr. Vishwanath Pandey (editor), FOUNDER OF BANARAS HINDU UNIVERSITY: PANDIT MADAN 
MOHAN MALVIYA, Publication Cell, Banaras Hindu University (2006), pp. 19, available at 
https://web.archive.org/web/20120412191310/http://www.bhu.ac.in/MMMMM.pdf. 
92 The Handbook of Indian Universities, published by Inter University Board India (1928), 
pp. 
255, 
available 
at 
https://archive.org/details/handbookofindian029307mbp/page/n269/mode/2up?view=th
eater; Syed Akbar, “Controversy over Osmania University Centenary as Firman says it was 
founded 
in 
1918, 
THE 
INDIAN 
EXPRESS 
(23 
November, 
2017) 
available 
at 
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/hyderabad/controversy-over-osmania-university-
centenary-as-firman-says-it-was-founded-in-1918/articleshow/61762699.cms. 
93 INDIAN STATUTORY COMMISSION, supra note 90, pp. 121. 
94 Prof. Yashpal, supra note 4, para 20-22. functionalize the institution once the sanction is received.95 This 
materiality was also briefly alluded to by the University Commission of 
1948, when it said that: 
 
“The Annamalai University owes its inception to the 
generosity of the late Annamalai Chettiar of Chettinad. The 
Banaras and the Aligarh Universities have had large 
endowments given by princes and commoners. The Calcutta 
University has had endowments given by such eminent 
persons as P.C. Ray, Rash Behari Ghose and Tarakanath 
Palit; while Bombay has had large endowments from the 
Singhania and Tata Trusts besides endowments from several 
other philanthropic citizens; the University of Nagpur has had 
a large endowment under the Laxminarayan Trust, Fund and 
the Madras University has for the first time been given a 
generous endowment by Dr. Alagappa Chettiar. The new 
university at Saugor owes its existence to a donation 
of Rs. 2,000,000 from Sir Hari Singh Gaur which is 
regarded as a first instalment.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
165. Hence, even when the legal existence—i.e., the authority to grant 
degrees—comes from an external body or legislature, it is an important 
but not the sole facet that constitutes a University. Further, the 
legislative object and intent of such a Statute would be a determinative 
factor in ascertaining the nature of the University. If it were solely 
responsible for the creation of the university, the statute might assume 
a size larger than the University. Instead, since the concept of a 
university encompasses numerous other factors beyond legal sanction, 
these factors also contribute to its existence, and the statute is one of 
them. Consequently, the presence of this external factor does not 
render the entire existence attributable to the Legislature. 
 
166. It seems to us that when the UGC Act or colonial laws mandated 
universities to be created by statutes, those who intended a university, 
including the minority community, were not absolved from complying 
with other relevant factors so as to bring the university into being. We 
 
95 Dr. Vishwanath Pandey, supra note 91. therefore do not find any conflict between the amended provisions of 
the NCMEI Act, UGC Act, and the holding in Prof. Yashpal (supra). 
Each holds its own independent and distinct field and operates validly 
within that sphere. The minority community thus can establish a 
university under Article 30,96 provided it fulfils the norms of the UGC—
i.e., gets legal sanction to create the university through a statute. To 
the extent that Azeez Basha (supra) holds to the contrary, it deserves 
to be modified and clarified. 
 
167. Having held so, we will now analyse the third category of institutes, 
which are ‘created by’ the legislature itself. 
 
I.1.2.3. Created by the statute 
168. The previous section showed that an institution would not owe its 
existence to the legislature itself, provided that other facets apart from 
legal operationalization are fulfilled by another body. However, it may 
also happen that the Government itself may fulfil the other aspects by 
perhaps ideating the institution, providing funds and infrastructure for 
its set-up, making its charter documents, and finally operationalizing it 
through different bodies. In case the leading role in the different factors 
instantiated in paragraph 141 of this judgement is played by the 
Legislature itself or through the Executive Government, then it will be 
said to have brought the institution into existence and not any private 
individual or community. 
 
169. The distinction between the second and third categories of institutions 
(i.e., those recognized by statute versus those created by statute) is 
thus one of degree and a matter of fact. While both types of institutions 
may appear on paper to be established under a statute, only a 
thorough analysis of their backgrounds can illuminate whether they 
belong to the second category—i.e., where the statute merely 
operationalizes the institution or to the third category—where their very 
 
96 Uttar Pradesh Private Universities Act, 2019, Section 2(p). existence is attributable to legislative action. Depending on such 
analysis, the Court can conclude whether the institution meets the 
establishment prong under Article 30 or not. 
 
170. To sum up the entire discussion on the spectrum of legislative 
interference pictorially: 

I.2 Establishment shall be for the benefit of the community 
171. There can hardly be any quarrel that, for fulfilling the establishment 
prong, it is not sufficient that the institution was brought into existence 
by the community, but it must be further proved that it was for the 
benefit of that community. For this purpose, it is essential to analyse 
the overall functioning of the institution and the primary objective for 
which it has been established. For instance, where the institution 
admits members of other communities; also teaches secular courses;97 
 
97 In Re: The Kerala Education Bill, supra note 58; para 23; Rev. Father W. Proost and Ors. v. 
State of Bihar and Ors., (1969), para 8; Ahmedabad St. Xaviers College Society 
and Anr. v. State of Gujarat and Anr., AIR 1974 SC 1389, para 10. or if it is working merely as a commercial entity that does not admit 
students of its own community; or working primarily towards the 
development of its community, it would be antithetical to the very 
purpose of Article 30 to grant such an institution minority status. 
 
172. This has been clarified by various judgements of this Court, which held 
that the purpose of Article 30 is to ensure the upliftment of the 
minority community by providing them with a congenial atmosphere for 
education.98 If the institution is not aligned with this purpose, it would 
not be covered under the purview of Article 30 and would not enjoy 
extra administrative autonomy, even if its existence is owed to a 
minority community. 
 
173. To conclude the discussion on the meaning of ‘establish’, for an 
institution to fulfil the establishment prong under Article 30, it is 
necessary for it to have been brought into existence by the minority 
community and must be working towards the benefit of that 
community. 
 
J. Issue V: What is the meaning of ‘administer’ in Article 30? 
174. The parties are not unanimous on the meaning of the term ‘administer’ 
as contained in Article 30 of the Constitution. The Appellant sought to 
assail that the term ‘administer’ essentially refers to who has overall 
control over the university. The parties argued that the mere fact that 
the 
State 
regulates 
the 
institution 
does 
not 
take 
away 
the 
‘administration’ from the community. The Respondents, on the other 
hand, proffered that the ‘administer’ prong requires the minority 
community to control essential factors of the institution, such as 
admission to the institution, fee structure, appointment of teachers, 
etc. 

98 In Re: The Kerala Education Bill, supra note 58; Para 32; P.A. Inamdar, supra note 48, 
para 97. 

175. Before 
venturing 
onto 
understanding 
what 
is 
included 
in 
administration, it is necessary to first understand what it does not 
include. Various judicial precedents, including the decision in TMA Pai 
(supra), have held that the term ‘administration’ does not include 
maladministration. In other words, while the minority community has 
the right to administer the institution, the regulatory measures 
imposed by the State that merely regulate the educational standards 
are not included within the right of ‘administration’.99 
 
176. To this end, the State has the power to prescribe, inter alia: compliance 
requirements of the government for granting recognition to the 
university, if they largely and substantially leave unimpaired the right 
of administration in regard to internal affairs of the institution;100 
general laws of the land applicable to all persons, such as laws relating 
to taxation, sanitation, social welfare, economic regulation, public order 
and morality, or general regulations regarding welfare of students and 
teachers;101 regulations requiring transparency and merit in admission 
procedure;102 
regulations 
restricting 
charging 
of 
capital 
fee;103 
regulations which mandate that there is a govt. nominee in admission 
process, that fix merit criteria for minority students, or which mandate 
that the vacant seats shall go to non-minority students;104 etc. 
 
177. Similarly, this Court has held that in a minority institution, there can 
be a sprinkling of outsiders in administration, and the mere presence of 
 
99 Very Rev. Mother Provincial, supra note 71, para 9-10; Gandhi Faiz-e-am-College v. 
University of Agra and Anr., (1975), para 40; Kolawana Gram Vikas Kendra v. 
State of Gujarat and Anr., (2010). 
100 All Saints High School v. Govt. of A.P. and Ors., (1980), para 5. 
101 TMA Pai Foundation, supra note 3, para 136 and 161; P.A. Inamdar, supra note 48. Para 
94; Secy., Malankara Syrian Catholic College, supra note 51. 
102 TMA Pai Foundation, supra note 3, para 161; Christian Medical College Vellore Assn. v. 
Union of India, (2020). 
103 P.A. Inamdar, supra note 48, Para 140; Modern School v. Union of India and Ors., (2004); Father Thomas Shingare and Ors. v. State of Maharashtra and Ors., (2002). 
104 Andhra Kesari College of Education v. State of A.P., (2019), para 6.9. members of the non-minority community does not take away the 
minority character of the institution.105 
 
178. However, at the same time, there is a core part of ‘administration’ that 
should remain in control of the minority community. As has been 
discussed before during the discussion on the conjunctive and 
disjunctive nature of the test incorporated within the text of Article 30 
(Issue III), this is necessary to prevent the potential misuse of this 
provision. The question that now arises is when would ‘administration’ 
be said to have been taken away from the minority community? 
 
179. To this end, the very concept of ‘administration’ is inherently fluid, and 
a specific definition is likely to be underinclusive. Determining whether 
a minority community exercises control over an institution is a factual 
question that varies from case to case. Although there is no definitive 
test to ascertain whether administration lies with the minority 
community, various judicial precedents provide indicators that may be 
considered relevant. 
 
180. Similar to the test to determine ‘establishment’, these indicators alone 
may not conclusively establish whether the administration rests with 
the minority community. Instead, a cumulative and holistic analysis of 
these factors can assist the court in making its determination. 
 
181. To instantiate, illustrative factors which are likely to take away 
administration of minority community from the institution include, 
inter alia: 
i. 
Management staff is not answerable to the founders, or an 
external person has veto over their selection.106 The lack of control 
over such selection would have significant weight since it is a post 
of prime importance around which administration revolves, i.e., 
 
105 In Re: Kerala Education Bill, supra note 58; Society for Unaided Private Schools of 
Rajasthan v. Union of India, (2012), para 57. 
106 Very Rev. Mother Provincial, supra note 71, para 19. he/she is the hub on which all spokes of the institution’s wheels 
are set around.107 
 
ii. 
There are outside authorities in the governing body of the 
managing committee108 with wide powers over the other members; 

iii. 
Minority community does not have any right over determining the 
overall fee structure of the institution;110 
 
iv. 
Minority 
community 
does 
not 
have 
the 
final 
say 
over 
administration, such that over the management committee 
comprising of members of the minority community, there is an 
appeal to an outside member; 111 
 
v. 
Minority community does not have any say over the medium of 
instruction;112 
 
vi. 
Regulation 
prescribes 
reservation 
for 
unaided 
minority 
institutions;113 
 
vii. 
Minority community does not have the right to choose the 
governing body and to choose teachers or admit students;114 
 
107 Secy., Malankara Syrian Catholic College, supra note 51, para 22-28; Board of Secondary 
Education and Teachers Training v. Jt. Director of Public Instructions, (1998), para 
3; Ivy C.Da. Conceicao v. State of Goa and Ors., (2017), para 16; The Manager, 
Corporate Educational Agency v. James Mathew and Ors., (2017); R. Sulochana 
Devi v. D.M. Sujatha & Ors., (2005), para 26. 
108 Dr. T. Varghese George, supra note 73, para 37. 
109 All Saints High School, supra note 100. 
110 Icon Education Society v. State of M.P. and Ors.,; Islamic 
Academy of Education v. State of Karnataka and Ors., 2003; Cochin University of 
Science & Technology and Anr. v. Thomas P. John and Ors., (2008), para 16. 
111 Lilly Kurian v. Sr. Lewina and Ors., AIR 1979 SC 52. 
112 State of Karnataka and Anr. v. Associated Management of English Medium Primary & 
Secondary Schools and Ors., (2014). 
113 Society for Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan v. Union of India and Anr., (2012), para 62; Pramati Educational & Cultural Trust and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors., (2014), para 55. viii. 
Removal of an employee requires the approval of an outside 
member who has the discretion to withhold such consent;115 
 
ix. 
The minority community does not have a say in appointment of 
administrative authorities of the university such as the Vice 
Chancellor, Pro-Vice Chancellor, Registrar etc.; 
 
x. 
The minority institution entirely depends on government aid; and 
 
xi. 
The minority community does not have the right to deploy 
properties and assets for the benefit of the institution.116 
 
182. It thus emerges that the minority community must largely be free from 
external control and must have broad autonomy to mould the 
institution’s functioning and administration per their idea of what 
would be best for the community.117 If the long-term administrative 
factors and the day-to-day sundry decisions do not lie with the 
community, it would mean that the institution is being administered by 
an outside authority and not by the minority community. As already 
elucidated, while the minority community can be subjected to general 
regulations regarding the betterment of such management, and while 
there can be a sprinkling of outsiders, administration itself cannot be 
taken away from the minority community. This is perhaps best 
explained in Gandhi Faiz-e-am-College v. University of Agra,118 
where this Court held: 
 
“16. The discussion throws us back to a closer study of 
Statute 14A to see if it cuts into the flesh of the 
management's right or merely tones up its health and habits. 
The two requirements the University asks for are that the 
managing body (whatever its name) must take in (a) the 
 
114 Dr. T. Varghese George, supra note 73, para 19. 
115 G. Vallikumari v. Andhra Education Society, (2010), para 17; Frank Anthony 
Public School Employees' Assn. v. Union of India and Ors., (1986), para 18. 
116 Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College Society, supra note 97, para 19. 
117 St. Stephen's College, supra note 50, para 46. 
118 Gandhi Faiz-e-am-College, supra note 99, para 16. 

Principal of the College; (b) its seniormost teacher. Is this 
desideratum dismissible as biting into the autonomy of 
management or tenable as ensuring the excellence of 
the institution without injuring the essence of the 
right? On a careful reflection and conscious of the 
constitutional dilemma, we are inclined to the view that this 
case falls on the valid side of the delicate line. Regulation 
which restricts is bad; but regulation which facilitates 
is good. Where does this fine distinction lie? No rigid 
formula is possible but a flexible test is feasible. Where 
the object and effect is to improve the tone and temper 
of the administration without forcing on it a stranger, 
however superb his virtues be, where the directive is 
not to restructure the governing body but to better its 
performance by a marginal catalytic induction, where 
no external authority's fiat or approval or outside 
nominee 
is 
made 
compulsory 
to 
validate 
the 
Management Board but inclusion of an internal key 
functionary appointed by the autonomous management 
alone is asked for, the provision is salutary and saved, 
being not a diktat eroding the freedom of the freedom.” 
[Emphasis Supplied] 
 
183. Notably, for such administration to lie with the community, it is not 
enough if the decisions are taken by a member of such a community. If 
these decisions lie with the community but there is an outside 
authority with the power to change these decisions, it would imply that 
the minority community does not have pervasive control over the 
administrator, and its status is merely that of a paper tiger.119 
Conversely, if there are outside authorities and the minority community 
does not have the power to oversee or reverse the decisions of such 
authorities, it would again imply that control lies externally. In other 
words, the administration shall cover both the active and the reactive 
aspects, such that the minority community can take active steps to 
effect changes in the institution without outside restriction and can 
also veto decisions taken or changes made from the outside. 
 
184. Consequently, in order to satisfy the requirements of Article 30, a 
minority community must retain both de jure and de facto control over 
 
119 Lilly Kurian, supra note 111. the institution. It is insufficient for the community to simply have a 
minority member appointed by the majority for administrative roles; 
this does not confer genuine control. If the minority member's position 
can be revoked at any time by the majority, the real power of 
administration does not lie with the minority community. Allowing 
Article 30 protection under such circumstances would create legal 
unpredictability, as non-minority institutions could temporarily appoint 
minority members to exploit the benefits. To meet the administration 
test, the minority community must therefore first have visible de jure 
control over the institution. 
 
185. Similarly, mere de jure control over the institution may not be sufficient 
on its own. It is possible that, to secure protection under Article 30, a 
minority community might be nominally granted administrative power 
while actual control is exercised behind the scenes by individuals 
outside the community. Such a scenario would amount to a façade of 
minority administration, failing to satisfy the test of genuine physical 
control over the management. Thus, the need arises for both aspects of 
control over the educational institution. 
 
186. To summarize, the test for administration under Article 30 involves 
identifying who holds effective and overall control within the institution. 
While external authorities may assist in its administration, the decisive 
influence and control must rest with members of the minority 
community. To meet this test, the minority community must exercise 
both active and reactive control, ensuring that administrative powers 
are genuinely held in both de jure and de facto terms. 
 
K. 
Issue VI: Whether the Union of India is obligated to defend the 
AMU Amendment Act, 1981? 
187. Before parting, we would like to fairly acknowledge that both sides to 
the present dispute, aggressively argued on the issue as to whether the 
UOI could be allowed to change its stance and challenge its own 

statute. While the Appellant urged that the UOI and the Learned 
Attorney General for India are obliged to defend the 1981 Amendment 
Act, the Respondent maintained that such support would run 
antithetical to constitutional values. 
 
188. We have pondered over the submissions and are of the view that the 
controversy has been rendered academic. In our considered opinion, all 
the legal issues, including those relating to constitutional interpretation 
have already been answered effectively. In all fairness, the parties also 
rendered their full assistance in the context of the factual issues as 
well, especially in terms of whether or not AMU is entitled to the 
protection of Article 30 of the Constitution. This second limb of the 
controversy however, will be resolved by the Regular Bench, and to this 
extent we are respectfully in tandem with the opinion rendered by 
Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India. 
 
V. 
AREAS OF DIVERGENCE 
189. In light of the above discussion, we find ourselves at variance with 
Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India on the following issues: 
 
189.1. Whether the opinion of the seven-judge bench in Kerala 
Education Bill (supra) which according to Hon’ble the Chief Justice, 
was followed by a six-judge Constitution bench in Rev. Sidhajbhai 
Sabhai v. State of Bombay,120 has been overlooked in Azeez Basha 
(supra)? a. 
In Kerela Education Bill (supra), this Court, in no uncertain 
terms opined that: (i) “there is no reason why the benefit of Article 
30(1) should be limited only to educational institutions established 
after the commencement of the Constitution. The language employed 
in Article 30(1) is wide enough to cover both pre-Constitution and 
post-Constitution institutions.”; and (ii) “Article 30(1) gives two 
 
120 Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai v. State of Bombay, 1963 (3) SCR 837. rights to the minorities, (1) to establish and (2) to administer 
educational institutions of their choice. The right to administer 
obviously cannot include the right to maladminister. The minority 
cannot surely ask for aid or recognition for an educational institution 
run by them in unhealthy surroundings, without any competent 
teachers, possessing any semblance of qualification, and which 
does not maintain even a fair standard of teaching or which teaches 
matters subversive of the welfare of the scholars…” 
 
b. 
In Sidhajbhai Sabhai (supra), the challenge was laid to a 
government order directing that “80% of the total number of seats 
in non-Government Training Colleges should be reserved for School 
Board teachers deputed by the Government…” In this regard, the 
six-judge Constitution Bench held that “unlike Article 19, the 
fundamental freedom under Clause (1) of Article 30, is absolute in 
terms; it is not made subject to any reasonable restrictions of the 
nature the fundamental freedoms enunciated in Article 19 may be 
subjected to. All minorities—linguistic or religious—have, by virtue of 
Article 30(1), an absolute right to establish and administer 
educational institutions of their choice; and any law or executive 
direction which seeks to infringe the substance of that right under 
Article 30(1) would to that extent be void. This, however, is not to 
say that it is not open to the State to impose regulations upon the 
exercise of this right...” 
 
c. 
What comes to light in Sidhajbhai Sabhai (supra) is that the 
bench therein did not rely upon the opinion delivered by the seven-
judge bench in Kerala Education (Bill) and rather distinguished 
it, as the latter was relied on by the State. The Constitution bench 
in Sidhajbhai Sabhai (supra) thus took pains to explain that the 
opinion in Kerala Education Bill (supra) was distinguishable 
and that it “is not an authority for the proposition submitted by the 
Additional Solicitor General that all regulative measures which are 

not destructive or annihilative of the character of the institution 
established by the minority, provided the regulations are in the 
national or public interest, are valid…” 
 
d. 
We now turn to examine whether the five-judge bench in Azeez 
Basha (supra) failed to follow the principles opined in Kerala 
Education Bill (supra) or those laid down by the six-judge bench 
in Sidhajbhai Sabhai (supra). In so far as Kerala Education 
Bill (supra) is concerned, Azeez Basha (supra) categorically holds 
that the protection of Article 30(1) was not restricted only to 
educational institutions established after the Constitution came 
into force. Such a restrictive interpretation was held to be contrary 
to the opinion delivered in Kerala Education Bill (supra) and 
was bolstered with strong language that “if that interpretation was 
given to Article 30(1) it would be robbed of much of its content’.” The 
bench further held that the expressions ‘establish’ and ‘administer’ 
must be read conjunctively, in response to a plea that even if an 
educational institution was not established by minorities, it could 
still be administered by them under the ambit of Article 30. This 
view, which has been consistently affirmed in the later decisions 
as well, in our considered opinion, is the correct interpretation of 
Article 30(1). e. 
As regard to Sidhajbhai Sabhai (supra) it was neither cited nor 
was particularly relevant in the context of the controversy that 
arose for consideration in Azeez Basha (supra). f. 
Most pertinently, the decision in Sidhajbhai Sabhai (supra) is no 
longer a good precedent, to the extent of disapproval of its view by 
the 11-judge bench in TMA Pai (supra), in this regard. g. 
We therefore see no discordance between Kerala Education Bill 
(supra) and Sidhajbhai Sabhai (supra) on the one hand and 
Azeez Basha (supra) on the other. 
 
189.2. Is there any conflict between Azeez Basha (supra) and the 
principles enunciated in TMA Pai (supra)? a. 
A conjoint reading of paragraphs 106 to 108 of the draft judgement 
circulated by Hon’ble the Chief Justice, gives an impression that 
Azeez Basha (supra) has had some collision with the subsequent 
eleven-judge Constitution bench in TMA Pai (supra). In this 
regard, Hon’ble the Chief Justice has relied on paragraph 70 (the 
majority opinion by Chief Justice Kirpal, as his Lordship then 
was). We are, however, unable to find any such perceived conflict 
between the two decisions. TMA Pai (supra) considered the scope 
of regulating the right of administering government aided private 
minority institutions from paragraph 82 onwards. Pursuantly, in 
paragraph 93, the bench therein formulated the following 
questions: 
 
“93. Can Article 30(1) be so read as to mean that it contains 
an absolute right of the minorities, whether based on religion 
or language, to establish and administer educational 
institutions in any manner they desire, and without being 
obliged to comply with the provisions of any law? Des Article 
30(1) give the religious or linguistic minorities a right to 
establish an educational institution that propagates religious 
or racial bigotry or ill will amongst the people? Can the right 
under Article 30(1) be so exercised that it is opposed to public 
morality or health? In the exercise of its right, would the 
minority while establishing educational institutions not be 
bound by town planning rules and regulations? Can they 
construct and maintain buildings in any manner they desire 
without complying with the provisions of the building by-
laws or health regulations?” 

b. 
After due discussion and a detailed reference to Kerala 
Education Bill (supra) and Sidhajbhai Sabhai (supra), the 
Constitution Bench in TMA Pai (supra) answered these questions 
in paragraph 107 which reads as follows: 
 
“107. The aforesaid decision does indicate that the right 
under Article 30(1) is not so absolute as to prevent the 
government from making any regulation whatsoever. As 
already noted hereinabove, in Sidhajbhai Sabhai's case, it 
was laid down that regulations made in the true interests of 
efficiency of instruction, discipline, health, sanitation, 
morality and public order could be imposed. If this is so, it is 
difficult to appreciate how the government can be prevented 
from framing regulations that are in the national interest, as 
it seems to be indicated in the passage quoted hereinabove. 
Any regulation framed in the national interest must 
necessarily apply to all educational institutions, whether run 
by the majority or the minority. Such a limitation must 
necessarily be read into Article 30. The right under Article 
30(1) cannot be such as to override the national interest or to 
prevent the government from framing regulations in that 
behalf. 
It 
is, 
of 
course, 
true 
that 
government 
regulations cannot destroy the minority character of 
the institution or make the right to establish and 
administer a mere illusion; but the right under Article 
30 is not so absolute as to be above the law. It will 
further be seen that in Sidhajbhai Sabhai's case, no 
reference 
was 
made 
to Article 
29(2) of 
the 
Constitution. This decision, therefore, cannot be an 
authority for the proposition canvassed before us.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
c. 
It may thus be seen that the decision in Sidhajbhai Sabhai 
(supra), which holds that the “fundamental freedom under Clause 
(1) of Article 30, is absolute in terms; it if; not made subject to any 
reasonable restrictions” has in fact been expressly disapproved by 
TMA Pai (supra). In essence, Sidhajbhai Sabhai (supra) has 
thus lost its binding nature, in that context. 

189.3. Whether a two-judge bench would be competent to make a 
reference to a larger bench of seven-judges? Whether the Constitution 
bench in Dawoodi Bohra (supra) has been correctly construed by 
Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India in his opinion? a. 
In order to avoid any repetition, we wish to mention here that an 
elaborate answer to the aforesaid question has been given under 
‘Issue I’ from paragraphs 83 to 99 of our judgement. In essence, 
the reference by the two-judge bench to a larger bench of seven-
judges is totally impermissible; such a recourse is directly in the 
teeth of the dictum of the Constitution bench in Dawoodi Bohra 
(supra). Such an attempt by a two-judge bench is hit by: (i) the 
doctrine of predictability; (ii) the doctrine of finality; (iii) the 
principle of judicial propriety; and (iv) the doctrine of stare decisis. b. 
Further, there is no substantial difference between ‘doubting’ a 
larger bench or ‘disagreeing’ with such a judgement. ‘Doubt’ and 
‘disagreement’ both originate from a tentative opinion which is in 
conflict with the reasons already assigned by the larger bench. 
There cannot be disagreement without doubting the correctness 
and there cannot be a doubt unless you disagree with the reasons. c. 
Most importantly, entertaining a reference by a two-judge bench 
doubting a larger bench would dilute the authority and position of 
the Chief Justice of India as enjoyed upon Article 145 read with 
Order VII Rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966, as was then 
applicable. 
 
189.4. What is the true import of Entry 63 of List I of the Constitution? a. 
The Seventh Schedule derives its relevance from Article 246 of the 
Constitution. This provision is included in Chapter I of Part XI of 

the Constitution, which deals with the relationship between the 
Union and the State and defines their legislative relations. b. 
It may be seen that Parliament has exclusive power to make laws 
with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in the 
Seventh schedule, known as the Union List. In this vein, Entry 63 
of List I reads as follows: 
 
“63. The institutions known at the commencement of 
this Constitution as the Benares Hindu University, the 
Aligarh Muslim University and the Delhi University; the 
University established in pursuance of article 371E; any 
other institution declared by Parliament by law to be an 
institution of national importance.” 
[Emphasis supplied] 
 
c. 
Entry 63 has two significant components which we can broadly 
label as procedural and substantive. The former, i.e., the 
procedural feature, flows from Article 246 and reiterates that the 
Parliament is the sole Competent Authority for legislating to 
declare any other institution to be an institution of National 
Importance 
 
d. 
The first component of Entry 63 is a substantive part, which is a 
constitutional declaration of BHU and AMU, to be institutions of 
National Importance. The opening part of Entry 63 manifestly 
indicates that the Constituent Assembly was determined to confer 
such an elevated status on both, BHU and AMU. e. 
The second component of Entry 63 on the other hand, permits the 
Parliament to declare any other institution also to be an institution 
of national importance. It seems from the language of Entry 63 
that the Parliament has no power to take away the status of an 
institute of national importance conferred upon BHU or AMU, save 
and except by following the route of an amendment to the 

Constitution itself. Though the Parliament can declare any other 
institution as an institution of National Importance through the 
route of Article 246; such plenary legislative power cannot be 
invoked to take away the status of an institution of National 
Importance, accorded by the Constitution. 
 
190. Having delineated the issues of disagreement with the opinion of 
Hon’ble the Chief Justice, we may hasten to add that one of the 
conclusions assigned in Azeez Basha (supra), is such that it deserves 
to be revisited. We say so for the reasons that: 
 
a. 
In this regard, Azeez Basha (supra) rightly holds that the 
expression ‘educational institutions’ is of very wide import and 
would also include universities. It has correctly understood that a 
religious minority has the right to establish a university under 
Article 30(1). Azeez Basha (supra) is also right in observing that 
there was no law in India before the Constitution came into force, 
which prohibited any private individual or body from establishing 
a university. Azeez Basha (supra) further holds that no private 
individual or body could, prior to 1950, insist that the degrees of 
any university established by them must be recognised by 
government. This position continued even after the enactment of 
University Grants Commission Act, 1956. b. 
Azeez Basha (supra) however, seems to be erroneous to the 
extent it holds that since Section 6 of the Aligarh Muslim 
University Act, 1920 (AMU Act, 1920) provided that the degrees 
conferred by the university would be recognised by government, 
consequently, “an institution was brought into existence which 
could not be brought into existence by a private individual or 
body…” Azeez Basha (supra) might therefore not be correct in its 
entirety and as a general principle of law, to hold that even if the 
AMU Act, 1920 was passed as a result of the efforts of the Muslim 

minority it “does not mean that the Aligarh University when it came 
into being under the 1920 Act was established by the Muslim 
minority”. c. 
In this context, it is our considered opinion that the establishment 
of a university, whether as a minority institution or as a religion 
neutral institution of high standard, is a complex and mixed 
question of law and fact. The legislative intent behind the 
establishment of a university or an institution will have a 
significant role in determining the status of such an institution. 
For instance, if the Preamble or the Statement of Objects and 
Reasons of a Statute explicitly states that the University or the 
institution concerned is intended to be established and shall be 
administered by a minority community, we see no reason as to 
why such a University or institution would be denuded of its 
minority character merely because it was created through 
legislative means. d. 
Conversely, if the Legislature 
by itself (particularly, post-
Constitution) decides to establish an institution where besides 
preserving 
the 
culture, 
values, 
traditions, 
language 
and 
conventions of a religious or linguistic minority community, it 
promotes other streams of education without any barrier to 
children belonging to other religions, it will be highly debatable to 
discern whether such a university can take refuge under the 
protective umbrella of Article 30. 
 
191. Having laid down the broad principles to be followed to determine as to 
whether AMU qualifies as a minority institution within the meaning of 
Article 30, we leave it for the regular bench to determine such status, in 
light of the parameters laid down in our opinion. We, therefore, do not 
deem it appropriate to express any final view as to whether or not AMU 
is a minority institution within the meaning of Article 30 of the 

Constitution. Accordingly, we refrain ourselves from determining the 
factual issue enumerated as ‘Issue No. VII’. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
192. Thus, drawing upon the comprehensive analysis presented in the 
preceding sections, we thus hold that: 
a. 
There is no conflict between the seven-judge bench opinion in 
Kerala Education Bill (supra) and the five-judge Constitution 
Bench in Azeez Basha (supra) on the other. b. 
The six-judge Constitution Bench in Sidhajbhai Sabhai (supra), 
laying down that the right under Article 30 is absolute and 
unconditional, is not the correct principle of law; the judgement is 
no more binding in nature and stands effectively overruled in TMA 
Pai (supra), to that extent. Consequently, Azeez Basha (supra) 
does not suffer from any legal infirmity on the premise that it did 
not cite or follow Sidhajbhai Sabhai (supra). c. 
There 
is 
no 
substantial 
difference 
between 
‘doubting’ 
or 
‘disagreeing’ with a judgement. That being so, the reference by a 
two-judge bench in Anjuman (supra) doubting the correctness of 
the five-judge bench in Azeez Basha (supra) and referring it to a 
seven-judge bench suffers from multiple illegalities, including 
judicial impropriety. d. 
In view of the dictum of the Constitution Bench in Dawoodi 
Bohra (supra), a two-judge bench has no authority whatsoever to 
doubt or disagree with a judgement of the larger bench, and 
directly refer the matter to a bench having a numerically greater 
strength than the matter so doubted. The reference by the two-
judge bench in Anjuman (supra) is nothing but a challenge to the 
authority of the Chief Justice of India being the master of the 
roster and in derogation of the special powers enjoyed upon under 

Article 145 of the Constitution read with Order VII Rule 2 of the 
Supreme Court Rules, 1966 (as was applicable). Consequently, the 
said reference is not maintainable. However, the subsequent 
reference dated 12.02.2019, in which the then Hon’ble Chief 
Justice of India was the presiding judge, is maintainable. e. 
The reference in Anjuman (supra) to a seven-judge bench for the 
reconsideration of the five-judge decision in Azeez Basha (supra) 
is bad in law and ought to be set aside. f. 
The Constitution Bench in Azeez Basha (supra), when it holds 
that since Section 6 of the AMU Act, 1920 stipulates that degrees 
conferred by AMU would be recognised by the Government, it 
could not have been ‘brought into existence by a private individual 
or body’, is seemingly incorrect. Accordingly, and for the reasons 
assigned in paragraphs 190 (b) and (c), the said decision to that 
extent is hereby modified and clarified. g. 
The minority institutions established in the pre-Constitution era 
are also entitled to the protection conferred by Article 30. h. 
Educational institutions, with reference to Article 30 include 
universities as well. i. 
In order to seek protection under Article 30 of our Constitution, 
the minority institution must satisfy the conjunctive test, namely 
that it was established by a minority community and has been/is 
being administered by such a community. j. 
The true import and meaning of the expressions ‘establish’ and 
‘administer’, which comprise the very core of Article 30, are to be 
construed and understood strictly in accordance with the indicia 
in paragraphs 141 and 181. k. 
The question pertaining to whether AMU satisfies the above-
mentioned test of ‘establish’ and ‘administer’ so as to seek 
protection of Article 30 of the Constitution, and which will 
concomitantly entail a mixed question of facts and law, will be 
determined by a Regular Bench. 
 
193. The reference is answered in the above terms. Ordered accordingly. 

………..………………… J. 
[SURYA KANT] 

NEW DELHI 
DATED: 08.11.2024 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL ORIGINAL/ APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY 

 … APPELLANT 
VS. 
NARESH AGARWAL & OTHERS 

…RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 
 
ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY 

 … APPELLANT 
VS. 
ANUJ GUPTA & OTHERS 

…RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 
 
ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY 

 … APPELLANT 
VS. 
VIVEK KASANA & OTHERS 

…RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 
 
UNION OF INDIA 

 … APPELLANT 
VS. 
MALAY SHUKLA & OTHERS 

…RESPONDENTS 

WITH 
 
SYED ABRAR AHMAD 

 … APPELLANT 
VS. 
ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY & OTHERS …RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 
 
ASHRAF MATEEN & OTHERS 

 … APPELLANT 
VS. 
ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY & OTHERS …RESPONDENTS 
WITH 
 
ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY OLD 
BOYS’ ALUMNI ASSOCIATION 

 … APPELLANT 
VS. 
NARESH AGGARWAL & OTHERS 

…RESPONDENTS 
 
WITH 
 
HAJI MUQEET ALI QURESHI 

 … APPELLANT 
VS. 
MALAY SHUKLA & OTHERS 

…RESPONDENTS 
WITH 
 
ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY 

 … APPELLANT 
VS. 
MALAY SHUKLA & OTHERS 

…RESPONDENTS 

WITH 
 
ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY 

 … APPELLANT 
VS. 
MANVENDRA SINGH & OTHERS 

…RESPONDENTS 
AND 
 
ANOOP PRABHAKAR & OTHERS 

 … APPELLANTS 
VS. 
UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS 

…RESPONDENTS 
 
JUDGMENT 
DIPANKAR DATTA J. 
PROLOGUE 
1. There is a saying, “the past refuses to lie buried”. Possibly, no other 
case would demonstrate the validity of this statement more 
poignantly. 
2. A Constitution Bench of 5 (five) Judges of this Court delivered its 
verdict in the celebrated case of Union of India vs. Tulsiram Patel1 
on 11th July, 1985, i.e., a little less than 40 (forty) years back. As the 
youngest member of the bench, Hon’ble M.P. Thakkar, J. (as His 
Lordship then was) expressed lament in the following words: 
“178. A benevolent and justice-oriented decision of a three-Judge 
Bench of this Court, rendered ten years back in a group of service 
matters, [D.P.O., Southern Railway v. T.R. Challappan, (1976) ], is sought to be overruled by the judgment proposed to be 
 
1 (1985) 

delivered by my learned Brother Madon, J., with which, the majority 
appear to agree. Challappan having held the field for such a long 
time, it would have been appropriate if a meeting of the Judges 
constituting the Bench had been convened to seriously deliberate and 
evolve a consensus as to whether or not to overrule it. A ‘give’ and 
‘take’ of ideas, with due respect for the holders of the opposite point 
of view (in a true democratic spirit of tolerance), with willingness to 
accord due consideration to the same, would not have impaired the 
search for the true solution. Or hurt the cause of justice. The holders 
of the rival view points could have, perhaps, successfully persuaded 
and converted the holders of the opposite point of view. Or got 
themselves persuaded and converted to the other point of view. 
179. Brother Madon, J., to whom the judgment was assigned by the 
learned Chief Justice, also appears to suffer heart-ache on the same 
score, for, in his covering letter dated July 6, 1985 forwarding the 
first instalment of 142 pages he says: 
‘...I regret to state that the draft judgment could not be sent 
to you earlier. The reason was that as we did not have a 
meeting to discuss this matter, I did not know what would be 
the view of my other Brothers on the large number of points 
which fall to be determined in these cases, except partly in the 
case of two of my Brothers with whom by chance I got an 
opportunity to discuss certain broad aspects...’ 
If only there had been a meeting in order to have a dialogue, there 
might have been a meeting of minds, and we might have spoken in 
one voice. Failing which, the holders of the dissenting view point 
could have prepared their dissenting opinions. That was not to be. 
On the other hand, it has so transpired, that, the full draft judgment 
running into 237 pages has come to be circulated in the morning of 
July 11, 1985, less than 3 hours before the deadline for pronouncing 
the judgment. There is a time compulsion to pronounce the 
judgment, on 11th July, 1985, as the learned Chief Justice who has 
presided over the Constitution Bench is due to retire on that day, and 
the judge-time invested by the five Judges would be wasted if it is 
not pronounced before his retirement. The judge-time would be so 
wasted because the entire exercise would have to be done afresh. 
The neck-to-neck race against time and circumstances is so keen 
that it is impossible to prepare an elaborate judgment presenting the 
other point of view within hours and circulate the same amongst all 
the Judges constituting the Bench in this important matter which was 
heard for months, months ago. I am, therefore, adopting the only 
course open to me in undertaking the present exercise. 
180. ‘Challappan’, in my opinion, has been rightly decided. And there 
is no compulsion to overrule it— ***” 
 
I regret to find myself in the same unenviable position Hon’ble M.P. 
Thakkar, J. was placed in Tulsiram Patel (supra). 

3. Hearing of these appeals and petitions commenced on 9th January, 
2024. Spread over 8 (eight) days of marathon hearing, learned senior 
counsel/counsel advanced erudite arguments in respect of a 
reference which this Bench of 7 (seven) Judges has been called upon 
to answer. Judgment was reserved on 1st February, 2024. The task 
of authoring the judgment had not been assigned to me, which 
obviously left me with no other option but to wait for the draft opinion 
to reach my residential office. While the wait continued, it is only on 
17th October, 2024 that the draft opinion authored by the Hon’ble the 
Chief Justice of India2, being the presiding Judge of the Bench, 
numbering 117 pages was placed on my desk. Aware of the deadline 
of 10th November, 2024 (the day the HCJI would demit office) within 
which the final judgment had to be pronounced, the task of reading 
the learned dissertation started right away squeezing out time from 
the long hours that had to be spent in getting ready for the matters 
on board for each day and in conducting proceedings in court. No 
sooner had I completed reading the draft opinion, came a revised 
draft opinion of the HCJI spread over almost the equal number of 
pages. It reached my residential office in the evening of 25th October, 
2024, i.e., on the eve of the short Diwali break. Inter alia, there was 
one very significant change in the revised draft. While in the first draft 
“the test laid down” by a Constitution Bench of 5 (five) Judges of this 
 
2 HCJI, hereafter 

Court in S. Azeez Basha and Anr. vs. Union of India3 “to 
determine if an educational institution is entitled to the guarantee 
under Article 30(1)” of the Constitution of India4 was proposed to be 
overruled, in the revised draft the view taken in Azeez Basha 
(supra) “that an educational institution is not established by a 
minority if it derives its legal character through a statute” has been 
proposed to be overruled. The effect of the revised draft opinion of 
the HCJI is the defenestration of the view taken in Azeez Basha 
(supra) that Aligarh Muslim University5 is not a minority institution. 
Such view has stood its ground for the last more than 50 (fifty) years. 
It is the only decision of this Court where Article 30(1) was considered 
and law laid down keeping establishment and administration of a pre-
independence era university in perspective as distinguished from 
schools and colleges, which have been the subject matter of other 
Constitution Bench decisions. Utilising the short Diwali break, the 
draft opinions were read many times over together with perusal of 
the materials on record to decide whether the erudite opinion of the 
HCJI commended acceptance by me. On 2nd November, 2024, came 
another few pages from the office of the HCJI containing corrections 
effected in quite a few of the paragraphs of the revised draft opinion 
in track changing mode with paragraph 72 being altogether deleted. 
 
3 (1968) 
4 Constitution 
5 “AMU” or “University”, hereafter, depending upon the context 

4. Difficult though it is to disagree with any opinion penned by the HCJI, 
which has always been a product of thorough research and high 
intellect and is thoughtfully expressed, I could not persuade myself 
to completely agree with the opinion expressed in the revised drafts 
and the whole of the proposed conclusions recorded therein. This is 
when I had decided to pen my own opinion encapsulating my 
thoughts in brief having regard to the very short time at my disposal. 
5. While on the task of preparing the draft opinion and completing it for 
circulation, arrived separate draft opinions of Hon’ble Surya Kant, J. and Hon’ble Satish Chandra Sharma, J. on 6th November, 2024. 
Rummaging through the draft opinions penned by Their Lordships, I 
felt inclined to substantially agree with the thoughts and conclusions 
expressed therein. However, in view of disagreements on a couple of 
points, coupled with my inability to be ad idem with the noteworthy 
progressive approach of the HCJI, writing a separate opinion (which 
was already in progress and was nearing completion) seemed all the 
more the better, the safer and the easier option. 
6. I do not grudge getting very little time to express my views in the 
manner I would have wished to express. Had it not been a race 
against time to circulate the opinion by 6th November, 2024, the limit 
I had set for myself and assured to the HCJI, the opinion could have 
been much better articulated and more compact. But my pain is truly 
reflected in the passage from Tulsiram Patel (supra) quoted above 
and how, despite all the advancements in the justice delivery system 

that we proudly boast of having introduced, in a way history seems 
to have repeated itself. Here, a Constitution Bench of 7 (seven) 
Judges had apparently embarked on a voyage to interpret Article 
30(1) of the Constitution navigating through considerable weight of 
materials without any physical or virtual meeting of the members of 
the Bench post-reservation of judgment, not to speak of meeting of 
minds, either immediately after hearing was concluded or even 9 
(nine) months thereafter (either collectively or even in small groups 
of four-five) to explore which acceptable direction should the 
outcome sail. A common venue for a purposeful and effective 
dialogue where members of the bench could freely express their 
points of view, an attempt to share thoughts and to exchange 
opinions, a ‘give’ and ‘take’ of ideas, in true democratic spirit to build 
up a consensus - all these seem to have taken a backseat, having 
regard to the immense pressure of work which we, the HCJI and the 
other Judges on the bench, have undertaken during the time ever 
since the judgment was reserved. Judicial and administrative works 
of varied nature, which I need not dilate here, also weighed me down 
to such an extent that sending a request to the HCJI for a meeting of 
all the colleagues at this stage would have been too late to make a 
difference (if at all it were to happen). Alas, without any insightful 
and constructive discussion of the rival contentions in the presence 
of all the members comprising this Bench of 7 (seven) Judges, it is 

only individual opinions of 4 (four) Judges that could be crafted and 
circulated for perusal and approval. 
7. That being said, after circulation of my draft opinion, all the Judges 
forming the quorum had the occasion to meet together for a little 
while on 7th November, 2024, when it emerged that the opinion of 
the HCJI, as circulated, had the concurrence of 3 (three) Judges6 and 
I was part of the minority trio (3 out of 7) with a distinct perspective. 
As the narrative would reveal, my view diverges from the other 2 
(two) Judges in the minority. 
8. Since it was revealed in the aforesaid meeting that my view did not 
align with the majority, my draft opinion warranted certain changes 
and such changes have been incorporated in this final opinion without 
changing the core foundation thereof. 
 
THE REFERENCE 
9. This Constitution Bench of 7 (seven) Judges has been constituted by 
the HCJI pursuant to a reference made by a bench of 3 (three) Judges 
of this Court vide order dated 12th February, 20197 in Aligarh 
Muslim University vs. Naresh Agarwal and Ors.8. Though the 
said order is ostensibly the referral order necessitating constitution 
of this Bench, in reality, the reference has its roots in an order dated 
26th November, 1981 passed by a bench of 2 (two) Judges of this 
 
6 majority opinion, hereafter 

8 (2020) 

Court in Anjuman-e-Rahmania and Ors. vs. Distt. Inspector of 
School and Ors.9. I am inclined to the view, based on my reading of 
the orders in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) and Aligarh Muslim 
University (supra), that the former order could well qualify as the 
referral order for the reference and the latter the re-referral order for 
the re-reference (to be referred hereafter as such for clarity). The 
reasons, therefor, are not far to seek and would unfold as one 
proceeds to read this opinion. 
10. At the outset, I find it significant to record that this Bench has been 
addressed by at least half a dozen senior counsel/counsel on why the 
decision in Azeez Basha (supra) ought to be reconsidered and 
overruled. In the context of the decision dated 5th January, 200610 
rendered by the High Court of Judicature of Allahabad11 in an intra-
court appeal12, the issue assumes some importance and it is indeed 
essential to consider whether Azeez Basha (supra) should at all be 
reconsidered merely because of the two referral orders coupled with 
the fact that the issues are before a Constitution Bench of 7 (seven) 
Judges of which the HCJI is the presiding Judge. If the orders of 
reference are found to be ex facie flawed and non-est, as the learned 
Solicitor General and other senior counsel who addressed the Bench 
 
9 Writ Petition (Civil) Nos. 54-57 of 1981 
10 2006 SCC OnLine All 2207 
11 High Court, hereafter 
12 Special Appeal No. 1324/2005 

on behalf of the respondents have urged us to hold, the re-reference 
would be plainly incompetent. 
11. In the cacophony of dissonant notes, one ought not to forget that the 
hallmark of a judicial pronouncement is its stability and finality. I am 
reminded of what the HCJI speaking for the bench in Supertech Ltd. vs. Emerald Court Owner Residents Association13 said, - 
“judicial verdicts are not like sand dunes which are subject to the 
vagaries of wind and weather”. There cannot be any doubt that this 
Court has extensive powers to correct an error or to review its 
decision, but such correction / review ought not to be at the cost of 
the doctrine of finality. An issue of law can be overruled by a 
subsequent decision but a decision on questions of fact should not be 
reopened once it has been finally sealed in proceedings relating to 
the same subject matter. 
12. Also, the doctrine of stare decisis has to be given due credence. 
Hon’ble H.R. Khanna, J (as His Lordship then was) while being part 
of a Constitution Bench and agreeing with the majority opinion in 
Maganlal Chhaganlal (P) Ltd. vs. Municipal Corpn. of Greater 
Bombay14, made telling observations reading as follows: 
“22. I must also utter a note of caution against the tendency to lightly 
overrule the view expressed in previous decisions of the Court. It may 
be that there is a feeling entertained by certain schools of thought, to 
quote the words of Cardozo, that 
‘... the precedents have turned upon us and are engulfing and 
annihilating us — engulfing and annihilating the very devotees that 
 
13 (2023) 
14 (1974) 

worshipped at their shrine. So the air is full of new cults that disavow 
the ancient faiths. Some of them tell us that instead of seeking certainty 
in the word, the outward sign, we are to seek for something deeper, a 
certainty relative and temporary, a writing on the sands to be effaced 
by the advancing tides. Some of them even go so far as to adjure us to 
give over the vain quest, to purge ourselves of these yearnings for the 
unattainable ideal, and to be content with an empiricism that is 
untroubled by strivings for the absolute.’ (See page 9 Selected Writings 
of Benjamin Nathan Cardozo by Margaret E. Hall.) 
At the same time, it has to be borne in mind that certainty and 
continuity are essential ingredients of rule of law. Certainty in law would 
be considerably eroded and suffer a serious set back if the highest court 
of the land readily overrules the view expressed by it in earlier cases, 
even though that view has held the field for a number of years. In quite 
a number of cases which come up before this Court, two views are 
possible, and simply because the Court considers that the view not 
taken by the Court in the earlier case was a better view of the matter 
would not justify the overruling of the view. The law laid down by this 
Court is binding upon all courts in the country under Article 141 of the 
Constitution, and numerous cases all over the country are decided in 
accordance with the view taken by this Court. Many people arrange their 
affairs and large number of transactions also take place on the faith of 
the correctness of the view taken by this Court. It would create 
uncertainty, instability and confusion if the law propounded by this 
Court on the basis of which numerous cases have been decided and 
many transactions have taken place is held to be not the correct law. 
This Court may, no doubt, in appropriate cases overrule the view 
previously taken by it but that should only be for compelling reasons. 
***” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
Sadly, these are dicta which very few tend to remember not to speak 
of applying the same. 
13. I have noted that as per the draft opinion of the HCJI, the question 
as to whether AMU “is a minority educational institution must be 
decided based on the principles laid down in this judgment”. In view 
of such proposed order, and since it is also the majority opinion now 
and thus final, it is a foregone conclusion that history would be 
rewritten and declaration of AMU by this Court as a minority 
educational institution is only a matter of time. 

14. Not only is Azeez Basha (supra) a judicial verdict more than half a 
century old on the status of AMU vis-à-vis minority rights, but it has 
a strong foundational basis and is anchored in robust legal reasoning. 
It has withstood, so to say, the vagaries of wind and weather and 
stands tall as a pyramid in the desert. The decision was rendered by 
Judges of the pre-independence era who, apart from being no less 
knowledgeable than us, were people having grown up while India was 
struggling for independence and (must have) witnessed such struggle 
from close quarters. I cannot lay claim to match their wisdom and 
experience; but without being unduly overawed by the stature of the 
Judges on the bench and viewing the reasons assigned in Azeez 
Basha (supra) for not declaring AMU as a minority educational 
institution, a University which was established in 1920 and whose 
status from inception till the Constitution came into effect has 
remained unchanged, I consider it prudent to say that the view taken 
therein, in the given facts and circumstances, is indeed a plausible 
view which demands due deference rather than the view being 
overruled at this distance of time. A relook at it for recasting of the 
opinion cannot be resorted to, as I presently propose to demonstrate, 
without throwing asunder all the established doctrines in the wake of 
referral orders which themselves bear the mark of invalidity on their 
foreheads. 

15. However, before I venture to consider the orders of reference/re-
reference, a glance at what Azeez Basha (supra) decided would not 
be inapposite. 
16. In Azeez Basha (supra), this Court considered the legal 
sustainability of the 1951 and 1965 amendments to the Aligarh 
Muslim University Act, 192015. These amendments were challenged 
as violative of the Fundamental Rights enumerated, inter alia, under 
Articles 26 and 30 of the Constitution. In such decision, it was held 
by this Court both on facts as well as law that AMU cannot be declared 
a minority institution. It was held that AMU was not established by a 
minority community, as it was the creature of a statute. The right 
under Article 30(1) was interpreted so as to give the linguistic and 
religious minorities the right to administer the institutions which were 
established by the minority community. Building on this argument, 
the Court further stated that a minority would not enjoy the rights of 
administering the institution not established by it, merely because it 
might have been administering it before the Constitution came into 
force. The phrase “establish and administer” in Article 30 has to be 
read conjunctively and there is no precedent which holds that it can 
be read disjunctively. The Court further went on to hold that in 1920, 
there was nothing to stop the Muslim community from establishing a 
university if they so desired. The nucleus of AMU was Mohammedan 
 
15 AMU Act, hereafter 

Anglo-Oriental College16, an institution under the Allahabad 
University. The conversion of MAO College to AMU was not 
undertaken or effectuated by the Muslim community, but by the force 
of statute. Therefore, this Court declared that AMU was established 
by the Central Legislature of British India. 
17. Through Azeez Basha (supra), this Court distinguished its earlier 
Constitution Bench decision in Re: Kerala Education Bill17. An 
argument was raised therein that only minority institutions 
established post the commencement of the Constitution could be 
granted the protection under Article 30(1). This Court in Re: Kerala 
Education Bill (supra) held that any institution, whether established 
before or after the commencement of the Constitution, could be 
afforded the protection under Article 30(1) as Article 30(1) would lose 
much of its content if interpreted so narrowly. But it was pointed out 
that in Re: Kerala Education Bill (supra), this Court never held that 
the terms “administer” and “establish” can be read disjunctively. 
18. The decision in Azeez Basha (supra) was doubted in Anjuman-e-
Rahmania (supra), and was referred to a bench of 7 (seven) Judges 
for 
reconsideration. 
That 
proceeding 
germinated 
from 
an 
unconnected writ petition filed by an institution registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 186018 and was hardly related to the issue 
of the minority character of AMU. In fact, the question of law arising 
 
16 MAO College, hereafter 

18 Societies Act, hereafter 

for decision in the writ petition under Article 32, briefly captured in 
the order dated 26th November, 1981, would show that there was no 
factual similarity with that in Azeez Basha (supra). 
19. It is, therefore, considered proper to read the referral order in its 
entirety for facility of proper understanding of what the bench of 2 
(two) Judges in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) had in mind and 
what was the ultimate direction. The said order reads as follows: 
“After hearing counsel for the Parties, we are clearly of the opinion 
that this case involves two substantial questions regarding the 
interpretation of Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India. The 
present Institution was founded in the year 1938 and registered 
under the Societies Registration Act in the year 1940. The documents 
relating to the time when the institution was founded clearly shows 
that while the institution was established mainly by the Muslim 
community but there were members from the non-muslim 
community also who participated in the establishment process. The 
point that arises is as to whether Act. 30(1) of the Constitution 
envisages an institution which is established by minorities alone 
without the participation for the factum of establishment from any 
other community. On this point, there is no clear decision of this 
court. There are some observations in S. Azeez Basha & ors. Vs. 
Union of India 1968 (1) SCR 333, but these observations can be 
explained away. Another point that arises is whether soon after the 
establishment of the institution if it is registered as a Society under 
the Society Registration Act, its status as a minority institution 
changes in view of the broad principles laid down in S. Azeez Basha’s 
case. Even as it is several jurists including Mr. Seervai have 
expressed about the correctness of the decision of this court in S. 
Azeez Basha’s case. Since the point has arisen in this case we think 
that this is a proper occasion when a larger bench can consider the 
entire aspect fully. We, therefore, direct that this case may be placed 
before Hon. The Chief Justice for being heard by a bench of at least 
7 judges so that S. Azeez Basha’s case may also be considered and 
the points that arise in this case directly as to the essential conditions 
or ingredients of the minority institution may also be decided once 
for all. A large number of jurists including Mr. Seervai, learned 
counsel for the petitioners Mr. Garg and learned counsel for 
respondents and interveners Mr. Dikshit and Kaskar have stated that 
this case requires reconsideration. In view of the urgency it is 
necessary that the matter should be decided as early as possible we 
give liberty to the counsel for parties to mention the matter before 
Chief Justice.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

20. Ever since the mid-fifties of the last century, the entire functional 
strength of Judges of the Supreme Court of India has never 
assembled to decide any case. The last time the entire strength of 8 
(eight) Judges did assemble was in 1954, when the Constitution 
Bench decided two writ petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution 
in M. P. Sharma vs. Satish Chandra19. It is well known that while 
discharging its judicial duties, owing to administrative exigency and 
practical expedience, the Supreme Court of India functions through 
separate benches. Although voices of the benches could be different 
on a common point of law, yet, the reasons and the ultimate 
conclusions are treated as the view-point of the Supreme Court. No 
matter the strength, all these voices bear the symbol of the Supreme 
Court. It is also well known that it is the power of the Chief Justice of 
India, on the administrative side, to determine appropriate numerical 
strength of the benches. However, the mere fact of this Bench having 
a numerical strength of 7 (seven) Judges and presided over by none 
other than the Chief Justice of India does not necessarily make it 
competent to decide the re-reference, if the orders of reference/re-
reference are found to be seriously flawed and no such reference/re-
reference should have or could have been made in the first place. I 
presently proceed to assign my view-point in support of my 
conclusion that the reference as well as the re-reference is 
incompetent. 
 
19 (1954) 

21. The discussion on why the order in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) 
is completely flawed and, thus, should not have any bearing on the 
re-reference must start with the decision in Lala Shri Bhagwan vs. 
Shri Ram Chand20. Deprecating the approach of a Single Judge of 
the relevant high court, who had taken upon himself the task of 
deciding whether earlier decisions of Division Benches of the same 
high court ought to be reconsidered and revised based on his 
perception that such decisions stood impliedly overruled by a decision 
of this Court, Hon’ble P.B. Gajendragadkar, CJ. (as His Lordship then 
was) speaking for a bench of 3 (three) Judges observed: 
“18. *** It is hardly necessary to emphasise that considerations of 
judicial propriety and decorum require that if a learned Single Judge 
hearing a matter is inclined to take the view that the earlier decisions 
of the High Court, whether of a Division Bench or of a Single Judge, 
needed to be reconsidered, he should not embark upon that enquiry 
sitting as a Single Judge, but should refer the matter to a Division 
Bench or, in a proper case, place the relevant papers before the Chief 
Justice to enable him to constitute a larger Bench to examine the 
question. That is the proper and traditional way to deal with such 
matters and it is founded on healthy principles of judicial decorum 
and propriety. It is to be regretted that the learned Single Judge 
departed from this traditional way in the present case and chose to 
examine the question himself.” 
 
22. It is true that this Court had the occasion to make the above 
observations the concern that the healthy principles of 
judicial decorum and propriety had not been followed by a Single 
Judge of a high court who had departed from the traditional way. 
However, what is significant and follows from the above passage is 
that a Single Judge, even if he is not in agreement with the view of a 
 
20 [1965] 

Division Bench which is binding on him, cannot refer the case 
straightaway to a larger bench; at the most, he may refer the case 
to a Division Bench or, in a proper case, direct placing of the papers 
before the Chief Justice to take a call on whether constitution of a 
larger bench is warranted or not. A Single Judge cannot decide the 
case himself by not following the binding decision of the Division 
Bench, with which he disagrees or has a doubt about its correctness. 
The position of law that emerges is that constitution of the bench, 
whether it be a combination of 2 (two), 3 (three) or more, must be 
left to the Chief Justice. However, there could be no valid reason as 
to why what was observed in the aforesaid excerpt by His Lordship 
would not proprio vigore apply to Judges of this Court too. 
23. The principle is simple. Whether it be the Supreme Court, or the high 
courts, it is beyond any shadow of doubt that a decision of a bench 
of greater strength is binding on a bench of lesser strength. Our 
system of administration of justice aims at certainty in the law and 
that can be achieved only if Judges do not ignore decisions by courts 
of coordinate authority or of superior authority. This is not to say that 
the bench of lesser strength is denuded of the authority or 
competence to distinguish the decision of greater strength based on 
consideration of facts that are involved. 
24. It has, however, been considered uniformly to be an act of breach of 
judicial propriety and discipline if a bench of lesser strength [of 2 
(two) Judges] casts doubt in respect of a decision rendered by a 

bench of greater strength [of 5 (five Judges] and a request is made 
to the Chief Justice of India to constitute a still larger Bench [of 7 
(seven Judges]. This concept was extensively ratiocinated in Central 
Board 
of 
Dawoodi 
Bohra 
Community 
vs. 
State 
of 
Maharashtra21. Hon’ble R.C. Lahoti, CJ. (as His Lordship then was), 
speaking for the Bench held: 
“12. Having carefully considered the submissions made by the 
learned Senior Counsel for the parties and having examined the law 
laid down by the Constitution Benches in the abovesaid decisions, we 
would like to sum up the legal position in the following terms: 
(1) The law laid down by this Court in a decision delivered by a Bench 
of larger strength is binding on any subsequent Bench of lesser or 
coequal strength. 
(2) A Bench of lesser quorum cannot disagree or dissent from the 
view of the law taken by a Bench of larger quorum. In case of doubt 
all that the Bench of lesser quorum can do is to invite the attention 
of the Chief Justice and request for the matter being placed for 
hearing before a Bench of larger quorum than the Bench whose 
decision has come up for consideration. It will be open only for a 
Bench of coequal strength to express an opinion doubting the 
correctness of the view taken by the earlier Bench of coequal 
strength, whereupon the matter may be placed for hearing before a 
Bench consisting of a quorum larger than the one which pronounced 
the decision laying down the law the correctness of which is doubted. 
(3) The above rules are subject to two exceptions: (i) the abovesaid 
rules do not bind the discretion of the Chief Justice in whom vests 
the power of framing the roster and who can direct any particular 
matter to be placed for hearing before any particular Bench of any 
strength; and (ii) in spite of the rules laid down hereinabove, if the 
matter has already come up for hearing before a Bench of larger 
quorum and that Bench itself feels that the view of the law taken by 
a Bench of lesser quorum, which view is in doubt, needs correction 
or reconsideration then by way of exception (and not as a rule) and 
for reasons given by it, it may proceed to hear the case and examine 
the correctness of the previous decision in question dispensing with 
the need of a specific reference or the order of the Chief Justice 
constituting the Bench and such listing. Such was the situation 
in Raghubir Singh22 and Hansoli Devi23.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

21 (2005) 
22 (1989) 
23 (2002) 

25. In Hansoli Devi (supra), the Constitution Bench of 5 (five) Judges 
followed the earlier decision of the Constitution Bench of 5 (five) 
Judges in Pradip Chandra Parija vs. Pramod Chandra Patnaik24. 
It was held in Pradip Chandra Parija (supra) that judicial discipline 
and propriety demands that a bench of 2 (two) learned Judges should 
follow a decision of a bench of 3 (three) learned Judges. But if a bench 
of 2 (two) learned Judges concludes that an earlier judgment of a 
bench of 3 (three) learned Judges is so very incorrect that in no 
circumstances can it be followed, the proper course for it to adopt is 
to refer the matter before it to a bench of 3 (three) learned Judges 
setting out the reasons why it could not agree with the earlier 
judgment and if the bench of 3 (three) learned Judges also comes to 
the conclusion that the earlier judgment of a bench of 3 (three) 
learned Judges is incorrect, then a reference could be made to a 
bench of 5 (five) learned Judges. In view of such decision, the 
Constitution Bench in Hansoli Devi (supra) held the very reference 
itself made by 2 (two) learned Judges to be improper. 
26. Campaign for Judicial Accountability and Reforms vs. Union of 
India25 is also a Constitution Bench decision of recent origin of 5 
(five) Judges. In a somewhat different context, the bench ruled that 
“there cannot be any kind of command or order directing the Chief 
Justice of India to constitute a particular Bench”. 
 
24 (2002) 
25 (2018) 

27. These decisions of high authority seek to reinforce the principles of 
judicial discipline, propriety and comity, which have been followed by 
the courts since time immemorial. Permitting a bench of lesser 
strength to doubt a decision given by a bench of greater strength and 
to refer a given issue to a still larger bench would be in the teeth of 
principles which are well-established and well-entrenched. Doctrines 
of precedents and stare decisis provide a level of certainty to 
individuals appearing before the court and bring a degree of 
objectivity in a largely subjective decision-making process. The 
litigant needs to have confidence that the legal position which has 
been chiselled on the tapestry of law by legal precedents will not be 
unceremoniously 
blown 
away 
through 
subsequent 
judicial 
commands, which could be ill-advised, like the vagaries of wind and 
weather. It would behove this Court to remember the legal maxim 
interest republicae ut sit finis litium, i.e., it is in the interest of the 
State that there be an end to litigation, and the importance of not 
disturbing legally sound precedents without following the procedure 
established by law. 
28. Although Pradip Chandra Parija (supra), Hansoli Devi (supra) and 
Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community (supra) are later 
decisions and were not in existence when the order in Anjuman-e-
Rahmania (supra) was made by the bench of 2 (two) Judges, it 
matters little. The principle flowing from Lala Shri Bhagwan (supra) 
bound the bench of 2 (two) Judges in Anjuman-e-Rahmania 

(supra). The law laid down, in the decisions post Anjuman-e-
Rahmania (supra), is neither expressly nor even impliedly made to 
operate prospectively. Besides, it seems elementary though it 
requires to be restated that a bench sitting in a combination of 2 
(two) Judges is bound by what is laid down by a Constitution Bench 
of 5 (five) Judges and should the bench of lesser strength have valid 
reasons to disagree with the view expressed by the latter bench of 5 
(five), the former bench of 2 (two) cannot straightway make a 
reference for being placed before a Constitution Bench of greater 
numerical strength. I am left to wonder how the bench of 2 (two) 
Judges in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) could at all request that 
the case be placed before a bench of at least 7 (seven) Judges. 
Without a doubt, what the bench in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) 
did was not only plainly impermissible in law but the referral order 
answers the test for holding a judgment per incuriam. If “doubting 
the correctness of the opinion in Azeez Basha (supra), without 
disagreeing with it” could permit the bench in Anjuman-e-
Rahmania (supra) to request the Chief Justice of India to place the 
matter for being heard by a bench of 7 (seven) Judges and such a 
course of action were held to be permissible and within the limits of 
Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community (supra), as 
proposed in the majority opinion (paragraph 39 of the revised draft) 
- I am afraid, tomorrow, a bench of 2 (two) Judges, referring to 
opinions of jurists [as in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra)] could well 

doubt the ‘basic structure’ doctrine and request the Chief Justice of 
India to constitute a bench of 15 (fifteen) Judges. The reasoning in 
the majority opinion, with due respect, appears to be based on an 
incomplete reading of paragraph 12(2) of Central Board of 
Dawoodi Bohra Community (supra), extracted supra. Though the 
second sentence of the said paragraph is a bit ambiguous, but the 
same - read harmoniously with the other sentences - would lead to 
the inevitable conclusion that even in case of a doubt being expressed 
by a bench of 2 (two) Judges in respect of the ratio laid down by a 
bench of 5 (five) Judges, the case on a reference being made (with 
sufficient reasons) ought to be first placed before a bench of 3 (three) 
Judges, and not to a bench of either 5 (five) or 7 (seven) Judges. If, 
indeed, the proposed view in the majority opinion were accepted, all 
the precedents referred to above would stand overruled and a legal 
principle, which hitherto no bench of this Court did, would be laid 
down and, in the process, the floodgates for unmeritorious references 
opened. In my humble view, that would be an incorrect and improper 
approach. Hence, for the foregoing reasons and for all intents and 
purposes, the order of reference in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) 
must be regarded as completely flawed and non-est. 
29. One other interesting feature draws attention. The bench in 
Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra), perceiving the matter to be urgent, 
granted liberty to the counsel for the parties to mention the matter 
before the Chief Justice of India for an early decision but the file 

seems to have gathered dust ever since. There is hardly any material 
on record to suggest that either the incumbent Chief Justice of India 
or any of the successive Chief Justices of India for the next 20 
(twenty) years, thought it fit to direct the office to dust the dust for 
a bench of 7 (seven) Judges to be constituted to decide the issue that 
was referred, assuming that question 3(a) formulated for an answer 
by the Constitution Bench of 11 (eleven) Judges in T.M.A. Pai 
Foundation and ors. vs. State of Karnataka and ors.26 was 
inspired by the order in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra). Res ipsa 
loquitur! 
30. The contention that the said order in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) 
was acted upon and the bench in T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra) 
being called upon to address question 3(a) could be traced to the 
order in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra), apart from being incorrect, 
pales into insignificance for primarily two reasons. In T.M.A. Pai 
Foundation (supra), initially 9 (nine) questions were framed27, later 
10 (ten) questions were framed28 and finally 11 (eleven) questions 
were framed by the bench of 11 (eleven) Judges. Neither does one 
find reference in the said orders framing questions to any 
decision/order of this Court including Anjuman-e-Rahmania 
(supra) nor is the order in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) referred 
to in the entire judgment in T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra). To say 
 
26 (2002) 
27 (2002) 
28 (2002) 

that question no. 3(a) was framed because of Anjuman-e-
Rahmania (supra) appears to be thoroughly misconceived. While 
T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra) did not answer question 3(a), the 
Regular Bench too was not persuaded to decide the same as it 
appears from its order dated 11th March, 2003 in Shahal H. Musaliar 
and Anr. vs. Union of India and Ors.29. The proceedings in 
Anjuman-e-Rahmania vs. District Inspector effectively stood 
closed by the order of this Court dated 11th March 2003. 
31. Significantly, T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra) came to be considered 
by two more Constitution Bench decisions of this Court, viz. Islamic 
Academy of Education vs. State of Karnataka30 and P.A. 
Inamdar vs. State of Maharashtra31 not too long thereafter. The 
former decision does record that the Constitution Bench of 5 (five) 
Judges was constituted to clarify doubts/anomalies, if any, arising 
from varied interpretation of the majority view in T.M.A. Pai 
Foundation (supra) by the parties. The Constitution Bench of 7 
(seven) Judges in the latter decision has also recorded that post 
T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra), petitions flooded the high courts as 
well as this Court to resolve issues which were not answered by the 
bench of 11 (eleven) Judges. Relevance of Islamic Academy of 
Education (supra) and P.A. Inamdar (supra) lies in the fact that 
these decisions attempted to iron out creases arising from the 

30 (2003) 
31 (2005) 

decision in T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra). If indeed question 3(a) 
required an answer, I would be persuaded to think that either 
Islamic Academy of Education (supra) or P.A. Inamdar (supra) 
would have answered it. That the Constitution Benches did not 
attempt to answer question 3(a) should leave none in doubt that the 
said question did not merit an answer. 
32. After the order dated 11th March 2003 of disposal in Shahal H. 
Musaliar (supra), the matter lay dormant for a period of time; it was 
resuscitated when AMU, through its Executive Council, passed a 
resolution dated 19th May 2005, reserving 50% seats in postgraduate 
programmes for Indian Muslims. This resolution was challenged 
before the High Court invoking its writ jurisdiction. Both the Single 
Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court held that the 
reservation, sought to be made, could not be enforced. The Division 
Bench, relying on Azeez Basha (supra), went even further than the 
Single Judge and set aside the 1981 amendment to the AMU Act. The 
Division Bench observed that the 1981 amendment sought to side 
step Azeez Basha (supra) without removing the basis on which 
Azeez Basha (supra) was rendered. The judgment of the Division 
Bench was carried in appeal before this Court by AMU and it is on 
such appeal that the re-referral order was passed by the bench of 3 
(three) Judges, which I propose to note now. 
33. On 12th February, 2019, the bench of 3 (three) Judges in Aligarh 
Muslim 
University 
(supra), 
after 
noticing 
the 
aforesaid 

developments, proceeded to hold that “the correctness of the 
question arising from the decision of this Court in S. Azeez Basha 
(supra) has remained undetermined”. The order that followed such 
observation reads as under: 
“9. That apart, the decision of this Court in Prof. Yashpal and 
another vs. State of Chhattisgarh and others and the 
amendment of the National Commission for Minority Educational 
Institutions Act, 2004 made in the year 2010 would also require 
an authoritative pronouncement on the aforesaid question 
formulated, as set out above, besides the correctness of the 
view expressed in the judgment of this Court in S. Azeez Basha 
(supra) which has been extracted above. 
10. Ordinarily and in the normal course the judicial discipline 
would require the Bench to seek a reference of this matter by a 
Five Judges Bench. However, having regard to the background, 
as stated above, when the precise question was already referred 
to a Seven Judges Bench and was, however, not answered, we 
are of the view that the present question, set out above, should 
be referred to a Bench of Hon’ble Seven Judges. 
11. Consequently and in the light of the above, place these 
matters before the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India on the 
administrative side for appropriate orders.” 
 
34. Why I perceive the re-referral order to suffer from the same invalidity 
and to be untenable is this. Apart from Anjuman-e-Rahmania 
(supra) being non-est for the reason adverted to above, neither the 
bench of 11 (eleven) Judges in T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra) nor 
the Regular Bench of 2 (two) Judges considered it necessary to 
answer question 3(a). The order dated 11th March, 2003 observing 
that the question could be answered should a problem arise in future 
did put a quietus, for the time being, to question 3(a), as formulated, 
as well as provided finality qua what was said about Azeez Basha 
(supra) in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra). Once the issue attained 
finality, in my respectful opinion, the bench of 3 (three) Judges could 

not have reopened the same issue. It could be revisited in exceptional 
circumstances and that too, in a manner known to law. No intra-court 
appeal being available in the Supreme Court and in the absence of 
any allegation of fraud having vitiated the process of decision making, 
and there being no occasion for exercise of the inherent powers of 
the Court, it would have been most appropriate for the bench of 3 
(three) Judges on 12th February, 2019 not to refer to Azeez Basha 
(supra) at all. What the bench of 3 (three) Judges did, so to say, was 
sort of making an order as if it were exercising appellate jurisdiction 
over the decision in T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra), the order dated 
11th March 2003, Islamic Academy of Education (supra) and P.A. 
Inamdar (supra) [last two without being noticed]. Significantly, the 
re-reference was made citing the necessity to consider the decision 
in Prof. Yashpal vs. State of Chhattisgarh32 and the amendment 
of the National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions Act, 
200433 which, as per the majority opinion, have no real bearing with 
regard to the issue under consideration. Indeed, even if the decision 
in Prof. Yashpal (supra) and the 2004 Act were to make any 
difference to the legal position, hitherto settled, reference to that 
limited extent only could be justified with a call to answer question 
3(a), extracted supra, independently and without referring to Azeez 
Basha (supra). 
 
32 (2005) 
33 NCMEI Act, hereafter 

35. An issue which has some bearing on the correctness or otherwise of 
the decision in Azeez Basha (supra) [assuming that the order in 
Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) was valid and did form the ground 
for framing question 3(a)], if consciously has not been decided in 
course of a previous round of litigation, would it give rise to an 
occasion for a subsequent bench to hold that the issue should be 
decided because it has not been decided? Exercise of jurisdiction by 
a bench of lesser strength would not permit such an approach. That 
the bench of 3 (three) Judges was presided over by none other than 
the then Chief Justice of India did not make things better and 
ameliorate the circumstances. With due respect and utmost humility 
at my command, although the Chief Justice of India is primus inter 
pares and on the administrative side has powers and authority which 
no puisne Judge has, the Chief Justice of India while discharging 
judicial functions on the bench with a puisne judge or judges may not 
enjoy any power greater than what the puisne judge or judges 
forming the quorum has/have in authoring judgments/ passing 
orders. Therefore, the re-referral order merely by reason of the 
presence of the Chief Justice on the bench did not get sanctified. It 
was not that the bench of 3 (three) Judges were not alive to the 
settled law and the principles of judicial propriety, discipline and 
comity; yet, any doubt touching upon the correctness or otherwise of 
the view expressed in Azeez Basha (supra), if at all, should not have 
been sought to be resolved by referring the matter directly to a bench 

of 7 (seven) Judges. Such an order of reference, apart from being in 
the teeth of Pradip Chandra Parija (supra), Hansoli Devi (supra) 
and Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community (supra), could 
not have been justified by reasoning that earlier, the issue had been 
referred to a bench of 7 (seven) Judges. It was incumbent on the 
bench while hearing Aligarh Muslim University (supra) to examine 
whether the referral order made in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) 
was legal and valid. Answering the said question could have obviated 
the need for a further referral. Nothing much turns on the fact that 
all of us are now sitting in a combination of 7 (seven) Judges. The 
Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) referral order being non-est, to my 
mind, any order premised thereon is also non-est. At best, the bench 
of 3 (three) Judges in Aligarh Muslim University (supra) could 
have required a bench of 5 (five) Judges to reconsider whether 
question 3(a), which fell for consideration in T.M.A. Pai Foundation 
(supra), does at all require an answer [not in the light of whatever 
Azeez Basha (supra) had held while interpreting Article 30(1)] and 
only upon formation of an opinion that it does, should the further 
referral been made to a bench of 7 (seven) Judges to maintain judicial 
propriety, discipline and comity. The course of action adopted in 
Aligarh Muslim University (supra), thus, does not commend to me 
to be in accordance with established principles of law and should have 
well been avoided, being unnecessary. However, I repeat, any issue 
 the law laid down in Azeez Basha (supra) was not 

open to be referred once again even after noticing that the earlier 
endeavours to overturn Azeez Basha (supra) had proved abortive. 
36. More often than not, this Court treats procedure as a hindrance 
towards attaining justice rather than treating it as a guardrail to 
ensure fairness and non-arbitrariness while conducting judicial 
proceedings. It must be remembered that at times, leaving aside the 
urge to render substantive justice without following the laid down 
procedure, it is perhaps advisable to follow the procedure as the 
means towards the end. 
37. Thus, I have no hesitation in holding that the referral orders of this 
Court are ex-facie not in accordance with law and the re-reference in 
itself is equally incompetent and unnecessary as well. 
38. Notwithstanding what I have opined above in support of my viewpoint 
that the referral orders are invalid and the references incompetent, 
albeit for technical reasons, there is a weightier reason for declaring 
the referral orders fragile. That is on the merits and I would 
immediately proceed to say why. 
39. Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) talked of two substantial questions 
that arose before it. The first was, whether Article 30(1) of the 
Constitution envisages an institution which is established by 
minorities alone without the participation for the factum of 
establishment from any other community. This question was 
formulated recording that there was no clear decision of this Court. 
Secondly, whether the status of an institution as a minority 

institution, which soon after its establishment is registered as a 
society under the Societies Act, would change in view of the broad 
principles laid down in S. Azeez Basha (supra). Aligarh Muslim 
University (supra) had the occasion to observe that question 3(a) 
which was formulated for an answer in T.M.A. Pai Foundation 
(supra) coincidentally reflected the questions referred by Anjuman-
e-Rahmania (supra). 
40. In TMA Pai Foundation (supra), question 3(a) was: 
“3(a) What are the indicia for treating an educational institution 
as a minority educational institution? Would an institution be 
regarded as a minority educational institution because it was 
established by a person(s) belonging to a religious or linguistic 
minority or its being administered by a person(s) belonging to 
a religious or linguistic minority?” 
 
41. To recount, the reference order duly took note of question 3(a) and 
the fact that TMA Pai Foundation (supra) did not decide it. Now, 
two questions arise: (i) whether there is any decision prior to 
Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) which had directly decided the first 
point? And (ii) whether the point touching the Societies Act, i.e., a 
minority educational institution being registered under the Societies 
Act could have any bearing on the question decided by Azeez Basha 
(supra) by equating the former with a case where a university is 
established by an enactment? 

42. Insofar as the first question is concerned, State of Kerala vs. Very 
Rev. Mother Provincial34, which is of course another decision of the 
Constitution Bench of 6 (six) Judges of this Court rendered more than 
half a century back, and has never been doubted by any subsequent 
bench, provides the answer. The essence of the law laid down therein 
is that the minority institution should have been established for the 
benefit of a minority community by a member of that community. 
Attention of the bench of 2 (two) Judges in Anjuman-e-Rahmania 
(supra) was not invited to this direct answer to the question it posed 
and one is left to wonder whether the reference would have at all 
been made if Very Rev. Mother Provincial (supra) was cited. There 
being no reference in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) of Very Rev. 
Mother Provincial (supra), a binding decision, certainly the said 
decision of the Constitution Bench had not been placed before the 
bench of 2 (two) Judges by the set of very learned senior counsel 
appearing before it who agreed with the bench on the question of 
(in)correctness of Azeez Basha (supra). Regarding the second 
question, there cannot be any comparison of chalk and cheese. I have 
no hesitation to hold that the case dealt with by Azeez Basha (supra) 
and the one arising for decision in Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) 
were fundamentally different and in stark contrast with each other. 
Therefore, even on merits, there was no good reason to make a 
 
34 (1970) 

reference for being placed before a bench of 7 (seven) Judges which 
Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra) ordered. 
43. Now turning to Aligarh Muslim University (supra), I have been 
unable to comprehend as to how question 3(a) could be said to 
coincidentally reflect the questions referred by Anjuman-e-
Rahmania (supra). As evident from a bare reading of question 3(a), 
it had two parts: the first is, what is the indicia for treating an 
educational institution as a minority educational institution? 
Secondly, would an institution be regarded as a minority educational 
institution because it was established by a person(s) belonging to a 
religious/linguistic minority or its being administered by a person(s) 
belonging to a religious/linguistic minority? 
44. In any event, qua question 3(a), why did the bench of 11 (eleven) 
Judges in TMA Pai Foundation (supra) not consider necessary to 
even attempt to answer it and relegate the same to the Regular 
Bench of 2 (two) Judges? Was it too trivial a question not meriting an 
answer or was there some other reason? Though the answer is not 
too obvious, the answer to the second part of question 3(a) seems to 
be firm and clear that the conjunction ‘and’ between ‘establish’ and 
‘administer’ in Article 30(1) cannot be read as ‘or’ for the reasons 
that I seek to highlight a little later. 
45. If one were to form the opinion that the question as to indicia for 
treating an educational institution as a minority educational 
institution was traceable to Anjuman-e-Rahmania (supra), that can 

only happen if the said order were misread or some additional words 
were read into it. 
46. It is one thing to identify indicia, i.e., indicia that are already existing. 
However, if indicia have to be formulated, i.e., created, by us in 
course of these proceedings, are we not discrediting the earlier 
Constitution Bench decisions on minority status vis-à-vis rights under 
Article 30(1) premised on an implicit indicia, though not expressly 
declared as such? It is considered most inappropriate that the first 
part of question 3(a) has engaged our attention in the present 
discussions and deliberations. 
47. I am firm in my conviction that the reference and the re-reference, 
for all the reasons discussed above, do not require a decision. 
 
TREATING THE REFERENCE TO BE VALID 
48. Since the issue of correctness of the decision in Azeez Basha (supra) 
has been argued before us and carries immense significance for the 
future, I deem it proper to give due consideration to it treating the 
reference to be valid and legal. The minority character of AMU as well 
as the contours of rights under Article 30(1), assuming the same to 
be under a cloud of uncertainty, needs to be cleared. Hence, in my 
own way, I seek to bring clarity and finality to the issue through this 
opinion. 
49. The majority opinion has sought to lay down the indicia and left it for 
an appropriate bench to be constituted by the Chief Justice of India 

for deciding whether AMU is a minority or not. Hon’ble Surya Kant 
and Hon’ble Satish Chandra Sharma, JJ. also seem to have proceeded 
to dispense with the factual inquiry of whether or not AMU is a 
minority educational institution and focussed on the indicia to 
determine the applicability of Article 30(1). 
50. Respectfully, I cannot bring myself to traverse the same path. After 
almost 9 (nine) months the judgment came to be reserved, it pricks 
my conscience to send the matter back once again to an appropriate 
bench; more so, after both sides have exhaustively addressed us on 
the very issue as to whether AMU answers the characteristics of a 
minority institution. In present times, when there is a lot of emphasis 
on pendency of cases and expeditious disposal thereof, precious 
judicial time would be wasted if the same issue has to be agitated yet 
again when such time could be well utilised in answering other 
pressing questions of law. I feel the urge to decide here and now, 
based on whatever indicia we identify or formulate, as well as the 
circumstances - antecedent, attending and surrounding – of the 
relevant time, as to whether AMU is a minority educational institution 
or not. I feel equipped to do so on account of extensive evidence 
having already been led by both sides. 
THE INDICIA 
51. In the majority opinion, the indicia for treating an educational 
institution as a minority educational institution are these: 

I. Ideation of establishment: The brain behind the establishment of 
the institution, as gauged from, inter alia, correspondence and 
government resolutions, should be a member of the minority 
community. 
II. Purpose: 
The 
institution 
should 
have 
been 
established 
predominantly for the benefit of the minority community, as 
opposed to solely for their benefit. 
III. Implementation: The implementation of the idea to establish the 
institution, with respect to raising of funds, acquisition of land, 
etc. has to be examined. State aid in the same, would not 
adversely affect the minority status of the institution. 
IV. Administration: The right to administer flows as a consequence of 
the institution having been established by the minority. Thus, it is 
not required that the institution be administered by the minority, 
but what is essential is that the administrative structure reflects 
the minority character of the institution. 
52. Hon’ble Surya Kant, J. has, however, identified the indicia as follows: 
I. 
Article 30(1) provides for a twin fold test – establishment and 
administration. 
II. 
Establishment is to be understood as coming into existence of the 
institution, which is to be holistically gauged from examination of 
factors, inter alia, who is responsible for the genesis of the idea, 
accumulation of funds, framing of charter documents of the 

educational institution, procuring of government approvals. In 
such acts, the minority community must play a decisive role. 
III. 
Incorporation of a university under a statute would not necessarily 
mean that the institution is a creature of statute, unless it is the 
Government which has played the decisive role in ideation, 
funding, implementation and operationalising the institution. 
IV. 
Establishment has to be for the benefit of the minority 
community. 
V. 
Administration, at its core, has to vest with the minority 
community. This would include within its fold long term 
administrative roles and day to day sundry decisions. The minority 
community should thus be vested with both, de jure and de facto 
control. 
53. Hon’ble Satish Chandra Sharma, J. has in His Lordship’s draft opinion 
laid out a threefold indicia: 
I. 
The minority community must play a predominant role, almost to 
the point of exclusion of all other forces, in tangibly bringing about 
the entirety of the institution into existence. 
II. 
The purpose of the institution must be to predominantly serve the 
interests of the minority community, irrespective of the form of 
education provided. 
III. 
The actual functional, executive, and policy administration should 
rest with the minority community. The real decision making 
authority of the institution should be the minority community. 

54. While the majority opinion seems to have identified establishment as 
the sole indicium, Hon’ble Surya Kant and Hon’ble Satish Chandra 
Sharma, JJ. have laid equal stress on administration apart from 
establishment as the indicia. Inasmuch as the broad criteria which 
can be used to assess the status of an educational institution is 
concerned, I express my agreement with the indicia laid out by Their 
Lordships. 
55. Taking a cue from the above indicia, what comes to mind is that a 
seed, by itself, cannot germinate into a plant without being sown in 
the soil. It is the farmer’s endeavours of watering, nourishing and 
caring for the seed, not the sheer existence of the seed itself, which 
results in the emergence of the tree. Similarly, mere ideation by itself 
amounts to little if it is not backed by action or implementation. 
Ideation and conceiving of an idea are mere seeds, while the work of 
gathering resources, acquiring land, establishing an administrative 
structure, recruiting teachers, and admitting students are akin to the 
planting and nurturing required for those seeds to grow into a 
flourishing tree. Educational institutions, like all other institutions, are 
an outcome of the coalescence of resources, actions, and meticulous 
planning by the people “establishing” it. 
56. Indicia is a term often used in various disciplines including law to 
describe signs or symptoms that suggest the presence of something. 
When we say that ‘x’ is the indicia of ‘y’, it could be so that ‘x’ could 
be the definite indicium of ‘y’ (implying a comprehensive or exclusive 

indicator); at the same time, it may not necessarily imply that ‘x’ is 
the only indicator of ‘y’ (exhaustiveness) or that ‘x’ guarantees the 
presence of ‘y’ (certainty) or ‘x’ is unique to ‘y’ (specificity). However, 
to suggest that, ‘x’ is the definite indicum of ‘y’, it may not be 
appropriate in the present context where I can identify multiple 
indicia for concluding whether AMU answers the characteristics of a 
minority educational institution. 
57. Certain broad indicia, which are universally applicable, may be 
applied 
prospectively 
to 
facilitate 
identification 
of 
minority 
institutions. However, any indicium or the indicia, as identified or 
formulated, for treating an institution as a minority institution may 
not be exhaustive so as to cater to all situations. Previous decisions 
of this Court, as earlier discussed, have also determined the minority 
character of educational institutions vis-à-vis Article 30, as per indicia 
tailored to the specific factual matrices. It could be well-nigh difficult, 
if not impossible, to fix indicia without regard to a whole lot of 
relevant facts and circumstances, which might have escaped notice 
or may not have been visualized. In my humble opinion, a flexible 
framework rather than a rigid one-size-fits-all model is always 
desirable and essential for accurately assessing minority institution 
status. Having regard to special features that each minority 
institution is most likely to have, a nuanced approach would be 
required to identify minority institutions by balancing the general 
guidelines with unique institutional circumstances. The indicia, which 

have been proposed, could partly inform classification of minority 
institutions but a tailored evaluation is all the more necessary to 
account for distinct characteristics which each such institution is 
associated with; more so, when AMU is unique in itself and its status 
is under consideration as a standalone institution. 
58. Having clarified my stance on the general indicia which should 
prospectively govern the evaluation of minority educational 
institutions, I shall now endeavour to be punctilious in assessing the 
status of AMU bearing in mind its unique institutional characteristics. 
59. However, my consideration of the indicia must be preceded by this 
philosophical musing. If, indeed, indicia for treating an educational 
institution as a minority educational institution have not been either 
identified or formulated by any previous decision of this Court and 
this is the first time an attempt to so identify/formulate is being 
made, can the tests laid down in Azeez Basha (supra) which are 
facts specific be held invalid? My answer would be in the negative. 
60. Nonetheless, the search for the truth must continue appreciating all 
the relevant factors. 
 ESTABLISHMENT OF AMU 
61. AMU traces its origins to its institutional predecessor, MAO College 
which was established on 08th January, 1877. The establishment of 
MAO College was spearheaded by late Sir Syed Ahmed Khan35, a 
national leader who envisioned the idea of a modern and Western 
 
35 Sir Syed, hereafter 

educational institution for the Muslim community, distinct from the 
traditional madrasas, which otherwise prevailed. There is no contest 
to the fact that that MAO College was established specifically for the 
educational advancement of the Muslims; it is what comes thereafter 
which is the point of contention and calls for being noticed, to the 
extent relevant, and addressed. 
62. Upon Sir Syed’s death in 1898, the Muslim community in his honour 
started collecting funds with the goal to raise a sum of Rs 1,00,000/- 
(Rupees one lakh only) so that MAO College could evolve into a 
university. It is the appellants’ submission that over a period of 22 
(twenty-two) years, the Muslim community, through the Muslim 
University Association, collected a staggering sum of Rs 30,00,000/- 
(Rupees thirty lakh only) which finally led the British Government to 
agree with the demands for a university, leading to the establishment 
of AMU in 1920. 
63. Travelling down memory lane, one is bound to trace the emergence 
of the movement for a Hindu university which, over a period of time, 
took shape with the establishment of the Banaras Hindu University36 
through a similar statute, viz. the Banaras Hindu University Act, 
191537. Despite all the efforts of Sir Syed, who did not consider 
Muslims to be in any way inferior, and the later endeavours to have 
a university established with full control being exercised by the 
 
36 BHU, hereafter 
37 BHU Act, hereafter 

Muslim community, refusal of the imperial government to succumb 
to the demand was a blow to the aspirations that many of the leaders 
of the Aligarh movement harboured. There emerged two disputing 
factions within the Aligarh movement – that of the Loyalists headed 
by Aftab Ahmad Khan and the other by Maulana Mohammad Ali, the 
latter being vexed with the increasing control of the imperial 
government over the proposed AMU. Once the BHU Act had been 
passed leading to establishment of the BHU, the Loyalists realised 
that they were caught between the devil and the deep sea, i.e., they 
either accede to the British envisioning of AMU, which was under 
overwhelming government control, or they stick to their demands 
and lose out on the proposed university altogether. Writ large was 
the fact that since BHU had not been granted the right of affiliation, 
it seemed to be inevitable that the proposed Muslim university will 
also be governed by similar such provisions governing BHU. In a 
decisive meeting of the Muslim University Association, the decision 
was put to a vote and the Loyalists emerged the winner, leading to 
the eventual walkout of the dissenting faction headed by Maulana 
Mohammad Ali, who would go on to establish Jamia Milia Islamia. A 
salient feature of Jamia was that it was independently funded and 
thrived without any aid from the imperial government. Registered in 
1939 as Jamia Milia Islamia Society, the institution was deemed to 

be a University under section 3 of the University Grants Commission 
Act, 195638 in 1962. 
64. Much would turn on this piece of historical evidence while 
appreciating whether AMU was an institution established by the 
Muslim community. 
65. Further, in British India, the legislative framework governing 
educational institutions was such that schools and colleges, such as 
MAO College, could be established by private persons, but 
universities in particular were exclusively within the domain of the 
Governor General-in-Council39. Though there existed no legal bar to 
the establishment of universities by private individuals or societies, 
the British Government granted recognition only to degrees issued 
by universities which were creatures of statute. It is the appellants’ 
submission that in such a context, the appellants had no recourse but 
to obtain the concurrence of the British Government, if Sir Syed’s 
dream was ever to be realised. It is pressed that the British 
Government enacted the AMU Act only upon furnishing of adequate 
funds by the Muslim community, and hence, though AMU was a 
statutory institution, it was argued to be established by the Muslims, 
for the Muslims. 
66. Article 30(1) of the Constitution guarantees to minorities, religious 
and linguistic, the right to establish and administer educational 
 
38 UGC Act, hereafter 
39 GGIC, hereafter 

institutions of their choice. The provision, at a glance, has the 
following three components: 

Existence of a minority community – either religious or 
linguistic, 
(ii) the minority community has the right to establish an 
educational institution; and 
(iii) the minority community has the right to administer an 
educational institution. 
67. It is no longer res integra that even institutions established prior to 
the Constitution would be eligible to seek the protection of Article 
30(1), as was expressed by this Court in Re: The Kerala Education 
Bill, 1957 (supra) at p. 1051: 
“There is no reason why the benefit of Article 30(1) should be limited 
only to educational institutions established after the commencement of 
the Constitution. The language employed in Article 30(1) is wide enough 
to cover both pre-constitution and post-constitution institutions. It must 
not be overlooked that Article 30(1) gives the minorities two rights, 
namely, (a) to establish, and (b) to administer, educational institutions 
of their choice. The second right clearly covers pre-constitution schools 
just as Article 26 covers the right to maintain pre-constitution religious 
institutions.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
AMU, though established during pre-Constitution days, it was 
contended that it is thus eligible to seek the protection of Article 30(1). 
68. 
Having regard to such contention, it is necessary to examine the 
aspect of establishment. To understand how and why AMU came to be 
established, a perusal of the Statement of Objects and Reasons to the 
Act, and its Preamble, is necessitated: 

“An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching and residential Muslim 
University at Aligarh.” 
“WHEREAS it is expedient to establish and incorporate a teaching and 
residential Muslim University at Aligarh, and to dissolve the Societies 
registered under the Societies' Registration Act, 1860, which are 
respectively known as the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College, 
Aligarh, and the Muslim University Association, and to transfer to and 
rest in the said University all properties and rights of the said Societies 
and of the Muslim University Foundation Committee.” 
69. 
While on the subject, a study of contrasts would be of profit, if one 
were to examine the founding Acts of one contemporary university, 
i.e., the Annamalai University Act, 192840. It would also be of profit to 
examine the Visva Bharati Act, 195141, which came to be enacted 
immediately after India attained independence. 
70. 
The 1928 Act records as follows: 
“AND WHEREAS the Hon’ble Diwan Bahadur Sir S.R.M. Annamalai 
Chettiyar has established and is maintaining colleges at and near 
Chidambaram in which higher instruction is imparted in English, Tamil 
and Sanskrit studies; 
AND WHEREAS the said Sir Annamalai Chettiyar has agreed with the 
Local Government to hand over the said institutions together with all 
the properties attached thereto and further to give a sum of twenty 
lakhs of rupees for the purposes of establishing and maintaining at 
Annamalainagar a Teaching and Residential University wherein he and 
his heirs shall be entitled to certain powers and privileges;” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
71. 
The 1951 Act, similarly, pays homage and specifically recognises its 
founder, ‘Kabiguru’ to millions of his ardent followers in his state of 
birth and beyond, as follows: 
“2. Declaration of Visva-Bharati as an institution of national 
importance.—Whereas the late Rabindranath Tagore (Thakur) founded 
an institution known as Visva-Bharati at Santiniketan in the district of 
Birbhum in West Bengal the objects of which are such as to make the 
 
40 1928 Act, hereafter 
41 1951 Act, hereafter 

institution one of national importance, it is hereby declared that the 
institution known as ‘Visva-Bharati’ aforesaid is an institution of national 
importance and is as such hereby constituted as a University.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
72. 
It is evident upon bare perusal of the above extracts that while 
establishing the respective universities, which are obviously statutory 
creations, the 1928 Act and the 1951 Act categorically recognise 
establishment of the respective predecessor institution by its founder. 
Annamalai University and Visva Bharati University are synonymous 
with Sir Annamalai Chettiar and Gurudeb Rabindra Nath Thakur, 
respectively; however, the AMU Act is woefully bereft of the same or 
similar recognition. The AMU Act is conspicuously silent on two major 
elements which the appellants argue was what brought AMU into 
existence – the contributions of Sir Syed and that of the donations 
collected en masse from the Muslim community in order to establish 
the erstwhile MAO College. If the institution was truly founded by the 
minority community, as contended by the appellants, there is no 
reason why the Preamble would not have been drafted in a similar 
manner so as to highlight the same. I am unable to subscribe to the 
majority opinion of recognition of the respective founders in the 1928 
Act and the 1951 Act being of no relevance. 
73. 
It would be further apposite to examine the enactments establishing 
two other minority universities. Firstly, the Sam Higginbottom 
University of Agriculture, Technology and Sciences, Uttar Pradesh Act, 

2016, whose Preamble decisively recognises the establishment of the 
said university by the minority Christian community, as follows: 
“An Act to establish and incorporate a Teaching, Research and 
Extension University with a view to upgrade and reconstitute the 
existing Sam Higginbottom Institute of Agriculture, Technology 
and Sciences (Deemed-to-be- University), Allahabad, established 
and administered by the Ecumenical Minority Christian Society 
namely the Sam Higginbottom Educational and Charitable 
Society, Higginbottom House, 4- Agricultural Institute, Allahabad-
211007, Registered under the Society Registration Act, 1860 in 
the State of Uttar Pradesh, and to provide for natters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.” 
 
74. 
Secondly, the preamble of Era University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh Act, 
2016, unambiguously recognises the minority character of the 
institution by stating that: 
“Preamble 
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching University sponsored by 
Era Educational Trust duly established and administered by the 
members of Muslim Minority community, 
*** 
2. Definitions—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires 
 *** 
(t) ‘Trust’ means the Era Educational Trust, established and 
administered by the members of Muslim Minority community, in the 
year 1995 for imparting education, having its office at 88, Victoria 
Street (Tulsi Das Marg), Lucknow a 'not for profit' Trust registered in 
the office of Sub-Registrar-I Lucknow under the Indian Trust Act, 
1882.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
75. 
Thus, these enactments are in stark contrast to the AMU Act, insofar 
as they categorically recognise the factum of establishment and 
administration of the universities by the respective minority 
community. 
76. 
Proceeding further, section 7 of the AMU Act states that: 

“The University shall invest and keep invested in securities in which 
trust funds may be invested in accordance with the law for the time 
being in force relating to trusts in British India a sum of thirty lakhs of 
rupees as a permanent endowment to meet the recurring charges of 
the University other than charges in respect of Fellowships, 
Scholarships, Prizes and rewards…” 
(emphasis supplied) 
Therefore, the sum of Rs 30,00,000/- (Rupees Thirty lakh only) 
collected by donations across the country was not spent in the 
establishment of AMU; rather, it was to be used as a fund to meet 
recurring expenditure. The appellants have repeatedly underscored 
the contribution made by the Muslim community, motivated to do the 
same by a systematic and sustained effort on the part of Sir Syed, in 
the setting up of AMU. The impact of such a monetary contribution 
cannot be gainsaid, but can the same be equated to establishment of 
AMU? I think not. The efforts of the Muslim community in leading to 
the establishment of AMU were no doubt monumental in spearheading 
the movement, and perhaps without such efforts AMU would never 
have become a reality, but this cannot by any stretch of imagination 
mean that the community itself established AMU. 
77. 
There is no contest that MAO College was a minority institution, but 
AMU would not be endowed with the same characteristic solely on 
account of tracing its lineage from MAO College. The same is evidenced 
by section 4 of the AMU Act, which is reproduced hereinbelow: 
“4. From the commencement of this Act- 
(i) The Societies known as the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College, 
Aligarh, and the Muslim University Association shall be dissolved, and 
all property, moveable and immoveable, and all rights powers and 

privileges of the said Societies and all property, moveable and 
immoveable, and all rights, powers and privileges of the Muslim 
University Foundation Committee shall be transferred to and vest in the 
University and shall be applied to the objects and purposes for which 
the University is incorporated; 
(ii) All debts, liabilities and obligations of the said Societies and 
Committees shall be transferred to the University and shall thereafter 
be discharged and satisfied by it; 
(iii) all references in any enactment to either of the said Societies and 
Committee shall be construed as references to the University; 
(iv) any will, deed or other document, whether made or executed before 
or after the commencement of this Act, which contains any bequest, gift 
or trust in favour either of the said Societies or of the said committee 
shall, on the commencement of this Act, be construed as if the 
University was therein named instead of such Society or Committee; 
(v) subject to any order which the Court may make, the buildings which 
belonged to the Muhammadan Anglo Oriental College, Aligarh, shall 
continue to be known and designated immediately before the 
commencement of this Act; 
(vi) Subject to the provision of this Act, every person employed 
immediately before the commencement of this Act in the Muhammadan 
Anglo-Oriental College, Aligarh, shall hold employment in the University 
by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions and with 
the same rights and privileges as to pension and gratuity as he would 
have held the same under the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College, 
Aligarh, if this Act had not been passed;” 
(emphasis supplied) 
Thus, the societies, from which the appellants contend AMU inherited 
its minority character, stood dissolved upon the AMU Act coming into 
force. AMU was, thus, an institution unto itself, distinct from MAO 
College. There was a clear and statutory break from the antecedent 
history, and the character of AMU as it were, has to be examined on 
its own merit. 
78. 
The appellants have relied on a number of decisions to contend that a 
university could also be a minority institution, foremost of which was 
St. Stephen’s College vs. University of Delhi42. However, all the 
 
42 (1992) 

precedents relied on, have as their focus of discussion colleges and not 
universities. Though both are educational institutions which come 
under the ambit of Article 30(1), they are not synonymous with each 
other and are markedly different, particularly in one aspect, i.e., 
universities only can confer degrees while colleges cannot unless, as 
in present days, a college is also deemed to be a university and can 
award degrees. MAO College when it existed, established by Muslim 
individuals, could not confer degrees and it was only Allahabad 
University, of which MAO College was an affiliated college, that could 
award degrees. 
79. 
As rightly contended by the learned Attorney General, the private 
individuals who had set up MAO College were not legislatively 
competent to establish a university in the first place. Being devoid of 
the authority to establish, the power to do which was the sole preserve 
of the British Government, the establishment of AMU could not possibly 
be owed to the Muslim community. An example of this is section 6 of 
the AMU Act, which stated that degrees conferred by AMU would be 
recognised by the Government. The provision states: 
“6. Recognition of degrees. – The degrees, diplomas and other academic 
distinctions granted or conferred to or on persons by the University shall 
be recognised by the Central and State Governments as are the 
corresponding degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions 
granted by any other University incorporated under any enactment.” 
As has been discussed, the only universities whose degrees were 
recognised by the Government were those established by statute. 

Degrees issued by private universities were not recognised by the 
British Government. The degrees issued by AMU being officially 
recognised, it could not, as a logical corollary, be said that AMU was 
established by the Muslim community. The university being brought 
into existence solely by virtue of the statute, its establishment could 
not be owed to anything other than the statute. 
80. 
Provisions of the AMU Act have been highlighted to show that bodies 
such as the Court were to be comprised entirely of Muslim members. 
However, such bodies could not be said to have established AMU. 
81. 
Black’s Law Dictionary43 defines ‘establish’ as: 
“establish, vb. (14c) 1. To settle, make, or fix firmly; to enact 
permanently <one object of the Constitution was to establish justice>. 
2. To make or form; to bring about or into existence <Congress 
has the power to establish Article III courts>. 3. To prove; to convince 
<the House managers tried to establish the President’s guilt>.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
82. 
The appellants advocated for the verb “to establish” to be interpreted 
widely so as to mean “to found”. While this Court has time and again 
interpreted words of statutes in a liberal manner so as to align them 
with legislative intent, the interpretation canvassed by the appellants, 
insofar as “to establish” is to be equated with “to found”, demands an 
implausibly expansive reading of Article 30(1). It is a primary rule of 
interpretation that statutes must be interpreted as they are, and 
auxiliary connotations must not be read into the provision, unless 
 
43 9th Edition 

there is reason established for doing so. The two words are very 
distinct in their purport and understanding. The Constituent Assembly, 
in its legislative wisdom, chose specifically to use the words ‘to 
establish” in Article 30(1); interpreting it in a manner so wide as to 
change its meaning altogether would be doing the Constitution and its 
framers a disservice. A perusal of the decisions of this Court, which 
shall be discussed henceforth, categorically evinces that this 
contention is untenable in law. 
83. 
In Very Rev. Mother Provincial (supra), this Court explained 
‘establishment’ by categorically holding that it refers to the factum of 
bringing into existence of the university, and not the founding of the 
institution: 
“8. Article 30(1) has been construed before by this Court. Without 
referring to those cases it is sufficient to say that the clause 
contemplates two rights which are separated in point of time. The first 
right is the initial right to establish institutions of the minority's choice. 
Establishment here means the bringing into being of an institution and 
it must be by a minority community. It matters not if a single 
philanthropic individual with his own means, founds the institution or 
the community at large contributes the funds. The position in law is the 
same and the intention in either case must be to found an institution 
for the benefit of a minority community by a member of that 
community. It is equally irrelevant that in addition to the minority 
community others from other minority communities or even from the 
majority community can take advantage of these institutions. Such 
other communities bring in income and they do not have to be turned 
away to enjoy the protection.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
84. 
Hon’ble V.N. Khare, J. (as His Lordship then was) in T.M.A. Pai 
Foundation (supra) observed as follows: 
“254. The expression ‘to establish’ means to set up on permanent 
basis. The expression ‘to administer’ means to manage or to attend to 
the running of the affairs…” 

(emphasis supplied) 
85. 
This Court, in A.P. Christian Medical Educational Society vs. Govt. of A.P.44, emphasized the importance of piercing the veil to gauge 
whether an institution is truly a minority educational institution, by 
stating as follows: 
“8. It was seriously contended before us that any minority, even a single 
individual belonging to a minority, could found a minority institution and 
had the right so to do under the Constitution and neither the 
government nor the University could deny the society’s right to establish 
a minority institution, at the very threshold as it were, howsoever, they 
may impose regulatory measures in the interests of uniformity, 
efficiency and excellence of education. The fallacy of the argument 
insofar as the instant case is concerned lies in thinking that neither the 
government nor the University has the right to go behind the claim that 
the institution is a minority institution and to investigate and satisfy 
itself whether the claim is well-founded or ill-founded. The government, 
the University and ultimately the court have the undoubted right to 
pierce the ‘minority veil’ — with due apologies to the corporate lawyers 
— and discover whether there is lurking behind it no minority at all and 
in any case, no minority Institution. The object of Article 30(1) is not to 
allow bogies to be raised by pretenders but to give the minorities ‘a 
sense of security and a feeling of confidence’ not merely by 
guaranteeing the right to profess, practise and propagate religion to 
religious minorities and the right to conserve their language, script and 
culture to linguistic minorities, but also to enable all minorities, religious 
or linguistic, to establish and administer educational institutions of their 
choice. These institutions must be educational institutions of the 
minorities in truth and reality and not mere masked phantoms. They 
may be institutions intended to give the children of the minorities the 
best general and professional education, to make them complete men 
and women of the country and to enable them to go out into the world 
fully prepared and equipped. They may be institutions where special 
provision is made to the advantage and for the advancement of the 
minority children. They may be institutions where the parents of the 
children of the minority community may expect that education in 
accordance with the basic tenets of their religion would be imparted by 
or under the guidance of teachers, learned and steeped in the faith. 
They may be institutions where the parents expect their children to 
grow in a pervasive atmosphere which is in harmony with their religion 
or conducive to the pursuit of it. What is important and what is 
imperative is that there must exist some real positive index to enable 
the institution to be identified as an educational institution of the 
minorities. We have already said that in the present case apart from the 
 
44 (1986) 

half a dozen words ‘as a Christian minorities’ institution’ occurring in 
one of the objects recited in the memorandum of association, there is 
nothing whatever, in the memorandum or the articles of association or 
in the actions of the society to indicate that the institution was intended 
to be a minority educational institution. As already found by us these 
half a dozen words were introduced merely to found a claim on Article 
30(1). They were a smoke-screen.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
86. 
It is thus evident that establishment is a question of fact and has to 
be proved as such. The factum of establishment cannot, thus, be solely 
determined by intention of the minority community alone; rather, it 
has to be factually established in words and deeds and functioning of 
the university. 
87. 
Azeez Basha (supra) categorically dealt with the factum of AMU’s 
establishment to conclude that AMU was not established by the Muslim 
community, in the following manner: 
“It is true, as is clear from the 1920-Act, that the nucleus of the Aligarh 
University was the M.A.O. College, which was till then a teaching 
institution under the Allahabad’ University. The conversion of that 
college (if we may use that expression) into a university was however 
not by the Muslim minority; it took place by virtue of the 1920-Act which 
was passed by the Central legislature. There was no Aligarh University 
existing till the 1920- Act was passed. It was brought into being by the 
1920-Act and must therefore be held to have been established by the 
Central Legislature which by passing the 1920-Act incorporated it. The 
fact that it was based on the M.A.O. College, would make no difference 
to the question as to who established the Aligarh University. The answer 
to our mind as to who established the Aligarh University is clear and 
that is that it was the Central Legislature by enacting the 1920-Act that 
established the said University.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
88. This Court in Azeez Basha (supra) having held, upon an exhaustive 
analysis of the facts and circumstances presented before it, that AMU 

was brought into existence by the Central Legislature by virtue of the 
AMU Act, I see no infirmity warranting the view taken therein to be 
overruled. And, this being the settled position for more than half-a-
century by now, it is not worthwhile to interfere with the same at this 
distance of time notwithstanding the attempts to have it removed. 
ADMINISTRATION OF AMU 
89. The other element enumerated under Article 30(1) is ‘administer’. 
Administration, like establishment, is a question of fact. The minority 
community needs to prove, through material evidence, the fact of 
administration by the community. 
90. Before delving into the factual scenario, it is necessary to grasp what 
are the elements of administration. To fully appreciate what 
administration entails, it would be opportune to go through treatises 
and the previous articulations of this Court on the topic. 
91. The eleventh edition of Black’s Law Dictionary defines the term 
“administration” as: 
administration, n. (14c) 1. The management or performance of the 
executive duties of a government, institution, or business; 
collectively, all the actions that are involved in managing the work of 
an organization. 2. In public law, the practical management and 
direction of the executive department and its agencies….” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
 
92. This Court in Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College Society vs. State of 
Gujarat45 has provided an unambiguous rubric to understand what the 
“right to administer” entails: 
 
45 (1974) 

“19. The entire controversy centres round the extent of the right of 
the religious and linguistic minorities to administer their educational 
institutions. The right to administer is said to consist of four principal 
matters. First is the right to choose its managing or governing body. 
It is said that the founders of the minority institution have faith and 
confidence in their own committee or body consisting of persons 
elected by them. Second is the right to choose its teachers. It is said 
that minority institutions want teachers to have compatibility with 
the ideals, aims and aspirations of the institution. Third is the right 
not to be compelled to refuse admission to students. In other words, 
the minority institutions want to have the right to admit students of 
their choice subject to reasonable regulations about academic 
qualifications. Fourth is the right to use its properties and assets for 
the benefit of its own institution.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
93. The articulation of ‘right to administer’ provided by this Court in the 
abovementioned decision is supplemented by the decision in TMA Pai 
Foundation (supra), where this Court outlined what rights constitute 
the right to administer and establish: 
“50. The right to establish and administer broadly comprises the 
following rights: 
(a) to admit students; 
(b) to set up a reasonable fee structure; 
(c) to constitute a governing body; 
(d) to appoint staff (teaching and non-teaching); and 
(e) to take action if there is dereliction of duty on the part of any 
employees.” 
 
94. What can be culled out from the above discussion is that administration 
means carrying out all the functions, which are essential for functioning 
of an institute. Even if some regulatory interference by the State does 
exist, it cannot be said that the community is not administering the 
institute merely because there is some superficial interference in the 
working of the institution by the State. Only when the State enjoys a 

deep and pervasive control over the functioning of an institution, it can 
be said that the State is administering the institution. 
95. However, to substantiate the argument that a certain community has 
been administering an institute, it has to be illustrated that the overall 
governance of the institute is under the control of the community. 
Administration vis-à-vis a university consists of making decisions with 
regard to hiring of faculty, admitting and subjecting students to take 
lessons and examinations, fee structures, disciplinary proceedings for 
the teaching and non-teaching staff and other miscellaneous day-to-
day operations which are needed to keep the university operating 
optimally. 
96. The test which needs to be satisfied in order to establish that a 
university is administered by a minority community is the test of 
ultimate control. 
97. The administrative functions of AMU are broadly carried out by five 
bodies: 
a) Visitor (erstwhile Lord Rector); 
b) Visiting Board; 
c) Executive Council; 
d) Academic Council; and 
e) Court of AMU. 
98. AMU Act, as it stood in 1920, prior to the amendments, did not provide 
for a mechanism for Muslims to administer the University. Section 13 
of the AMU Act provided for the Governor General of British India to be 

the Lord Rector (now Visitor). The Lord Rector had been bestowed with 
the ultimate control and superintendence of the University. Section 14 
provided for the Visiting Board, which was responsible for ensuring that 
the University is functioning in accordance with the act, ordinances, and 
rules. The composition of the Visiting Board did not reflect any special 
dispensation being made for Muslim control over the board. 
99. There have been extensive submissions on the nature of the Court of 
AMU, and much reliance has been placed by the appellants on section 
23(2) of the AMU Act. According to the appellants, the Court of AMU is 
the supreme governing body of the university. At first blush, this 
submission by the appellants seems reasonable; however, on closer 
examination of the statute, this submission cannot be accepted. Section 
23(2) gives only residuary powers to the Court of AMU over matters not 
explicitly provided for in the AMU Act and rules of the University. If 
sections 13 and 23 are read jointly, the clear picture which emerges is 
that the Court of AMU is subservient to the Lord Rector; as the Lord 
Rector had been given the power to overrule the Court of AMU under 
section 13(5) of the Act. 
100. Deep involvement of the State is demonstrated through the Governor-
General/Governor in all major activities of the University, such as 
establishing colleges, promulgating ordinances, and superintendence 
over the Executive and the Academic Councils. 
101. The governing structure of AMU gives me compelling indications to hold 
that there is a deep and pervasive control of the State over the 

administration of the University. The governance structure, funding, 
admissions, and appointments in the University demonstrates an 
involvement of the State which goes way beyond mere regulatory 
oversight and into its absolute control over the administration of the 
University. 
102. Hence, I find myself being drawn to the irresistible conclusion that AMU 
has not been administered by a minority community at any point in 
time. The Act places the ultimate control of the University with the 
Central Government and the Central Government and its predecessor 
have been administering AMU since 1920. 
CONJUNCTIVE INTERPRETATION OF ESTABLISH AND ADMINISTER 
103. Now that the two aspects of establishment and administration have 
been examined individually, it is apposite to investigate whether the 
two rights, as guaranteed by the Constitution, have to be read as 
disjunctive or conjunctive rights. In view of the consensus on the 
point that ‘and’ between ‘establish’ and ‘administer’ has to be read 
and understood as ‘and’ and not ‘or’, the discussion is rendered 
practically academic. However, some discussion on the topic is 
considered worthwhile having regard to the re-referral order in 
Aligarh Muslim University (supra). 
104. The Constitutional Debates on the drafting of Article 30 have been 
brought to the fore by the respondents, and while the provision 
underwent multiple revisions, what remained constant was the use 
of the word “and” in the phrase “establish and administer”. This is 

also evident from the Hindi version of Article 30(1) in Devnagari 
script, reading as follows: 
 
A perusal of Article 30(1) in Hindi reveals that the conjunction used 
to connect establish (स्थापना) and administer (प्रशासन) is “और”, i.e., “and” 
as opposed to the word “या” which means “or”. It is well settled that 
the word “and” connotes a conjunctive nature whereas the word “or” 
connotes a disjunctive meaning. Though the terms can be, in 
exceptional circumstances, interchangeably interpreted with the aim 
of fulfilling the legislative intent, there is nothing in the provision, 
which impels us to read and understand the word other than what is 
conveyed by its ordinary meaning. Therefore, this Court in multiple 
decisions has interpreted the right to establish and administer as 
conjunctive rights rather than disjunctive. 
105. The perusal of the Hindi version also buttresses the position that 
establishment has to only be read as so, rather than being 
expansively interpreted as founding. This is evident from the use of 
the word “स्थापना” by the Constitution framers, which means ‘to 
establish’ rather than the use of the word “उद्भावना” which means ‘to 
conceive’ or ‘to found’. As discussed above, words have to be 

interpreted literally, unless the context requires otherwise, which in 
this case, it does not. 
106. This Court, in Dayanand Anglo Vedic (DAV) College Trust and 
Management Society vs. State of Maharashtra46, held that: 
“34. After giving our anxious consideration to the matter and 
in the light of the law settled by this Court, we have no 
hesitation in holding that in order to claim minority/linguistic 
status for an institution in any State, the authorities must be 
satisfied firstly that the institution has been established by the 
persons who are minority in such State; and, secondly, the 
right of administration of the said minority linguistic institution 
is also vested in those persons who are minority in such State. 
The right conferred by Article 30 of the Constitution cannot be 
interpreted as if irrespective of the persons who established the 
institution in the State for the benefit of persons who are 
minority, any person, be it non-minority in other place, can 
administer and run such institution.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
107. A similar view was echoed by this Court in St. Stephen’s (supra), 
wherein it was held that: 
“28. There is by now, fairly abundant case law on the questions 
as to ‘minority’; the minority’s right to ‘establish’, and their 
right to ‘administer’ educational institutions. These questions 
have arisen in regard to a variety of institutions all over the 
country. They have arisen in regard to Christians, Muslims and 
in regard to certain sects of Hindus and linguistic groups. The 
courts in certain cases have accepted without much scrutiny 
the version of the claimant that the institution in question was 
founded by a minority community while in some cases the 
courts have examined very minutely the proof of the 
establishment of the institution. It should be borne in mind that 
the words ‘establish’ and ‘administer’ used in Article 30(1) are 
to be read conjunctively. The right claimed by a minority 
community to administer the educational institution depends 
upon the proof of establishment of the institution. The proof of 
establishment of the institution, is thus a condition precedent 
for claiming the right to administer the institution.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

46 (2013) 

108. Finally, reference to Azeez Basha (supra) again, is considered 
relevant. The argument raised before the Court was a bit different in 
the sense that right to administer AMU was claimed by almost 
abandoning the claim that AMU was established by the minority 
community. It was held that: 
“It is to our mind quite clear that Article 30(1) postulates that 
the religious community will have the right to establish and 
administer educational institutions of their choice meaning 
thereby that where a religious minority establishes an 
educational institution, it will have the right to administer that. 
An argument has been raised to the effect that even though 
the religions (sic, religious) minority may not have established 
the educational institution, it will have the right to administer 
it, if by some process it has been administering the same before 
the Constitution came into force. We are not prepared to accept 
this argument. The Article in our opinion clearly shows that the 
minority will have the right to administer educational 
institutions of their choice provided they have established 
them, but not otherwise. The article cannot be read, to mean 
that even if the educational institution has been established by 
somebody else, any religious minority would have the right to 
administer it because, for some reason or other, it might have 
been administering it before the Constitution came into force. 
The words ‘establish and administer’ in the article must be read 
conjunctively and so read it gives the right to the minority to 
administer an educational institution provided it has been 
established by it. In this connection our attention was drawn to 
In re: The Kerala Education Bill, 1957 [(159) SCR 995] where, 
it is argued, this Court had held that the minority can 
administer an educational institution even though it might not 
have established it. In that case an argument was raised that 
under Article 30(1) protection was given only to educational 
institutions established after the Constitution came into force. 
That argument was turned down by this Court for the obvious 
reason that if that interpretation was given to Article 30(1) it 
would be robbed of much of its content. But that case in our 
opinion did not lay down that the words ‘establish and 
administer’ in Article 30(1) should be read disjunctively, so that 
though a minority might not have established an educational 
institution it had the right to administer it. It is true that at p. 
1062 the Court spoke of Article 30(1) giving two rights to a 
minority i.e. (i) to establish and (ii) to administer. But that was 

said only in the context of meeting the argument that 
educational institutions established by minorities before the 
Constitution came into force did not have the protection of 
Article 30(1). We are of opinion that nothing in that case 
justifies the contention raised of behalf of the petitioners that 
the minorities would have the right to administer an 
educational institution even though the institution may not 
have been established by them. The two words in Article 30(1) 
must be read together and so read the Article gives this right 
to the minority to administer institutions established by it. If 
the educational institution has not been established by a 
minority it cannot claim the right to administer it under Article 
30(1).” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
109. The above passage has been quoted by the bench of 3 (three) Judges 
in Aligarh Muslim University (supra). Having read the said passage 
in between the lines, I have utterly failed to find any infirmity in the 
process of reasoning by the Constitution bench while dealing with the 
arguments that were raised before it. 
110. In any event, leaving aside Azeez Basha (supra), it is amply clear 
that this Court has consistently read Article 30(1) to provide 
conjunctive, rather than separate and disjunctive, rights. The 
interpretation of Article 30 in the manner sought to be projected in 
the majority opinion, would mean that even an institution, though 
established by the minority, but has never been administered by it 
would reap the protection granted by Article 30(1). Such a result is 
exactly what was warned against by this Court in A.P. Christian 
Medical Educational Society (supra). The right to ‘administer’ 
accruing to the minority community only upon the factum of 
‘establish’ having first been proven leaves but one with the 

unescapable conclusion, that the right to establish and the right to 
administer are twin rights, and cannot be read in isolation from one 
another. Any other interpretation would lead to consequences that 
were far from what the Constituent Assembly did intend. 
111. The majority opinion, though extensive, seems to have created an 
existential impasse, akin to the Chakravyuh orchestrated by 
Dronacharya. While it is mentioned in paragraph 73 of the revised 
draft opinion that “Article 30(1) cannot extend to a situation where 
the minority community which establishes an educational institution 
has no intention to administer it”, it has been opined at paragraph 
156 (could also be 155) that “In the preceding sections we have held 
that establishment by a minority is the only indicia for a minority 
educational institution”. To my mind, these two positions create an 
inherent contradiction which is as perplexing to solve as the 
Chakravyuh was for Abhimanyu, inasmuch as it lays out mutually 
exclusive positions of law which cannot possibly co-exist. In view 
thereof, a question comes to my mind that if a minority community 
establishes an educational institution and thereafter abandons its 
administration to rank outsiders, can such an institution be said to 
merit protection under Article 30(1), if establishment is the only 
indicium, as held in the majority opinion? From the paradoxical legal 
test laid out above, the answer remains elusive. 

ENTRY 63 OF LIST I 
112. There is yet another issue that demands attention: what is the impact 
of including AMU in List I, Entry 6347 of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution, and what are the implications of its designation as 
‘institution of national importance’? 
113. Apart from AMU, BHU also finds pride of place in Entry 63. Respect 
and honour, in equal measure, as well as equal status as institutions 
of national importance were bestowed on these two universities 
(having religious imprint in their respective titular description), which 
were established by the end of the second decade of the century in 
which India attained independence from colonial rule, mandating that 
it is Parliament which can exercise its legislative authority over them 
without any constraints or qualifications. 
114. When the Constitution was being drafted, AMU was not remotely 
relatable to being considered as a minority institution. The framers 
of the Constitution proceeded on that basis and included AMU in Entry 
63 of List I not only as an institution in respect whereof laws could 
be framed by the Parliament but also, by necessary implication, 
designated AMU as an institution of national importance. 
115. A brief reference to the Constituent Assembly Debates would be apt 
at this stage. While deliberating on Entry 63 (originally Entry 40, List 
 
47 63. The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the Banaras 
Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim University and the Delhi University, and any other 
institution declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance. 

I of the Seventh Schedule to the Draft Constitution of India), Mr. 
Naziruddin Ahmad remarked: 
“I have slightly altered my amendment to suit the change 
introduced by Dr. Ambedkar in his own amendment. I submit that 
Dr. Ambedkar’s amendment would unduly enlarge the jurisdiction 
of the Centre and many things which would be otherwise 
cognizable by the Provinces would now, by virtue of the words 
which I seek to delete, be included within the jurisdiction of the 
Centre. The Banares Hindu University and the Aligarh Muslim 
University have been regarded from their very inception as 
institutions of a national character and importance and therefore 
they have been rightly regarded so far as national institutions and 
they have been rightly placed under the jurisdiction of the 
Union.”48 
 
116. The foresight of the Constituent Assembly is, thus, evident in that the 
Assembly aimed to preserve and reinforce the national and secular 
character of AMU. By incorporating AMU within Entry 63 of List I in 
the Seventh Schedule, the Assembly decisively entrenched its secular 
and 
national 
identity 
through 
constitutional 
enactment. 
Consequently, any remnants of affiliation to a specific community 
were deliberately eliminated. 
117. “Aligarh Muslim University is not a theological convent. It is a 
university, and a university cannot function as a communal 
institution”, observed Mr. M.C. Chagla [one of the most (if not the 
most) reputed and respected Chief Justices of the High Court of 
Bombay] serving as the Minister of Education, Government of India 
 
48 Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume 9, 30th August 1949 (9.127.209) 

at the time, while addressing Parliament during the debate on the 
AMU (Amendment) Bill, 1965—a bill that was ultimately enacted by 
Parliament49. Excerpts from Mr. Chagla’s speech in the Parliament50 
read as under: 
“In my opinion, the Aligarh Muslim University is a national institution, 
an institution of national importance. There are four Central 
universities: there is the Banaras Hindu University; there is the Aligarh 
Muslim University; there is the Delhi University; and there is the 
Visvabharati University. All these institutions are institutions of national 
importance. If you look at the Seventh Schedule entry 63 therein is very 
significant; entry 63 of List I of the Seventh Schedule gives the power 
to the Parliament to legislate […] 
My submission to this House is that Aligarh University has neither been 
established nor is being administered by the Muslim Community. […] 
You had first the Muslim college which was founded by Sir Syed Ahmed. 
Sir Syed Ahmed has asked the British Government of those days to 
establish a university and the British Government established the 
University. Therefore, the establishment of the institution was by the 
legislature and not by the community […] Now I cannot understand how 
it can be said that the administration is in the hands of the minorities. 
The administration of the University depends upon the law. During the 
British times it depended upon this Act. After independence it depends 
upon the Act, as had been amended by the Parliament. Does Mr. 
Anthony suggest that it is open to the Aligarh University or the Muslim 
community to change the administration of the university even to the 
slightest degree and go contrary to what the Parliament has laid down? 
If the minority had the right to administer the Aligarh University, then 
it can have any administration it liked; it can change the administration 
and it can close down the University; it can change the constitution of 
the court or the Executive Council. Can it do so? Even the constitution 
of the court, of the executive council and of the academic council is 
regulated and not by the minority committee but by the Parliament. 
There is another aspect of the matter which Mr. Anthony has completely 
forgotten. He has attached great importance to the fact that under the 
Act of 1920, the British Government, as a concession, said that the court 
shall consist wholly of Muslims. Now everybody know that the University 
is administered by the executive council and not by the court. The court 
of course is the supreme authority and it is like a show-piece. It meets 
once a year; lots of people come there and make speeches and pass 
resolutions. But the day-to day administration, selection, appointments, 
and so on are carried on by the executive council and it is significant 
that even in the British days it was not provided that the executive 
council shall consist only of Muslims. That clearly shows that the British 
 
49 Lok Sabha Debates, Twelfth Session, Third Series Vol. XLIV – No. 9, 27th August 1965 
50 Lok Sabha Debates, Twelfth Session, Third Series Vol. XLIV – No. 9, 27th August 1965 

Government did not concede the argument. Although there is no 
Constitution then the arguments is now advanced by Mr. Anthony that 
the minority has a right to administer a particular institution. I say that 
this institution was not established by the minority; nor is it being 
administered by the minority community. That is the legal position as 
far as Article 30 is concerned.”51 
 (emphasis supplied) 
118. Prof. Nurul Hasan, a reputed historian, followed in the footsteps of 
Mr. M.C. Chagla as the Minister of Education. This is what Prof. Hasan 
had to say in Parliament: 
“**Regards the third objection that as a minority institution it is only 
Muslims who should be on the Court and on the Executive Council and 
they should have an exclusive hand in the management of the 
University, hon Members are aware of the writ which had been filed in 
the Supreme Court. It has since been withdrawn. Mr. Chagla has 
expressed his opinion on the legal aspect of the matter. He thinks that 
this University was not established by the minorities, but by Parliament 
and, therefore, this objection is not right. As far as interpretation of the 
Constitution is concerned, I see no reason to differ from the 
interpretation given by him. I do feel, however, that the spirit 
underlying the Constitution should not be lost sight of. As far as the 
objection that there should be only Muslims, who should manage the 
affairs of the University, is concerned, I know that one of our learned 
colleagues, Shri P. N. Sapru, has been on the Executive Council of the 
University for quite a number of years.” 
 
119. The inclusion of AMU in Entry 63 of List I conferred upon it a distinct 
status of being an “institution of national importance”. The 
Constitution itself did not categorize AMU as either a minority 
institution or otherwise. Following the adoption of the Constitution in 
1950, amendments were promptly enacted to the AMU Act in 1951 
and again in 1965. These amendments were designed to align with 
 
51 Lok Sabha Debates, Twelfth Session, Third Series Vol. XLV- No. 13, 2nd September 1965 

constitutional provisions and to reflect the status of AMU as an 
“institution of national importance”. 
120. Entry 63 grants exclusive legislative authority over the specified 
universities therein to Parliament, and to any other institution 
declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national 
importance. The scheme of Entry 63, which constitutionally 
designates AMU, BHU and Delhi University as institutions of national 
importance, is sufficient to indicate that AMU is not a minority 
institution. Absence of specific names of universities other than the 
ones in Entry 63 or anywhere else in the Constitution cements AMU’s 
distinctive status as an institution of national importance, with its 
national and non-minority character at the forefront. There could be 
other institutions of national importance, even institutions which have 
minority character, but such institutions being designated by ordinary 
laws would never reach the elevated status of AMU. 
121. As clearly distinguishable from other entries in the three lists forming 
part of Schedule VII, which only provide the vast field of subjects 
pertaining to which laws could be enacted by the Centre/the States, 
it is essential to interpret Entry 63 of List I not merely as a field over 
which Parliament has the authority to make a law but also as a 
Constitutional provision of recognition of certain institutions as 
‘institutions of national importance’. The language of the Entry 
explicitly designates these institutions with a unique status, thereby 
affirming their designation as universities of national importance. 

Thus, it would be inappropriate to construe this Entry solely as a 
legislative subject without acknowledging its broader implications. 
122. In light of the above, an institution having secular traits which was 
designated as one of national importance by the framers of the 
Constitution and enshrined in the Constitution adopted in 1950, 
cannot be retroactively reclassified as a minority Muslim institution in 
2024 without violating the secular principles that underpin our 
Constitution. Such a reclassification would fundamentally conflict with 
the secular ethos embedded in our Constitutional framework, which 
upholds the equal status of all institutions irrespective of religious 
affiliation. The original intent was to recognize these institutions for 
their national significance, and altering this status now would 
undermine the foundational values of secularism and equality that 
guide our Constitutional order. 
123. Moreover, universities of national importance, such as AMU, cannot 
be subordinated to the control of any minority community or 
particular group. Their national character necessitates that they 
remain under the jurisdiction of the Central Government to ensure 
that their operations and management align with their designated 
national significance. This is crucial as the Central Government 
provides full funding for these institutions, which is vital for their 
continued existence. The control of the Central Government and the 
Parliament’s jurisdiction to legislate on AMU could in a way be 
terminated if the minority community is conceded the right to close 

down AMU even. A ‘right to administer’ (although may not include 
the ‘right to maladminister’) could include the ‘right not to administer’ 
and, thus, bring about a closure of AMU. This would not be in the 
greater national interest. 
124. AMU’s status having been firmly established upon the adoption of the 
Constitution through its inclusion in Entry 63 of List I, any alteration 
of AMU’s status—particularly as executed by the Amendment of 
1981— is untenable. Any such modification must be effected through 
an appropriate Constitutional amendment under Entry 63 of List I, 
adhering to the procedure set forth in Article 368 of the Constitution 
and such changes cannot be made merely by amending the relevant 
statute, i.e., the AMU Act. Under these circumstances, the intention 
of the framers of the Constitution to affirm the national and secular 
character of AMU may not be altered, particularly not in the manner 
proposed by the appellants. 
125. None of us on the bench was born within a decade of India attaining 
independence. What was the pre-independence scenario is, thus, not 
known to any one of us. Whatever we know is through our ancestors 
or books and treatises on the subject. We have not been trained to 
decide any issue based on our personal knowledge. However, judicial 
notice can of course be taken of facts specified in section 57 of the 
Evidence Act, 1872 (currently, section 52 of the Bharatiya Sakshya 
Adhiniyam, 2023) which would include matters of public history 
based on appropriate books or documents of reference but the court, 

if it is called upon by a person, may refuse to take judicial notice of 
any fact unless and until such person produces any such book or 
document as it may consider necessary to enable it do so. There is, 
however, no such tether insofar as debates of the Constituent 
Assembly or proceedings of Parliament are concerned. Judicial notice 
thereof can be taken without any reservation and what have been 
debated, as seen from documented records, are assumed to be 
correct. Does that mean that the courts are bound to accept the 
contents of the debates as portrayal of the correct position on facts? 
The answer may not be in the affirmative in all cases. But, although 
courts are not bound to accept the speeches of members of the 
Constituent Assembly or the members of the Parliament including 
ministers, made on the floor of the Parliament, as unvarnished and 
unimpeachable truth, the speeches are of sufficient persuasive value 
and if, the factual accuracy of the contents of such speeches are not 
shown to be questionable or incorrect, there is no reason as to why 
the court should feel shy to rely on them. Mr. M.C. Chagla, followed 
by Prof. Nurul Hasan, was emphatic on the floor of the Parliament 
that AMU was not a minority institution. I have not been impressed 
upon to hold, with reference to any credible material shown by the 
appellants, that what the ministers said was factually incorrect, they 
were nowhere near the truth or their speeches were ‘a long shot from 
reality’. Based on post-independence events like these speeches as 
well as other evidence that is available, which provide sufficient 

ground to hold that AMU is not a minority institution, the voyage to 
change history through a judicial pronouncement may not be 
continued further. 
126. The discussion on this topic ought to end by quoting Sahibzada 
Aftab Ahmad Khan, former Vice Chancellor of AMU52: 
“It is only fair to observe that no other national institution in 
India has shown such a liberal and catholic spirit in actual 
practice as has been the consistent policy of this institution 
from its start up to the present time. We have always had a 
good number of Hindu students, and the first graduate, in the 
late M.A.O. College, was a Hindu who took his degree in 
1880.Thus if there is any institution in India, which can truly be 
called national and all-India in character, it is this University 
which deserves the sympathy and support not only of the 
Muslim community but of the people of India as a whole.” 
 
APPLICABILITY OF PROF YASHPAL (SUPRA) AND THE NCMEI ACT 
127. In the revised draft opinion, it has been proposed to be held that the 
decision in Prof Yashpal (supra) will not have a bearing on the 
question referred herein, since the decision was rendered in the 
context of universities existing only on paper, and thus, mandated 
that institutions be established and incorporated so as to ensure their 
material existence. It has been opined by the HCJI that the decision 
does not efface the distinction between the words “established” and 
“incorporated”, with Article 30’s only indicia being that of 
establishment. 
 
52 History of the Aligarh Muslim University, Khaliq Ahmad Nizami, p. 110, Idarah-i-Adbiyat-
i-Delli, Delhi, 1995. 

128. With respect to the NCMEI Act, upon consideration of the original and 
the post-amendment definition of a minority educational institution, 
it has been proposed to be held that a statutory amendment cannot 
determine the interpretation of Article 30(1). In other words, the 
issue referred need not be decided on the basis of the amended 
definition of minority educational institution. 
129. The opinion on the applicability or relevance of the decision in Prof 
Yashpal (supra) is accepted. However, the opinion on how the 
NCMEI Act has to be read, in particular section 2(g), in the light of 
the opinion earlier expressed that establishment is the only indicia 
and not coupled with administration is difficult to accept for reasons 
elaborated before. 
130. However, since Prof Yashpal (supra) and the NCMEI Act are not 
relevant for deciding the reference, it is an indicium that reference to 
the same by the bench of 3 (three) Judges in Aligarh Muslim 
University (supra) was redundant and constitutes another reason 
for the re-reference to be held invalid. 
131. Hon’ble Surya Kant J. has extensively dealt with the interplay among 
the reference, NCMEI Act amendment, UGC Act, and the holding in 
Prof Yashpal (supra). Azeez Basha (supra) holds that a university 
established by the legislature cannot have the character of a minority 
institution, however, the NCMEI Act provides for establishment of 
minority universities; to compound matters, as per the UGC Act 
degrees can only be conferred by universities that are established “by 

or under” a statute. In Prof Yashpal (supra), this Court held that a 
statute would not give legal sanction to a university unless certain 
infrastructural facilities were already in place. To resolve this 
apparent contradiction, His Lordship has clarified and modified Azeez 
Basha (supra) to the extent that in the new legal regime a university 
established “by or under” a statute can have a minority character as 
long as it fulfils the requirements under the UGC Act. According to 
His Lordship, a university could either be (i) recognised by statute, 
(ii) brought into existence by statute, (iii) created by statute. It is 
only if the university falls into the third category that it is prevented 
from assuming the character of a minority educational institution due 
to it being a creature of statute. With this reasoning, His Lordship has 
harmonised the amended portions of the NCMEI Act, the UGC Act, 
and the holding of Prof. Yashpal (supra) while simultaneously 
modifying Azeez Basha (supra) to that extent. Resultantly, a 
minority community can establish a university under Article 30, if it 
complies with the rigours of the UGC Act. 
132. When Azeez Basha (supra) was decided, the UGC Act and the NCMEI 
Act were not on the statute-book. Hence, the decision therein was 
based on the facts and circumstances before the Court. The test that 
was laid may not apply to present day facts and circumstances, which 
are governed by the UGC Act and the NCMEI Act. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 
133. Judges of the Supreme Court of India are no doubt the final arbiters 
in resolving disputes and differences between the parties; however, 
the recent judicial trend of eschewing all that is old, for the sake of 
progress and constitutional dynamism, is disturbing. We, the Judges, 
at times tend to forget the confines of our own jurisdiction and that 
we too, like every other human, are fallible. We are meant to be 
guided in our approach by Constitutional morality and the words of 
the architects of the Constitution. Facilitating history to be re-written, 
more than a century later by a judicial opinion, is not what we, as 
Judges, are supposed to do. Additionally, in matters such as the one 
under consideration, there is no warrant for the thought process to 
gain ground that Judges of this Court who had authored opinions in 
the relevant past were wrong and that the present generation of 
Judges are correct. Judicial deference, in my view, ought to have 
leaned towards the interpretation of Article 30(1) that has stood the 
test of time for almost 75 (seventy-five) years since the Constitution 
has been in existence. 
134. It is doubtful whether any of us, as Judges, would lay a claim to be 
omniscient. The limitations of a Judge’s expertise would negate any 
assertion of authority in extra-legal areas as well as to claim special 
knowledge of what the canvas was prior to 1920 when AMU came to 
be established. Conscious as I am of my limitations, it would be a 
misadventure on my part to agree with the majority opinion and 

command the appropriate bench to determine whether AMU was 
established by the minority community based on the indicium 
proposed therein, post-independence decisions of this Court and 
liberal ideas of present times, without there being credible material 
of proof that AMU, all along, was perceived as an educational 
institution established ‘by the Muslim community’, as distinguished 
from ‘for the Muslim community’, even during the pre-Constitution 
days. Whether or not an educational institution has been established 
by a particular community has to be judged bearing in mind all 
antecedent, attending and surrounding circumstances of the relevant 
time. No one can claim with certainty that the entirety of the 
dialogue/correspondence/incidents/events, which did precede the 
establishment of AMU, have been placed before us and that too with 
cent percent accuracy. Such being the state of affairs, we ought not 
to substitute historical facts by our appreciation of half-baked 
evidence. Notwithstanding the knowledge, erudition and eminence 
that some of us have been gifted with, I am sceptical as to whether 
any of us can claim to be more learned than those who played 
significant roles in framing of the Constitution. It is not as if they were 
wholly unaware of the circumstances of the yesteryears. If ‘establish’ 
were to be read as ‘found’, there is no reason as to why the framers 
did not express themselves differently by using ‘to found’ instead of 
‘to establish’ or, in the alternative, both - but one after the other. 

135. Tinkering with understanding of a Constitutional provision, which has 
been consistent and has stood the test of time since its inception, in 
the name of interpretation and overruling of longstanding precedents 
is too frequent an occurrence which judicial activism has brought 
about, sometimes unnecessarily, in the past couple of decades. It is 
time that we refrain from such an approach, unless absolutely 
required, and allow the people’s will to prevail and the Constitution 
to reign supreme. 
136. Turning to the point of indicia, the tests employed for identifying 
post-Constitution minority educational institutions cannot be the 
same as for identification of pre-Constitution institutions, more so 
when a college established by the minority is elevated to the status 
of a university upon establishment and incorporation through statute. 
There can be no dispute that an educational institution undoubtedly 
established prior to the Constitution coming into force by a minority 
community, either based on religion or language, and administered 
as well by such community would be entitled to the protection 
envisaged in Article 30(1). However, if there is a serious doubt as to 
who established the educational institution and how it was 
established, question of piercing of the minority veil does not arise in 
the absence of any concept of minority when the institution came to 
be established. One has to understand, in this regard, the purpose 
for which the minority community is sought to be extended protection 
post-Constitution era. The dominant purpose is to protect the 

minority from the domination of the majority. Until independence of 
India was achieved, irrespective of whether a ‘native’ so called was a 
Hindu or a Sikh or a Muslim or a Christian or a Jain or a Buddhist or 
a Zoroastrian, each individual irrespective of his faith was the subject 
of colonial rule with little freedom. The concept of minority being 
totally absent in those days, extending the protective umbrella of 
Article 30 to AMU by proposing to hold that establishment by a 
minority is the only indicia for a minority educational institution 
without any indicia as to administration of such institution would be 
inherently contradictory to the terms of such article and susceptible 
to invalidity. Formulating indicia now without there being a holistic 
consideration of all relevant factors ought not to be embarked upon 
by the Court as a task particularly when earlier benches, including 
benches larger than this one, have jettisoned the issue. 
137. Though schools, colleges and universities are all known to be 
educational institutions, their purposes and direction are different. 
Depending upon the areas of focus and emphasis, they vary in 
importance too. Education remains largely incomplete without a basic 
bachelor’s degree, which a student obtains by qualifying in the 
relevant examination conducted by the university to which the 
college, 
where 
he 
studied, 
is 
affiliated. 
One 
other 
major 
distinguishing feature is the way each institution is created. In the 
days with which we are concerned, a school or college could be 
privately created but not a university. To ‘found’ an institution such 

as a school or a college or a university cannot be equated with its 
‘establishment’. Conscious of such limitation, the argument of 
construing Article 30(1) in a manner such that the verb ‘to establish’ 
does not call for being read in a narrow and formalistic sense and in 
its expansive reading ought to take within its fold ‘to found’ would 
only beg the question that AMU was not established but, at best, 
found by the Muslim community. 
138. The parties having agreed that the words ‘establish’ and ‘administer’ 
must be read conjunctively, there can be little doubt that 
administration has to necessarily follow establishment. It is axiomatic 
that to enjoy the protection that Article 30(1) guarantees, the right 
of the minority community to administer an educational institution 
can be claimed only if the educational institution is established by it. 
Also, Article 30(1) cannot extend to a situation where the minority 
community which establishes an educational institution shows no or 
little intention to administer it. This being the unequivocal position in 
law, it would be an indicium as to whether the educational institution, 
apart from being established by the minority, was or is being 
administered by the minority. 
139. For the purposes of Article 30, the right to establish and the right to 
administer must go hand in hand. Once established, administration 
of the institution begins. In order to attract the protection guaranteed 
by Article 30, it would not be sufficient for the minority community to 
say that though it might have established the institution, whether to 

administer it or not is a choice given by the article itself so much so 
that the administration can be wholly left to even a non-minority 
community. Only those institutions which are established by the 
minority community and are being administered by such community 
may exercise their choice of whether to establish a school or a college 
or a university as well as the manner and mode of management of 
such institution. These are of course tests which need to be applied 
to specific institutions which have not been brought into existence 
through a statute. If any institution is a creature of a statute, various 
other circumstances need to be holistically considered. Whether or 
not AMU is a minority institution presents a unique case bearing no 
similarity with any other pre-independence university. 
140. Having regard to the state of affairs existing in India during the last 
quarter of the nineteenth century and the first two decades of the 
twentieth century, there can be no disagreement that both the Hindus 
and the Muslims were aspiring to have universities to cater to the 
needs of their respective communities. The imperial government, 
however, was not prepared to give up an inch and hand over control 
of the proposed universities to either community. The Hindus 
relented and BHU came to be established in 1915. The Muslims too 
wished to have a university but the degree of control sought to be 
exercised by the imperial government brought about the rift, referred 
to earlier. What followed was sort of a compromise. The Muslim 
community relented in the same manner the Hindus had relented to 

get BHU established, leading to the process for establishment of AMU. 
The Loyalists mixed priority with pragmatism. Prioritisation meant 
focus on the most essential thing, i.e., establishment of AMU, and by 
being pragmatic, they recognised their limitations of being unable to 
administer a university. Once AMU came to be established through 
statute and became a body corporate, there was a total 
relinquishment of all claims. The land used for AMU was a public land; 
the funds for AMU were sourced to public money; the person at the 
helm of administration was the Rector, who was none other than the 
Governor General; and the sum of Rs. 30 lakh that belonged to the 
Muslim community and which they were prepared to spend for AMU 
was kept as the reserve fund, etc. 
141. Assuming that the verb ‘to establish’ could be read as ‘to found’, 
although I found no warrant to so read, it is clear that the Muslim 
community had no intention to administer AMU which was left to be 
worked out as per the AMU Act. 
142. There are a couple of other aspects, which must not escape notice. 
143. First, AMU is a creature of a statute and is engaged in discharging 
public duties. By passage of time, AMU happens to be one of the 
foremost Central Universities in the country. It is, however, entirely 
dependent on finances allocated by the Central Government. It is 
mandatorily required to function as per the AMU Act as well as 
provisions of other enactments. There can, thus, be no doubt that 
AMU is an Article 12 authority. Being an Article 12 authority, it is 

bound by all the articles in Part III of the Constitution which impose 
duty upon it inter alia to ensure equality and fairness in all its actions 
including Article 29(2). In the present context, Article 30(1) cannot 
be divorced from Article 29(2). The scope of ‘choice’ of the minority 
as in Article 30(1), if at all it has established AMU, could diminish for 
an institution such as AMU, for, it is always subject to the 
Constitutional provisions and the enactment that has created it. 
Whatever the Constitution as well as the AMU Act now provides or 
could provide in future, would represent the will of the people of 
India, and not the will of the minority. It, therefore, admits of no 
doubt that in administrative, functional and financial matters, the 
control of AMU vests in assigned entities not designated by the 
minority community. This being the status of AMU, it would be an 
indicium of not being an educational institution over which and in 
respect whereof the minority has a choice to administer it in the 
manner the minority prefers. 
144. Secondly, regard must be had to how TMA Pai Foundation (supra) 
answered questions 5(a), 5(b) and 5(c). The declaration of law seems 
to be clear that the minority community administering an aided 
minority educational institution does not enjoy full liberty to act as 
per its choice in matters relating to admission of students. Admission 
has to be on the basis of merit and it will also be permissible for the 
Government to provide that consideration should be shown to the 
weaker sections of the society. 

145. Reservation is an element of substantive justice, and to deny it to the 
SC/ST community, does not bode well for the compliance of Article 
15. We should be careful not to abridge the rights enumerated in 
Article 15 in our quest to expand and solidify the rights provided in 
Article 30. The architects of the Constitution were acutely aware of 
the stratified nature of our society. To minimise this stratification, the 
framers made a concerted effort towards integrating various 
communal identities into a composite national identity of “Indians”. 
The immediacy of this exercise can be garnered from the preamble 
to the Constitution, where we find the idea of fraternity, a 
brotherhood of Indians. 
146. The idea of substantive equality, which arose as a remedy to the 
historical injustices suffered by the members of the SC/ST 
community, was central to this new national identity. This national 
identity is manifested in institutions such as AMU, which has 
pioneered the idea that India and its institutions, belong, and are 
open to all Indians, irrespective of caste, creed, religion, or sex. To 
remove an institution like AMU from this national project would hurt 
India’s integrity and the idea of fraternity among its citizens. 
147. The appellants have argued that the Constitution is a living document 
which needs to evolve with time and this Court has not only the power 
but also the duty to read and interpret the Constitution to reflect the 
aspirations of the people of this county. The doctrine of progressive 
realisation of rights has been this Court’s north star for over several 

decades. This Court has “found” rights which were not explicitly set 
forth in Part III of the Constitution. For better or for worse, the 
Constitution in the present form is substantially different than the 
Constitution which was adopted by the Constituent Assembly. Hence, 
there are no inherent or constitutional limitations before us to expand 
the scope of Part III of the Constitution in suitably appropriate cases. 
148. However, that is quite different than what the appellants are asking 
us to do in the present case. Acceptance of their arguments will result 
in this Court engaging in historical revisionism. Anyone claiming that 
historical facts can be changed by judicial fiat, is sorely mistaken. 
Courts are the custodian of the “truth” and cannot create an 
alternative version of the “truth”, which are not supported by 
historical facts. To do so would be thoroughly unjust, arbitrary, and 
unreasonable. Allowing Courts to create alternative facts in support 
of a pre-determined conclusion would obliterate the creditability of 
this Court among the citizenry. Facts cannot be created by the stroke 
of a pen, and to attempt to do that, 100 years later, would be a 
misguided endeavour. 
CONCLUSION 
149. In the light of the above discussion, the claim of the appellants cannot 
stand. AMU was neither established by any religious community, nor 
is it administered by a religious community which is regarded as a 
minority community; hence, AMU does not qualify as a minority 
institution. Protection under Article 30(1) of the Constitution is, thus, 

not available. This submission of the appellants has no historic, legal, 
factual, or logical basis. 
150. In terms of clause (5) of Article 145 of the Constitution, it is my firm 
opinion that not only do the references not require an answer, it is 
also declared that AMU is not a minority educational institution and 
that the appeals seeking minority status for it should fail. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
151. Before parting, I express my sincere appreciation for the members of 
the bar who addressed this bench. Listening to their erudite 
arguments was indeed enriching. Further, I express gratefulness to 
my research assistants who worked tirelessly and burned the 
midnight oil, in tandem with me, to help me win the race against 
time. The scholarly contributions in books and treatises which were 
consulted and the artificial intelligence systems now available, which 
have opened up a whole new world, did provide me with valuable 
guidance and inputs. The assistance and cooperation received from 
this Court’s library also significantly enhanced this work and has 
made my opinion richer. I, however, regret my inability to 
acknowledge the contributors individually. 

……………………………….. J. 

 (DIPANKAR DATTA) 
New Delhi; 
8th November, 2024. and Ors. 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY 
 
VERSUS 
 
NARESH AGARWAL & ORS. 

WITH 

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2024 
[ SLP (C) No. 32490 of 2015] 

 and Ors. 

JUDGMENT 

SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA, J. 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
A. 
PREFACE 
B. 
UNDISPUTED FACTS 
C. 
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES 
C.1 
Appellants questioning the correctness of Azeez 
Basha (1968) 
C.2 
Respondents defending the correctness of Azeez 
Basha [supra] 
C.3 
Submissions in Rejoinder 
 
D. 
SCOPE OF PROCEEDINGS 
D.1 
Petitions before the Court 
D.2 
The Anjuman reference 
D.3 
The present reference 
D.4 
The parameters on which reference can be made 
to a larger bench 
D.5 
A holistic approach 
 
E. 
ISSUES 
F. 
WHETHER ESTABLISHMENT IS NECESSARY 
G. 
MEANING OF “ESTABLISHMENT” AND THE REAL POSITIVE 
INDICIA BEHIND 
G.1 
The existing jurisprudence of this Court 
G.2 
The founding moment or the genesis argument 

 and Ors. 

G.3 
Relevance of “choice” and “intent” in the question 
of establishment 
G.4 
The nature of administration at the time of 
establishment 
G.5 
Locating the real positive indicia 
 
H. 
THE AZEEZ BASHA JUDGMENT 
H.1 The content of the judgment of Azeez Basha 
[supra] 
H.2 The rationale behind the findings 
 
I. 
BALANCING CONFLICTING NARRATIVES 
J. 
PRE-INDEPENDENCE 
UNIVERSITIES 
AND 
OTHER 
INSTITUTIONS 
 
K. 
THE QUESTION OF ADMINISTRATION AND THE 1920 ACT 
 
L. 
‘INCORPORATED’ OR ‘ESTABLISHED’ BY OR UNDER A 
STATUTE 
 
M. 
EVOLUTION OF AMU AND THE ADVENT OF THE 
CONSTITUTION 
 
M.1 The amendments made to the 1920 Act 
M.2 The Constitution and the question of surrender of 
rights 
 
N. 
THE DE-FACTO AND SAFE HAVEN ARGUMENT 
O. 
THE UGC ACT AND YASHPAL 
P. 
NCMEI ACT AND THE AMENDMENT 
Q. 
CONCLUSIONS 

 and Ors. 

1. 
I have had the privilege and the honour of perusing the 
erudite and illuminating opinions authored by Hon’ble Chief 
Justice, Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud and Hon’ble J. Suryakant. 
Considering that the present matter involved fundamental 
questions concerning interpretation of the constitutional 
provisions and the judgments rendered by this Hon’ble Court, I 
find it necessary to render the present opinion. 
 
A. 
PREFACE 
2. 
The present larger bench of seven Hon’ble Judges, had 
assembled in order to adjudicate upon validity of some of the 
amendments made to the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920 
[hereinafter referred to as the “AMU Act”], through the Aligarh 
Muslim University Amendment Act, 1981 [hereinafter referred 
to as “1981 amendment(s)”] and the notifications of the 
Admission Committee dated 10.01.2005, Academic Council 
dated 15.01.2005 and the Executive Council dated 19.05.2005, 
providing for reservation to the extent of 50 per cent of seats to 
be reserved for Muslims of India for admission to post graduate 
programmes. While adjudicating the validity of the same, various 
other connected questions of constitutional importance arise 
which would be discussed in detail hereinunder. 
3. 
The primary question that captures the attention of this 
Court in the present proceedings is the form, content and 

 and Ors. application of Article 291 and 302 of the Constitution of India, 
1950 [hereinafter referred to as “the Constitution”]. The 
judgments of this Hon’ble Court have settled the law with regard 
to the effect of the application of Article 29 and 30, specifically 
the larger bench judgment in case T.M.A. Pai Foundation v. 
State of Karnataka, (2002), which is the locus 
classicus on the subject, rendered by a bench of eleven Hon’ble 
Judges. A co-ordinate bench of seven judges has thereafter 
distilled the position of law in P.A. Inamdar v. State of 
Maharashtra, (2005). The said judgments are a 
guiding light on the subject and assist the Court in course of the 
present judgment. 
 
1 Article 29. Protection of interests of minorities.— 
(1) Any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India or any part 
thereof having a distinct language, script or culture of its own shall have the 
right to conserve the same. 
(2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution 
maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only 
of religion, race, caste, language or any of them. 
2 Article 30. Right of minorities to establish and administer educational 
institutions.— 
(1) All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall have the right 
to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. 
(1A) In making any law providing for the compulsory acquisition of any 
property of an educational institution established and administered by a 
minority, referred to in clause (1), the State shall ensure that the amount fixed 
by or determined under such law for the acquisition of such property is such 
as would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under that clause. 
(2) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions, 
discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it is under 
the management of a minority, whether based on religion or language. and Ors. 

4. 
While the said judgments amongst others, have cleared the 
air on the broader interpretation of Article 29 and 30, the question 
which concerns the present bench is of an atypical nuance, which 
requires further elaboration and jurisprudential extraction. 
Considering the unique position that the Aligarh Muslim 
University [hereinafter referred to as “the AMU”] has in the 
history, the constitutional text and the facts surrounding the 
birthing of the University itself, this Court was required to 
interrogate certain aspects of Article 29 and specifically Article 
30, which have not necessarily arisen before this Court in any 
previous case. The specific occasion on which issues of the like 
arose was in the case concerning the AMU itself in S. Azeez 
Basha v. Union of India, (1968) (hereinafter referred 
to as “Azeez Basha”), the correctness of which is a subject matter 
of intense and rigorous debate before this Court in the present 
proceedings. 
5. 
Article 29 and 30, forming a part of the fundamental rights 
chapter of the Constitution, represent an important constitutional 
guarantee available to the citizens of the country. It is a guarantee 
that embeds cultural diversity, secularism and fairness on the 
canvas of the Constitution. The judgment in TMA Pai [supra] 
describes India as ‘a land of diversity – of different castes 
peoples, communities, languages, religions and culture’. It was 
this inherent diversity that perhaps led the Constitution makers to 

 and Ors. make specific provisions to guard and celebrate the cultural, 
religious and linguistic diversity. The Constitution thus provided 
minorities, based on religion or language, the right to establish 
and administer, educational institutions of their choice. The right 
was geared towards educational institutions as it was felt that 
education forms the bedrock of the identity of the next generation 
of individuals which would help preserve, protect and further the 
cultural, religious and linguistic diversity. 
6. 
This diversity is not a coincidence in India and is a product 
of inherent genetic built of Indian society. The citizens of this 
land mass, which we call India, or Bharat, are therefore 
inherently pluralistic and organically imbibe within them the 
ideals of religious, cultural and linguistic diversity. It is a 
function of this cultural synthesis that almost accidently and not 
necessarily by design, the fundamental rights are also provided 
for in the Constitution at two separate levels or units – the 
individual; and the group. The rights against arbitrariness, for 
equality, 
freedom 
of 
speech/ 
move 
freely/reside 
and 
settle/profession, freedom of life and liberty, freedom of religion, 
etc. are granted at an individualistic level. 
7. 
At the same time, the freedom of trade, freedom of 
association, rights against untouchability, right to manage 
religious institutions and the right establish and administer 
educational institutions, are granted to group(s) or specific 

 and Ors. groups. The said individual rights and their interplay with groups 
rights colour the palette of Indian constitutional law and would 
assist the Court in chartering its future course. 
8. 
The specific rights to the minorities under the Constitution, 
over and above the existing individual and group rights available 
to all citizens and/or groups which are agnostic to minority/non-
minority classification, are to be theorised within the distinctive 
context of Indian nationhood. It is necessary to note that India is 
a “nation”, but not in the euro-centric sense, which merges 
linguistic identity with a colonial or medieval past. India is a 
continuum, it is a civilization that has perpetuated its course 
through the annals of history, carrying with it the lives and stories 
of every hue of human existence. India’s national identity merges 
many diverging groups, communities, sects, etc. which often 
intersect with each other in varying fashions. This diversity does 
not rob the country of a unified past, a shared history and 
composite present. It is, in fact, this kaleidoscope of 
intermingling and off-shooting cultures that builds the national 
identity or the national character. The uniqueness of India, its 
nationalism, its shared cultural history and the context in which 
the Constitution came in to being, gives life to the provisions of 
Constitution. It is with this broad understanding that this Court 
would seek to locate the answers to the questions presented 
before it. and Ors. 

B. 
UNDISPUTED FACTS 
9. 
There has been a considerable degree of contest over the 
facts that may be germane in the present matter. The question of 
establishment of the AMU and the facts surrounding it, the 
resultant AMU Act, 1920 [as it then stood] and the history of the 
Mahommedan Anglo-Oriental College [hereinafter referred to as 
the “MAO College”] have been presented by the parties in their 
own manner and style. Without adverting to the contested facts 
or claims, the Court would be benefitted by culling out the 
uncontested facts which are relevant for the purposes of the 
present adjudication. 
10. 
 The history of modern higher education in India starts 
from the Charter Act of 1813 of the British Crown which 
allocated funds for education in British India, leading to the 
establishment of institutions like the Hindu College in Calcutta 
in 1817. In 1854, an education policy of the British for British 
India came in the form of the Wood’s Dispatch, officially known 
as the “Despatch on Indian Education”. It was a seminal 
educational policy document issued in 1854 by Sir Charles 
Wood, the President of the Board of Control for India and marked 
a significant step in the development of the modern education 
system in India. The Dispatch advocated for the establishment of 
universities in major cities and improvements in schools and 
specifically provided that the “examinations for degrees will not 

 and Ors. include any subjects connected with religious belief; and the 
affiliated institutions will be under the management of persons of 
every variety of religious persuasion.” 
11. 
In 1857, Act II, XXII and XXVII were passed by the 
Imperial Legislative Council [a representative body empowered 
by the British Parliament to make laws for British India] to 
establish the first three Universities in India, namely Universities 
of Calcutta, Bombay and Madras. Thereafter, Act XLVII of 
1860, was passed by the Imperial Legislative Council, which 
expanded the powers of the abovesaid three Universities to grant 
degrees. As a matter of policy and practice, the British Imperial 
power in India therefore, set-up Universities through a legislative 
enactment and resultantly “recognised” such Universities for the 
purposes the colonial power deemed fit. The legislations 
mentioned above, provided the British officials significant 
controlling and regulatory powers to administer the institutions. 
There has been considerable emphasis on this aspect of the matter 
and shall be discussed separately in a particular section of the 
judgment. 
12. 
In 1870, a private committee was set up by the name of 
Committee for the Better Diffusion and Advancement of 
Learning among the Muhammadans of India, which submitted its 
report in 1872. The said Report provided a roadmap for the 
Muhammadan Oriental College as an institution to promote 

 and Ors. 

Western Arts and Sciences for the education of Muslims in India. 
In 1873, on the said lines, a Scheme was proposed for the MAO 
College. 
13. 
On 24.05.1875, the opening ceremony of the MAO 
College was held in Aligarh. On 08.01.1877, the foundation of 
the MAO College was laid by Sir Syed. The Rules and 
Regulations for the Appointment of the Trustees of the MAO 
College were passed in 1889. The said Rules described the object 
of MAO College was “primarily the education of Mahomedans 
and, so far as may be consistent therewith, of Hindus and other 
persons.” 
14. 
In 1902, the Report of the Indian Universities Commission 
was published. The said report, with regard to MAO College, it 
was specifically noted that “no obstacle should be placed in the 
way of denominational colleges, it is important to maintain the 
undenominational character of the Universities”. On 24.03.1904, 
the Indian Universities Act (VIII of 1904) was passed which 
unified the pre-existing legislation based University regime in 
British India, repealed the previous Acts, and brought within its 
purview the five Universities. It also reconstituted the then 
existing Governing Bodies of the universities and gave statutory 
recognition to the ‘Syndicates’ in the said Universities. 
15. 
From the late 1800s to 1910, several individuals associated 
with the MAO College propounded various differing ideas for 

 and Ors. setting up of a “University”. In May 1911, representatives from 
the MAO College met Harcourt Butler, Member of the Governor-
General’s Council for the setting up of a “University”. From 1911 
till 1913-14, the prayer was for the setting up of a predominantly 
“denominational” University which would be recognised by the 
British Indian Government. The stances of parties took a sharp 
turn on the passing of the Benaras Hindu University Act, 1915 
[hereinafter referred to as the “BHU Act”] by the Imperial 
Legislative Council on 01.10.1915 leading to the establishment 
of the Benares Hindu University [hereinafter referred to as the 
“BHU”]. 
16. 
At the said time, as per the British officials in-charge, the 
“Benares model” as it was then referred, had to be followed. It is 
sought to be presented that once the movement to establish the 
BHU gained prominence and acceptance, the tone and tenor of 
all sides changed. 
17. 
Separately, there were also considerable disagreements 
within the various groups of the minority community advocating 
for a University over issues such as recognition by the British 
Indian Government and extent of control that the British Indian 
Government would exercise over any such proposed University. 
As the said matter also involves minute machinations of the 
working of the colonial government and the views and counter 
views of various personalities involved in the process, the parties 

 and Ors. before this Court have sought to highlight one aspect over the 
other. The various conflicting narratives of the process shall be 
discussed separately in a particular section of the judgment. 
18. 
On 10.04.1916, 
the 
informally 
formed 
‘Moslem 
University Committee’, which was requesting the British 
Government to form the University by bringing in an enactment, 
by a Resolution observed that “it has no other alternative at 
present, but to accept the principles of the Hindu University 
Act…”. Once the deck was cleared for the in-principle 
“acceptance” of having a University on the Benares model, the 
discussions started on the actual draft of the Aligarh Muslim 
University Bill. 
19. 
Finally, on 27.08.1920, Sir Mian Muhammed Shafi, the 
education member in the Imperial Legislative Council, 
introduced the Bill for the establishment of a University and on 
the same day, sought to refer the Bill to a Select Committee. On 
08.09.1920, the Select Committee submitted its Report. On 
09.09.1920, Mr. Shafi moved the report of the Select Committee 
on the Bill to establish AMU in the Indian Legislative Council. 
Finally, on 14.09.1920, the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920 
was passed. and Ors. 

20. 
Till the mid-1920’s almost a dozen Universities under 
legislative enactments had been established in British India3. On 
23.03.1925, an Inter-University Board was established to 
facilitate the exchange of professors between these Universities, 
to serve as an authorised channel of communication and facilitate 
the coordination of university work, to assist Indian Universities 
to get recognition for their degrees and diplomas in other 
countries, etc. 
21. 
In 1935, the Government of India Act, 1935 was enacted 
by the British Parliament which specifically included provisions 
relating to the regulation of higher education. It divided 
legislative powers between the Federal Government and 
Provincial Governments. In matters related to higher education, 
both the central and provincial legislatures had the authority to 
make laws. However, there was a specific legislative entry with 
regard to “Benares Hindu University” and “Aligarh Muslim 
University” which vested the Federal Legislature with the 
exclusive legislative powers over the same under Entry 13, List 
I, in S. 100, of the Government of India Act, 1935. 
 
3 University of Calcutta; University of Bombay (now known as University 
of Mumbai); University of Madras; Panjab University (Established as 
University College, Lahore. Later, raised to a level of University.); 
University of Allahabad; University of Mysore; Banaras Hindu University; 
Patna University; Aligarh Muslim University; University of Lucknow; 
University of Dhaka; Delhi University; Nagpur University. and Ors. 

22. 
In 1944, the Central Advisory Board of Education made 
attempts to formulate a national system of higher education and 
submitted the “Sargent Report” which recommended the 
formation of a “University Grants Committee” to coordinated 
Higher Education in India. In pursuance to the same, in 1945, the 
Department of Education, Health and Lands vide resolution dated 
June 4, 1945 established the University Grants Committee to 
advise the government on the grants to be given to the Central 
Universities [Delhi, Benares and Aligarh]. 
23. 
In 1947, the constitution of the Committee was amended 
and its scope enlarged by the Department of Education 
Resolution to empower the Committee to deal with all 
Universities in India. In 1948, the University Education 
Commission was set up under the Chairmanship of S. 
Radhakrishnan “to report on Indian university education and 
suggest improvements and extensions that might be desirable to 
suit the present and future needs and aspirations of the country”. 
The Commission submitted its Report, whereby it was 
recommended to reconstitute the University Grants Committee, 
to expand its membership, include experts on the panel, give 
powers of visitation, distribution of grant-in aid, etc. 
24. 
In 1951, the AMU Act was amended in order to bring it in 
line with the Constitution [which came in to force in 1950]. This 
was simultaneous with similar amendments being carried out to 

 and Ors. the BHU Act. The AMU Act was further amended in 1965, 1972 
and 1981. The content and the purport of the amendments to the 
AMU Act over the years shall be discussed in detail in a separate 
section of the judgment. 
25. 
On 28.12.1952, the Government of India set up an 
‘interim’ University Grants Commission (hereinafter referred to 
as “UGC”) by resolution to advise it on the allocation of grants-
in-aid from public funds. On 03.03.1956, the University Grants 
Commission Act, 1956 [hereinafter referred to as the “UGC 
Act”] was enacted thereby giving statutory recognition to the 
UGC. 
26. 
In 1968, the judgment in Azeez Basha [supra] was 
delivered which held that the AMU was neither established nor 
administered by the minority community. After the judgement in 
Azeez Basha [supra] was delivered, the AMU was treated to be 
a free and open institution as opposed to a minority educational 
institution. This position continued until 1981 when the 
Parliament passed The Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) 
Act, 1981. This Act made several changes to the provisions of 
the 1920 Act chief among which was an amendment to Section 
2(l) which now read as follows: 
(l) “University” means the educational institution 
of their choice established by the Muslims of India, 
which orginated as the Muhammadan Anglo-
Oriental College, Aligarh and which was 

 and Ors. subsequently incorporated as the Aligarh Muslim 
University.” 
 
27. 
An addition was also made of clause 5(2)(c) dealing with 
the powers of the University which gave the University power 
“to 
promote 
especially 
the 
educational 
and 
cultural 
advancement of the Muslims of India”. The word “established” 
was deleted from the long title of the Act and it now read “An 
Act to incorporate a teaching and residential Muslim University 
at Aligarh” as opposed to the unamended long title i.e., “An Act 
to establish and incorporate a teaching and residential Muslim 
University at Aligarh”. The Act also empowered the Court of 
the University to act as the Supreme Governing Body. 
28. 
Consequent to this amendment, no issue arose till 2005, 
when the Admissions Committee of the University took a 
decision at its meeting of January 10, 2005 to reserve 50% of 
seats in the Post Graduate Medical Courses for Muslims. The 
same was also accepted by the Union of India on February 25, 
2005. The Resolutions providing such reservations and the 1981 
amendments were challenged before a Single Judge of the 
Hon’ble High Court of Judicature at Allahabad [hereinafter 
referred to as the “Allahabad High Court” or “High Court”] on 
the ground that the amendments amounted to an impermissible 
legislative overruling of Azeez Basha [supra]. and Ors. 

29. 
The Single Judge had read down Section 2(l) to mean that 
the word “established” in that section would refer to the MAO 
college and not the University. The learned Single Judge further 
held that the amendment of 1981 did not turn the AMU into a 
minority institution because Azeez Basha [supra] still held the 
field. Thereafter, appeals were preferred before a division bench 
of the Hon’ble High Court. 
30. 
The Ld. Division Bench rendered two separate judgements 
which concurred entirely on all points of law raised before it. 
Briefly stated, it was held that the core principle of the Azeez 
Basha [supra] was that the minority community had requested 
the British Government to establish the AMU because they 
wanted governmental recognition of its degrees. It was held that 
this recognition of historical fact could not be overcome by “an 
enforced declaration of substantial identity” as given in section 
2(l) and as sought to be done by removing the word “establish” 
from the long title of the Act. Consequently, Section 5(2)(c) was 
also struck down for being discriminatory since it privileged the 
advancement of a particular section over others. It was further 
held that the Parliament had no competence to enact the 1981 Act 
because only a minority could create a minority institution, 
Parliament could not. 
31. 
The decision of the High Court was challenged by the 
University in a Special Leave Petition before this Court. The 

 and Ors. 

Union of India had also challenged the decision of the High Court 
and had supported the University’s stand. On April 24, 2006, a 
Division Bench of this Court had directed status quo to be 
maintained in the proceedings after Counsel for the University 
undertook not to implement the 50% reservation policy until final 
disposal of the case. The question regarding the status of the 
university was directed to be considered before a larger bench. 
32. 
Thereafter, the Union had sought to withdraw the appeal 
filed against the judgement of the High Court on the ground that 
the historical finding of fact in Azeez Basha [supra] could not 
have been set at naught by an amending act of the Parliament. On 
February 2, 2019, a bench of three judges of this Court had 
directed that the question of correctness of the Azeez Basha 
[supra] decision should be referred to a bench of Seven Judges. 
The reference was made directly to seven judges because in the 
Bench’s view, the very same question had been referred before 
in the case of Anjuman-e-Rahmania and Others v. District 
Inspector of Schools and Others W.P. (C) 54-57 of 1981. These 
writ petitions were heard and disposed of by the Bench in TMA 
Pai Foundation v. Union of India, (2002) but this 
question was left unanswered. The issue with regard to the scope 
of the reference shall be discussed separately in detail. and Ors. 

C. 
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES 
C.1 
Appellants questioning the correctness of Azeez Basha 
[supra] 
 
33. 
It was submitted by Dr. Rajeev Dhawan, learned Senior 
Counsel, appearing for the Aligarh Muslim University, that the 
order dated 26.11.1981 passed by this Court in the case of 
Anjuman-e-Rahmaniya v. District Inspector of Schools, 
W.P.(C) No. No. 54-57 of 1981 and the reference order dated 
12.02.2019 in the present batch of petitions creates several points 
of reference for this bench to adjudicate upon, which include the 
correctness of judgment in Azeez Basha [supra], impact of Prof. 
Yashpal v. State of Chhattisgarh, (2005), and those 
relating to National Commission for Minority Educational 
Institutions Act, 2004 (‘NCMEI Act’). However, no specific 
issues were spelt out in the order dated 12.02.2019. 
34. 
In view of the above, Dr. Dhawan submitted that the issues 
are required to be framed and then decided by this Bench. 
According to him, following issues arise in the present matter: 
a. 
Was Azeez Basha [supra] correctly decided, and whether 
it suffers from internal contradiction and reasoning on facts 
and on law? b. 
Does Azeez Basha [supra] need to be reconsidered in light 
of earlier and subsequent decisions of this Court on Article 
30(1)? and Ors. c. 
What is the effect of Azeez Basha [supra] on the future 
decisions of the Hon’ble Allahabad High Court which 
applies Azeez Basha [supra] in toto and strikes down the 
statutory amendments to the Aligarh Muslim University 
Act 1920 (hereinafter referred to as 1920 Act) through the 
1981 Amendment Act as a usurpation of judicial power? d. 
What is the effect of NCMEI Act read with the University 
Grants Commission Act, 1956 (‘UGC Act’)? Should Azeez 
Basha [supra] be reconsidered in the light of the NCMEI 
Act (as amended in 2010) and read with UGC Act as 
considered in Yashpal supra? e. 
Was Azeez Basha [supra] correct in accepting the 
antecedent historical data on AMU’s Muslim character, 
but denying its constitutional significance while deciding 
the issue of its minority status, which is at the variance with 
St. Stephen’s College v. University of Delhi, (1992) [5-Judge Bench]; Rev. Father W Proost v. State 
of Bihar, (1969) [5-Judge Bench]; and Right 
Rev. Bishop SK Patro v. State of Bihar, (1969) 
[5-Judge Bench]? f. 
Is Azeez Basha [supra] contrary to the constitutional 
dispensation on rights of minorities under Articles 29 and 
30, discerned before the Constituent Assembly Debates 
and approved in TMA Pai? and Ors. 

35. 
Further, Dr. Dhawan raised a preliminary objection 
regarding change of stand of the Union of India insofar as the 
validity of the 1981 Amending Act is concerned. Having once 
filed an appeal against the impugned judgment of the Allahabad 
High Court, the decision to withdraw the same by Union of India 
and adopting a stand, which is contrary to the pleadings before 
the Hon’ble High Court is arbitrary, unreasonable and lacks 
bonafides. Dr. Dhawan submitted that the stance taken by Union 
of India presently is also contrary to its stance in the case of Azeez 
Basha [supra], which should not be permitted at this stage. 
36. 
Dr. Dhawan interpreted Articles 26, 29 and 30 of the 
Constitution to argue that there are three questions, answers to 
which determine the character of a particular institution i.e., 
whether a particular institution is a minority institution or not: - 
a. 
What is the origin of the institute? b. 
Whether the minority community founded the institution 
or not? c. 
Whether the community in question is minority, either 
linguistic or religious, in the State or not? 
37. 
Dr. Dhawan assailed the correctness of Azeez Basha 
[supra], by making the following submissions. Firstly, it has 
been held that as per the University Grants Commission Act, 
1956, a university can be established only by a statute (enacted 
either by the Parliament or a State Legislature) and a university 

 and Ors. can also be of a minority character. Also, that the university loses 
its minority character as soon as it is established by a statute. 
Therefore, there is inherent contradiction in the said judgment. 
Secondly, while Azeez Basha [supra] recognizes the history, 
background and antecedent role that the MAO College played in 
building this institution, the bench, however, ignores it at the end 
in view of the existence of 1920 Act. The said history and 
background ought to be appreciated as has been done in case of 
St. Stephen’s [supra]. Thirdly, in this respect, Azeez Basha 
[supra] completely ignores the purpose of the 1920 Act. The said 
judgment fails to correctly appreciate the salient features of the 
1920 Act which demonstrate the minority character of Aligarh 
Muslim University. Furthermore, Azeez Basha [supra] adopts a 
very narrow construction of the word “establish” used in Article 
30 of the Constitution and further, fails to give reasons to 
disregard other meanings of the said term. Lastly, Azeez Basha 
[supra] wrongly concludes that the educational institutions of the 
minorities converted into, and incorporated as, a university by a 
statute loses or seizes to retain its minority character. If a minority 
can establish a university under Article 30(1), and if universities 
are required to be incorporated under a statute for degrees to be 
recognised, then it must follow that the minority community is 
entitled to seek incorporation of its institution as a university. and Ors. 

38. 
Dr. Dhawan, relying upon the provisions of the 1920 Act, 
asserted that that it clearly demonstrates the Muslim character of 
the Aligarh Muslim University. It is further urged that the AMU 
is the alter ego of MAO College has been recognized by various 
provisions of the 1920 Act. Dr. Dhawan emphasized that the then 
Imperial Legislature had incorporated various provisions in the 
1920 Act which are clearly intended for the benefit of the Muslim 
community. It is pointed out that the administration of AMU has 
been vested with the Muslim minority and that Muslim 
community had de jure and de facto control over the management 
of AMU. 
39. 
Dr. Dhawan asserted that the law laid down in Azeez 
Basha [supra] ignored the earlier binding decisions of larger 
benches of this Hon’ble Court and therefore is, per incuram. 
These include the law laid down by a 7-judge bench in the case 
of In Re Kerala Education Bill, 1957, (1959) SCR 995 and also 
by a 6-judge bench in the case of Sidhajbhai Sabhai v. State of 
Bombay, (1963). 
40. 
Furthermore, in view of the subsequent decisions of this 
Hon’ble Court also, the law laid down in Azeez Basha [supra] 
does not hold the field anymore. Additionally, it is urged that so 
far as UGC Act and NCMEI Act (as amended in the year 2010) 
are concerned, Sections 2(f), 22 and 23 of the former Act read 
with Sections 2(g) and 10 of the latter Act indicate that a 

 and Ors. university can only be established by a statute and apart from 
them, only those institutions can confer degrees which have been 
declared as ‘deemed to be University’ under Section 3 of the 
UGC Act or which have been specifically empowered as such by 
an Act of Parliament. A university established by a statute cannot 
be kept out of the scope of Article 30 of the Constitution. If it is 
so kept out, then it would mean all tertiary education, except 
private institutions, will not get the protection of Article 30. As 
per Dr. Dhawan’s reading of Azeez Basha [supra], every 
minority institution, once given a statutory recognition, will fall 
outside the ambit of Article 30. 
41. 
Dr. Dhawan referred to the amendments made to the 1920 
Act in the year 1981, which, as noted hereinabove, have already 
been struck down by the Allahabad High Court by the impugned 
judgment. It is submitted that the validity of the said amendment 
provisions need not be examined by this Bench and can be later 
dealt with by the regular bench. As per Dr. Dhawan, presently, 
the only issue which may be decided is whether Azeez Basha 
[supra] was correctly decided or not. 
42. 
Dr. Dhawan, referring to the said provisions and the 
statutes annexed to the 1920 Act, submitted that de jure the 
control of management of the Aligarh Muslim University was 
and is with the Muslim Community. Further, adverting to certain 
other facts such as that all Chancellors till date have been 

 and Ors. 

Muslims and 34 out of 37 Vice-Chancellors have been Muslims, 
it has been pleaded that de facto too, the administration of the 
Aligarh Muslim University has been in the hands of the Muslim 
community. 
43. 
Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned senior counsel, appearing for the 
Old Boys’ Association, submitted that the judgment in Azeez 
Basha [supra] failed to consider the history and genesis of the 
Aligarh Muslim University in the right perspective. While 
determining the factum of the establishment of the University, 
historical initiative, impetus, promotion, and purpose behind the 
institution has to be given due importance, which was not done 
in Azeez Basha [supra]. 
44. 
It is asserted that Azeez Basha [supra] wrongly concludes 
that the University was established by the 1920 Act and therefore, 
it cannot be considered a minority institution. The 1920 Act is 
not the establishing factum of the University but only a 
recognition of such establishment, which has been done by the 
Muslim community at the relevant time. In order to highlight the 
history and purpose behind the institute, Mr. Sibal relied upon 
letters exchanged between Sir Syed Ahmed Khan and the 
relevant authorities of the Government and the debates which 
took place when the Aligarh Muslim University Bill was being 
discussed in the Imperial Legislature in the year 1920. In short, 
the genesis, according to him, includes the following: 

 and Ors. a. 
Inspiration or purpose to set up the institution is by the 
minority. b. 
The steps taken for persuasion are by the minority. c. 
The essential paraphernalia or initial funding should be by 
the minority. d. 
Persuading the authorities, by the minority, to accept that 
fact. 
 
45. 
Mr. Sibal vehemently argued that the mere presence of 
“outsiders” in the administration of a minority institution would 
not deprive the institution from its minority status. He accepted 
that certain regulations can be imposed by the State on such 
institution to maintain the stands of excellence, however, those 
regulations would not affect the minority status of the institution. 
In contrast, the right of a linguistic or a religious minority under 
Article 30 to establish and administer an institution “of their 
choice”, which cannot be subject to any regulation, is absolute. 
46. 
Additionally, it is submitted that the only benefit to a 
particular institute of having a minority character is that the 
institute has the right to reserve a certain number of seats for 
students of the said minority community. The said right should 
not be taken away in the case of Aligarh Muslim University, 
where de facto, majority of students are already of Muslim 
community. and Ors. 

47. 
Apart from adopting submission of Dr. Dhawan and Mr. 
Sibal, Mr. Salman Khurshid, learned senior counsel, appearing 
for applicants in I.A Nos. 5 & 6 of 2016 in i.e., AMU Lawyers Forum and AMU Old Boys’ 
Association, Delhi Unit, submitted that a moral reading of the 
Constitution needs to be adopted in the present case. If that is so 
done, it will follow that the rights under Part III of the 
Constitution of India are natural to or inherent in a human being. 
Mr. Khurshid argued that the natural rights are inalienable 
because they are inseparable from the human personality and 
have been just preserved by the Constitution. In this context, the 
rights under Article 30 that the minorities have, as individuals, 
existed even prior to 1950. As such, these rights cannot be taken 
away by way of an artificially restricted interpretation of a word 
like 'establish'. 
48. 
Mr. Shadan Farasat, learned counsel, appearing for the 
appellant in CA 2316 of 2006 - Haji Muqeet Ali Qureshi vs 
Malay Shukla, submitted that there is a difference between 
establishment of an educational institution and the device to bring 
it into legal existence, which the judgment in Azeez Basha 
[supra] fails to take note of. The 1920 Act is a device to bring 
into legal existence the Aligarh Muslim University, which was 
established by the Muslim Community. Furthermore, the 
interpretation of Article 30 cannot depend on the existence of a 

 and Ors. particular legal regime at any given point, which is the UGC Act 
in the present case. Mr. Farasat relied upon the data to show that 
de facto, the administration of the AMU has been with persons, 
majority of whom belong to Muslim community and further that, 
whether there is reservation of 50% for Muslim Community or 
not will not make any real difference since the majority of 
students also has been of Muslim Community. 
49. 
Mr. M R Shamshad, learned counsel appearing for the 
applicants in I.A. No. 563 of 2024 in i.e., Anjuman-e-Rahmania, submitted that the applicant was 
the petitioner in WP Nos. 54-57 of 1981 titled as Anjuman-e-
Rahmania v. Distt. Inspector of School in which the order dated 
26.11.1981 was passed by Fazal Ali J. questioning the 
correctness of the judgment in Azeez Basha [supra]. In addition 
to what has already been argued, he submitted that minorities in 
the country have group rights in the form of rights under Articles 
29 and 30 of the Constitution, which must be protected as is done 
in the case of other group rights available to Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes, OBCs, etc. 
 
C.2 
Respondents defending the correctness of Azeez Basha 
[supra] 
 
50. 
Controverting the same, on behalf of the parties defending 
the judgment of the High Court and the correctness of the 
judgment in Azeez Basha [supra], Mr. R. Venkataramani, the 

 and Ors. learned Attorney General, submitted that the power to establish a 
university is traceable to Article 30 of the Constitution and 
because the Aligarh Muslim University was a pre-constitutional 
university, the Muslim community did not legally have the power 
to establish it. Only the British Government could have 
established the University through an act of the Legislature. He 
has also sought to distinguish the existence of the University 
from its predecessor, the Mohammedan Anglo Oriental College, 
as the enabling power to create such a college came from the 
Societies Registration Act. Ld. Attorney General argues that the 
words “educational institutions of their choice” used in Article 
30 do not by themselves confer a power of establishment 
independent of legal competence to do so. The Ld. Attorney 
General argued that Azeez Basha [supra] was correct insofar as 
it stated that the AMU was not “established” by the Muslim 
community but by an Act of Legislature. 
51. 
Mr. Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General of India, raised a 
preliminary objection challenging the very reference itself, 
holding that a bench of two judges could not have directly 
referred the matter to seven judges in Anjuman [supra]. The 
Solicitor General disputed the interpretation of Azeez Basha 
[supra] put forward by the Appellants whereby it is argued that 
Azeez Basha [supra] holds that universities established by 
legislation can never be minority institutions. He accepted that 

 and Ors. institutions incorporated by statute can also be minority 
institutions but submitted that in such a case, the Legislature 
would include provisions in the Act clarifying the minority 
character of the institution and AMU Act makes no such 
provision. He gave the example of the pre-constitution 
Annamalai University Act, to indicate how the British parliament 
recognised “founders” of universities, which were eventually 
taken over by the then Government. 
52. 
The Solicitor General made extensive reference to the 
provisions of the 1920 Act to argue that the intent was in fact the 
opposite, that is to have government control over the institution 
by controlling, inter alia, the appointment of important office 
holders, the composition of administrative bodies, the rule 
making power of the university etc. 
53. 
The Solicitor General argued that the AMU, despite its 
name is not really a Muslim University but rather a secular 
educational institution. Reference was made to the secular nature 
of the education provided therein, to the history of AMU as a 
national institution and the correspondences between British 
officials prior to the passage of the Act to show that their intent 
was to have significant control over the administration of the 
educational institution sought to be established. Reference was 
further made to the Parliamentary debates on the amending acts 
of 1965 and 1981. and Ors. 

54. 
It was asserted, through various examples, that in a pre-
constitutional context, the British Government had the power to 
require a community to establish a university on the 
Government’s own terms. It was sought to be argued that the 
AMU was a secular institution and not a denominational 
university as the proponents of AMU may have wished for. It was 
argued that since there was no Article 30 at the said time, there 
was no right to establish a university free of government control 
while still seeking governmental recognition of degrees. 
55. 
The Solicitor General took the Court through the history 
of establishment of Universities in the country. It was argued that 
the history of universities under British rule to show that 
government control was a built-in feature so far as educational 
institutions were concerned. Reference was made to the history 
of the split between the AMU and the Jamia Milia Islamia to 
argue that the AMU chose to remain under government patronage 
while the Jamia was established as a “nationalist” college. 
56. 
It was asserted that it was open to the AMU to remain a 
college and be free of government control or to establish a 
university without recognition of its degrees by the government 
but it chose not to exercise these options. The substance of the 
submission was that the right of administration was ‘surrendered’ 
when the proponents of the AMU accepted establishment by 
statute of the kind made by the 1920 Act. and Ors. 

57. 
The Solicitor General made an attempt to distinguish the 
concept of being established by an Act from the concept of being 
established under an Act. The decision in Dalco Engineering 
Pvt. Ltd. v. Satish Prabhakar Padhye, (2010), was 
cited to urge that the AMU owes the whole of its existence to a 
statute and thus it cannot be said that the statute was a mere 
recognition of an existing arrangement. It was argued that 
through the 1920 Act, the establishment of the AMU was the 
fresh establishment of an entirely new body. 
58. 
It was argued that the rights of establishment and 
administration are distinct and separate. Reference in this regard 
was made to Re: Kerala Education Bill, 1957, [supra]. The 
thrust of the argument was that the institution must be shown to 
have been established by the minority community. Only when 
this preliminary fact is proved, would “administration” come into 
the picture. According to him, the words “establish and 
administer” must be read conjunctively i.e. there can be no right 
of administration separate from establishment. The stand that 
these words are conjunctive is common to all the Respondents. 
He referred to the Constituent Assembly Debates and to 
amendments carried out in the NCMEI Act by which the words 
“establish or administer” were substituted with “establish and 
administer” in line with the constitutional scheme and Azeez 
Basha [supra]. and Ors. 

59. 
It is further argued that an overly-expansive reading of 
Article 30 would result in educational institutions using the 
‘cloak’ of minority to escape government regulations and 
therefore, there must be a real positive index which connects the 
minority community to the institution. Extensive reference is 
made to A.P. Christians Medical Educational Society v. 
Government of Andhra Pradesh, (1986) and St. 
Stephens College [supra] to show what might be indicia of 
minority character of an institute. 
60. 
The Solicitor General supported the interpretation of 
“establish” put forth in Azeez Basha [supra], to assert that it was 
in line with the constitutional intent of Article 30. Since the 
provision is intended to give a right to specifically to minorities, 
it was argued that was necessary to show that the institution must 
have been “actually, tangibly and manifestly brought into being” 
by a minority. 
61. 
It was asserted that “establishment” is a question of fact 
and as Azeez Basha [supra] decided this question of fact 
conclusively, it is not open for the Legislature to reverse a factual 
finding by bringing a legislation stating otherwise in the form of 
the 1981 amendment. The Solicitor General, in response to the 
submissions made on the stand of the Union of India, stated that 
the Union of India has been consistent in its stand. It was stated 
that as per the Union of India, the AMU was not a minority 

 and Ors. institution even during the hearing of the case of Azeez Basha 
[supra]. It was further stated that a party can always withdraw 
the appeal at its discretion and the Union of India can always 
choose the assist the Court on a question of law. 
62. 
Mr. K.M. Nataraj, learned Additional Solicitor General of 
India, has submitted a short note wherein it was argued that the 
Muslim minority surrendered their right to establish the college 
and opted for the governmental establishment in order to have 
recognition for its degrees. It was urged that the circumstances in 
which such surrender was made cannot be gone into by the Court 
in exercise of its power of judicial review while placing reliance 
on the judgment in the case of Dir. of Endowments Gov. of 
Hyderabad v. Syed Akram Ali, AIR 1956 SC 60. He 
distinguishes the observations regarding impossibility of 
surrender of such rights made in the case of Ahmedabad St. 
Xavier's College Society v. State of Gujarat, (1974) 
by stating that the said observations applied only in a post-
constitutional context. He referred Black’s Law Dictionary 6th 
Edition to argue that in Azeez Basha [supra], the court correctly 
understood the meaning of ‘establish’. He further relies on State 
of Kerala v. Very Rev. Mother Provincial, (1970) to 
argue that the words ‘establish’ and ‘found’ have the same 
meaning. and Ors. 

63. 
It was further submitted that in order to qualify as a 
minority educational institution, an institution must be 
established for the betterment of the minority community and the 
inclusion of any outsiders must be merely incidental. It was 
argued that the administrative control must lie with the minority 
and that on a cumulative understanding it should be clearly 
visible that the institution in question is actually a minority 
institution and to a masked phantom as warned of in A.P. 
Christians Medical Educational Society v. Government of 
Andhra Pradesh, (1986). He finally submits that the 
AMU is an institution of national character and hence, it cannot 
be a minority institution. 
64. 
Mr. Vikramjit Bannerjee, learned Additional Solicitor 
General of India, briefly traced the history and purpose of 
incorporating Articles 25-30 from the Constituent Assembly 
Debates. It was argued that the purpose of these provisions was 
to instil a sense of confidence in the minorities with a final view 
to erasing the difference between majority and minority 
altogether. In that view, allowing an institute of national 
importance to be classified as a minority institution would go 
against the principles behind Article 30. To support his stand, he 
relied on Bal Patil v. Union of India, (2005). It was 
argued that the words “institution of national importance” in 
Entry 63 of List I must be read keeping in mind the principle of 

 and Ors. noscitur a sociis which would indicate that the AMU is intended 
to be a secular institution open to all. 
65. 
Mr. Rakesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Counsel, submitted 
that in the pre-constitution era, the sole prerogative of 
establishing universities lay with the Governor-General-in-
Council. He refers to the establishment of a number of 
Universities during the time of British time to show that all such 
Universities were established by an Act of the Legislature. It was 
argued that the intent of a minority in establishing a university 
was material factor because the ultimate fact of establishment 
could be only through the Government. It was argued that the 
Muslim community in the pre-constitution era did not identify as 
minorities at all. Therefore, it was stated that if the community 
itself did not accept a minority character, it was not open to 
confer such a character on them through operation of Article 30 
insofar as the AMU is concerned. It was argued that the 
numerical inferiority is only one aspect of minority status. Other 
aspects would include whether or not the community was 
dominant either socially or politically and whether or not it 
considered itself a minority. He relied on certain reports of the 
United Nations to reinforce the idea that minority must be 
defined with respect to socio-political dominance. 
66. 
Mr. Dwivedi referred to history of negotiations between 
the proponents of a Muslim University and the British 

 and Ors. 

Government to argue that all major demands of the community 
were rejected and administrative control of the university by the 
government was a condition precedent for approval. He also 
referred to the Constituent Assembly Debates to argue that the 
understanding of the constitution makers was that the AMU was 
an institution of a national character. It is argued that there is a 
difference between a university established under an Act by 
private persons and a university established by an Act. He argued 
that the AMU is established by the Act and not under the Act by 
the Muslim community. 
67. 
Mr Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Ld. Senior Counsel, took the stand 
that the correctness of Azeez Basha [supra] had been referred 
only to the limited extent of determining whether its holding of 
the words “establish” and “administer” being conjunctive in 
Article 30 was correct or not. He argued that the original 
reference order in Anjuman [supra] only referred the question 
of whether an institution could be called a minority institution 
even if certain non-minority individuals had been involved in its 
establishment. He also relied on the reference order dated 
12.02.2019 to argue that the status of AMU had not been referred 
as a question at all. 
68. 
In support of the conjunctive nature of the words establish 
and administer, Mr. Kaul relied on Hyderabad Asbestos Cement 
Products v. Union of India, (2000) and St. Stephens 

 and Ors. 

[supra] and also on the 2010 amendments to the NCMEI Act 
referred to above. It was argued that applying a disjunctive test 
would lead to adverse consequences since it would enable 
institutions to claim minority status even if they were never 
administered by minorities. It is submitted that no adverse effect 
would be caused to the right of minorities to establish universities 
as a result of Azeez Basha [supra]. It was argued that any 
university which wanted a minority status was free to do so and 
in the absence of action by the concerned authorities could take 
advantage of the deeming provision under the NCMEI Act. 
69. 
Mr. Kaul argued that the creation of the AMU was the 
creation of a new and distinct entity, not merely the incorporation 
of an existing institution as a university. The old MAO college 
had been completely dissolved and its assets and liabilities 
transferred to the University. It was further stated that the Act 
used the words “an act to establish” and it did not anywhere state 
that it was recognising an existing institution. 
70. 
Mr. Kaul defended the correctness of Azeez Basha [supra] 
by submitting that it had correctly appreciated the antecedent 
history of the MAO College and the AMU. He next referred to 
TMA Pai [supra] and the five parameters of administrative 
control outlined therein i.e. admissions, fees, governing body 
composition, appointment of staff and disciplinary control over 
staff. On each of those criteria, it was argued that the real control 

 and Ors. was with the government due to the predominant role of the 
Visiting Board and the Lord Rector. Mr. Kaul argued that the 
1981 Act had been correctly struck down by the Allahabad High 
Court since it did not take away the basis of Azeez Basha [supra] 
and moreover because legal fictions could not supplant historical 
facts. 
71. 
Mr. Guru Krishna Kumar, Ld. Senior Counsel, made 
extensive reference to the history of the AMU to argue that it was 
never established as a minority institution but as an institution for 
general and secular education. It was argued that the British 
Government was consistently opposed to both, the possibility of 
a denominational character of the university and the proposed 
power of the university to affiliate colleges. It was argued that the 
word “Muslim” in the university’s name was accepted more out 
of deference to local sentiment than as an indication of minority 
character. He also drew the Court’s attention to the array of 
powers exercised both by the Governor-General-in-Council as 
Lord Rector and the Visiting Board over the University. 
72. 
Mr. Guru Krishna Kumar argued that the fact that the 
Muslim community approached the then Government for 
establishing a university is insignificant, as it was not necessary. 
It was argued that the minority community had the right to 
establish a college as happened thereafter with the creation of the 
Jamia Milia Islamia without government interference. and Ors. 

73. 
It was argued that the muslim community approached the 
Government since they wanted governmental recognition of their 
degrees which was possible only if university was established by 
the Government. He gave examples of certain colleges to show 
how such colleges were given legal recognition as Universities 
through Acts of Legislature. By contrast the MAO college was 
instead dissolved by the 1920 Act and a new entity created in its 
place. 
74. 
Further, it was argued that the inclusion of the AMU as a 
specific entry in List I of the Constitution is a clear indication of 
its All-India character. Even if the university once had the 
trappings of a minority institution, such inclusion crystallises the 
secular nature of the university and erases all vestiges of control 
by one specific community. Reference in this regard is made to 
M. Siddiq (Ram Janambhumi Temple Reference-5J) v. Mahant 
Suresh Das, (2020). 
75. 
It was urged that the 1981 amendment indirectly attempted 
to set aside the judgement in Azeez Basha [supra] without 
removing the basis of the judgement, which is impermissible. He 
adds that there cannot be a legislative declaration of fact through 
an amending Act which operates to set aside a finding of fact by 
the Supreme Court and that the 1981 Amendment was bad on this 
count. He relied on Indra Sawhney v. Union of India & Anr., 

 and Ors. 

(2000) and Mullaperiyar Environmental Protection 
Forum v. Union Of India & Ors, (2006). 
76. 
Mr. Vinay Navare, Ld. Senior Counsel, submitted that the 
judgement in Azeez Basha [supra] is not under challenge, only 
the principle laid down therein. The findings arrived at in the said 
judgment cannot be affected by the decision of the present 
Constitution Bench and only the correctness of the legal principle 
is in question as a reference does not decide the merits of a 
dispute inter se parties but only the interpretation of a law. 
77. 
It was argued that declaring the AMU to be a minority 
institution would divest the Parliament of a large part of the 
power it could otherwise have exercised under Entry 63 of List I. 
Since the AMU is established by a special statute, it would be 
“State” within the meaning of Article 12 and hence, cannot be a 
minority institution. He relies on the judgement in Sukhdev 
Singh v. Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi, (1975). 
78. 
It was argued that the 1981 amendment relying on the 
judgement in Hotel and Catering Industry Training Board v. 
Automobile Propriety Ltd, (1968) 1 WLR 1526. It was argued 
that the AMU was created by a statute and not under a statute. It 
was argued that to say that having been established by the Act, 
the AMU can be governed only in terms of the Act and hence the 
minority community can make no claim of having established the 

 and Ors. 

AMU since such claim is precluded by the very provisions of the 
Act. It was argued that since the institution was created by an Act, 
the words “of their choice” in Article 30 would not be applicable. 
79. 
Mr. Shridhar Potaraju, Ld. Senior Counsel, referred to the 
requirement of publishing the university’s accounts in the official 
gazette and the submission of the accounts originally to the Lord 
Rector and after the 1981 amendment to the Parliament. On this 
basis he argues that the AMU is an open and public university. It 
was argued that the AMU itself never raised any questions about 
its character from 1950 until 2005, when for the first time it 
enacted reservations for Muslims. Until 2005, the AMU was 
governed by the non-discrimination requirement under Article 
29(2) since AMU is under the financial and administrative 
control of the Government, it is ‘State’ within the meaning of 
Article 12 of the Constitution. 
80. 
Ms. Archana Pathak Dave, Ld. Senior Counsel, submitted 
that the insertion of Section 2(l) by the 1981 amendment was an 
impermissible exercise of legislative overruling of a judgement. 
The question of establishment having been settled in Azeez 
Basha [supra] it cannot be reopened by an amendment act which 
seeks to take a contrary view on facts. 
81. 
Mr. Yatindra Sharma, Ld. Senior Counsel, reiterated that 
the university was established and is being administered by the 
government and not the Muslim community. He goes on to state 

 and Ors. that Muslims are in fact not a minority in terms of Article 30 as 
the said Article applies to electoral minorities i.e. those whose 
numbers are so few that they cannot influence electoral 
outcomes. It was argued that even assuming that the changes 
made in the 1981 amendment take away the basis of Azeez Basha 
[supra], they are unconstitutional for violating Articles 14, 15 
and 29(2) of the Constitution 
82. 
Mr. Anirudh Sharma, learned counsel, submitted that 
Article 29(2) would stand on higher footing as compared to 
Article 30(1) and therefore once any institution is covered by 
Article 29(2), the general right provided therein cannot be 
unsettled by the specific right under Article 30(1). He has also 
attempted to distinguish the case of the AMU from that of St. 
Stephens [supra] by arguing that there were clear indicia of 
minority character in St Stephens College which are not present 
in case of the AMU. 
83. 
Mr. Vivek Sharma, learned counsel, briefly submitted and 
reiterated that the administration of the AMU never vested in the 
Muslim community and always lay with the government under 
the 1920 Act. 
84. 
Mr. Nachiketa Joshi, learned counsel, submitted a note 
which reiterates that it was the choice of the proponents of the 
AMU to seek government recognition for the AMU’s degrees. 
To that end, they accepted the establishment by the government 

 and Ors. instead of establishing the university themselves. It was argued 
that therefore the benefit of Article 30 cannot be claimed since 
establishment by the minority was missing. Further, the 1981 
amendment was correctly struck down by the Division Bench of 
the Allahabad High Court as it was an attempt at legislative 
overruling of a judgement. 
85. 
Mr. Sanjay Kumar Dubey, learned counsel, made 
reference to the original 1920 legislative council debates to 
submit that Shri Mohammed Shafi who had tabled the AMU bill 
had himself stated that this was to be an All-India and national 
institution. In view of the intent of the original movers of the Bill, 
the AMU cannot be said to be a minority institution. 
 
C.3 
Submissions in Rejoinder 
86. 
In rejoinder, Dr. Rajeev Dhawan, Ld. Senior Counsel, 
argued that both sides to the dispute agree that the words 
‘establish’ and ‘administer’ in Article 30(1) must be read 
conjunctively, and not disjunctively. It was argued that it is also 
not in issue that the right to administer the educational institution 
flows from the proof of establishment, although they may exist 
in different points in time. 
87. 
It was argued that the Respondents’ contention that AMU 
is a sui generis institution is not a valid ground to avoid the 
reconsideration of Azeez Basha [supra]. It was argued that every 
minority educational institution is a standalone institution to 

 and Ors. serve unique needs of their community, which includes catering 
to the educational needs of their community, conserving their 
unique script or culture, and achieving standards of excellence. 
88. 
It is further urged that the minorities have been recognized 
in India even before the Constitution came into force and 
therefore, to say that Muslim community had no minority ‘group’ 
rights before 1950 is fallacious. It is argued that there exists a 
constitutional premium, as well as a statutory premium (for e.g., 
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 
2006) which is attached to minority exceptions and the minority 
dispensation. Therefore, it is not just Article 30 which recognizes 
the minority rights, but if the whole statutory dispensation 
analysed, it is clear that Parliament has excepted the minorities 
from Articles 15(5) and 15(6). 
89. 
Additionally, certain other factors have been suggested by 
Dr. Dhawan, which may be determinative of minority character 
of a particular institute, which are as follows: 
a. 
Founders should belong to either religious or linguist 
community; 
b. 
Historical antecedents of the institution which show the 
active involvement, intention, and contributions of 
minority founders or the community; 

 and Ors. c. 
Founders’ intent to establish an institute should be bona 
fide, and not devious or dubious and for the benefit of the 
minority community; 
d. 
Constitutional documents (such as statute, rules, or 
regulations) read as a whole should show predominance of 
minority character; 
e. 
Administration of the institution if it is vested in the 
founders or persons in whom the founders have faith and 
confidence; 
f. 
Imparting of religious education, or providing for religious 
instruction and worship 
g. 
Symbols such as the name, architecture, motto, and such 
other cultural symbols of the minority. 
90. 
It is further submitted that declaration as to a particular 
institute bearing national importance under Entry 63, List 1 and 
status as a minority institution operate in different spheres. It is 
open for the Parliament to declare an institution of national 
importance because of its academic excellence, strategic and 
security interests, geographic location, cultural or religious 
prominence, or even granting aid. Therefore, it is argued that the 
reasons for granting the tag of ‘national importance’ may be 
varied and unrestricted, which are different than the factors 
determinative of minority character of a particular institute. It 

 and Ors. was argued that the declaration under Entry 63, List 1 shall 
always be subject to the rights under Article 30. 
91. 
Mr. Kapil Sibal, Ld. Senior Counsel, submitted in 
rejoinder that the minority has a right under Article 30 to 
administer the institution which it has established, which it may 
exercise or may not exercise. It is not the duty of the said 
community to administer once it has established. Therefore, in 
the present case, even if it is assumed that the administration of 
AMU is not with the Muslim community, it would not mean that 
the AMU will cease to be a minority institution since it has been 
established as such by Muslim community. 
92. 
It was argued that to that extent, the judgment is Azeez 
Basha [supra] has been decided wrongly. Further, it is urged that 
if right to administer is exercised and if the Government 
interferes in such right, the minority institute can challenge such 
interference on the ground of it being violative of Article 30. 
Moreover, the Muslim minority wanted to establish a university 
which could grant degrees of its own which would have to be 
recognised by the Government. It was argued that subscribing to 
a regulatory framework that would offer better opportunities to 
students who enrolled with the institution, is a choice that has no 
relation to the alleged surrender of minority status. 
93. 
Mr. Shadan Farasat, learned counsel, compared the 
provisions of all the Acts establishing the Universities, existing 

 and Ors. at the relevant time to show that the denominational nature is 
evident from the level of autonomy granted vis-a-vis, the non-
denominational universities of the relevant time and sought to 
argue that the provisions of the AMU Act clearly depict the 
minority character of the institution even at the time of inception. 
 
D. 
SCOPE OF PROCEEDINGS 
D.1 
Petitions before the Court 
94. 
Before adverting to the legal issues and the contentions 
raised in the present proceedings, it would be appropriate to 
define the scope of the present proceedings. The present set of 
the petition can be divided in the following groups: 
i. 
Batch of eight (8) civil appeals challenging the judgment 
of Hon’ble Allahabad High Court dated 05.01.2006 
[hereinafter referred to as the “Impugned Order”] - Civil 
Appeal Nos. 2286, 2316, 2317, 2318, 2319, 2320, 2321 
and 2861 of 2006; 
ii. 
A transferred case involving a writ petition filed before the 
Hon’ble Allahabad High Court seeking implementation of 
reservations in terms of the Central Educational 
Institutions (Reservation in Admissions) Act, 2006 -. iii. 
A civil appeal challenging the judgment of the Hon’ble 
Allahabad High Court dated 16.10.2015 that dismissed the 
prayer for quo warranto regarding the appointment of the 

 and Ors. then Vice Chancellor of Appellant-University - SLP(C) 
No. 32490 of 2015; 
iv. 
A writ petition under Article 32 seeking a writ or direction 
to the Appellant - University to follow the regulations laid 
by University Grants Commission (‘UGC’) in 2010 on 
minimum qualifications for appointment of teachers and 
academic staff - WP(C) No. 272 of 2016 
 
D.2 
The Anjuman reference 
95. 
The Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920 was amended in 
the year 1965 following some disturbances at the campus. The 
said amendment was challenged by way of writ petitions filed 
under Article 32 and disposed off by this Court by way of the 
judgment in Azeez Basha [supra] [5 Hon’ble Judges]. The 
judgment dated 20.10.1967 held that the University was not 
established by the minority community and therefore, it cannot 
be said to be an institution falling under the expanse of Article 30 
of the Constitution. 
96. 
In 1981, came up before a 
bench of two Hon’ble Judges of this Court, which was titled 
Anjuman-e-Rehmania & Ors v. Distt. Inspector of School & 
Ors. In the said petition, this Court was confronted with a 
question, which is recorded in its order dated 26.11.1981. The 
relevant portion is reproduced hereunder: - 

 and Ors. 

“The point that arises is as to whether Act. 30(1) of 
the Constitution envisages an institution which is 
established by minorities alone without the 
participation for the factum of establishment from 
any other community. On this point, there is no 
clear decision of this court. There are some 
observations in S. Azeez Basha & ors. Vs. Union of 
India 1968(1) SCR 333, but these observations can 
be explained away. Another point that arises is 
whether soon after the establishment of the 
institution if it is registered as a Society under the 
Society Registration Act, its status as a minority 
institution changes in view of the broad principles 
laid down in S. Azeez Basha’s case. Even as it is 
several jurists including Mr. Seervai have 
expressed about the correctness of the decision of 
this court in S. Azeez Basha's case. Since the point 
has arisen in this case we think that this is a proper 
occasion when a larger bench can consider the 
entire aspect fully. We, therefore, direct that this 
case may be placed before Hon. The Chief Justice 
for being heard by a bench of at least 7 judges so 
that S. Azeez Basha's case may also be considered 
and the points that arise in this case directly as to 
the essential conditions or ingredients of the 
minority institution may also be decided once for 
all. A large number of jurists including Mr. Seervai, 
learned counsel for the petitioners Mr. Garg and 
learned counsel for respondents and interveners 
Mr. Dikshit and Kaskar have stated that this case 
requires reconsideration. In view of the urgency it 
is necessary that the matter should be decided as 
early as possible we give liberty to the counsel for 
parties to mention the matter before Chief Justice.” 

 and Ors. 

97. 
The question of law, as noticed above, was referred to 
bench of seven Hon’ble Judges by a bench of two judges. It may 
be noted that Hon’ble CJI at that time was not a part of this bench 
of two Hon’ble Judges. The said group of matters in Anjuman 
[supra] were placed before a bench of 11 Judges and was heard 
along with other writ petitions which culminated into the 
judgment of TMA Pai Foundation and Ors. v. State of 
Karnataka, (2002). 
98. 
The 11 Judges bench, inter alia, framed a question vide its 
order dated 26.11.1981, which reads as under: 
“3(a) What are the indicia for treating an 
educational institution as a minority educational 
institution? Would an institution be regarded as a 
minority educational institution because it was 
established by a person(s) belonging to a religious 
or linguistic minority or its being administered by a 
person(s) belonging to a religious or linguistic 
minority?” 
 
99. 
Finally, the larger Bench in TMA Pai [supra] opined that 
“this question need not be answered by this Bench, it will be dealt 
by a regular Bench.” Thereafter, the group of matters in case of 
Anjuman [supra] came to be disposed of vide order dated 
11.03.2003 
 
D.3 
The present reference 
100. Separately, the present proceedings arise out of the 
decisions/resolutions of the Admission Committee dated 

 and Ors. 

10.01.2005, the Resolution Passed by the Academic Council 
dated 15.01.2005 and the Resolution passed by the Executive 
Council dated 19.05.2005 which provided reservation to the 
extent of 50 per cent of seats to be reserved for Muslims of India 
for admission to post graduate programmes. 
101. The Petitioners before the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad [hereinafter referred to as the “Allahabad High Court” 
or “High Court”] filed writ petitions against the said decisions, 
while also challenging the amendment made to the AMU Act in 
1981. The said writ petition came to be decided by Ld. Single 
judge of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad vide 
Judgment and Order dated 04.10.2005. The said judgment was 
impugned before the Division Bench of the Hon’ble High Court 
by way of Special Appeal 1321 of 2005 and connected matters, 
which was finally decided by the judgment dated 05.01.2006, 
vide which the High Court dismissed the appeals filed by the 
appellants therein. The appeals/special leave petitions from the 
said order are under challenge before this Court. 
102. On 12.02.2019, a three Judge Bench has referred the 
present batch of appeals and petitions to a bench of seven 
Hon’ble Judges. Considering the intense divergence of opinion 
on the reference order and the resultant scope of the present 
proceedings, the said order deserves to be quoted in extenso as 
under: 

 and Ors. 

“3. The issue arising in S. Azeez Basha (supra) was 
referred to a Seven (07) Judges Bench by an order 
of this Court dated 26th November, 1981 passed in 
Writ Petition (Civil) Nos. 54-57 of 1981 [Anjuman-
e-Rahmania & Ors. vs. Distt. Inspector of School & 
Ors.]. 
4. The aforesaid writ petitions i.e. Writ Petition 
(Civil) Nos. 54-57 of 1981 were heard along with 
other connected cases {lead being Writ Petition 
( (T.M.A. Pai Foundation and 
others vs. State of Karnataka and others)] by a 
bench of Eleven (11) judges, the judgment in which 
cases is reported in (2002). 
5. The question 3(a) which was formulated for an 
answer in T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra) which 
coincidentally reflects the questions referred by the 
order of this Court dated 26th November, 1981 
passed in Writ Petition (Civil) Nos. 54-57 of 1981, 
is as follows: 
“3(a) What are the indicia for treating an 
educational institution as a minority 
educational institution? Would an institution 
be regarded as a minority educational 
institution because it was established by a 
person(s) belonging to a religious or 
linguistic minority or its being administered 
by a person(s) belonging to a religious or 
linguistic minority? 
6. However, the Bench did not answer the question 
stating that it will be dealt with by the Regular 
Bench. 
7. The order of the Regular Bench passed on 11th 
March, 2003, which, for reasons that we need not 
dilate, did not answer the aforesaid question 3(a) 
formulated in T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra). and Ors. 

8. The said facts would show that the correctness 
of the question arising from the decision of this 
Court in S. Azeez Basha (supra) has remained 
undetermined. 
9. That apart, the decision of this Court in Prof. 
Yashpal and another vs. State of Chhattisgarh and 
others 2 and the amendment of the National 
Commission for Minority Educational Institutions 
Act, 2004 made in the year 2010 would also require 
an authoritative pronouncement on the aforesaid 
question formulated, as set out above, besides the 
correctness of the view expressed in the judgment 
of this Court in S. Azeez Basha (supra) which has 
been extracted above. 
10. Ordinarily and in the normal course the judicial 
discipline would require the Bench to seek a 
reference of this matter by a Five Judges Bench. 
However, having regard to the background, as 
stated above, when the precise question was 
already referred to a Seven Judges Bench and was, 
however, not answered, we are of the view that the 
present question, set out above, should be referred 
to a Bench of Hon’ble Seven Judges. 
11. Consequently and in the light of the above, place 
these matters before the Hon’ble the Chief Justice 
of India on the administrative side for appropriate 
orders.” 
 
103. Considering the varying positions taken by various parties 
before this Hon’ble Court, we have divided the sides in two 
categories – the ones defending the judgment of the High Court 
and the ones aggrieved by the judgment of the Hon’ble Court. and Ors. 

D.4 
The parameters on which reference can be made to a 
larger bench 
 
104. The parties defending the judgment of the High Court were 
at pains to assert that it would not be permissible for the other 
side to re-agitate the factual findings and facts based legal 
controversies already decided by a five-Judge bench in Azeez 
Basha [supra]. The parties defending the judgment of the High 
Court assert that the lis between the parties, as far as the minority 
status of the AMU is concerned, stands settled by the judgment 
of Azeez Basha [supra] and cannot be re-opened. As per the said 
set of submissions, this Court is merely supposed to decide the 
question of law - Question 3(a), which was formulated for an 
answer in T.M.A. Pai [supra] without deciding status of the 
AMU. At the same time, the said parties urged the Hon’ble Court 
to decide upon the validity of the amendments made to the AMU 
Act in 1981 which were under challenge before the High Court. 
The said parties further highlighted the manner in which the 
matter was referred by the bench of two judges in Anjuman 
[supra] directly to seven judges was incorrect as the said bench 
was bound by a judgment of five judges in Azeez Basha [supra]. 
105. On the other hand, the parties challenging the judgment of 
the High Court, pressed that correctness of the view expressed in 
the judgment of this Court in Azeez Basha [supra] has been 
specifically referred to a larger bench of seven judges and 

 and Ors. therefore, the said issue is moot before this bench. The said 
parties requested this Court to lay down the law Question 3(a), 
which was formulated for an answer in T.M.A. Pai [supra] and 
decide thereupon whether the approach adopted in the judgment 
of Azeez Basha [supra] was correct or not. At the same time, the 
said parties urged the Hon’ble Court not to decide upon the 
validity of the amendments made to the AMU Act in 1981 which 
were under challenge before the High Court and other decisions 
of the AMU authorities made in 2005 and leave the same to be 
decided by a regular bench. 
106. At first, it is important to clarify the issue raised by the 
parties with regard to the reference order in Writ Petition (Civil) 
Nos. 54-57 of 1981 in Anjuman-e-Rahmania & Ors. v. Distt. 
Inspector of School & Ors. The said bench of two Hon’ble 
Judges [without comprising of the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India] 
referred the judgement of five Hon’ble Judges in Azeez Basha 
[supra], directly to a bench of seven Hon’ble Judges. The reason 
that the Court in Anjuman-e-Rahmania & Ors [supra] provides 
is that as per the judgement in Azeez Basha [supra], if after the 
establishment of an institution, the institution is registered as a 
society, its status as a minority institution changes. It has been 
pointed out that the AMU and the decision in Azeez Basha 
[supra], had nothing to do with a society or Societies 
Registration Act as the AMU is governed by way of a standalone 

 and Ors. legislation. The other reason the Court in Anjuman [supra] cites 
for making a reference is the criticism of the judgement by jurists 
like Mr. Seervai. It has been argued that while opinions of jurists 
hold persuasive value, the same cannot be a ground for making 
reference to a larger bench. The reference order in Anjuman 
[supra] does not point towards a future or previous judgement of 
equal or larger strength from Azeez Basha [supra], being 
contrary to the judgement in Azeez Basha [supra]. In effect, a 
Bench of two hon’ble Judges has directly referred to the 
correctness of a decision rendered by five Hon’ble Judges to 
seven Hon’ble Judges, without the presence of a Chief Justice 
despite being prima facie bound by the opinion of the larger 
Bench. 
107. A similar situation arose in relation to the judgment of this 
Court in Sardar Syedna Taher Saifuddin Saheb v. State of 
Bombay, 1962 Supp (2) SCR 496. In the said case, which 
concerned the powers of excommunication of the head of 
Dawoodi Bohra community, a five-Judge Bench of this Court, 
ruled by a majority of 4:1, that the Bombay Prevention of 
Excommunication Act (Act 42 of 1949) was ultra vires the 
Constitution as it violated Article 26(b) of the Constitution and 
was not saved by Article 25(2). 
108. Decades later, on 26-2-1986, a fresh petition was filed 
seeking reconsideration and overruling of the decision of this 

 and Ors. 

Court in Sardar Syedna [supra] and for issuing a writ of 
mandamus directing the State of Maharashtra to give effect to the 
provisions of the Bombay Prevention of Excommunication Act, 
1949. 
109. The said matter came up for hearing before a two-Judge 
Bench of this Court which on 25-8-1986 directed “rule nisi” to 
be issued. On 18-3-1994 a two-Judge Bench directed the matter 
to be listed directly before a seven-Judge Bench for hearing. On 
20-7-1994 the matter did come up before a seven-Judge Bench 
which adjourned the hearing awaiting the decision in WP No. 317 
of 1993 [T.M.A. Pai (supra)]. 
110. On 26-7-2004 IA No. 4 was filed on behalf of Respondent 
2 seeking a direction that the matter be listed before a Division 
Bench of two Judges. Implicitly, the application sought a 
direction for non-listing before a Bench of seven Judges and 
rather the matter being listed for hearing before a Bench of two 
or three Judges as is the normal practice of this Court. In the 
contents of the application reliance was placed on the 
Constitution Bench decisions of this Court in Bharat Petroleum 
Corpn. Ltd. v. Mumbai Shramik Sangha, (2001) 
followed in four subsequent Constitution Bench decisions 
namely Pradip Chandra Parija v. Pramod Chandra Patnaik, 
(2002); Chandra Prakash v. State of U.P., (2002); Vishweshwaraiah Iron & Steel Ltd. v. Abdul 

 and Ors. 

Gani, (2002) and Arya Samaj Education 
Trust v. Director of Education, (2004). 
111. The matter was ultimately placed before a bench of five 
Hon’ble Judges in order to decide that whether the course 
adopted by the two judge bench, doubting the correctness of a 
decision rendered by five Hon’ble Judges, was correct. While 
examining the issue, this Court highlighted the approaches 
available to the Court in a decision reported in Central Board of 
Dawoodi Bohra Community and Anr. v. State of Maharashtra 
and Anr, (2005). 
112. On the question of reference, the Court held that when a 
decision delivered by a Bench of larger strength is binding on any 
subsequent Bench of lesser or co-equal strength. A Bench of 
lesser quorum has only two options: 
a. invite the attention of the Chief Justice and request for the 
matter being placed for hearing before an appropriate 
bench or; 
b. place the matter before a Bench of coequal strength which 
pronounced the decision laying down the law the 
correctness of which is doubted. 
The only exception to the above said rule is the discretion 
of the Chief Justice in whom vests the power of framing 
the roster. and Ors. 

113. In extremely rare cases, if the matter has already come up 
for hearing before a Bench of larger quorum and that Bench itself 
feels that the view of the law taken by a Bench of lesser quorum 
needs correction or reconsideration, then by way of an exception 
and for reasons given by it, it may proceed to hear the case and 
examine the correctness of the previous decision in question 
dispensing with the need of a specific reference or the order of 
Chief Justice constituting the Bench and such listing. After 
discussing the said legal position, this Court in Central Board of 
Dawoodi Bohra Community [supra], crystallised the law as 
under: 
“12. Having carefully considered the submissions 
made by the learned senior counsel for the parties 
and having examined the law laid down by the 
Constitution Benches in the abovesaid decisions, we 
would like to sum up the legal position in the 
following terms:- 
(1) The law laid down by this Court in a decision 
delivered by a Bench of larger strength is binding 
on any subsequent Bench of lesser or co-equal 
strength. 
(2) A Bench of lesser quorum cannot doubt the 
correctness of the view of the law taken by a 
Bench of larger quorum. In case of doubt all that 
the Bench of lesser quorum can do is to invite the 
attention of the Chief Justice and request for the 
matter being placed for hearing before a Bench 
of larger quorum than the Bench whose decision 
has come up for consideration. It will be open 
only for a Bench of coequal strength to express 
an opinion doubting the correctness of the view 

 and Ors. taken by the earlier Bench of coequal strength, 
whereupon the matter may be placed for hearing 
before a Bench consisting of a quorum larger 
than the one which pronounced the decision 
laying down the law the correctness of which is 
doubted. 
(3) The above rules are subject to two 
exceptions: 
(i) The abovesaid rules do not bind the 
discretion of the Chief Justice in whom 
vests the power of framing the roster and 
who can direct any particular matter to be 
placed for hearing before any particular 
Bench of any strength; and 
(ii) In spite of the rules laid down 
hereinabove, if the matter has already 
come up for hearing before a Bench of 
larger quorum and that Bench itself feels 
that the view of the law taken by a Bench 
of lesser quorum, which view is in doubt, 
needs correction or reconsideration then 
by way of exception (and not as a rule) and 
for reasons given by it, it may proceed to 
hear the case and examine the correctness 
of the previous decision in question 
dispensing with the need of a specific 
reference or the order of Chief Justice 
constituting the Bench and such listing. 
Such was the situation in Raghubir Singh 
and Ors. and Hansoli Devi and Ors. 
(supra)” 
 
In understanding the correctness of the reference in 
Anjuman [supra], the said finding in Central Board of Dawoodi 
Bohra Community and Anr. [supra] is crucial. and Ors. 

114. Further, it has been held by this Court that reference to a 
larger bench cannot be merely made for the asking or even 
because another view appears to be a possible view. It in Govt. of A.P. v. B. Satyanarayana Rao, (2000), it was held 
as under: 
“8. Learned counsel for the respondent attempted 
to convince us that the decision in the case of State 
of A.P. v. V. Sadanandam [1989 Supp (1) SCC 574: 1989 SCC (L&S) 511: (1989) 11 ATC 391] has to 
be ignored on the principle of per incuriam as 
certain relevant provisions of the Rules were not 
considered in the said case, and in any case this 
case requires to be referred to a larger Bench of 
three Judges. The rule of per incuriam can be 
applied where a court omits to consider a binding 
precedent of the same court or the superior court 
rendered on the same issue or where a court omits 
to consider any statute while deciding that issue. 
This is not the case here. In State of A.P. v. V. 
Sadanandam [1989 Supp (1) SCC 574: 1989 SCC 
(L&S) 511: (1989) 11 ATC 391] the controversy 
was exactly the same as it is here and this Court 
after considering para 5 of the Presidential Order 
of 1975 held that the Government has power to fill 
a vacancy in a zone by transfer. We, therefore, find 
that the rule of per incuriam cannot be invoked in 
the present case. Moreover, a case cannot be 
referred to a larger Bench on mere asking of a 
party. A decision by two Judges has a binding 
effect on another coordinate Bench of two Judges, 
unless it is demonstrated that the said decision by 
any subsequent change in law or decision ceases 
to laying down a correct law. We, therefore, reject 

 and Ors. the arguments of learned counsel for the 
respondents.” 
 
115. In Shrimanth Balasaheb Patil v. Speaker, Karnataka 
Legislative Assembly (2020), it was held as under: 
“157. There is no doubt that the requirements under 
Article 145(3) of the Constitution have never been 
dealt with extensively and, more often than not, 
have received mere lip service, wherein this Court 
has found existence of case laws which have 
already dealt with the proposition involved, and 
have rejected such references. Normatively, this 
trend requires consideration in appropriate cases, 
to ensure that unmeritorious references do not 
unnecessarily consume precious judicial time in 
the Supreme Court. 
158. In any case, we feel that there is a requirement 
to provide a preliminary analysis with respect to the 
interpretation of this provision. In this context, we 
need to keep in mind two important phrases 
occurring in Article 145(3) of the Constitution, 
which are, “substantial question of law” and 
“interpretation of the Constitution”. By reading the 
aforesaid provision, two conditions can be culled 
out before a reference is made: 
(i) The Court is satisfied that the case involves a 
substantial 
question 
of 
law 
as to 
the 
interpretation of this Constitution; 
(ii) The determination of which is necessary for 
the disposal of the case. 
 
160. Any question of law of general importance 
arising incidentally, or any ancillary question of 
law having no significance to the final outcome, 
cannot be considered as a substantial question of 

 and Ors. law. The existence of substantial question of law 
does not weigh on the stakes involved in the case, 
rather, it depends on the impact the question of law 
will have on the final determination. If the 
questions having a determining effect on the final 
outcome have already been decided by a 
conclusive authority, then such questions cannot 
be called as “substantial questions of law”. In any 
case, no substantial question of law exists in the 
present matter, which needs reference to a larger 
Bench. The cardinal need is to achieve a judicial 
balance between the crucial obligation to render 
justice and the compelling necessity of avoiding 
prolongation of any lis.” 
 
116. Similarly in Joint Commissioner of Income Tax, Surat v. 
Saheli Leasing & Industries Ltd., (2010), it was held 
as under: 
“(x) In order to enable the Court to refer any case 
to a larger Bench for reconsideration, it is 
necessary to point out that particular provision of 
law having a bearing over the issue involved was 
not taken note of or there is an error apparent on 
its face or that a particular earlier decision was not 
noticed, which has a direct bearing or has taken a 
contrary view. Such does not appear to be the case 
herein. Thus, it does not need to be referred to a 
larger Bench as in our considered opinion it is 
squarely covered by the judgment of this Court 
in Gold Coin [(2008): (2008) 304 ITR 
308]” 
 
117. In view of the above, the approach adopted in the reference 
order in Anjuman [supra] was not wholly appropriate. However, 

 and Ors. considering the fact that the present reference was made by a 
separate three judge bench [which consisted of the then Hon’ble 
Chief Justice], it would be apposite to not be whittled down by 
the error that may have crept in Anjuman [supra] reference. As 
far the scope of the present proceedings is concerned, the Court 
must adopt a sustainable and consistent approach. In this regard, 
it is clear that this Court needs to provide a clear understanding 
of the overlapping and intersecting reference orders mentioned 
above. 
118. The expanse and the width of the proceedings before a 
larger cannot be whittled down by statute like reading of the 
reference order(s). Order VI Rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules, 
2013 reads as under: 
“ORDER VI 
CONSTITUTION OF DIVISION COURTS AND 
POWERS OF A SINGLE JUDGE 
2. Where in the course of the hearing of any cause, 
appeal or other proceeding, the Bench considers 
that the matter should be dealt with by a larger 
Bench, it shall refer the matter to the Chief Justice, 
who shall thereupon constitute such a Bench for the 
hearing of it.” 
 
119. The terms “any cause” and “other proceedings” are of a 
very wide import and the power of the Chief Justice of India, with 
regard to references to larger benches has also been judicially re-
iterated by numerous constitution benches. A bench of nine 

 and Ors. 

Hon’ble Judges in Kantaru Rajeevaru (Right to Religion, In re-
9 J.) (2) v. Indian Young Lawyers Association, (2020), has held as under: 
“27. No matter is beyond the jurisdiction of a 
superior court of record unless it is expressly shown 
to be so, under the provisions of the Constitution. In 
the absence of any express provision in the 
Constitution, this Court being a superior court of 
record has jurisdiction in every matter and if there 
is any doubt, the Court has power to determine its 
jurisdiction 
[Delhi 
Judicial 
Service 
Association v. State of Gujarat, (1991) ]. It is useful to reproduce from Halsbury's Laws of 
England, 4th Edn., Vol. 10, Para 713, relied upon 
in the aforementioned judgments, which states as 
follows: 
“713. … Prima facie, no matter is deemed to 
be beyond the jurisdiction of a superior court 
unless it is expressly shown to be so, while 
nothing is within the jurisdiction of an inferior 
court unless it is expressly shown on the face of 
the proceedings that the particular matter is 
within the cognizance of the particular court.” 
Undoubtedly there is no bar on the exercise of 
jurisdiction for referring questions of law in a 
pending review petition. Therefore, the reference 
cannot be said to be vitiated for lack of jurisdiction. 
This Court has acted well within its power in 
making the reference.” 
 
D.5 
A holistic approach 
120. It is undoubtedly true that the correctness of the view 
expressed in the judgment of this Court in Azeez Basha [supra] 

 and Ors. has been specifically referred to a larger bench of seven judges. 
Further it is correct that Court is supposed to decide the question 
of law - Question 3(a), which was formulated for an answer in 
T.M.A. Pai [supra]. 
121. The status of AMU is in question due to the amendments 
made to the AMU Act in 1981 and the decisions of the AMU 
authorities in 2005. The said changes, especially the legislative 
changes, have taken place after the judgment in Azeez Basha 
[supra], and therefore, it is imperative that this Court decides the 
questions arising therefrom. The validity of the amendments 
made to the AMU Act in 1981 and decisions of the AMU 
authorities made in 2005 may be left to be decided by a regular 
bench. 
122. This Court shall therefore decide the Question 3(a), which 
was formulated for an answer in T.M.A. Pai [supra]. A decision 
on the said question would naturally have an impact on the 
correctness, or lack thereof, on the judgment of Azeez Basha 
[supra]. 
123. Once the correctness of the judgment in Azeez Basha 
[supra], is under scanner and the Question 3(a) has been decided, 
the regular bench may decide the status of the AMU especially 
with regard to the question whether it was “established” by the 
minority community or not, would have to be adjudicated. The 
decision on the said question, would lay down the parameters of 

 and Ors. scope and extent to which the Parliament could have amended 
the AMU Act. Once the fate of the 1981 amendments to the AMU 
Act is decided, the Court would adjudicate upon the validity of 
actions of the AMU authorities in 2005. 
124. In light of the above, despite the strong contest with regard 
to the correctness of Anjuman [supra], this bench would be 
taking a holistic approach to the present reference in deciding the 
questions present before it. 
 
E. 
ISSUES 
125. In light of the above, the following issues would be 
decided by the present reference: 
i. 
Whether the bench of two judges in Writ Petition No.54-
51 of 1981 titled Anjuman-e-Rehmania & Ors v. Distt. 
Inspector of School & Ors. could have referred to the 
matter to a bench of seven Hon’ble Judges directly, 
without the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India, being a part of 
the bench? [already decided above] 
ii. 
Whether the “establishment” of an institution by the 
minority is necessary for the said minority to claim right of 
administration? To put it different, is “establish” and 
“administer” used disjunctively or conjunctively in Article 
30 of the Constitution? iii. 
What is the meaning of the term “establish” in Article 30 
of the Constitution and what are the real positive indicia 

 and Ors. for determining the question of establishment of an 
institution? iv. 
What is the true meaning and purport of the judgment in 
Azeez Basha [supra]? v. 
What must be the approach of the court in balancing the 
conflicting narratives of history presented before it in such 
cases? vi. 
What was the legislative scenario governing the 
Universities in India prior to the University Grants 
Commission Act, 1956 and how does the same impact the 
judicial enquiry in the present matter? vii. 
Whether the Legislature using the terms “establish” and/or 
“incorporate” in the Preamble of a legislation would be 
determinative of the question of establishment? viii. 
What is the impact of the Constitution coming into force 
and the subsequent legislative amendments made to the 
AMU Act on the present proceedings? ix. 
Whether the presence of members of the minority 
community in the governance of the institution, without 
any necessary legal requirement for the same, would 
impact the question of the institution falling under Article 
30? x. 
Whether Article 30 exists to protect institutions from 
“majoritarianism by default” approach? and Ors. xi. 
Whether the UGC Act, 1956 and the judgement in Yashpal 
[supra] impacts on the correctness of the judgment in 
Azeez Basha [supra]? xii. 
Whether the NCMEI Act, 2004 impacts on the correctness 
of the judgment in Azeez Basha [supra]? 
126. The following issues and proceedings are however, left to 
be decided by a regular bench: 
i. 
Whether the AMU was “established” and “administered” 
by the minority community and therefore entitled to claim 
protection under Article 30? ii. 
Whether the 1981 amendment to the AMU Act, 1920, was 
an impermissible exercise of legislative power? iii. 
Whether the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation 
in Admissions) Act, 2006, would be applicable to the 
AMU? iv. 
The civil appeal challenging the judgment of the Hon’ble 
Allahabad High Court dated 16.10.2015 that dismissed the 
prayer for quo warranto regarding the appointment of the 
then Vice Chancellor of Appellant-University - SLP(C) 
No. 32490 of 2015; 
v. 
The writ petition under Article 32 seeking a writ or 
direction to the Appellant - University to follow the 
regulations laid by University Grants Commission 
(‘UGC’) in 2010 on minimum qualifications for 

 and Ors. appointment of teachers and academic staff - WP(C) No. 
272 of 2016. 

F. 
WHETHER ESTABLISHMENT IS NECESSARY 
 
127. The first question that needs to be answered is whether an 
institution needs to be “established” by the minority community 
in order to claim protection/rights under Article 30? In other 
words, is it possible for an institution to “acquire” the status of a 
minority institution without being established as one? While 
there has not been much contest on the aforesaid question, 
considering the fact that it has arisen before this Court on 
numerous occasions and further was one of the factors for the 
reference in Anjuman [supra], it would be appropriate that the 
same is settled for posterity. 
128. The first judgment which may provide some assistance in 
this regard would be the landmark judgment in case of Re: 
Kerala Education Bill, 1957,, rendered by a 
bench of seven judges wherein this Court deliberated on the 
prerequisites for invoking Article 30 for the first time. The Court 
considered the argument presented by the State's counsel, which 
outlined three conditions necessary to avail the protections and 
privileges under Article 30(1): 

 and Ors. i. 
The presence of a minority community; 
ii. 
The initiation of the right to establish an educational 
institution by one or more members of that community 
'after the commencement of the Constitution'; 
iii. 
The establishment of the educational institution for the 
benefit of members of the minority community. 
During its examination of these arguments, the Court 
dismissed the notion that the institution must be established only 
after the commencement of the Constitution, affirming that 
institutions established prior to this could still claim such rights. 
Additionally, the Court clarified that admitting non-minorities 
into the institution would not alter its minority character. 
129. Moreover, while discussing the matter, the Court observed 
that Article 30(1) confers two distinct rights upon minorities: the 
right to establish and to administer. This clarification by the 
Court does not negate the remaining arguments presented by the 
State, which assert that the establishment of an institution by the 
minority is essential to assert rights under Article 30. The 
relevant paragraph of the said judgment, which has been read by 
both sides in the present case, to further their respective 
arguments, deserves to be quoted in toto as under: 
“22. We now pass on to the main point canvassed 
before us, namely, what are the scope and ambit of 
the right conferred by Article 30(1). Before coming 
to grips with the main argument on this part of the 
case, we may deal with a minor point raised by 

 and Ors. learned counsel for the State of Kerala. He contends 
that there are three conditions which must be 
fulfilled before the protection and privileges of 
Article 30(1) may be claimed, namely, (1) there 
must be a minority community, (2) one or more of 
the members of that community should, after the 
commencement of the Constitution, seek to exercise 
the right to establish an educational institution of 
his or their choice, and (3) the educational 
institution must be established for the members of 
his or their own community. We have already 
determined, according to the test referred to above, 
that the Anglo-Indians, Christians and Muslims are 
minority communities in the State of Kerala. We do 
not think that the protection and privilege of Article 
30(1) extend only to the educational institutions 
established after the date our Constitution came 
into operation or which may hereafter be 
established. On this hypothesis the educational 
institutions established by one or more members of 
any 
of 
these 
communities 
prior 
to 
the 
commencement of the Constitution would not be 
entitled to the benefits of Article 30(1). The fallacy 
of this argument becomes discernible as soon as we 
direct our attention to Article 19(1)(g) which, 
clearly enough, applies alike to a business, 
occupation or profession already started and 
carried on as to those that may be started and 
carried on after the commencement of the 
Constitution. There is no reason why the benefit of 
Article 30(1) should be limited only to educational 
institutions established after the commencement 
of the Constitution. The language employed in 
Article 30(1) is wide enough to cover both pre-
Constitution and post-Constitution institutions. It 
must not be overlooked that Article 30(1) gives the 

 and Ors. minorities two rights, namely, (a) to establish, and 
(b) to administer, educational institutions of their 
choice. The second right clearly covers pre-
Constitution schools just as Article 26 covers the 
right to maintain pre-Constitution religious 
institutions. As to the third condition mentioned 
above, the argument carried to its logical 
conclusion comes to this that if a single member of 
any other community is admitted into a school 
established for the members of a particular minority 
community, then the educational institution ceases 
to be an educational institution established by the 
particular minority community. The argument is 
sought to be reinforced by a reference to Article 
29(2). It is said that an educational institution 
established by a minority community which does not 
seek any aid from the funds of the State need not 
admit a single scholar belonging to a community 
other than that for whose benefit it was established 
but that as soon as such an educational institution 
seeks and gets aid from the State coffers Article 
29(2) will preclude it from denying admission to 
members of the other communities on grounds only 
of religion, race, caste, language or any of them and 
consequently it will cease to be an educational 
institution of the choice of the minority community 
which established it. This argument does not appear 
to us to be warranted by the language of the article 
itself. There is no such limitation in Article 30(1) 
and to accept this limitation will necessarily involve 
the addition of the words “for their own 
community” in the article which is ordinarily not 
permissible according to well established rules of 
interpretation. Nor is it reasonable to assume that 
the purpose of Article 29(2) was to deprive minority 
educational institutions of the aid they receive from 

 and Ors. the State. To say that an institution which receives 
aid on account of its being a minority educational 
institution must not refuse to admit any member of 
any other community only on the grounds therein 
mentioned and then to say that as soon as such 
institution admits such an outsider it will cease to 
be a minority institution is tantamount to saying that 
minority 
institutions 
will 
not, 
as 
minority 
institutions, be entitled to any aid. The real import 
of Article 29(2) and Article 30(1) seems to us to be 
that they clearly contemplate a minority institution 
with a sprinkling of outsiders admitted into it. By 
admitting a non-member into it the minority 
institution does not shed its character and cease to 
be a minority institution. Indeed the object of 
conservation of the distinct language, script and 
culture of a minority may be better served by 
propagating the same amongst non-members of 
the particular minority community. In our opinion, 
it is not possible to read this condition into Article 
30(1) of the Constitution.” 
 
130. Thus, the judgement in Kerala Education Bill [supra] 
does not in any way, detract from the position that the factum of 
establishment by the minority community was a necessary pre-
condition to claim rights/protection under Article 30. There was 
specific emphasis laid by both sides on the phrase ‘sprinkling of 
outsiders’ which shall be further discussed in a subsequent 
portion of the judgment. 
131. The subsequent judicial decisions and the evolving 
jurisprudence stemming from the rulings of this Court further 
solidify the legal position articulated above. Another significant 

 and Ors. judgment pertinent to the analysis of the rights conferred under 
Article 30, particularly addressing the issue at hand, is the verdict 
in State of Kerala v. Very Rev. Mother Provincial, (1970). Rendered by a bench of six Hon’ble Judges, this judgment 
emphasizes how the twin rights of “establishment” and 
“administration” are sequential in nature under Article 30(1). It 
elucidates that these rights are temporally distinct, with the act of 
establishment preceding the entitlement to administration. This 
interpretation is pivotal in comprehending Article 30(1) and 
underscores that the right to “administer” an institution arises 
subsequent to its “establishment” by the minority community. 
The pertinent excerpts from this judgment are cited below for 
reference: 
“8. Article 30(1) has been construed before by 
this Court. Without referring to those cases it is 
sufficient to say that the clause contemplates two 
rights which are separated in point of time. The 
first right is the initial right to establish institutions 
of the minority's choice. Establishment here 
means the bringing into being of an institution and 
it must be by a minority community. It matters not 
if a single philanthropic individual with his own 
means, founds the institution or the community at 
large contributes the funds. The position in law is 
the same and the intention in either case must be to 
found an institution for the benefit of a minority 
community by a member of that community. It is 
equally irrelevant that in addition to the minority 
community others from other minority communities 
or even from the majority community can take 

 and Ors. advantage of these institutions. Such other 
communities bring in income and they do not have 
to be turned away to enjoy the protection. 
9. 
The next part of the right relates to the 
administration of such institutions. Administration 
means “management of the affairs” of the 
institution. This management must be free of control 
so that the founders or their nominees can mould 
the institution as they think fit, and in accordance 
with their ideas of how the interests of the 
community in general and the institution in 
particular will be best served. No part of this 
management can be taken away and vested in 
another body without an encroachment upon the 
guaranteed right.” 
 
132. Therefore, the “administration” right is available to the 
minority community which establishes the institution [or ‘their 
nominees’] implying that “establishing” of institution by the 
minority is necessary. There has been considerable emphasis on 
part of the Appellants with regard to the use of the term “found” 
in the aforesaid paragraphs which shall be discussed in the 
subsequent part of the judgment. 
133. Thereafter, the judgement in S.P. Mittal v. Union of India, 
(1983) rendered by a bench of five Hon’ble Judges, 
albeit without much discussion on this specific issue, holds that 
the establishment of an institution by a linguistic or religious 
minority is necessary for claiming benefit under Article 30(1). 
The relevant paragraphs are quoted as under: 

 and Ors. 

“137. The impugned Act does not seek to curtail the 
rights of any section of citizens to conserve its own 
language, script or culture conferred by Article 29. 
In order to claim the benefit of Article 30(1) the 
community must show: (a) that it is a religious or 
linguistic minority, (b) that the institution was 
established by it. Without satisfying these two 
conditions it cannot claim the guaranteed rights to 
administer it. 
138. In Re Kerala Education Bill, 1957 [AIR 1958 
SC 956:: 1959 SCJ 321] Article 
30(1) of the Constitution which deals with the right 
of 
minorities 
to 
establish 
and 
administer 
educational institutions, came for consideration. 
The Kerala Education Bill, 1957, which had been 
passed by the Kerala Legislative Assembly was 
reserved by the Governor for consideration by the 
President. xxx 
142. On an analysis of the two Articles, Article 29 
and Article 30 and the three cases referred to above, 
it is evident that the impugned Act does not seek to 
curtail the right of any section of citizens to 
conserve its own language, script or culture 
conferred by Article 29. The benefit of Article 30(1) 
can be claimed by the community only on proving 
that it is a religious or linguistic minority and that 
the institution was established by it. 
In the view that we have taken that Auroville or the 
Society is not a religious denomination, Articles 29 
and 30 would not be attracted and, therefore, the 
impugned Act cannot be held to be violative of 
Articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution.” 

 and Ors. 

134. More recently, in the judgement in Dayanand Anglo 
Vedic (DAV) College Trust and Management Society v. State of 
Maharashtra, (2013), a Society claimed to have 
minority status in the State of Maharashtra as it sought to 
encourage Hindi, which is a linguistic minority in the said State. 
While examining the question of law, the Court held that the 
establishment of an institution as a minority institution is 
necessary to claim rights under Article 30. The relevant portion 
of the said judgement is quoted as under: 
“29. Similarly, 
in S.P. 
Mittal v. Union 
of 
India [(1983): AIR 1983 SC 1], this 
Court held that in order to claim the benefit of 
Article 30, the community must firstly show and 
prove that it is a religious or linguistic minority; 
and secondly, that the institution has been 
established by such linguistic minority. xxx 
34. 
After giving our anxious consideration to 
the matter and in the light of the law settled by this 
Court, we have no hesitation in holding that in 
order to claim minority/linguistic status for an 
institution in any State, the authorities must be 
satisfied firstly that the institution has been 
established by the persons who are minority in 
such 
State; 
and, 
secondly, 
the 
right 
of 
administration of the said minority linguistic 
institution is also vested in those persons who are 
minority in such State. The right conferred by 
Article 30 of the Constitution cannot be interpreted 
as if irrespective of the persons who established the 
institution in the State for the benefit of persons 
who are minority, any person, be it non-minority 

 and Ors. in other place, can administer and run such 
institution.” 
 
135. The aforementioned legal position illustrates that this 
Court has consistently embraced an approach which mandates 
the initial establishment of an institution as a minority institution 
by the minority community to assert minority status. This 
established legal principle has attained the status of stare decisis, 
which is a fundamental pillar of our legal framework.4 The 
doctrine of precedent serves to promote certainty, stability, and 
continuity within our legal system, particularly in matters 
concerning societal dynamics, religion, minority rights, and 
fundamental freedoms. 
136. The undoubted reaffirmation of this position is palpable in 
subsequent judicial decisions, notably in the landmark case of 
TMA Pai [supra], wherein the Court refrained from providing a 
response to question 3(a) on the grounds that it did not warrant 
constitutional scrutiny by 11 Judges perhaps owing to the firmly 
established legal position. Apart from the fact that TMA Pai 
[supra] is binding upon us being a judgment delivered by a larger 
bench of this Court, neither of the parties have argued that a 
divergent view ought to be taken in the present case. 
 
4 Sakshi v. Union of India, (2004); Milkfood Ltd. v. GMC Ice 
Cream Private Ltd., (2004); Narinder Singh v. State of Punjab, 
(2014); Shah Faesal v. Union of India, (2020) 

 and Ors. 

137. At this stage, another aspect of the matter may be noted. In 
the formalised education sector, the majority of educational 
institutions operating through private means are registered as 
societies under various Acts. This encompasses a significant 
number of secular/non-minority institutions established as such. 
Such institutions, whether aided or unaided, in contrast to 
minority institutions, whether aided or unaided, are subjected to 
a significantly higher degree of regulation by the State in various 
aspects, including curriculum, admissions, teacher appointments, 
and other factors. Consequently, it is evident that private entities 
administering minority institutions enjoy a notably higher degree 
of freedom from such regulation. Hence, there exists a 
pronounced inclination on the part of non-minority institutions to 
seek minority status. 
138. In the backdrop of this clamour for minority status, if 
minority status is deemed attainable without necessitating the 
factum of establishment of an institution by the minority at its 
inception, it may result in a widespread proliferation of 
institutions claiming to be minority institutions despite not being 
established as minority institutions. This could be easily achieved 
by merely amending the rules or Articles of Association of the 
society to create a semblance of minority control. If the 
prerequisite of initial establishment by a minority community is 
deemed dispensable for invoking protection under Article 30, it 

 and Ors. would result in a creation of minority institutions, in name only. 
On the said count as well, it is necessary to treat the criterion of 
establishment by the minority community, as essential to claim 
rights/protection under Article 30. 
 
G. 
MEANING OF “ESTABLISHMENT” AND THE REAL POSITIVE 
INDICIA BEHIND 
 
G.1 
The existing jurisprudence of this Court 
139. The two sides have diverged significantly on the aspect of 
the meaning of the word “establish” occurring in Article 30. The 
parties challenging the judgment of the High Court and the 
correctness of the judgment in Azeez Basha [supra] have argued 
that the term “establish” cannot have a strict meaning to signify 
'to bring into existence'. They argue that the word has various 
other meanings such as 'to ratify', 'to found', 'to confirm', or 'to 
settle', as defined in numerous dictionaries or utilized in foreign 
legal contexts. They further argue that the narrow interpretation 
of 'establish' solely as 'to bring into existence' lacks justification 
as it neglects to analyze Article 30(1) within its context, i.e., the 
safeguarding of minority rights and nullifies the effect of words 
‘of their choice’ in Article 30(1). It is further argued that the 
constrained interpretation of 'establish' is against the judgments 
in Very Rev. Mother Provincial [supra], which was endorsed by 
TMA Pai [supra] and argued for a broader interpretation to the 
term 'establish', implicitly overturning the narrow perspective of 

 and Ors. 

Azeez Basha [supra]. It was strenuously argued that the 
establishment of an educational institution can be ascertained 
from the ‘intention’ of the minority community “to found an 
institution” of their choice and “for the benefit of a minority 
community by a member of that community.” 
140. The parties defending the judgment asserted that the 
meaning of the word “establish” under Article 30 has indeed been 
understood by this Court consistently to mean to bring into 
existence. They submit that judgment in Azeez Basha [supra] 
correctly understands the word “establish” in the common sense 
it connotes. They argue that any minority community seeking to 
claim rights under Article 30, needs to necessarily prove that an 
institution in question was actually, tangibly and manifestly 
brought into being by the minority. It was asserted that the right 
under Article 30 and the factum of “establishment” is not a 
function of the “intent” of the minority at the said time or the 
“choice” of the minority at the said time and is a pure question of 
fact. It was argued that question of “establishment” cannot be 
satisfied by some limited effort or actions on part of the minority 
rather it has to be established that the predominant character of 
the institution and the predominant efforts in establishing the 
institution was of the minority only. It was argued that to claim 
protection under Article 30(1) an institution/university should be 

 and Ors. predominantly established by the minority, for the minority and 
administered as a minority institution. 
141. In understanding the meaning of the term “establish” 
occurring under Article 30, the judgment in the case of St. 
Stephens [supra] rendered by a bench of five Hon’ble Judges, is 
crucial. In the said case, the dispute arose due to the College, 
affiliated with the University of Delhi, had a practice of reserving 
a certain percentage of seats for Christian students in admissions. 
Furthermore, St Stephens had also formulated an admissions 
policy that was at variance with the admission policy of the 
University as a whole. The circulars issued by the University 
prescribing the admission schedule and procedure were not being 
followed in St Stephens on the ground that it was a minority 
educational institution which had the right to frame its own 
policy for admissions. Certain students challenged the admission 
policy of St. Stephens College for being divergent from the 
University policy. They also challenged the preference given by 
the college to Christian students. In response, the management of 
St Stephens retired that as a minority institution, it had the right 
to administer its own affairs, including the selection of students, 
to some extent. During the arguments, a question arose as to the 
status of the institution as a minority institution. The judgement 
points out towards what has been subsequently referred to as the 
‘real positive indicia’ for any institution to claim to be an 

 and Ors. institution established by a minority. The relevant paragraphs of 
the said judgment are quoted as under: 
“28. There is by now, fairly abundant case law on 
the questions as to “minority”; the minority's right 
to “establish”, and their right to “administer” 
educational institutions. These questions have 
arisen in regard to a variety of institutions all over 
the country. They have arisen in regard to 
Christians, Muslims and in regard to certain sects 
of Hindus and linguistic groups. The courts in 
certain cases have accepted without much scrutiny 
the version of the claimant that the institution in 
question was founded by a minority community 
while in some cases the courts have examined very 
minutely the proof of the establishment of the 
institution. It should be borne in mind that the 
words “establish” and “administer” used in Article 
30(1) are to be read conjunctively. The right 
claimed by a minority community to administer the 
educational institution depends upon the proof of 
establishment of the institution. The proof of 
establishment of the institution, is thus a condition 
precedent for claiming the right to administer the 
institution. Prior to the commencement of the 
Constitution of India, there was no settled concept 
of Indian citizenship. This Court, however, did 
reiterate that the minority competent to claim the 
protection of Article 30(1) of the Constitution, and 
on that account the privilege of establishing and 
maintaining educational institutions of its choice, 
must be a minority of persons residing in India. They 
must have formed a well defined religious or 
linguistic minority. It does not envisage the rights of 
the foreign missionary or institution, however, 
laudable their objects might be. After the 

 and Ors. 

Constitution, the minority under Article 30 must 
necessarily mean those who form a distinct and 
identifiable group of citizens of India. Whether it is 
“old stuff” or “new product”, the object of the 
institute should be genuine, and not devious or 
dubious. There should be nexus between the means 
employed and the ends desired. As pointed out 
in A.P. Christians Educational Society case [(1986): (1986) ] there must exist 
some positive index to enable the educational 
institution to be identified with religious or 
linguistic minorities. Article 30(1) is a protective 
measure only for the benefit of religious and 
linguistic minorities and it is essential, to make it 
absolutely clear that no ill-fit or camouflaged 
institution should get away with the constitutional 
protection. xxx 
 
Origin and Purpose of St. Stephen's College 
 
30. 
Surprisingly, the Delhi University in the 
pleading, has neither denied nor admitted the 
minority character of the College. But the counsel 
for the University have many things to contend 
which will be presently considered. Mr Gupta, 
counsel for the petitioner in T.C. No. 3 of 1980 has 
specifically urged that the College was established 
not by Indian residents, but by foreign Mission from 
Cambridge and therefore, it is not entitled to claim 
the benefit of Article 30(1). From the counter-
affidavit filed by Dr J.H. Hala — the Principal of the 
College in W.P. Nos. 13213-14 of 1984 and from the 
publication of “The History of the College” the 
following facts and circumstances could be noted: 
The College was founded in 1881 as a Christian 
Missionary College by the Cambridge Mission in 

 and Ors. 

Delhi in collaboration with the Society for the 
Propagation of the Gospel [SPG] whose members 
were residents in India. The College was founded in 
order to impart Christian religious instruction and 
education based on Christian values to Christian 
students as well as others who may opt for the said 
education. The Cambridge Brotherhood with plans 
of establishing the Christian College in Delhi sent 
the Cambridge Mission whose members were: Rev. 
J.D. Murray, Rev. E. Bickarsteth, Rev. G.A. Lefroy, 
Rev. H.T. Blackett, Rev. H.C. Carlyon and Rev. S.S. 
Allnutt. Of the said members of the Cambridge 
Mission, Rev. Allnutt, Rev. Blackett and Rev. Lefroy 
teamed up with Rev. R.R. Winter of the SPG to 
establish the College. It will be seen that Cambridge 
Mission alone did not establish the College. The 
Cambridge Mission with the assistance of the 
members of the SPG who were residents in India 
established the College. The contention to the 
contrary urged by Mr Gupta, counsel for the 
petitioner in T.C. No. 3 of 1980 is, therefore, 
incorrect. The purpose of starting the College 
could be seen from the Report of 1878 to the 
Cambridge Brotherhood and it states “the students 
after leaving St. Stephen's Mission School joined 
non-Christian Colleges and lost touch with 
Christian teachings … the case would be otherwise 
if we were able to send them from our school to a 
College, where the teachings would be given by 
Christian professors and be permeated with 
Christian ideas.” (F.F. Monk in A History of St. 
Stephen's College, Delhi, Calcutta, 1935, p. 3). In 
October 1879 the Cambridge Committee expressed 
the desirability of imparting instruction also in 
secular subjects. “It was also felt that the influence 
of the missionaries would be greatly increased if 

 and Ors. they held classes in some secular subjects and did 
not conform their teachings to strict religious 
instruction”. (ibid p. 5) 
Building 
31. 
Originally, the College building was housed 
in hired premises paid for by the SPG. A new 
building was eventually constructed by the Society 
for the Propagation of the Gospel wherein the 
foundation stone bore the following inscription: 
To the Glory of God 
And the Advancement of Sound 
Learning 
And Religious Education 
The new building of the College was eventually 
opened on December 8, 1881, by Rev. Allnutt. On 
the said building on the front of the porch, at the top 
of the parapet, a ‘cross’ in bas-relief was placed and 
immediately under the bracket the words “Ad Dei 
Gloriam” had been inscribed which have since been 
adopted as the College motto. 
32. 
Today the new College building in the 
University campus has also a large ‘cross’ at the top 
of the main tower and in the front porch is inscribed 
the St. Stephen's motto “Ad Dei Gloriam” to 
perpetuate and remind the students the motive and 
objective of the College, namely, “The Glory of 
God”. 
33. 
There is also a chapel in the College campus 
where religious instruction in the Christian Gospel 
is imparted for religious assembly in the morning. 
34. 
 It would thus appear that since its foundation 
in 1881, St. Stephen's College has apparently 
maintained its Christian character and that would 
be evident from its very name, emblem, motto, the 
establishment of a chapel and its religious 

 and Ors. instruction in the Christian Gospel for religious 
assembly. These are beyond the pale of controversy. 
Constitution of the College 
35. 
It is said that during the early part of the 
College history, it was managed by the Mission 
Council — a totally Christian body. Late in 1913 it 
was registered as a society and a constitution was 
formulated on November 6, 1913 which was adopted 
by the SPG Standing Committee and by the 
Cambridge Committee. The Constitution as it stands 
today again maintains the essential character of the 
College 
as 
a 
Christian 
College 
without 
compromising the right to administer it as an 
educational 
institution 
of 
its 
choice. 
The 
Constitution of the College consists of Memorandum 
of the Society and Rules. Clause 2 of Memorandum 
states that “the object is to prepare students of the 
College for University degrees and examinations 
and to offer instruction in doctrines of christianity 
which instruction must be in accordance with the 
teachings of the Church of North India”. Clause 4 
sets out the original members of the Society who 
were mostly Christians. The composition of the 
Society also reflects its Christian character 
inasmuch as the Bishop of the Diocese of Delhi is 
the Chairman of the Society [Rule 1(a)]. Further, 
two persons appointed by the Bishop of the Diocese 
of Delhi, one of whom shall be a senior Presbyter of 
the Diocese, shall be members of the Society [Rule 
1(b)]. One person to be appointed by the Church of 
North India Synodical Board of Higher Education 
shall also be a member of the Society [Rule 1(g)]. 
Similar is the position of a person to be appointed 
by the Diocesan Board of Education [Rule 1(h)]. 
Two persons to be appointed by the Executive 
Committee of the Diocese, one of whom shall be a 

 and Ors. 

Presbyter, shall also be members of the Society 
[Rule 1(i)]. The composition of the Society, 
therefore, indicates the presence of a large number 
of Christian members of the Church of North India 
on it. 
Management 
36. 
The management of the College is being 
looked after by the Supreme Council and the 
Governing Body. The Supreme Council consists of 
some members of the Society, all of whom must be 
members of the Church of North India or some other 
church in communion therewith, or any other duly 
constituted Christian church. They are: 
(a) The Bishop of the Diocese of Delhi, 
who shall be the Chairman. 
(b) Two persons appointed by the Bishop 
of the Diocese [under Rule 1(b)]. 
(c) The person appointed by the Church 
of North India Synodical Board of 
Higher Education [under Rule 1(g)]. 
(d) The person appointed by the Diocese 
Board of Education [under Rule 1(h)]. 
(e) The Principal of the College 
(Member-Secretary).” 
37. 
Rule 3 of the Society provides that the 
Supreme Council mostly looks after the religious 
and moral instruction to students and matters 
affecting the religious character of the College. The 
Principal of the College is the Member-Secretary of 
the Supreme Council. Rule 4 provides that the 
Principal shall be a member of the Church of North 
India or of a Church that is in communion with the 
Church of India. The Vice-Principal shall be 
appointed annually by the Principal. He shall also 

 and Ors. be a member of the Church of North India or of some 
other church in communion therewith. 
38. 
True, Rule 5 provides that the Supreme 
Council of the College has no jurisdiction over the 
administration of the College and it shall be looked 
after by the Governing Body. But the Governing 
Body is not a secular body as argued by learned 
counsel for the University. Rule 6 provides that the 
Chairman of the Society (Bishop of Diocese of 
Delhi) shall be the Chairman of the Governing 
Body. The members of the Society as set out in 
categories, (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), 
(k), (l) and (m) of clause (1) shall be the members of 
the Governing Body. The Chairman and the Vice-
Chairman of the Governing Body shall be the 
members of the Church of North India. Out of 
categories (a) and (m) in clause (1), only category 
(k) may be a member of the teaching staff who may 
not be a Christian. Two members referred under 
category (l) to be appointed by the Delhi University 
may not be Christian and likewise, under the 
category (n) may not be Christian. But the 
remaining members shall be Christians. Out of 
thirteen categories, only three categories might be 
non-Christians and therefore, it makes little 
difference in the Christian character of the 
Governing Body of the College. A comparison of 
Statute 30(c) of the Delhi University at pages 127-
28 of Calendar Volume I will show the difference 
between the Governing Body of other colleges under 
the Statute as contrasted with St. Stephen's College. 
Principal 
39. 
It is again significant to note the difference 
between the method of appointment of the 
Principal of St. Stephen's College and all other 
colleges. The Principal of St. Stephen's College is 

 and Ors. appointed by the Supreme Council and he must be 
a Christian belonging to Church of North India 
(Rule 4). He will exercise control, and maintain 
discipline and regulation of the College. He will be 
in complete charge of the admissions in the College 
assisted by admission committee. But the Principals 
of other affiliated colleges under Ordinance XVIII 
clause 7(2) [page 335 Calendar Volume I] are to be 
appointed by the Governing Body of the College. 
40. 
The immovable property of the College shall 
be vested in the Indian Church trustees, who shall 
merely act as Trustees, and shall have no power of 
management whatsoever. All other property 
connected with the College shall be vested in the 
Society (Rule 21).” 
 
142. During the examination of the particular college under 
consideration, the Court observes that the institution was 
established by missionaries with the primary purpose of 
providing Christian religious education - as per paragraph 30. It 
also observes that the assets and property of the college are 
legally owned by the church - as described in paragraph 40. The 
Court also notes that at the time of its inception, the college was 
under the exclusive management of a body composed entirely of 
Christians - as outlined in paragraph 35. The Court notices that 
the rules of the institution's society stipulate that all members 
must be appointed by Christian organizations - as mentioned in 
paragraph 35. The Court lays specific emphasis on the fact that 
the administration of the college is also entrusted to a body 

 and Ors. comprised entirely of Christians - as indicated in paragraph 36. 
The Court notes that the Principal of the college holds an ex-
officio position and is required to be a Christian - according to 
paragraph 39. As far as historical factors are concerned, the Court 
notes that the construction of the college building was 
commissioned by a minority community and funded by them - as 
detailed in paragraphs 31-34. In governance, the Court notes that 
both the Supreme Council and the Governing Body of the college 
are predominantly constituted of Christians, with 10 out of 13 
members belonging to this religious group - as per paragraphs 
37-38. 
143. As for St. Stephens [supra], both sides have placed 
considerable reliance on the aforesaid paragraphs to further their 
respective cases and see the facts surrounding the establishment 
of AMU from a particular perspective. In any event, from the said 
analyses in St. Stephens [supra], it is clear that the question of 
establishment is not dependent on a singular factor, rather is a 
culmination of various aspects surrounding the facts leading up 
to the establishment of the institution and the form of the 
institution itself. The factors that the Court found relevant in St. 
Stephens [supra] form jurisprudential basis of the factual 
enquiry that ought to be carried out by the Court in such matters. 
However, the said enquiry cannot be straight-jacketed in all cases 
and the Court ought to suitably modulate the approach suiting the 

 and Ors. needs of the institution in question and the nature of the 
institution. In simple words, a school or a college or a University 
may require a significant difference in approach while 
adjudicating the question of “establishment” by the minority 
community. 
144. The judgment in A.P. Christians Medical Educational 
Society v. Government of Andhra Pradesh, (1986) 
is another specific case wherein the Court interrogated the 
essentials of an institution claiming to be a minority institution. 
The Court guarded against false schemes in order to claim 
protection under Article 30. The relevant paragraphs of the said 
judgement are quoted as under: 
“A brazen and bizarre exploitation of the naive and 
foolish, eager and ready-to-be-duped, aspirants for 
admission to professional collegiate courses, behind 
the smoke-screen of the right of the minorities to 
establish and administer educational institutions of 
their choice — is what this case is about. A society 
styling itself as the ‘Andhra Pradesh Christian 
Medical Educational Society’ was registered on 
August 31, 1984. The first of the objectives 
mentioned in the memorandum of association of the 
society was, 
“to establish, manage and maintain 
educational and other institutions and 
impart education and training at all stages, 
primary, 
secondary, 
collegiate, 
post-
graduate and doctoral, as a Christian 
Minorities' Educational Institution”. and Ors. 

Another object was 
“to promote, establish, manage and 
maintain Medical colleges, Engineering 
colleges. Pharmacy colleges. Commerce, 
Literature, 
Arts 
and 
Sciences 
and 
Management colleges and colleges in other 
subjects and to promote allied activities for 
diffusion of useful knowledge and training.” 
 
Other objects were also mentioned in the 
memorandum of association. All that is necessary 
to mention here is that none of the objects, apart 
from the first extracted object, had anything to do 
with any minority. Even the first mentioned object 
did not specify or elucidate what was meant by the 
statement that education and training at all stages 
was proposed to be imparted in the institutions of 
that society “as Christian Minorities' Educational 
Institution”. Apparently the words “as a Christian 
Minorities' Educational Institutions” were added in 
order to enable the society to claim the rights 
guaranteed by Article 30(1) of the Constitution and 
for no other purpose. This will become clearer and 
clearer as we narrate further facts. xxx 
7. 
Even while narrating the facts, we think, we 
have said enough to justify a refusal by us to 
exercise our discretionary jurisdiction under Article 
136 of the Constitution. We do not have any doubt 
that the claim of the petitioner to start a minority 
educational institution was no more than the 
merest pretence. Except the words, “as the 
Christian Minorities’ Educational Institutions” 
occurring in one of the objects of the society, as 
mentioned in the memorandum of association, there 
is nothing whatever to justify the claim of the society 

 and Ors. that the institutions proposed to be started by it were 
‘minority educational institutions’. Every letter 
written by the society whether to the Central 
Government, the State Government or the 
University 
contained 
false 
and 
misleading 
statements. As we had already mentioned the 
petitioner had the temerity to admit or pretend to 
admit students in the first year MBBS course without 
any permission being granted by the government for 
the starting of the medical college and without any 
affiliation being granted by the University. The 
society did this despite the strong protest voiced by 
the University and the several warnings issued by 
the University. The society acted in defiance of the 
University and the government, in disregard of the 
provisions of the Andhra Pradesh Education Act, 
the Osmania University Act and the regulations of 
the Osmania University and with total indifference 
to the interest and welfare of the students. The 
society has played havoc with the careers of several 
score students and jeopardised their future 
irretrievably. Obviously the so-called establishment 
of a medical college was in the nature of a financial 
adventure for the so-called society and its office 
bearers, but an educational misadventure for the 
students. Many, many conditions had to be fulfilled 
before affiliation could be granted by the University. 
Yet the society launched into the venture without 
fulfilling a single condition beyond appointing 
someone as Principal. No one could have imagined 
that a medical college could function without a 
teaching hospital, without the necessary scientific 
equipment, without the necessary staff, without the 
necessary buildings and without the necessary 
funds. Yet that is what the society did or pretended 
to do. We do not have any doubt that the society 

 and Ors. and the so-called institutions were started as 
business ventures with a view to make money from 
gullible individuals anxious to obtain admission to 
professional colleges. It was nothing but a daring 
imposture and sculduggery. By no stretch of 
imagination, can we confer on it the status and 
dignity of a minority institution. 
8. 
It was seriously contended before us that any 
minority, even a single individual belonging to a 
minority, could found a minority institution and had 
the right so to do under the Constitution and neither 
the government nor the University could deny the 
society’s right to establish a minority institution, at 
the very threshold as it were, howsoever, they may 
impose regulatory measures in the interests of 
uniformity, efficiency and excellence of education. 
The fallacy of the argument insofar as the instant 
case is concerned lies in thinking that neither the 
government nor the University has the right to go 
behind the claim that the institution is a minority 
institution and to investigate and satisfy itself 
whether the claim is well-founded or ill-founded. 
The government, the University and ultimately the 
court have the undoubted right to pierce the 
‘minority veil’ — with due apologies to the 
corporate lawyers — and discover whether there is 
lurking behind it no minority at all and in any case, 
no minority institution. The object of Article 30(1) 
is not to allow bogies to be raised by pretenders but 
to give the minorities ‘a sense of security and a 
feeling of confidence’ not merely by guaranteeing 
the right to profess, practise and propagate religion 
to religious minorities and the right to conserve 
their language, script and culture to linguistic 
minorities, but also to enable all minorities, 
religious or linguistic, to establish and administer 

 and Ors. educational institutions of their choice. These 
institutions must be educational institutions of the 
minorities in truth and reality and not mere 
masked phantoms. They may be institutions 
intended to give the children of the minorities the 
best general and professional education, to make 
them complete men and women of the country and 
to enable them to go out into the world fully 
prepared and equipped. They may be institutions 
where special provision is made to the advantage 
and for the advancement of the minority children. 
They may be institutions where the parents of the 
children of the minority community may expect that 
education in accordance with the basic tenets of 
their religion would be imparted by or under the 
guidance of teachers, learned and steeped in the 
faith. They may be institutions where the parents 
expect their children to grow in a pervasive 
atmosphere which is in harmony with their religion 
or conducive to the pursuit of it. What is important 
and what is imperative is that there must exist some 
real positive index to enable the institution to be 
identified as an educational institution of the 
minorities. We have already said that in the present 
case apart from the half a dozen words ‘as a 
Christian minorities’ institution' occurring in one 
of the objects recited in the memorandum of 
association, there is nothing whatever, in the 
memorandum or the articles of association or in 
the actions of the society to indicate that the 
institution was intended to be a minority 
educational institution. As already found by us 
these half a dozen words were introduced merely to 
found a claim on Article 30(1). They were a smoke-
screen.” 

 and Ors. 

145. The jurisprudence in St. Stephens [supra] and A.P. 
Christians Medical Educational Society [supra] requires a real 
positive indicia for an institution to claim to have been 
established by a minority community. Therefore, it is permissible 
to ‘pierce the veil’ in order ascertain the real character of the 
institution and claims of minority status cannot be bestowed on 
illusionary claims. This ruling serves as a cautionary reminder 
that granting the right to administer educational institutions 
without the prior establishment by minorities could result in 
unwanted constitutional outcomes. The concerns expressed by 
the Court could materialize, potentially resulting in a widespread 
"takeover" of institutions by groups claiming minority status 
through creative interpretations to seek protection under Article 
29 and 30. 
146. After delving in to the finer details of the vexed 
constitutional question and the meaning of the term “establish”, 
it would serve a salutary purpose if one analyses the approach 
adopted by this Court as and when any institution approached it. 
In the case of Rev. Father Proost v. State of Bihar, (1969), with a bench consisting of five Judges, the Court 
acknowledges that the institution in question was established by 
the Catholic minority before extending the safeguards provided 
under Article 30. The relevant portion of the judgment is as 
under: 

 and Ors. 

“2. 
St. Xavier's College was established by the 
Jesuits of Ranchi. It was affiliated to Patna 
University in 1944. The management of the College 
vests in a Governing Body consisting of 11 
members. They are: 
“(i) The Superior Regular of Ranchi Jesuit 
Mission — President exofficio. 
(ii-v) Four Counsellors to the Superior 
Regular to be nominated by the Jesuit Mission 
authorities. 
(vi) The Principal of the College — Vice-
President and Secretary ex-officio. 
(vii) One representative of the teaching staff 
of the College elected by the members of the 
staff. 
(viii) One representative of the Patna 
University. 
(ix-xi) Three persons to represent Hindu, 
Muslim and Aboriginal interests.” 
The terms of service of religious staff are 
determined by the Jesuit Mission Authorities, but 
those of the members of the lay staff including their 
appointment are determined by the Governing 
Body. All appointments to the teaching staff, both 
religious and lay are reported to the Syndicate of 
the Patna University. The object of founding the 
College inter alia is “to give Catholic youth a full 
course of moral and liberal education, by imparting 
a thorough religious instruction and by maintaining 
a Catholic atmosphere in the institution”. The 
college is, however, open to all non-catholic 
students. All non-catholic students receive a course 
of moral science. 
2. The College was thus founded by a Christian 
minority and the petitioners claim they have a right 

 and Ors. to administer it a constitutional right guaranteed to 
minorities by Article 30. xxx 
 
12. 
We are, therefore, quite clear that St. Xavier's 
College was founded by a Catholic Minority 
Community based on religion and that this 
educational institution has the protection of Article 
30(1) the Constitution. For the same reason it is 
exempted under Section 48-B of the Act. The 
petition will therefore be allowed with this 
declaration but in the circumstances of the case we 
make no order about costs.” 
 
147. In Right Rev. Bishop S.K. Patro v. State of Bihar, (1969) 
 [bench of five Judges], a challenge was laid to an 
order of the Deputy Director of Education which imposed an 
obligation on the school to constitute a managing committee to 
control, administer and manage its affairs. During the discussion, 
the Court assessed various factors and evidence to ascertain the 
institution's status as a minority establishment, highlighting the 
significance of the funding source during its inception. The 
relevant paragraphs are quoted as under: 
“8. 
It was the case of the State and the parties 
intervening in the writ petition before the High 
Court that the school was established by the Church 
Missionary Society, London, which they claimed 
was a Corporation with an alien domicile and “such 
a society was not a minority based on religion or 
language” within the meaning of Article 30 of the 
Constitution. On behalf of the appellants in the 

 and Ors. appeal and the petitioners in the two writ petitions 
filed in this Court, it is claimed that the School was 
started in 1854 by the local Christian residents of 
Bhagalpur. They concede that the Church 
Missionary Society of London did extend financial 
aid in the establishment of the School, but they 
contend that on that account, the School did not 
cease to be an educational institution established by 
a religious minority in India. 
9. 
There is on the record important evidence 
about establishment in 1854 of the Lower Primary 
School at Bhagalpur. It is unfortunate that sufficient 
attention was not directed to that part of the 
evidence in the High Court. The “Record Book” of 
the Church Missionary Association at Bhagalpur 
which is Annexure ‘D’ to Writ Petition No. 430 of 
1968 furnishes evidence of vital importance having 
a bearing on the establishment of the School. It 
contains copies of letters written from Bhagalpur 
and minutes of meetings held and the resolutions 
passed by the Local Council of Bhagalpur. On June 
1, 1948, Rev. Vaux informed the Calcutta 
Corresponding 
Committee 
of 
the 
Church 
Missionary Society by a letter that if the Calcutta 
Society were to establish a School at Champanagar, 
“local assistance shall not be wanting to the extent 
of 1000 or 1200 rupees a year, besides providing a 
school house and residence for the master”, and 
that “At first, for breaking up the fallow ground and 
setting the school a going the presence of a 
Missionary of tact and experience may be 
necessary”. On June 26, 1848, Rev. Vaux by another 
letter 
informed 
the 
Calcutta 
Corresponding 
Committee that a special service was held in the 
Church on June 22, 1848 and thereafter on Friday, 
June 23, 1848, a meeting was held and contributions 

 and Ors. were invited from persons present including Indian 
residents, that monthly subscriptions of Rs 202 for 
the “salary of masters” and other expenses were 
promised, and that an amount of Rs 1647 was 
donated for building the school and residence for 
the master; that the general impression made was so 
favourable to the cause that he felt justified in 
assuring the Calcutta Committee that the local 
Committee were in a position to guarantee certain 
requisites for making a commencement such as 
payment of the salary of the School Master and 
Mistress and the building of a house for their 
accommodation which may afterwards be enlarged 
so as to form a suitable residence for a Mission. 
10. By letter, dated July 10, 1848, the Secretary, 
Calcutta Corresponding Committee, informed Rev. 
Vaux that they were looking out for a prominent 
person to commence missionary operations by 
opening a School “which is indeed a common way 
of beginning a Mission.” In a letter, dated 
December 22, 1848, written from Bhagalpur it was 
stated: 
“The Society will provide for the 
Missionary's salary and trust that local 
funds will provide a residence for him of a 
suitable 
kind. 
All 
other 
Mission 
requirements, such as school teachers etc. should be left to be provided on the spot.” 
 
11. Then there are minutes of the resolutions passed 
at a meeting held on October 24, 1849, by the Parent 
Committee and another resolution, dated October 
25, 1851, of the Local Committee, to raise funds, and 
to determine upon disbursements with the advice of 
the Missionary to promote the objects of the 
Mission. In the minutes of the meeting, dated 

 and Ors. 

October 25, 1851, it is recorded that a statement of 
account of receipts and disbursements up to 
September 30, 1851, including expenses of a boys' 
school and salary of masters, “hire of school rooms 
and furniture” and expenses of a girls' school 
“including cost of working materials up to date” 
was submitted. xxx 
 
15. It appears from this correspondence and the 
resolutions and the discussions at the meetings that 
a permanent home for the Boys’ School was set up 
in 1854 on property acquired by local Christians 
and in buildings erected from funds collected by 
them. The institution along with the land on which 
it was built and the balance of money from the 
local fund were handed over to the Church 
Missionary Society in 1856. It is also true that 
substantial assistance was obtained from the 
Church Missionary Society, London. But on that 
account, it cannot be said that the School was not 
established by the local Christians with their own 
efforts and was not an educational institution 
established by a minority.” 
 
148. Thus, this Court affirmed that the protection afforded by 
Article 30 extends to institutions established before the 
Constitution following the dictum in Kerala Education Bill 
[supra]. The Court scrutinized why the institution in question 
merits recognition as a minority institution, with particular 
emphasis on examining whether the minority was predominantly 
involved in its establishment. and Ors. 

149. In D.A.V. College v. State of Punjab, (1971), 
the Court expressly notes that the institution in question was 
established by a community which was minority within the 
confines of the State of Punjab. Similarly, in Ahmedabad 
St. Xavier's College Society v. State of Gujarat, (1974), J. H.R. Khanna’s opinion notes that the college in question 
was established, at the time of its inception, by the minority. 
Similarly, in Gandhi Faiz-e-am-College v. University of Agra, 
(1975), the Court, while extending rights under 
Article 30, notes that the institution claiming protection was 
expressly established by the minority. 
150. The said approach has been consistently adopted over the 
past five decades after the judgment in Azeez Basha [supra] [See 
Rt. Rev. Msgr. Mark Netto v. State of Kerala, (1979); 
Lily Kurian v. Lewina, (1979); Christian Medical 
College Hospital Employees' Union v. Christian Medical 
College Vellore Association, (1987); Al-Karim 
Educational Trust v. State of Bihar, (1996); Yunus 
Ali Sha v. Mohamed Abdul Kalam, (1999); Society 
of St. Joseph's College v. Union of India, (2002); 
Secy., Malankara Syrian Catholic College v. T. Jose, (2007); Satimbla Sharma v. St Paul's Senior Secondary 
School, (2011) ]. and Ors. 

151. In P.A. Inamdar v. State of Maharashtra, (2005), seven Hon’ble Judges, were called upon to interpret the 
judgment in TMA Pai [supra]. While the said inquiry primarily 
focused on the scope of regulations viz aided/unaided minority 
institutions, nevertheless, the bench reaffirmed the observations 
that the determination of whether an institution qualifies as a 
minority institution, and its character at the time of establishment, 
should be evaluated against the criterion that it must be envisaged 
primarily as a minority institution placing reliance on Kerala 
Education Bill [supra]. 
152. Through a survey of the case law cited above, it can be 
seen that the Court has adopted a varied approach is determining 
the criteria for discerning the true character of an institution at 
the time of its establishment. In order to arrive at a finding that 
an institution was established by the minority for the purposes of 
Article 30, it has been held that such institution must principally 
embody a minority character and be instituted to safeguard the 
minority language, culture, or religion. In some situations, there 
has also been a specific emphasis on the source of funding being 
from the minority community or the fact that the management of 
lands should eventually vest with the minority. Further, the 
presence of some non-minorities in administration has not been 
held detrimental if the actual authority rests with the minority 
community. and Ors. 

G.2 
The founding moment or the genesis argument 
153. The Appellants have argued that the word “establish” is to 
be interpreted broadly and would include the parallels drawn with 
generic phrases such as “genesis of the institution” or the 
“founding moment of the institution”. With regard to the claim 
that the word “establish” and “found” can be used 
interchangeably thereby according it with a wider and more 
generalised meaning, it can be noticed that the Court as a matter 
lexical variation may have used the terms interchangeably, 
however, the constitutional meaning of the term cannot be diluted 
on that count. This is because the word “establish” as used in the 
Constitution carries a specific meaning. The meaning of the 
terms occurring in the Constitution ought to have a specific 
meaning especially when the same occurs under Part III of the 
Constitution. 
154. This Court has consistently held that when the words of a 
provision are clear and there exists no ambiguity, the same ought 
to be given their plain and simple meaning. The assertion on part 
of the Appellant that “establish” ought to be given a wider 
meaning owing to the context in which it occurs is also unmerited 
on the same count. It must be noted that the right under Article 
30 is an important and exceptional right/protection extended by 
the Constitution to a specific class, for a specific purpose, in a 
particular circumstance. The extension of the same over and 

 and Ors. beyond what the Constitution contemplates would dilute the 
constitutional guarantee itself and would be counter-productive 
to the interests of the minorities themselves. 
155. As held by this Court, the objective of Article 30 is not to 
afford a false sense of security and confidence to pretenders 
posing as minorities. It was for this reason that this Court in A.P. 
Christian Medical Educational Society [supra] cautioned 
against what it referred to as masked phantoms. It is imperative 
to interpret the Constitution in a manner that ensures the sacred 
protection under Article 30 is extended only to institutions 
genuinely representing the minority community, in substance and 
not merely in appearance. 
156. From the above it is amply clear that the meaning of the 
word “establish” under Article 30 has indeed been understood by 
this Court consistently to mean ‘to bring into existence’. The 
meaning of “establish” in Black’s Law Dictionary 6th Edn. is as 
under: 
“xxx 
 
(3) To found, to create, to regulate; as: “Congress 
shall have power to establish post-roads and post- 
offices.” 
(4) To found, recognize, confirm, or admit; as: 
“Congress shall make no law respecting an 
establishment of religion.” 
(5) To create, to ratify, or confirm; as: “We, the 
people,” etc., “do ordain and establish this 
constitution.” 

 and Ors. 

To settle or fix firmly; place on a permanent 
footing; found; create; put beyond doubt or dispute; 
prove; convince. 
To bring into being; to build; to constitute; to 
create; to erect; to form, to found; to found and 
regulate, to institute, to locate; to make; to model; 
to organize; to originate; to prepare; to set up.” 
 
157. Similarly, the Webster’s Third New International 
Dictionary defines “establish” as – “To bring into existence, 
create, make, start, originate, found or build as permanent or with 
permanence in view”. The P.Ramanatha Aiyer’s Law Lexicon 
defines it as – “To found, recognize, confirm or admit, to make 
or form”. The Black’s Law Dictionary, 9th edition defines it as – 
“to settle, make or fix firmly, to enact permanently, to make, form 
or bring into existence.” The Bouvier Law Dictionary defines it 
as – “Creation or authorization of an operation or institution. 
Establishment is the act of creating or recognizing in law or in 
fact any institution, office, place or person so that the person or 
thing established has an authority or certain privileges that are 
recognized by others”. The Oxford Dictionary of English defines 
it as – “To set up on a firm or permanent basis, initiate or bring 
about.” The Collins English Dictionary and Thesaurus defines it 
as – “To create or set up”. The common thread amongst all the 
said definition is that “establish” refers to the creation or bringing 
in to being of a body/institution. It refers to the action or process 
which involves creation of a new entity. In light of these 

 and Ors. considerations, a minority community seeking to assert rights 
under Article 30 must substantiate that the institution in question 
was indeed physically, demonstrably, and conclusively brought 
into existence by the minority. 
158. The Appellants urged that the establishment is equivalent 
to a ‘founding moment’ in order to further their stance on the 
facts surrounding MAO College and AMU. This fundamentally 
ignores the understanding of “establishment” as establishment is 
not a moment rather establishment is a process. A process 
consists of various factors and forces at play, the culmination of 
which result in the creation of the institution. A moment connotes 
a singular act or just an idea which, in the opinion of this Court, 
would not suffice the enquiry under Article 30. A process is a 
complex sequences of events and actions/inactions on part of 
various stakeholders which were relevant in the history of the 
institution at the point of establishment. 
159. Further, in cases wherein there are multitude of forces and 
multiple stakeholders involved during establishment of an 
institution, the judicial inquiry would have to be suitably 
calibrated. The Court, in such situations, ought to take a holistic 
view of the matter and decide the question on totality of factors. 
The Court needs to weigh the factors and contributory forces in 
the balance in order to ascertain whether the minority community 

 and Ors. was the primary force behind the bringing in to being of the 
institution. 
 
G.3 
Relevance of “choice” and “intent” in the question of 
establishment 
 
160. At this juncture, it is necessary to understand the meaning 
of the term “choice” occurring in Article 30 of the Constitution. 
The term choice, is representative of the decision of minority 
community as to the nature of the institution it seeks to establish. 
The choice therefore could be to establish a technical institution, 
an arts institution, an institution for religious teaching or even a 
minority institution with largely secular teaching. The “choice” 
is therefore operationalised by the decision of the minority as to 
the kind of institution that the minority seeks to establish. 
161. In Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College Society and Ors. v. 
State of Gujarat and Ors., (1974), this Court refers 
to this aspect of “choice” as under: 
“96. xxx 
Clause (1) of Article 30 also contains the words “of 
their 
choice”. 
These 
words 
which 
qualify 
“educational institutions” show the vast discretion 
and option which the minorities have in selecting 
the type of institutions which they want to 
establish. In case an educational institution is 
established by a minority to conserve its distinct 
language, script or culture, the right to establish 
and administer such institution would fall both 
under Article 29(1) as well as under Article 30(1). 
The minorities can, however, choose to establish an 

 and Ors. educational institution which is purely of a general 
secular character and is not designed to conserve 
their distinct language, script or culture. The right 
to establish and administer such an institution is 
guaranteed by Article 30(1) and the fact that such 
an institution does not conserve the distinct 
language, script or culture of a minority would not 
take it out of the ambit of Article 30(1).” 
 
162. The “choice” therefore, is with regard to the type of the 
institution and cannot be conflated with the “administration” of 
an institution. The assertion that once the choice includes having 
secular education in the institution, it would be necessary that 
non-minority persons are appointed for the purposes of teaching 
and administration is only partially correct. Indeed, when a 
minority seeks to provide secular education it would have to 
appoint non-minority teachers and some administration from 
outside the community, however, the same cannot mean that even 
the 
major 
decision-making, 
managerial 
and 
superior 
administrative setup can be “outsourced” by the minority. The 
lower rungs of administration and the teaching staff may 
certainly be of a non-minority character however, the higher 
echelons of administration and policy decision making of the 
institution ought to be in the hands of the minority community to 
claim minority status. Further, the “intent” of the minority 
community unless expressed and actually exercised as the 
“choice”, cannot govern the question of establishment. and Ors. 

163. The constitutionally sustainable approach qua the question 
of "establishment" therefore, cannot hinge only upon the "intent" 
or "choice" of the minority at the time. The intent and choice may 
be relevant only to a limited extent and cannot be the controlling 
factors in the judicial enquiry for determining the question of 
establishment. The question of establishment is to be adjudicated 
from a multitude of factors as noticed above and cannot be 
inferred from bald assertions regarding the "wishes" or "choices" 
or "efforts" of a minority community. 
164. The question of establishment would constitute a factual 
inquiry to ascertain the predominant forces behind the bringing 
in to being of an institution. Admittedly, the admission or taking 
help of other members of other communities would not be fatal, 
but the prominence must be of the minority community in major 
aspects of the institution. The primary character of the institution 
and the predominant efforts in its establishment ought to 
originate from the minority community and must culminate 
[come in to being] through the said community. The “choice” and 
“wishes” during the process of establishment – if not accepted, 
would clearly indicate that the concerned minority community 
was not the predominant force behind the institution. 
 
G.4 
The nature of administration at the time of establishment 
165. The Appellants urge that it is open for a minority 
community, while exercising its choice, to hire teacher and other 

 and Ors. administrative staff from non-minority community while 
establishing a minority institution. There cannot be any doubt 
with regard to the said proposition however, while the teaching 
and administrative staff may be drawn from any community, the 
Court needs to be ultimately ascertain whether such a choice of 
having a secular staff was exercised by the minority community 
or was enforced by other stakeholders who were involved in the 
process of establishment. If the position is the latter, the same 
would have a significant bearing on the adjudication of the 
question at hand. 
166. At this juncture, it is necessary to understand the meaning 
of the term “administration” in Article 30. Further, it is important 
for the Court to delineate the distinction between administrative 
and academic setup in the concerned institution. The 
administrative and academic authorities within an educational 
institution are functionally distinct. The judgment of this Court 
in Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College Society [supra], provides 
some assistance in this regard. The relevant portion of the said 
judgement is quoted as under: 
“19. The entire controversy centres round the extent 
of the right of the religious and linguistic minorities 
to administer their educational institutions. The 
right to administer is said to consist of four 
principal matters. First is the right to choose its 
managing or governing body. It is said that the 
founders of the minority institution have faith and 
confidence in their own committee or body 

 and Ors. consisting of persons elected by them. Second is 
the right to choose its teachers. It is said that 
minority institutions want teachers to have 
compatibility with the ideals, aims and aspirations 
of the institution. Third is the right not to be 
compelled to refuse admission to students. In other 
words, the minority institutions want to have the 
right to admit students of their choice subject to 
reasonable 
regulations 
about 
academic 
qualifications. Fourth is the right to use its 
properties and assets for the benefit of its own 
institution. 
 
40. ….. The right to administer is the right to 
conduct and manage the affairs of the institution. 
This right is exercised through a body of persons in 
whom the founders of the institution have faith and 
confidence and who have full autonomy in that 
sphere. The right to administer is subject to 
permissible regulatory measures. Permissible 
regulatory measures are those which do not restrict 
the right of administration but facilitate it and 
ensure better and more effective exercise of the 
right for the benefit of the institution and through 
the instrumentality of the management of the 
educational institutions and without displacing the 
management. If the administration has to be 
improved it should be done through the agency or 
instrumentality of the existing management and not 
by displacing it. Restrictions on the right of 
administration imposed in the interest of the 
general public alone and not in the interests of and 
for the benefit of minority educational institutions 
concerned 
will 
affect 
the 
autonomy 
in 
administration. and Ors. 

41. Autonomy in administration means right to 
administer effectively and to manage and conduct 
the affairs of the institutions. The distinction is 
between a restriction on the right of administration 
and a regulation prescribing the manner of 
administration. The right of administration is day 
to day administration. The choice in the personnel 
of management is a part of the administration.” 
 
167. Similarly, TMA Pai [supra] considered the essential 
elements of the ‘right to administer’ [although under the heading 
“Private unaided non-minority educational institutions”] as 
follows: 
“50. The right to establish and administer broadly 
comprises the following rights: 
(a) to admit students; 
(b) to set up a reasonable fee structure; 
(c) to constitute a governing body; 
(d) to appoint staff (teaching and non-teaching); 
and 
(e) to take action if there is dereliction of duty on 
the part of any employees.” 
 
168. Therefore, “administration” and its link with the question 
of establishment is to be ascertained by locating who exercised 
the “choice” with regard the crucial aspects of an institution and 
to what extent was the minority’s decision making expressed in 
the tangible outcomes at the time of establishment. It is at this 
point that the “choice” of the minority marries itself with the 
“administration” by the minority community. As stated above, 
the choice can be said to have been exercised by the minority 

 and Ors. community, if the minority community is present in some higher 
echelons of the administrative setup. Such positioning of the 
minority community would, in fact, enable the community to 
exercise its “choice” as the said choice is a function of the 
decision making of the minority community. If the minority 
community is not the decision maker in offices of prominence in 
the institution, the offices which hold the keys to giving character 
to the institution, the claim of administration or establishment by 
the minority community would fall flat. 
 
G.5 
Locating the real positive indicia 
169. In light of the above, in discerning real positive indicia for 
adjudging the question of establishment, there cannot be a rigid 
formula; rather, it would rely on various factors depending on the 
era, type, and nature of the institution under consideration. The 
following broad parameters can be culled out from the judgments 
and may be considered by the Court while adjudicating the 
question of establishment: 
i. 
Firstly, to claim “establishment”, the minority community 
must actually and tangibly bring the entirety of the 
institution into existence. The role played by the minority 
community must be predominant, in fact almost complete 
to the point of exclusion of all other forces. The indicia 
which may be illustrative and exhaustive in this regard 
may be nature of the institution, the legal/statutory basis 

 and Ors. required for establishing the institution, whether the 
establishment required any “negotiation” with outside 
forces, the role in acquiring lands, obtaining funds, 
constructing buildings, and other related matters must have 
been held completely minority community. Similarly, 
while teachers, curriculum, medium of instruction, etc. can 
be on secular lines, however, the decision-making 
authority regarding hiring teachers, curriculum decisions, 
medium of instruction, admission criteria, and similar 
matters must be the minority community. The choice of 
having secular education in the institution must be made 
expressly by the minority community, demonstrating the 
link between institution and the persons claiming to 
establish it. ii. 
Secondly, the purpose of the institution must have been to 
predominantly serve the interests of the minority 
community or the sole betterment of the minority 
community, irrespective of the form of education provided 
and the mode of admission adopted. Therefore, as per the 
choice of the minority community, an institution may have 
secular education, but such secular education and the 
resultant institution, must be predominantly meant for the 
overall betterment of the minority community. and Ors. iii. 
Thirdly, 
the 
institution 
must 
be 
predominantly 
administered as a minority institution with the actual 
functional, executive and policy administration vested 
with the minority. The minority community should 
determine the selection, removal criteria, and procedures 
for hiring teaching, administrative staff, and other 
personnel. The authority to hire and fire staff must be from 
the minority community. Further, even if teaching or 
administrative staff may include non-minority persons, the 
final authority exercising functional, directional, and 
policy control over these authorities must be from the 
minority community. This ensures that the thoughts, 
beliefs, and ideas of the minority community regarding 
administration are implemented. This represents the real 
decision-making authority of the institution being the 
minority community. 
170. In ascertaining the aforesaid, it would be open for the 
Court look at the true purpose behind each of the above factors. 
The apprehensions expressed in A.P. Christian Medical 
Educational Society [supra], enable the Court to pierce the veil 
to determine answers to the factors mentioned above. 
171. It is reiterated that the factors mentioned above are not a 
straight-jacket formula rather illustrative for the Court to develop 
on a case-to-case basis. Additionally, factors such as 

 and Ors. incorporation under a statute as opposed to establishment under 
a statute would be relevant. The context may vary between pre-
Constitution 
and 
post-Constitution 
institutions. 
The 
interpretative exercise must be agnostic to generic claims of a 
‘narrow’ or ‘broad’ construction of constitutional terms. The 
interpretation must be such that it serves the interests of 
minorities by protecting genuine minority institutions. 
 
H. 
THE AZEEZ BASHA JUDGMENT 
H.1 The content of the judgment of Azeez Basha [supra] 
172. The judgment of the constitution bench of this Court in 
Azeez Basha [supra] is the cynosure of all eyes in the present 
case. The parties attacking the judgment of the High Court assert 
that the approach adopted by the Court in Azeez Basha [supra] 
to arrive at the finding that the AMU was “neither established nor 
administered by the Muslim minority” was fraught with errors. 
Apart from other aspects discussed hereinabove, the judgment 
was questioned on the ground that it made the rights under Article 
30 illusionary as far as Universities are concerned. It was argued 
that the judgment in Azeez Basha [supra], despite accepting that 
a minority community has the right to establish a ‘university’ 
under Article 30(1), held that since a university is necessarily 
required to be established/incorporated by or under a statute, 
Article 30(1) would not apply. It was also argued that if a 
minority can establish a university under Article 30(1), and if 

 and Ors. universities are required to be incorporated under a statute for 
degrees to be recognised, then it must follow that the minority 
community is entitled to seek incorporation of its institution as a 
university. It was argued that Azeez Basha [supra] holds that a 
university incorporated by a statute would lose its status as a 
minority institution and therefore, the reasoning is flawed. 
173. The parties defending the judgment of the High Court, in 
this regard assert that the understanding of the Appellants of the 
judgment in Azeez Basha [supra] is incorrect as the judgment is 
not merely premised on the fact that the AMU was established by 
way of a statute rather the said judgment, in depth, studies the 
antecedent facts prior to the establishment of the university and 
the nature of the legislation establishing the university, to 
ascertain the character of the university at the time of its initial 
establishment, and thereafter arrives at a factual finding. It is 
argued that the findings of the judgment in Azeez Basha [supra] 
are findings of fact at the time of the establishment of the AMU 
in 1920 and do not lay down any straightjacket formulation of 
law. 
174. Before adverting the countering versions, it is necessary to 
study the judgment in Azeez Basha [supra]. The judgement can 
be divided in ten parts. In the first part, the Court notes the broad 
parameters of challenge before it and the principal arguments by 
both sides. The Court notes that amendments made to the AMU 

 and Ors. 

Act, 1920 in the years 1951 and specifically 1965, were 
impugned before it. The Court noted assertion of the Petitioners 
therein, to the effect that, the AMU was established by the 
Muslim minority. It was claimed that therefore, the Muslim 
minority possess the right to administer it, and any provisions 
within the Acts of 1951 and 1965 that diminish or curtail this 
right are beyond the scope of Article 30(1) and hence, invalid. 
The argument of the Union of India at the said time was that the 
AMU was established by the 1920 Act and therefore, the 
Parliament possessed the authority to amend that statute as 
deemed necessary for the advancement of education. It was 
argued that the minority did not establish the AMU and thus 
cannot assert the right to administer it. Furthermore, it was 
contended that the provision in the 1920 Act, stipulating that the 
Court of the AMU was to be composed entirely of Muslims, did 
not confer any administration rights upon the Muslim community 
and the administration remained under the jurisdiction of the 
secular authorities established by the 1920 Act. 
175. The next part of the judgment notes in some detail the 
history prior to the AMU coming in to being. The said portion is 
relevant as it represents a specific, fact-based enquiry that the 
Court carried out. The Court noted that it was “necessary to refer 
to the history” prior to the establishment of the AMU in 1920 in 
order to “understand the contentions raised on either side”. The 

 and Ors. 

Court notes the establishment of the MAO College by efforts of 
Sir Syed Ahmad Khan. The Court notes that the at the end of the 
19th century, the idea of establishing a Muslim University 
gathered strength and by 1911 some funds were collected and a 
Muslim University Association was established. The Court 
referred to the parleys that took place between the Association 
and the Government of India, the condition to collect funds by 
the Government, and the MAO College and its properties being 
vested in the proposed university. The Court notes a variety of 
factors which led to the establishment of the Aligarh University 
in 1920 by the 1920 Act. 
176. In the next part, the Court refers to the provisions of the 
1920 Act to ascertain the character of the AMU when it was 
established in 1920. The Court refers to a large number of 
sections, including Section 23, which provided for the ‘Court’ to 
be a minority body [along with the comment of the Select 
Committee on the same]. After a detailed analysis of the 
provisions, Azeez Basha [supra] concludes that the ‘final power 
in almost every matter of importance’ was not with the minority 
community. 
177. Thereafter, the Court discusses the amendments made to 
the 1920 Act in 1951 and 1965. It specifically notes the 
amendments made to Section 9 and Section 23 which deal with 
Islamic education and the all-Muslim member ‘Court’, wherein 

 and Ors. the provisions were altered. It noted that the amendments were 
made in 1951 to specifically bring the 1920 Act in conformity 
with the provisions of the Constitution and for the benefit of the 
University so that it could continue to receive aid from the 
Government. For the 1965 amendments, it was noted that the 
‘Court’ under Section 23, ceased to be the supreme governing 
body and the powers of the Executive Council were 
correspondingly increased. The constitution of the ‘Court’ was 
drastically changed making it largely a nominated body. 
178. In the next portion, the Court discussed the legal challenge 
and the position of law under the Constitution. The Court 
squarely rejects the argument that even though the religious 
minority may not have established the educational institution, it 
will have the right to administer it, if by some process it had 
been administering the same before the Constitution came into 
force. It held that the ‘minority will have the right to administer 
educational institutions of their choice provided they have 
established them, but not otherwise’ and that ‘words "establish 
and administer" in the Article must be read conjunctively’. The 
Court then referred to certain observations Durgah Committee, 
Ajmer v. Syed Hussain Ali, (1962), wherein it was 
held that even if it be assumed that a certain religious institution 
was established by a minority community it may lose the right to 
administer it in certain circumstances. and Ors. 

179. In the next part of the judgment, the Court contextualised 
the position of educational institutions and specifically 
Universities in the pre-Constitution and pre-UGC era. The Court 
notes that a University and a college are different institutions and 
what distinguishes a university from any other educational 
institution is that a university grants degrees of its own while 
other educational institutions cannot. Most critically, the Court 
noted that at the said time, there was no prohibition against 
establishment of universities privately however, the degrees of 
such a “University” would not be recognised by the then British 
Indian Government. The non-recognition was non-justiciable as 
establishment of a Government recognised was only through a 
legislation and there existed no Article 30 or fundamental rights 
before 1950. The Court emphasized the importance of the 
recognition from the then Government as it made the value of 
degree being awarded by such an institution higher. The Court 
noted that it was only in the year 1956, that the University Grants 
Commission Act, 1956, prohibited establishment of a University 
without a statute. 
180. In essence, in this critical part of the judgement, the Court 
noted the two important considerations as under: 
i. 
There was no law prohibiting establishment of a private 
institution which grants degree without Government 
intervention or legislation prior to 1956; 

 and Ors. ii. 
The educational institution established with Government 
intervention and legislation had a significant advantage of 
British Government’s recognition to the degree granted by 
the institution. 
It was this simple understanding of facts as prevalent in pre-
Constitution India, that formed the fulcrum of the judgment in 
Azeez Basha [supra]. 
181. On the basis of the said observations, the Court held that 
the minority community was not prevented in any manner in 
1920 from establishing a university if it was not interested in 
having such University and its degrees recognised by the British 
Indian Government. The Court also noted that in such a situation, 
the minority community could not insist that degrees granted by 
such a university should be recognised by Government. 
Therefore, on the said basis the Court remarked that when the 
AMU was established, by virtue of Section 6 of the 1920 Act, its 
degrees were recognised by Government and in that manner, an 
institution was brought into existence which could not be brought 
into existence by any private individual or body. 
182. In the next portion, the Court referred to the MAO College 
as the ‘nucleus’ of AMU – an expression which has caused 
considerable controversy in the present proceedings. The Court 
thereafter notes that the Central Legislature established the AMU 
through the 1920 Act as the minority could not establish a 

 and Ors. university whose degrees were bound to be recognised by 
Government and that one circumstance was critical. The Court 
notes that the 1920 Act was passed as a result of the efforts of the 
Muslim minority but it would not mean that the AMU, as a 
University granting government recognised degrees in 1920, was 
established by the Muslim minority. 
183. In the next part, the Court renders its opinion on the 
meaning of the word ‘establish’ to mean "to bring into existence". 
On the basis of the said meaning, the Court thereafter again 
ventured into the history surrounding the establishment of the 
AMU. The Court notes through a historical analysis that the 
minority community approached the Government to bring into 
existence a university whose degrees would be recognised by 
Government. It was thereafter that the British Government took 
the decision to establish the university, whose degrees it would 
recognise, in the only manner known to law for establishing such 
a university at the said time – by passing a legislation. The Court 
notes that the 1920 Act was then passed by the Central 
Legislature and the university of that type was established. 
184. Thus, the Court held that the University was brought into 
existence by the 1920 Act for it could not have been brought into 
existence otherwise. Thus, the Court held that since AMU was 
not established by the minority, and therefore, the amendments 

 and Ors. of 1951 and 1965 cannot be struck down as being 
unconstitutional under Art. 30(1). 
185. Finally, the Court in Azeez Basha [supra], analyses 
various provisions of the Act as it then existed and held that 
administration was also not vested in the Muslim minority rather 
it was vested in the statutory bodies created by the 1920 Act. It 
noted that only the ‘Court’ was minority only body in 1920 
[amended in 1951], but the electors for some of the members 
included non-minorities. On the totality of the factors, the Court 
held that AMU was neither established nor administered by the 
minority. The remaining part of the judgment considers the attack 
on other fundamental rights like Article 26 and Article 19, which 
may not be germane to the present enquiry. 
 
H.2 The rationale behind the findings 
186. This Court has consistently held that the text, context and 
the totality of the factors, give actual meaning to a judgment. In 
P.S. Sathappan v. Andhra Bank Ltd. & Ors., (2004), this Court has held as follows: 
“144. While analyzing different decisions rendered 
by this Court, an attempt has been made to read the 
judgments as should be read under the rule of 
precedents. A decision, it is trite, should not be read 
as a statute. 145. A decision is an authority for the 
questions of law determined by it. While applying 
the ratio, the court may not pick out a word or a 
sentence from the judgment divorced from the 

 and Ors. context in which the said question arose for 
consideration. A judgment as is well-known, must 
be read in its entirety and the observations made 
therein should receive consideration in the light of 
the questions raised before it.” 
 
In Goan Real Estate & Construction Ltd. & Anr. v. Union of India, (2010), it has been held as 
under: 
 
“What is more important is to see the issues 
involved in a given case, and the context wherein 
the observations were made by the Court while 
deciding the case. Observation made in a judgment, 
it is trite, should not be read in isolation and out of 
context. It is the ratio of the judgment, and not every 
observation made in the context of the facts of a 
particular case under consideration of the court, 
which constitutes a binding precedent.” 
 
187. The Court needs to conduct a careful exercise in 
ascertaining the true purport and meaning of a judgement. Both 
sides in the present case have to an extent tried to read the 
judgment in Azeez Basha [supra] as per their own respective 
conveniences. As is the case in any adversarial exercise, to an 
extent, the Court needs to reconcile the varying approaches. The 
judgment in Azeez Basha [supra] ought to be understood in the 
correct historical perspective in order to ascertain if it lays down 
the proposition - that whenever a University is established by 
way of an enactment, it cannot be a minority institution. and Ors. 

188. From a proper reading presented above, it is incorrect to 
suggest that the Court in Azeez Basha [supra] adopts an 
approach which this Court has not adopted in future cases. It is 
also crucial to note that apart from Azeez Basha [supra] this 
Court has, in no other case, ever dealt with a situation where a 
University, which was established by the Legislative Council 
during the British period, has claimed minority status. In that 
sense, the judgment in Azeez Basha [supra] and present bench 
are faced with a unique situation. It is for this reason, the Court 
in Azeez Basha [supra] had to adopt a suitably modulated 
approach. 
189. The notion that Azeez Basha [supra] categorically 
prohibits minorities from establishing universities due to 
statutory requirements is unfounded. The judgment in Azeez 
Basha [supra] underscores the importance of legislative intent 
and the specific provisions within statutes in determining the 
character of an institution at the time of its establishment. The 
AMU's founding legislation, according to Azeez Basha [supra], 
did not designate it as a minority institution, either in character 
or administration. 
190. Furthermore, the judgment in Azeez Basha [supra] 
correctly emphasizes the absence of UGC regulations at the time 
of the AMU's establishment and underscores the need to consider 
historical circumstances highlighting the supreme importance of 

 and Ors. 

Government recognition of degrees at the said time. In essence, 
the judgement in Azeez Basha [supra] provides crucial insights 
into the contextual factors influencing the establishment of 
educational institutions, emphasizing the need for interpretative 
clarity while considering pre-Constitution and pre-UGC 
institutions 
status 
as 
minority 
institutions, 
especially 
Universities. It would be unfair to judge the approach of a 
judgement rendered almost six decades back for the alleged lack 
of verbosity. 
191. The judgment in Azeez Basha [supra] does not preclude 
minorities from establishing universities but rather highlights the 
importance of legislative intent and statutory provisions in 
determining an institution's character. As a matter of law, it is 
within the purview of the Legislature to enact legislation for the 
establishment of a minority university, provided that such 
legislation fulfills the criteria of constituting a statute for a 
minority university. In such a scenario, the concerned legislation 
must 
incorporate 
provisions 
that 
clearly 
indicate 
the 
establishment of the institution by the minority community and 
confer administrative authority to the minority community. 
 
I. 
BALANCING CONFLICTING NARRATIVES 
192. There is an inherent problem in the study of history. Since 
the events in history that have already occurred can be 
highlighted or dimmed depending upon the proclivities of the 

 and Ors. writer, the ‘correct’ version of history often remains elusive. 
Many modern history writers adopt an approach which is known 
as Complex Adaptive System, where the world is seen as an 
unruly unorganised place in which the sequence of events is 
complex and unpredictable. The events are characterised by 
interactions between a host of factors including grand socio-
economic forces, geography, actions of persons in power, actions 
of a random commoner, culture, ideology, technology, fluke etc. 
The theory provides that history does not follow a predetermined 
path and can go down multiple ones at the hands of any of the 
factors mentioned above. While some outcomes remain to be 
more likely than others, the theory remains that the world is made 
up of unintended consequences, random shocks and cascading 
effects of significant and insignificant events both. 
193. Both sides in the present case have highlighted their own 
version of history of the establishment of the AMU and sought 
highlight specific events which, in their understanding, were 
crucial in the eventual establishment of the AMU. The 
Appellants contended that the AMU's formation was 
fundamentally enabled by the proactive involvement, demand, 
and contributions of the Muslim community. They argued that 
the 1920 Act essentially transformed the status of 'MAO College' 
from being affiliated with Allahabad University to an 
independent entity named 'Aligarh Muslim University' primarily 

 and Ors. aimed at imparting Muslim religious education and featuring a 
Department of Islamic Studies. 
194. The Appellants delineated the historical trajectory of 
AMU into three distinct phases: 
A. 
The period spanning from 1870 to 1877 witnessed the 
inception of the idea among the Muslim community to 
establish a university for the upliftment and progress of 
Muslims, leading to the establishment of MAO College. 
B. 
From 1877 to 1910, the Muslim community fervently 
advocated for the conversion of MAO College into a 
university, eventually securing tentative agreement from 
the Government. 
C. 
The period from 1910 to 1920 saw concerted efforts by the 
founders of the Muslim University to engage with the 
Government, culminating in the successful conversion and 
incorporation of MAO College into Aligarh Muslim 
University. 
195. It was sought to be highlighted that Sir Syed Ahmad Khan 
envisioned establishing a university in India akin to Oxford and 
Cambridge to address the educational backwardness among 
Indian Muslims. In order to achieve this goal: 
i. 
On October 2, 1870, Sir Syed formed the Committee for 
the Better Diffusion and Advancement of Learned among 
Mohammadans of India. This committee aimed to 

 and Ors. understand why Muslims were not pursuing Western 
education, identifying reasons such as lack of religious 
education and non-involvement of Muslims in educational 
decisions. Consequently, the idea of an educational 
institution managed by and for Muslims with religious 
instruction gained traction. ii. 
In 1871, Sir Syed established the Mohammadan Anglo-
Oriental College Fund Committee to raise funds for the 
educational institution. The committee's objective was 
explicitly stated as collecting funds for establishing a 
college, particularly for the education of Muslims. iii. 
The committee resolved to establish Madrasatul Uloom 
(an Arabic term for educational institution) in Aligarh, 
which was inaugurated on May 24, 1875. This marked the 
initial step toward realizing the vision of a university for 
the Muslim community. iv. 
Subsequently, Madrasatul Uloom was established as the 
Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental College (MAO College) on 
January 8, 1877, as a registered society. During the laying 
of the foundation stone, the College Fund Committee 
addressed the Viceroy and Governor-General of India, 
expressing the hope that the college would eventually 
evolve into a university spreading the values of free 
inquiry, tolerance, and morality. and Ors. v. 
The Rules and Regulations of MAO College emphasized 
its primary objective as the education of Muslims, while 
also accommodating Hindus and other communities. vi. 
Administration of MAO College was exclusively entrusted 
to the Muslim community, as evidenced by various 
resolutions and rules. The Select Committee for the 
Advancement of Muslim Education, the Fund Committee, 
and the Trusteeship regulations all mandated Muslim 
involvement in the institution's governance. 
196. The Appellants sought to highlight that in the second 
phase, the MAO College expanded, and Sir Syed and the Muslim 
community continued to seek government support for its 
“conversion” into a university by placing reliance on the 
following: 
i. 
Sir Syed pursued government support primarily because 
the Muslim community viewed a degree as essential for 
success and government employment. This viewpoint was 
documented in Mr. Altaf Husain Hali's biography of Sir 
Syed, "Hayat-i-Javed." Justice S Amir Ali also stressed the 
necessity for the proposed university to be empowered to 
grant government-recognized degrees. ii. 
To further this goal, the College Fund Committee 
presented a written address to the Viceroy on 18.11.1884, 
expressing the hope that, with increased funds and 

 and Ors. completed schemes, they would seek recognition as an 
independent university. iii. 
After Sir Syed's demise on 27.03.1898, a memorial fund 
was established on 08.04.1901 to gather funds for 
elevating MAO College to university status. This endeavor 
met with success, with Rs. 1,27,000/- collected by 
11.11.1901. Additionally, Mr. Syed Jafar Husain initiated 
the 'one rupee fund' scheme, urging each Muslim to 
contribute at least one rupee towards the proposed 
university, resulting in substantial funds being raised. iv. 
Various representations were made to the government by 
the MAO College management and members of the 
Muslim community, including addresses to the Viceroy on 
01.10.1906 and 22.04.1908, seeking assistance in 
establishing a Muslim university. The 22.04.1908 address 
emphasized the alignment of their goals with Sir Syed's 
vision, with significant support from figures like Mr. 
Justice Mahmood and Mr. Theodore Morison. v. 
In 1910, the efforts of the Muslim community garnered in-
principle acceptance from the Government of India for the 
conversion of MAO College into a Muslim University. 
197. The Appellants pointed out that in the final phase, the 
Muslim community continued to collect funds and negotiate with 

 and Ors. the government to establish the university, highlighting the 
following: 
i. 
In 1911, the internal Foundation Committee was formed to 
establish a University, with the Raja Saheb of 
Mahmoodabad as its President. ii. 
On 18.07.1911, the Secretary of State approved in 
principle the establishment of a university at Aligarh, 
subject to the provision of adequate funds and control, 
based on the recommendation of the Government of India 
dated 10.06.1911. iii. 
The then Government of India, in its letter dated 
31.07.1911 to the Foundation Committee, specified that 
the university could be established only through a bill in 
the Imperial Legislative Council, expressing willingness to 
draft the proposed bill in consultation with community 
representatives. iv. 
A draft bill was prepared by the Constitution Committee in 
August 1911. v. 
Negotiations in November 1911 led to a dispatch from the 
Government of India to the Secretary of State, highlighting 
the significance of sanctioning a university at Aligarh for 
the Muslim community. vi. 
The negotiations continued, addressing issues such as 
university affiliation, nomenclature, and the Chancellor's 

 and Ors. role. A letter dated 09.08.1912 from the Education 
Member 
of 
the 
Government 
acknowledged 
the 
community-led initiative and the draft constitution's intent. vii. 
In 1915, the Muslim University Association, comprising 
entirely of Muslim members, was founded to facilitate the 
conversion of MAO College. The association's efforts 
were detailed in the MAO College Annual Report 1912-
14, highlighting significant funds raised. viii. 
The Muslim Community successfully raised Rs. 30 lakhs 
for the university, as required by the Government. ix. 
After prolonged negotiations, the Muslim University Bill 
was prepared in 1919 and referred to a Select Committee. 
The committee's report, submitted on 02.09.1920, 
underscored the Muslim Community's pivotal role in the 
university's establishment and administration. x. 
The Aligarh Muslim University Bill, 1920 was debated in 
the Indian Legislative Council and passed. The President 
congratulated the Muslim community on its passage. xi. 
Consequently, the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920 
was enacted, with the Statement of Objects and Reasons 
acknowledging the significant role of the Muslim 
community in its establishment. and Ors. 

198. Apart from the above, the Appellants sought to highlight 
other aspects to highlight minority character of the institution 
such as: 
i. 
The historical background of the institution, as described 
above, showcases the evolution MAO College into a full-
fledged university through the Aligarh Muslim University 
Act, 1920. This journey reflects the concerted efforts of the 
Muslim community, led by visionaries like Sir Syed 
Ahmad Khan, to address the educational needs and 
aspirations of Indian Muslims. ii. 
The architecture of AMU's buildings, characterized by 
features such as deep green color, domes, and Qur'anic 
inscriptions, distinctly embodies its Islamic identity. 
Photographic evidence presented to the Division Bench of 
the High Court further underscores this Islamic 
architectural style. iii. 
The emblem of AMU incorporates a Qur'anic verse, 
serving as both its motto and a symbol of its Islamic 
heritage. iv. 
AMU boasts a University Mosque, a significant religious 
and cultural landmark within its premises. The Amending 
Act of 1972 permits the establishment of halls, hostels, 
specialized laboratories, and research units within a 25 km 

 and Ors. radius of the University Mosque, highlighting its central 
importance. v. 
The employment of Muezzins at AMU reflects its 
commitment 
to 
Islamic 
traditions 
and 
practices, 
contributing to the religious and spiritual ambiance on 
campus. vi. 
Initially, AMU offered separate Departments of Studies 
for Sunni Theology, Shia Theology, Islamic Studies, 
Arabic language and literature, Persian, and Urdu. Over 
time, these departments have expanded to include various 
disciplines, such as Islamic systems of medicine, 
Philosophy (with a focus on Islamic Philosophy), and a 
Center for Quranic Studies, reflecting the university's 
continued emphasis on Islamic scholarship and education. vii. 
AMU has historically accommodated female students to 
observe purdah (veiling) as per Islamic tradition. 
Photographs documenting these accommodations provide 
tangible evidence of the university's efforts to create an 
inclusive and supportive environment for its female 
students while respecting their religious beliefs and 
practices. 
199. On the contrary, the parties defending the judgment in 
Azeez Basha [supra] and the judgment of the High Court, have 
sought to highlight their own version of events prior to the 

 and Ors. establishment of the AMU in order make a case that while the 
minority community was involved in the process, the 
establishment of the University was at the primary will and 
decision of the British Indian Government. The following aspects 
were highlighted: 
i. 
In 1873, Sir Syed Ahmad Khan proposed substituting the 
term "college" with "university" in the name of MAO 
College. However, the government responded by stating 
that if a "Mohammedan University" were to be established, 
no financial aid would be provided. ii. 
It was brought to the fore that contributions from various 
sources, including government officials and dignitaries, as 
well as the donation of land by Lt. Governor Sir John 
Strachey, underscored the national character of MAO 
College. iii. 
The college, initially dependent on government funds, 
struggled with significant debt around the time of Sir 
Syed's death in 1898. iv. 
Efforts to establish a university at Aligarh continued, with 
suggestions from individuals like Prof. Dr. Zia-ud-din, 
Justice S. Amir Ali, Theodore Morison, Theodore Beck, 
and Maulvi Rafi-u'd-din, aiming to model it after European 
universities and offering a blend of Western and Oriental 

 and Ors. learning. However, despite proposals for a predominantly 
minority university, the demands were not fully accepted. v. 
The Imperial Government insisted on substantial secular 
control over the university's establishment, as indicated in 
correspondences between officials such as JP Hewitt, the 
Secretary of State, and Sir Harcourt Butler. Despite 
proposals for affiliating colleges outside Aligarh, such 
plans were rejected to prevent potential overgrowth and 
competition with future institutions. vi. 
During meetings and conferences, the government's 
proposal for a university along the lines of the Benares 
Hindu University was met with disappointment and 
protest, highlighting the community's desire for autonomy. 
Eventually, the Muslim University Association voted to 
accept the government's proposal, aligning the university's 
setup with that of the Benares Hindu University. vii. 
Discussions regarding government recognition of degrees 
and control over examinations emphasized the need for 
government oversight to maintain standards. Members of 
the Regulations Committee agreed to government veto 
power over the appointment of the University Vice 
Chancellor, citing the university's envisioned All India 
character and the desire to avoid local prejudice. and Ors. viii. 
On October 10, 1917, H. Sharp, the Secretary of the 
Department of Education in the Government of India, 
outlined several key principles to consider regarding the 
organization of the proposed university's constitution. 
Firstly, he suggested following the precedent set by the 
University of Benares, except for non-essential changes or 
improvements. Secondly, he emphasized not allowing 
adherence to the constitution of the Mahomedan Anglo-
Oriental College as a basis for deviating from the Benares 
model. Additionally, he highlighted various political 
considerations, including the desire to establish Islamic 
colleges affiliated with Aligarh, potential political 
movements centered around Aligarh, and the desire for a 
network of recognized Islamic schools. Other concerns 
included the desire for autonomy from local government 
control, political representation within the university's 
governing bodies, the conferment of inexpensive degrees 
to increase Muslim graduates, and the potential 
elimination of European staff members. Sharp also 
addressed specific aspects of the draft bill, such as the 
powers of the Governor-General in Council, the role of the 
Visitor, and the composition and powers of the Court, 
Senate, and Syndicate. and Ors. ix. 
On January 19, 1918, a letter from Sir E.D. Maclagan, 
Secretary to the Government of India, highlighted the need 
for any legislation to establish a Muslim University at 
Aligarh to conform with the provisions of the legislation 
passed for the Hindu University at Benares. The letter 
raised concerns about certain provisions in the draft bill, 
including compulsory theology instruction for Muslim 
students and the absence of provisions regarding a Visitor's 
control over statutes and regulations. x. 
On December 19, 1918, a demi-official letter from Mr. 
Keane mentioned the expectation of a liberal annual grant 
from the Government of India to the proposed university, 
similar to the grant given to the Benares Hindu University. xi. 
On December 27, 1919, the Government of the United 
Provinces provided its views on the draft constitution for 
the proposed Muslim University at Aligarh. The 
Lieutenant-Governor expressed concerns about granting 
the Court the power to interpret statutes and suggested 
limiting the Court's powers to preserve the influence of the 
Governor-General. xii. 
On March 12, 1920, Mr. H. Sharp's letter to Kunwar 
Maharaj Singh noted that the draft bill would allow the 
Governor-General in Council to give instructions and 

 and Ors. compel the university to follow them regarding the 
standard of university examinations. xiii. 
On May 8, 1920, a telegram compared the Muslim 
University draft bill with the Benares Hindu University 
Act, noting differences in the publication of accounts, the 
approval process for alterations to statutes and ordinances, 
and the transfer of certain powers from the Visitor to the 
Governor-General in Council. The telegram emphasized 
the importance of retaining control over these all-India 
universities under the Government of India. xiv. 
On June 12-13, 1920, a meeting was held to discuss the 
establishment of Aligarh Muslim University. A large 
number of points were discussed at the meeting which 
ultimately ended with the observation that BHU and AMU 
should be on equal footing regarding their relations with 
the government. xv. 
In a subsequent speech on September 9, 1920, Mr. Shafi 
presented the report of the Select Committee on the AMU 
Bill in the Indian Legislative Council. Amendments 
proposed during the session, such as altering the tenure of 
key university officials and modifying the ordinance-
making process, were met with objections. Concerns were 
raised about potential anomalies and the balance of power 
between university bodies and government authorities. and Ors. 

Despite objections, the proposed amendments were put to 
a vote and rejected by the council. 
200. Significantly, another aspect that was highlighted by the 
parties defending the judgment in Azeez Basha [supra] and the 
judgment of the High Court, was about the two groups that 
emerged during the ‘negotiations’ with the British Indian 
Government on the minority side and the creation of the Jamia 
Milia Islamia. It was pointed out as under: 
i. 
Sir Syed's original vision for AMU was deeply rooted in 
loyalty to the British. ii. 
The division within the Aligarh University movement 
stemmed from the government's refusal to grant the 
college authority to affiliate with institutions outside 
Aligarh. Even prior to this, the Ali brothers endeavored to 
remove pro-government influences from the college 
administration. iii. 
The rift intensified over the denial of affiliating powers to 
MAO College, exacerbated by events like the annulment 
of the Bengal partition, perceived by Mahomed Ali as a 
betrayal of Muslims. iv. 
The factions emerged, with Maulana Aftab Ahmed Khan 
leading those willing to accept the government's terms (the 
loyalists), including later Mohd. Shafi. and Ors. v. 
Conversely, the opposition, led by Ali Brothers and Hasrat 
Mohani, advocated for Muslim control of the university 
and affiliation powers. vi. 
The Ali brothers and their followers sympathized with 
Turkey and opposed British actions during WWI. 
Mahomed Ali's influence over Aligarh students created 
challenges for MAO college's principal, Dr. Ziauddin. vii. 
After the BHU Act, pressure mounted to accept the 
government's terms, leading to a split in the movement. 
Despite the University Foundation Committee's decision 
to accept government proposals without conditions in 
April 1917, Mahomed Ali remained opposed to the same. viii. 
In 1920, negotiations between the Government and the 
Aligarh group led to the introduction of the University Bill. 
Simultaneously, Gandhiji's involvement in the Khilafat 
movement aimed to mobilize Muslims amidst anti-
government sentiments during the Non-cooperation 
movement started with the co-operation from the Ali 
Brothers. ix. 
The rapid introduction of the AMU bill was aimed to align 
Muslims with the government amid growing anti-
government sentiment. Subsequently, the pro-Khilafat 
group urged the university to reject government aid, 
prompting Maulana Mahomed Ali to advocate for non-

 and Ors. cooperation. On October 12, 1920, the Ali brothers and 
Gandhiji urged the college to cease accepting government 
aid. Aligarh students actively joined the non-cooperation 
movement, threatening to nationalize the college. x. 
Leaders supporting the non-cooperation movement 
assured Aligarh students of the college's transformation 
into a National University, encouraging enrollment. The 
Deoband Theological School issued a fatwa advising 
students to leave MAO College and enroll in the proposed 
National University. xi. 
On October 27, the Aligarh Board of Trustees directed 
Maulana Mohammed Ali and his supporters to vacate 
college hostels, leading to the college's closure. xii. 
Finally, on October 29, 1920, Maulana Mohammed Ali 
and his followers left the college to establish Jamia Milia 
Islamia, aimed at countering government influence at 
AMU. Consequently, the Ali Brothers established Jamia 
Milia Islamia as an independent institution not subject to 
government control, contrasting with AMU's dependence 
on government support. 
201. On the basis of the above, it was argued that the judgment 
in Azeez Basha [supra] correctly recognises the historical 
context of AMU's establishment and the influence of British 
recognition on its character. It was argued that the judgement in 

 and Ors. 

Azeez Basha [supra] does not simplicitor conclude that statutory 
establishment precludes minority status but examines the 
circumstances preceding AMU's founding to determine its nature 
as a government-supported institution. 
202. Keeping the above factors in mind, the Court must survey 
the important events and incidents that led to the formation of the 
AMU. In the conflict of narrative surrounding the century old 
history, the Court cannot be swayed by one side of the story or 
the other. In a complex historical context such as this, the Court 
must weigh carefully the role played by the minority as against 
that played by the government in establishment of the institution 
in order to determine who is responsible for the positive fact of 
such establishment. 
203. From a minute study of the aspects highlighted above, it is 
clear that in some case, there may exist certain factors which 
point towards efforts made by the minority community to claim 
to have a denominational University. Further, clearly the real 
intention of the minority community may indeed have been to 
have a denominational University for its own use. However, as 
stated above, intention and efforts are not the complete answer to 
the question of establishment. 
204. If in a given case, there may be other factual factors 
pointing towards the contrary, highlighting that whatever the 
intention or the will of the minority community might have been 

 and Ors. at the said time, in exchange or during negotiations, if the 
resultant institution was effectively rendered an open 
governmental institution [with limited minority aspects], then 
Article 30 would be out of the picture. An institution with a 
limited minority aspects/elements cannot be a minority 
institution. The Court in such a situation, must balance the 
narratives on a weighing scale and test which forces were 
stronger during the process of establishment and the resultant 
institution. 
 
J. 
PRE-INDEPENDENCE 
UNIVERSITIES 
AND 
OTHER 
INSTITUTIONS 
 
205. At this juncture, it would be appropriate to refer to the 
position of educational institutions, specifically Universities, 
prior to the advent of the Constitution and the UGC Act, 1956. 
During the said time, the British Indian Government, through 
legislations passed through provincial legislatures, passed 
various enactments establishing Universities in various 
zones/cities. The University of Calcutta, the University of 
Bombay, the University of Madras, the Panjab University and the 
University of Allahabad were established through legislations in 
the 19th century. 
206. At the same time, throughout this period, it is noteworthy 
that a significant number of colleges and similar educational 
institutions were established across the country, including those 

 and Ors. established by minority communities. The said institutions did 
not aspire to attain “university” status and were content with 
operating as affiliated colleges to the Universities established by 
legislation by legislative bodies. 
207. Parallelly, prior to the prohibition contained in the UGC 
Act, 1956, there existed a period wherein the legal landscape 
lacked statutory constraints preventing the establishment of 
universities without specific legislative enactments. During this 
time, it was within the prerogative of any collective body or 
individuals to establish educational institutions in the nature of 
universities without legislative intervention. 
208. In fact, in the absence of a provision like Section 23 of the 
UGC Act, 1956, it was open to such institutions to even adopt the 
titles such as "university" or in some cases "vidyapeeth" or 
"jamia" asserting their capability to grant degrees. This era 
witnessed the emergence of numerous universities, predating 
independence, whose degrees did not carry recognition from the 
British Government for eligibility in employment within Crown 
services. Despite this absence of official recognition, many of 
these institutions rose to prominence, eventually becoming 
leading national educational establishments. 
209. Therefore, the authorities behind the MAO College, had 
three options: 

 and Ors. i. 
First, request the British Indian Government to establish a 
university, with the classical British Indian Government’s 
control as in case of other Universities, through a 
legislation passed by the Imperial Legislative Council or 
Provincial Legislature. In the said eventuality, the 
advantage was that the institutions degrees could be 
recognised by the British Indian Government [and perhaps 
the world over] however, it would require foregoing of the 
character and the control over the institution. ii. 
Second, continue as the MAO College, affiliated to the 
Universities already in existence, and persist as a college 
only [without granting its own degrees] while preserving 
its control and character as a denominational institution 
subject to regulatory controls that came along with the 
affiliation with a legislation-based University; 
iii. 
Thirdly, the MAO College had the option to establish a 
university/Vidyapeeth/jamia under its own name or any 
other name without the need for government enactment, 
albeit without recognition from the British Indian 
Government. The institution could have chosen to 
maintain its character and avoid British governmental 
control. 
210. The history of the events as mentioned above, is witness to 
the decisions taken and path chosen by the stakeholders and the 

 and Ors. same would have a bearing on the issue whether the AMU was 
established as a minority institution or not. 
 
K. 
THE QUESTION OF ADMINISTRATION AND THE 1920 ACT 
211. As stated above, “administration” and its link with the 
question of establishment is to be ascertained by locating who 
exercised the “choice” with regard the crucial aspects of an 
institution and to what extent was the minority’s decision making 
expressed in the tangible outcomes at the time of establishment. 
As stated above, it is at this point that the “choice” of the minority 
marries itself with the “administration” by the minority 
community. As stated above, the choice can be said to have been 
exercised by the minority community, if the minority community 
is present in some higher echelons of the administrative setup. 
Such positioning of the minority community would, in fact, 
enable the community to exercise its “choice” as the said choice 
is a function of the decision making of the minority community. 
If the minority community is not the decision maker in offices of 
prominence in the institution, the offices which hold the keys to 
giving character to the institution, the claim of administration or 
establishment by the minority community would fall flat. It is in 
this light that the AMU act, 1920 [and as it stood post the 
Constitution coming into force], would have to be examined. 
212. The AMU act, 1920, as enacted, is an interesting piece of 
legislative drafting. The Act had 40 sections and created a unique 

 and Ors. machinery, to administer the AMU. As discussed above, the 
establishment of the university and the question thereof is also a 
function of nature of the university established through the Act 
and the real controlling authorities – both at executive level and 
staff level. The parties doubting the judgment in Azeez Basha 
[supra], sought to highlight some aspects of the 1920 Act in 
order to further their points. 
213. It was pointed out that the Statement of Objects and 
Reasons and preamble of the Act explicitly articulates its purpose 
to establish and incorporate a teaching and residential Muslim 
University while dissolving the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental 
College, Aligarh, and the Muslim University Association, 
transferring all their properties and rights to the new university. 
It was pointed out that all assets, rights, powers, and privileges of 
MAO College and its affiliate bodies were fully transferred and 
vested in AMU. It was pointed out that any references to MAO 
College or its affiliate bodies in previous enactments or 
documents are construed as references to AMU. It was pointed 
out that all employees and staff of MAO College were 
automatically deemed as employees of AMU with the same 
tenure, terms, rights, and privileges. It was pointed out that 
donations received from the Muslim community, totaling thirty 
lakh rupees, were allocated as the Reserve Fund to be managed 
by AMU. and Ors. 

214. It was pointed out that all students of MAO College 
became the responsibility of AMU upon commencement, 
including the provision of instruction as per the prospectus of 
Allahabad University. It was pointed out that the First Statutes 
mandated that the Register of registered graduates include those 
who had been educated for at least two years at MAO College. 
Additionally, the Central Legislature incorporated provisions in 
the AMU Act specifically benefiting the Muslim community, 
such as the promotion of Oriental and Islamic studies, instruction 
in Muslim theology and religion, and furtherance of arts, science, 
and other branches of learning. 
215. It was pointed out that the Act allowed for the 
establishment of intermediate colleges and schools within the 
vicinity of MAO College to provide instruction in Muslim 
religion and theology. It was pointed out that regarding 
administration, the Muslim community had both de jure and de 
facto control over the management of AMU. It was pointed out 
that the limitation of the membership to the ‘Court’ [which is the 
supreme governing body] to Muslims is a significant aspect in 
that regard. 
216. It was highlighted that the Chancellor, Pro-Chancellor, and 
Vice-Chancellor, being ex-officio members of the ‘Court’, had to 
be from the minority community. It was pointed out that the 
powers vested in the Court to appoint university officers and 

 and Ors. frame statutes for the Executive and Academic Councils, and the 
predominance of Muslims in elected university positions. It was 
pointed out that additionally, the Act did not require the 
submission and approval of certain statutes dealing with Muslim 
education. It was pointed out that the presence of non-Muslims 
in governing bodies does not diminish the minority character of 
the university, citing legal precedents. It was pointed out that 
powers vested in the Lord Rector and the Visiting Board under 
the Act do not affect the university's minority character and are 
merely ‘regulatory’ or ‘supervisory’ in nature as would be in case 
of even present-day Universities and their ‘Chancellors’. 
217. The parties defending the judgment of the High Court 
pointed out that the 1920 Act provides for government control 
over the AMU by controlling, inter alia, the appointment of 
important office holders, the composition of administrative 
bodies, the rule making power of the university etc. It was 
pointed out that the Governor General-in-Counsel was 
appointing authority at the time of inception for the high 
positions of Chancellor, Pro-Chancellor, and Vice-Chancellor. It 
was pointed out that powers of the University had 12 sub-clauses, 
all of which were secular expect for one. It was pointed out that 
the admissions in the University at the time of inception were 
made on secular lines. It was pointed out that First Statutes of the 
University were framed not by the ‘Court’ but by the British 

 and Ors. 

Indian Legislature and the First Ordinances of the University at 
the time of inception were also not framed by the minority rather 
were framed by the non-minority authority of the Governor 
General-in-Council. It was pointed out that Lord Rector had wide 
ranging powers and it was the British Indian authorities that had 
effective, de-facto, policy level control over the AMU and not the 
minority community at the time of establishment. 
218. It is critical to note that the 1920 Act and the nature thereof, 
also bestows the AMU with its character at the time of inception. 
The said character at the time of inception would be useful in 
ascertaining if the institution was predominantly established for 
the minority community with a ‘sprinkling of outsiders’ or not. It 
may be noted that merely having a faculty or a portion thereof 
dedicated to a religious discipline would not bestow a larger 
public entity like a University, with its character. The leading 
Universities of the world today have faculties for religious 
studies and enquiry5. The said faculties are genuine centres of 
intellectual and theological enquiry and would also interest 
persons from other religions in numerous cases. Therefore, 
having a specific portion carved out in a larger University set-up 
would not be the defining characteristic of the University. In fact, 
such a dedicated Faculty in a University would indicate the wide-
 
5 Oxford Centre for Hindu Studies (OCHS), Oxford Centre for Islamic 
Studies, Delhi University's Centre for Hindu Studies 

 and Ors. ranging nature of studies the institution. Therefore, the regular 
bench must examine if the AMU Act, 1920 [and how it stood 
after the advent of the Constitution], is an enacting establishing 
an institution which was predominantly minority in character. 
 
L. 
‘INCORPORATED’ OR ‘ESTABLISHED’ BY OR UNDER A 
STATUTE 
 
219. At this stage, this Court has to adjudicate another issue that 
touches upon the question of establishment. It has been argued 
that the 1920 Act was a mere legislative “veneer” or a token 
recognition to an already existing entity. On the other hand, it 
was countered by the argument that there is a difference between 
a body which is created under a statute as opposed to a body 
which the statute claims to itself ‘establish’. On the basis of the 
same, it is urged that since the AMU owed its very existence to a 
statute, it was established by the statute only. 
220. In this regard, the Court needs to clarify that a legislation 
[more so a legislation in the pre-independence era] can never be 
considered to be an inconsequential veneer or a mere 
recognition/token. A legislation is the will of the sovereign 
reflected and enacted through a dedicated body. A legislation is 
always of some consequence and cannot be presumed to be of 
tertiary importance. 
221. Separately, the parties defending the judgment of the 
Azeez Basha [supra], place heavy reliance on the judgment in 

 and Ors. 

Dalco Engineering Pvt. Ltd. v. Satish Prabhakar Padhye, 
(2010), and others6 to assert that the use of the term 
‘established’ in the phrase ‘established by or under an Act’ in any 
statutory enactment creates a deeming fiction which would entail 
the coming into existence of the entity so established a result of 
the statutory enactment alone. 
222. While testing this argument, it is important to note that the 
judgment in Dalco [supra], was dealing with entities and 
enactments such as the State Bank of India Act, 1955 or the Life 
Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 or the State Financial 
Corporations Act, 1951. The same principle cannot ipso facto be 
lifted and applied in the context of Article 30, especially when it 
concerns the fundamental rights of citizens. 
223. Crucially, as pointed out during arguments, there are other 
statutes, enacted by the State Legislatures, which recognise the 
minority character of the institutions through various provisions. 
In the said statutes, the ‘establishment’ is done by and under the 
statute and at the same time, the establishment of the previous 
institution is recognised to be done by the minority community. 
For example, The Sam Higginbottom University of Agriculture, 
 
6 Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi, (1975); Executive Committee of Vaish Degree College v. Lakshmi Narain, 
(1976); S.S. Dhanoa v. MCD, (1981); CIT v. Canara 
Bank, (2018) 

 and Ors. 

Technology and Sciences, Uttar Pradesh Act, 2016, in this 
preamble provides as under: 
“An Act to establish and incorporate a Teaching, 
Research and Extension University with a view to 
upgrade and reconstitute the existing Sam 
Higginbottom Institute of Agriculture, Technology 
and 
Sciences 
(Deemed-to-be- 
University), 
Allahabad, established and administered by the 
Ecumenical Minority Christian Society namely the 
Sam Higginbottom Educational and Charitable 
Society, Higginbottom House, 4- Agricultural 
Institute, Allahabad-211007, Registered under the 
Society Registration Act, 1860 in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh, and to provide for natters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto,” 
 
224. Similarly, The Era University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 
Act, 2016, and its Preamble provides as follows: 
“Preamble 
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching 
University sponsored by Era Educational Trust duly 
established and administered by the members of 
Muslim Minority community..” 
 
225. At the same, time, there were other enactments which 
claimed to have established and incorporated the Universities and 
still bestowed them with minority characteristics. For example, 
in the North East Adventist University Act, 2015, in the 
Preamble, provides as under: 
“An Act to establish and incorporate an University 
in the State, with emphasis on providing high 
quality education, training and research in the 

 and Ors. fields of Physical Sciences, Applied Sciences, Life 
Sciences, Health Sciences, Social Sciences, Bio-
Technology, Information Technology, Engineering, 
Management, Commerce, Communication, Law, 
Humanities, Languages, Performing Arts and other 
allied areas, sponsored by the Medical Educational 
Trust Association Surat of Seventh-day Adventists, 
and to provide for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.” 
 
226. Similarly, the preamble of The Teerthanker Mahaveer 
University Act, 2008 reads as under: 
“An Act to establish and incorporate a Jain 
Minority Teaching University sponsored by 
Teerthanker Mahaveer Institute of Management & 
Technology, Society, Moradabad Uttar Pradesh 
and to provide for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.” 
 
227. Therefore, the use of the phrase ‘establish and incorporate’ 
by the Legislature may be relevant in the larger enquiry but 
cannot be said to be determinative of the factum of establishment 
or not by the minority community. The question of establishment 
is to be ascertained by a multitude of factors, and especially in 
case of Universities – the history of the establishment, the nature 
of the Act, the nature of the University, etc. and the phrase 
‘establish and incorporate’ would be of limited importance only. and Ors. 

228. Separately, it is noteworthy that there exist alternative 
paradigms of universities established by legislative bodies7, 
which may claim to be minority institutions. 
229. The legislative frameworks of statute-based minority 
Universities were highlighted before this Court, wherein the 
predominant character of the University is minority-oriented with 
only peripheral non-minority elements. Therefore, if the intention 
was to establish or incorporate or recognise a minority 
University, the Legislatures have incorporated suitable 
provisions to colour the University with a minority identity. 
230. Furthermore, the abovementioned enactments and a 
perusal of the same underscores that a considerable degree of 
autonomy was retained by the sponsoring entity, with pivotal 
decision-making powers vested therein and further in some cases, 
specific provisions for providing religion-based reservations. 
231. The Court may notice another aspect that the 1920 Act in 
its Preamble provided that it was “An Act to establish and 
incorporate a teaching and residential Muslim University at 
 
7 The Integral University Act, 2004; The Teerthanker Mahaveer University, 
Uttar Pradesh Act, 2008; The North East Adventist University Act, 2015; 
Sam Higginbottom University of Agriculture, Technology and Sciences, 
Uttar Pradesh Act, 2016; The Era University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh Act, 
2016; The Mohammad Ali Jauhar University Act, 2005; The Aliah 
University Act, 2007; The Sri Guru Granth Sahib World University Act, 
2008; The Spicer Adventist University Act, 2014; The Khaja Bandanawaz 
University Act, 2018; The Khangchendzonga Buddhist University, Sikkim 
Act, 2020; The Enteral University (Establishment And Regulation) Act, 

 and Ors. 

Aligarh”. The said recognition is relevant but cannot be the sole 
basis of enquiry on either side. A Legislature speaks through the 
enactment and not merely the Preamble, therefore, the contents 
of the legislation would be primordial source of information for 
the enquiry. The amendment made to the 1920 Act in 1981, and 
the deletion of the words ‘establish and’ from the Preamble, 
cannot therefore alter the pre-existing, pre-occurred factual 
situation. The regular bench, would therefore, have to analyse the 
factual situation and arrive at a finding. 
 
M. 
EVOLUTION OF AMU AND THE ADVENT OF THE 
CONSTITUTION 
 
M.1 The amendments made to the 1920 Act 
232. The statute enacted in 1920 has gone through its own 
journey and evolution. As far as the evolution of the 1920 Act is 
concerned, both sides have illustrated the amendments made over 
the years. The 1951 Amendment Act introduced notable 
alterations, including the omission of Section 9 from the original 
1920 Act, which had sanctioned compulsory instruction in 
Muslim religion for Muslim students. Further, an amendment to 
Section 8 allowed for religious instruction for consenting 
students, aligning with Article 28(3) of the Constitution, which 
prohibits such instruction in aided institutions. In Section 5(12), 
which was the residuary clause, the portion dealing with Islamic 
learning and Muslim theology, along with another portion, was 

 and Ors. deleted. Importantly, the lynchpin of the case of the parties 
challenging the judgment of the High Court and Azeez Basha 
[supra], the proviso to Section 23(1) of the 1920 Act [as it then 
was], which limited ‘Court’ membership to Muslims, was deleted 
by the 1951 Amendment Act. As per amendment to Section 15, 
Governor of the State of Uttar Pradesh became the Chief Rector 
of the University. 
233. The amendment in 1965, more than its content and 
changes, becomes relevant because of the unusual sparring 
between two giants of their respective fields – Retd. J. M.C. 
Chagla [the well-known Retd. Chief Justice of the Bombay High 
Court and the Education Minister in 1965] and Mr. Frank 
Anthony [a well-known educationist and Senior Counsel before 
this Court]. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 16.08.1965. 
On 27.08.1965, Mr. J. Chagla presented the reasons behind the 
amendments. The amendments were thereafter described and 
were sought to be justified in the context of the occurrences at the 
University. It was stated that the amendment, to at least some 
portions, was a temporary measure. Critically, Mr. J. Chagla 
discussed the ‘character of the University’ during the said debate. 
He asserted that the AMU was a ‘national institution’ of ‘national 
importance’ along the lines of the four Central Universities as per 
Entry 63 of List I of Seventh Schedule. While emphasizing the 
importance of intellectual enquiry qua Muslim culture in India at 

 and Ors. the institution, Mr. J. Chagla highlighted that it was in the context 
of national and secular India. He referred to the history of the 
AMU in 1920 and the amendments made in 1951. 
234. In response, on the same day, Mr. Anthony raised the issue 
how the Government had on affidavit claimed that the Article 30 
would not apply to the AMU in the proceedings before the 
Supreme Court [purportedly in a petition challenging the 
Ordinance preceding the 1965 amendment]. Mr. Anthony, on 
01.09.1965, made a detailed speech claiming that the right under 
Article 30 has two elements – establish and administer – which 
can be used disjunctively. In his opinion, establishment was not 
a necessary pre-condition. Mr. Anthony thereafter refers to his 
own understanding of history of the AMU and refers to the MAO 
College as the ‘nucleus’ and asserted that the 1920 Act vested 
administration with the minority community. 
235. Mr. J. Chagla responded to this on 02.09.1965 quippingly 
claiming that he was ‘no longer a practicing lawyer and perhaps 
my law has become rather rusty. But still I know a little bit of 
law, particularly constitutional law. I entirely disagree with him 
[Mr. Anthony]’. Mr. J. Chagla stated that the AMU was neither 
established nor administered by the Muslim community. He 
stated that the AMU was created by a statute, the 1951 
amendments and the presence of the AMU in Entry 63, List I of 
Seventh Schedule makes the same crystal clear. He further gave 

 and Ors. numerous examples of how the administration of the institution 
was not technically with the minority community. He again 
claimed that the AMU was a national institution and the 
sovereign legislature had the right to amend the clause. He also 
remarked that through history, the British ensured that the 
institution which was financed by Indian money, was open to all 
communities. 
236. The sparring between the two continued on 03.09.1965 as 
well. Mr. Anthony clearly claimed that he equated establishment 
with foundation and with ‘who founded it. If the minority 
community founded it, then giving legislative recognition will 
merely be as I said and I repeat, giving legislative sanction’. Mr. 
J. Chagla stated that in law the Parliament cannot make a 
classification on the basis of religion and therefore, both the 
AMU and the BHU enactments were amended in 1951. Finally, 
on 06.09.1965, after short closing speech by Mr. J. Chagla, the 
amendment was passed. The 1965 Amending Act effected a 
notable amendment by demoting the Court from its status as the 
'supreme governing body' of the University to a consultative 
body for the Visitor of the University, namely, the President of 
India. 
237. The 1972 amendment made additions to the definition 
clause. Critically, it added a clause to Section 5 which provides 
the University with the power to promote the study of religion, 

 and Ors. civilisation and culture of India. It amended Section 17 to 
provide that the Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes and amended 
Section 19 made him the principal executive and academic 
officer of the University, and shall exercise general supervision 
and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to 
the decisions of all the authorities of the University. The powers 
of the ‘Court’ were revised but remained significantly curtailed. 
238. The amendment in 1981 rescinded Section 23 to its 
position prior to 1965, which had resulted in the ‘Court’ being 
demoted to a consultative body. It amended Section 17 to provide 
that the Chancellor to be elected by the ‘Court’. The 1981 
amendment deleted the portion in Section 8 which restricted the 
University from adopting or imposing any test of religious belief 
or profession for admissions or appointments as teacher or other 
office. The 1981 amendment also made three specific changes 
which are a subject matter of the present petitions and deserve to 
be quoted in full: 
PREVIOUS PROVISION 
AMENDED PROVISION 
(l) “University” means the 
Aligarh Muslim University 
(l) “University” means the 
educational institution of their 
choice established by the 
Muslims of India, which 
originated 
as 
the 

 and Ors. 

Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental 
College, Aligarh, and which 
was 
subsequently 
incorporated as the Aligarh 
Muslim University. 
 
An Act to establish and 
incorporate a teaching and 
residential Muslim University 
at Aligarh. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to 
establish and incorporate a 
teaching 
and 
residential 
Muslim University at Aligarh, 
and to dissolve the Societies 
registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 
1860), which are respectively 
known as the Muhammadan 
Anglo-Oriental 
College, 
Aligarh, and the Muslim 
University Association, and to 
transfer to and vest in the said 
University all properties and 
An Act to incorporate a 
teaching 
and 
residential 
Muslim University at Aligarh. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to 
incorporate a teaching and 
residential Muslim University 
at Aligarh, and to dissolve the 
Societies registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 
1860 (21 of 1860), which are 
respectively known as the 
Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental 
College, Aligarh, and the 
Muslim 
University 
Association, and to transfer to 
and vest in the said University 
all properties and rights of the 
said Societies and of the 

 and Ors. rights of the said Societies and 
of the Muslim University 
Foundation Committee; 
 
Muslim 
University 
Foundation Committee; 
5. Powers of the University— 
The University shall have the 
following power, namely:- 
xxx 
 
5. Powers of the University— 
The University shall have the 
following power, namely:- 
xxx 
2 (c) to promote especially the 
educational 
and 
cultural 
advancement of the Muslims 
of India; 
 
239. From a perusal of the same, it is clear that through a 
legislative device, the question as to who established the AMU, 
was sought to be laid out. As stated above, the legislative 
declaration as to the fact of establishment or incorporation, while 
relevant, cannot be sole basis of the enquiry required under 
Article 30. Further, the said amendments may have been without 
any controversy had the fact as to who established the AMU in 
1920 was not already finally decided by this Court in Azeez 
Basha [supra]. The limitations of the Legislatures, in rendering 
questions of fact decided by the Court nugatory through a 
legislative device, would be decided by the regular bench. and Ors. 

M.2 The Constitution and the question of surrender of rights 
240. Once the amendments have been discussed, it is important 
to note the coming in to force of the Constitution and the effect it 
had on the rights claimed. The parties defending the judgment of 
the High Court asserted, on the basis of Durgah Committee 
[supra], and the reliance placed in Azeez Basha [supra], that the 
right to administer was relinquished in 1920 itself and it cannot 
be revived subsequent to the advent of the Constitution, as it was 
complete at a juncture when fundamental rights were not 
operative. Further it was argued that the fundamental rights 
surrendered prior to the Constitution, cannot be revived after the 
advent of the Constitution [See Sri Jagadguru Kari Basava 
Rajendraswami of Govimutt v. Commr. of Hindu Religious and 
Charitable Endowments, (1964); Rabindranath 
Bose v. Union of India, (1970); Guru Datta Sharma 
v. State of Bihar, (1962) ]. 
241. On the other hand, the parties challenging the judgment of 
the High Court, placed reliance on St Xavier’s [supra] and KS 
Puttaswamy (Privacy-9 J.) v. Union of India, (2017), 
to assert that the fundamental rights cannot be surrendered. It was 
also argued that the events prior to 1920 and the establishment 
process which culminated in to the 1920 Act, could not have 
taken away the minority character in the name of legislative 
recognition as a University. and Ors. 

242. It is necessary to clarify at this juncture that it cannot be 
said that the fundamental rights can be surrendered by one 
generation for it to be extinguished from utilization by another 
generation. Fundamental rights are the bedrock of the 
Constitution and the Republic and must be perennial and 
continuing in nature. 
243. Further, it is a well-established legal principle that 
fundamental rights do not possess retrospective effect, and 
actions that were concluded before the enactment of the 
Constitution cannot be revisited. In Keshavan Madhava Menon 
v. State of Bombay, (1951) SCR 228, it was noted as under: 
 
“As already explained, Article 13(1) only has the 
effect of nullifying or rendering all inconsistent 
existing laws ineffectual or nugatory and devoid of 
any legal force or binding effect only with respect 
to the exercise of fundamental rights on and after 
the date of the commencement of the Constitution. 
It has no retrospective effect and if, therefore, an act 
was done before the commencement of the 
Constitution in contravention of any law which, 
after the Constitution, becomes void with respect to 
the exercise of any of the fundamental rights, the 
inconsistent law is not wiped out so far as the past 
act is concerned, for, to say that it is, will be to give 
the law retrospective effect.… So far as the past acts 
are concerned the law exists, notwithstanding that 
it does not exist with respect to the future exercise 
of fundamental rights.” 

 and Ors. 

Similarly in Pannalal Binjraj v. Union of India, it was noted that: 
 
“It is settled that Article 13 of the Constitution 
has no retrospective effect and if, therefore, any 
action was taken before the commencement of the 
provisions of any law which was a valid law at the 
time when such action was taken, such action 
cannot be challenged and the law under which such 
action was taken cannot be questioned as 
unconstitutional and void on the score of its 
infringing the fundamental rights enshrined in Part 
III of the Constitution” 
 
244. In the absence of any application of Article 30 in 1920, 
there was no inherent fundamental right to establish a minority 
institution and neither was there a requirement on the State to 
provide any recognition to any institution. The argument of the 
parties defending the judgment of the High Court claiming that 
the right was “surrendered” by the minority community in 1920 
is misplaced. It erroneously assumes that there existed any right 
in the decade of 1910-1920 when the events concerning 
establishment of the AMU took place. There is no question of 
surrendering any right as no such right, even in context of MAO 
College, ever existed as the British Indian Government was a 
supreme Imperial power in the country and no person living in 
India had any constitution-based rights nor was there any such 
concept. The entirety of the landscape was a function of the 
largesse of the Executive or the Legislative powers of the British 

 and Ors. 

Indian Government and its bodies. Thus, the question of 
surrender is illusory and does not arise in the present case. 
245. Indeed, fundamental rights could not have been 
surrendered after 26.01.1950 however, if some events have 
already happened prior to the same, it is not possible to re-
interpret such factual events in a different or a purportedly 
constitutionally compliant manner. The facts of history cannot be 
changed by the advent of the Constitution. 
246. It is important to clarify at this stage that the said 
proposition does not entail that pre-Constitution enactments, 
even enactments providing for taking over of institutions 
[religious or educational] by the then Legislatures, would be free 
from the vice of unconstitutionality. The said statutes would 
always be subject to the overarching constitutional rights and 
subject to the rigours of Article 13. The present case therefore, 
does not concern surrender of “rights” rather involves a holistic 
survey of events leading up to the 1920 Act. 
 
N. 
THE DE-FACTO AND SAFE HAVEN ARGUMENT 
 
247. It has also been argued by the parties challenging the 
judgment of the High Court that de-facto, the important 
authorities like the members of the ‘Court’ and the Vice-
Chancellors of the University have been from the minority 
community. On the basis of the same, it is asserted that the while 

 and Ors. after 1951, there may not have been a specific requirement for 
the ‘Court’ to be consisting of the minority community, in reality, 
the members from the minority community have been appointed 
in most cases. The same has been read to be a pointer towards the 
minority character of the institution. On the other hand, the 
parties defending the judgment of the High Court highlighted that 
once there exists no such requirement in law, it would be 
erroneous to base a conclusion on the basis of practice. 
248. As a matter of law, a practice or a chance occurrence 
would not be a factor in deciding the nature of the institution and 
certainly not relevant to decide the question of establishment. If 
the institution is not held to have been established by a minority, 
if by some reason, persons of one community have manned the 
positions in the administration in an institution, the same would 
not ascribe character to the institution. For example, if a secular 
institution was established by a group of persons [which were not 
predominantly of the minority community], if for some reasons, 
the Principal/Director of the institution has been from one 
minority community, the said occurrence could not be said to be 
enough to declare the institution to be a minority institution. The 
de-facto position of the AMU, with regard to the electors in the 
‘Court’, the ‘Court’ or the Vice-Chancellors, would therefore not 
be the deciding factor for the purpose of the Article 30 question. and Ors. 

249. Apart from the above, it was also asserted that the AMU 
has, over the years, provided the minorities a haven to gain 
knowledge in the country, and declaration as a non-minority 
institution, would be highly detrimental to the same. The said 
argument, apart from being constricted in approach, is evidently 
contradictory. 
250. The AMU, from the time of its establishment, has never 
had any sort reservations on the basis of religion all the way up 
till 2005, which was the first time the said exercise was sought to 
be carried out. Further, the AMU, after the declaration in Azeez 
Basha [supra], at least till 1981 and arguably even thereafter, 
was always considered to be a non-minority institution. The 
contention that the AMU serves the interests of the minority 
community and denial of the protection under Article 30 would 
jeopardise the same, ignores the fact that the AMU, without being 
recognized as a minority institution or implementing religion-
based reservations for an entire century, has served such a 
purpose. Therefore, asserting minority status and advocating for 
religious reservations based on the university's historical 
contributions to the minority community, appears to be self-
contradictory. 
251. At this juncture it is also important to deal with another 
submission to the effect that ‘neutral’ institutions or non-minority 
institutions would in the natural course of things be-

 and Ors. 

‘majoritarian’. It was asserted that since such neutral institutions 
tend to be driven by the assumptions, leanings, and priorities of 
the majoritarian groups/cultures, Article 30 contemplates 
constitutionally protecting certain educational spaces from such 
‘majoritarianism-by-default’, guarding their minority character 
and priorities. 
252. The said assertion completely misconstrues the purpose of 
Article 30 and the nature of non-minority or neutral institutions 
in the country. The purpose of Article 30 is not to create ‘minority 
only’ ghettos rather provide positive rights to the minorities to 
establish educational institutions of their choice and kind. Article 
30, as a feature of the Constitution, provides important rights 
which function within the larger penumbra of fundamental rights. 
There is substantial interplay, intermixing and balancing of rights 
inter se within the fundamental rights. 
253. The Constitution, specifically under the fundamental 
rights chapter, provides for other rights such as Article 14 [right 
against arbitrariness], Article 15 [right to equality], Article 16 
[right to equality in matters of public employment], Article 19 
[fundamental freedoms], Article 21 [right to life and liberty and 
dignity], Article 21A [right to education], Article 25 [freedom of 
religion], Article 26 [freedom of religious institutions], etc, all of 
which contain shades of protection, equality and freedoms, 
available to minorities as well. Article 30, and the rights 

 and Ors. contained thereunder, are therefore, not absolute and certainly do 
not exist in a silo. The other fundamental rights under Chapter III 
of the Constitution colour the interpretation of Article 30 and vice 
versa. In this regard, certain paragraphs of the judgement in TMA 
Pai [supra] would be crucial and require reproduction as under: 
“148. Both Articles 29 and 30 form a part of the 
fundamental rights chapter in Part III of the 
Constitution. Article 30 is confined to minorities, be 
it religious or linguistic, and unlike Article 29(1), 
the right available under the said article cannot be 
availed by any section of citizens. The main 
distinction between Article 29(1) and Article 30(1) 
is that in the former, the right is confined to 
conservation of language, script or culture. As was 
observed in Father W. Proost case the right given 
by Article 29(1) is fortified by Article 30(1), insofar 
as minorities are concerned. In St. Xavier's College 
case it was held that the right to establish an 
educational 
institution 
is 
not 
confined 
to 
conservation of language, script or culture. When 
constitutional provisions are interpreted, it has to 
be borne in mind that the interpretation should be 
such as to further the object of their incorporation. 
They cannot be read in isolation and have to be 
read harmoniously to provide meaning and 
purpose. They cannot be interpreted in a manner 
that renders another provision redundant. If 
necessary, 
a 
purposive 
and 
harmonious 
interpretation should be given. xxx 
137. It follows from the aforesaid decisions that 
even though the words of Article 30(1) are 
unqualified, this Court has held that at least certain 
other laws of the land pertaining to health, morality 

 and Ors. and standards of education apply. The right under 
Article 30(1) has, therefore, not been held to be 
absolute or above other provisions of the law, and 
we reiterate the same. By the same analogy, there 
is no reason why regulations or conditions 
concerning, generally, the welfare of students and 
teachers should not be made applicable in order to 
provide a proper academic atmosphere, as such 
provisions do not in any way interfere with the right 
of administration or management under Article 
30(1). 
 
138. As we look at it, Article 30(1) is a sort of 
guarantee or assurance to the linguistic and 
religious minority institutions of their right to 
establish and administer educational institutions of 
their choice. Secularism and equality being two of 
the basic features of the Constitution, Article 30(1) 
ensures protection to the linguistic and religious 
minorities, thereby preserving the secularism of the 
country. Furthermore, the principles of equality 
must necessarily apply to the enjoyment of such 
rights. No law can be framed that will discriminate 
against such minorities with regard to the 
establishment and administration of educational 
institutions vis-a-vis other educational institutions. 
Any law or rule or regulation that would put the 
educational institutions run by the minorities at a 
disadvantage when compared to the institutions 
run by the others will have to be struck down. At the 
same time there also cannot be any reverse 
discrimination. It was observed in St. Xavier's 
College case at SCR p. 192 that: (SCC p. 743, para 
9) 

 and Ors. 

"The whole object of conferring the right on 
minorities under Article 30 is to ensure that 
there will be equality between the majority 
and the minority. If the minorities do not 
have such special protection they will be 
denied equality." 
 
In other words, the essence of Article 30(1) is to 
ensure equal treatment between the majority and 
the minority institutions. No one type or category 
of institution should be disfavoured or, for that 
matter, receive more favourable treatment than 
another. Laws of the land, including rules and 
regulations, must apply equally to the majority 
institutions as well as to the minority institutions. 
The minority institutions must be allowed to do what 
the non-minority institutions are permitted to do.” 
 
254. Article 30, therefore, is a reinstatement of constitutional 
values of Chapter III, specifically in the context of educational 
institutions. It is clear that the crux of Article 30(1) lies in its 
mandate to ensure parity between non-minority [or ‘neutral’] 
institutions and minority institutions. Its fundamental aim is to 
prevent any form of discrimination or preferential treatment, 
thereby advocating for equal treatment under the law for one and 
all. This provision underscores that no specific category or type 
of institution should be disadvantaged or unduly favoured over 
another within the legal framework. 
255. In this light, and under the mandate of TMA Pai [supra], 
to assert that the neutral institutions are majoritarian by nature, 
would be ignore the mandate of other provisions of the 

 and Ors. 

Constitution which specifically provide for equal treatment for 
all, protect secularism and diversity and protect individuals and 
communities against arbitrariness. 

O. 
THE UGC ACT AND YASHPAL 
256. In relation to the UGC Act, the parties challenging the 
judgment of the High Court relied upon Section 2(f), Section 3, 
Section 22, and Section 23, read with the judgment in Prof. 
Yashpal v. State of Chhattisgarh, (2005), to assert 
that universities are necessarily created and chartered through 
legislative enactments. As per the said provisions, the institutions 
established in that manner only are legally authorized to utilize 
the term "University" in their names and confer degrees. Taking 
this further, it was argued that, if the judgement in Azeez Basha 
[supra], which holds that if any institution is established by 
virtue of the statute, cannot be a minority institution, because a 
University has to be established by and under a statute, no 
University can ever be conferred the status of a minority 
institution. 
257. As already concluded hereinabove, the judgment in Azeez 
Basha [supra] ought to be understood in its historical context 
and does not lay down a proposition that whenever a University 
is established by way of an enactment, it cannot be a minority 
institution. The assertion that the establishment and incorporation 
of a university through legislation inherently preclude it from 

 and Ors. being classified as a minority institution is unfounded. Such a 
contention arises from a misinterpretation of the decision in 
Azeez Basha [supra], which was specific to a particular statute 
and 
addressed 
a 
legislative 
framework 
predating 
the 
Constitution, enacted by a colonial authority. 
258. It was noticed in Yashpal [supra] that a university lacking 
infrastructure or educational facilities would still have the 
authority to grant degrees, potentially resulting in significant 
disorder in coordinating and upholding standards in higher 
education, which could detrimentally affect the entire nation. 
Therefore, it was in the larger public interest that this Court, held 
that the establishment of a university by the State, exercising its 
sovereign power, ought to occur through a legislative enactment. 
It held that insofar as private universities are concerned, 
“established or incorporated” should be read conjunctively and 
further that “a private university can only be established by a 
separate Act or by one compendious Act where the legislature 
specifically provides for establishment of the said university”. 
259. It can be seen through various enactments8 that universities 
are established by the ‘sponsor’ who designs the administrative 
framework, considering the minimum requirements outlined in 
 
8 See The Amity University Uttar Pradesh Act, 2005; The Galgotias 
University Uttar Pradesh Act, 2011; The Bennett University, Greater 
Noida, Uttar Pradesh Act, 2016; The Mohammad Ali Jauhar 
University Act, 2005; The Era University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 
Act, 2016; Maulana Azad University, Jodhpur Act, 2013. and Ors. the regulations. The “sponsor”, typically a society, also arranges 
the necessary properties, including land and buildings. 
Subsequently, the University may either be recognized as 
deemed to be a university under Section 3 of the UGC Act, or it 
may be formally established and incorporated on behalf of the 
sponsor through a statutory enactment. 
260. As stated above, there exists substantial legislative 
frameworks of minority Universities established by statute. The 
said statutes highlight the predominantly minority orientation of 
these institutions with peripheral non-minority elements. As 
stated above, the said legislative enactments and their 
examination reveals that a significant level of autonomy was 
retained by the sponsoring entity, with pivotal decision-making 
authority vested therein. In some instances, specific provisions 
were made for religion-based reservations as well through the 
legislation itself. Therefore, the appropriate Legislature, in its 
wisdom, can certainly establish, incorporate, or recognize a 
minority University, and include appropriate provisions to imbue 
the University with a minority identity. Therefore, the UGC Act 
or the judgment in Yashpal [supra], in no manner, come to the 
aid of the parties challenging the correctness of the judgment in 
Azeez Basha [supra]. and Ors. 

P. 
NCMEI ACT AND THE AMENDMENT 
261. According to the parties challenging the judgement of the 
High Court, the error that since a University requires a statute for 
establishment and statutory establishment renders such 
University to be non-minority, was furthered under the National 
Commission for Minority Educational Institutions Act, 2004 
(hereinafter referred to as the “NCMEI Act”). The said enactment 
and its definition clause, excluded universities from being 
certified as ‘Minority Educational Institution’. From 2004-2010, 
the NCMEI Act defined the word “minority educational 
institution” as under- 
“(g) “Minority Educational Institution” means a 
college or institution (other than a University) 
established or maintained by a person of group of 
persons from amongst the minorities;” 
 
262. Subsequently in 2010, the said definition was amended on 
two counts: one, the phrase other than a University was deleted 
and two, the words established and administered was put in the 
clause taking cue from Article 30. The statement of the Hon’ble 
Minister while moving the said amendment is illustrative in this 
regard. The relevant portion is quoted as under: 
“24.02.2009 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (SHRI 
M.A.A. FATMI):…In Section 2 of the Bill, two 
amendments are proposed in clause (g). First is to 
do away with the exclusion of Universities in the 

 and Ors. definition of "Minority Educational Institutions". 
The second proposal is to substitute the words "or 
maintained by" with the words "and administered 
by". The existing exclusion of a University from 
the definition of a minority educational institution 
runs counter to the law laid down by the Supreme 
Court of India vide Azeez Basha V. Union of India 
(A.I.R. 1968) substitution of words "or maintained 
by" with the words "and administered by" Several 
complaints were received to the effect that non-
minorities were advertising the institutes as 
established by the minorities. Through this 
amendment this defect is sought to be removed by 
providing that the institutions should be both 
established and administered by a person or group 
of persons belonging to the same minorities. This 
will also conform to the language used in Article 30 
of the Constitution.” 
 
263. Therefore, the amendment in the NCMEI Act provides that 
Universities can be considered under the provisions of the 
NCMEI Act and further, there exists a twin requirement of 
“establishment” and “administration” for claiming minority 
status in line with Azeez Basha [supra]. 
264. According to the parties challenging the judgement of the 
High Court, since the provisions of the NCMEI Act as amended 
in 2010 clearly recognize that a University can be a minority 
institution in terms of Article 30 and post Yashpal [supra], since 
a university can only be established by a statute, the purported 
finding in Azeez Basha [supra] that a university established and 

 and Ors. incorporated by a statute cannot be held to be “established” by a 
minority community for the purposes of Article 30, is erroneous. 
265. As stated above, the said assertion is also a product of the 
erroneous understanding of the judgment in Azeez Basha 
[supra]. It is reiterated that the judgement in Azeez Basha 
[supra] does not lay down a proposition that established and 
incorporated by a statute cannot be held to be “established” by a 
minority community for the purposes of Article 30. The 
judgement in Azeez Basha [supra] ought to be understood in its 
historical context and does not lay down a proposition that if a 
University is established by way of a legislative enactment, it 
cannot be a minority institution. In light of the above, the 
amendment in the NCMEI Act does not come to the aid of the 
parties questioning the correctness of the decision in Azeez 
Basha [supra]. 
 
Q. 
CONCLUSIONS 
266. In light of the above, the following conclusions can be 
recorded: 
i. 
The bench of two judges in 
titled Anjuman-e-Rehmania & Ors v. Distt. Inspector of 
School & Ors. could not have referred the matter to a 
bench of seven Hon’ble Judges directly, without the 
Hon’ble Chief Justice of India, being a part of the bench. and Ors. ii. 
The “establishment” of an institution by the minority is 
necessary for the said minority to claim right of 
administration under Article 30. The words “establish” and 
“administer” are used conjunctively in Article 30 of the 
Constitution. iii. 
The term “establish” in Article 30 means “to bring into 
existence or to create” and cannot be conflated with 
generic phrases such as “genesis of the institution” or the 
“founding moment of the institution”. iv. 
The real positive indicia for determining the question of 
establishment of an institution would have to be developed 
on a case to case basis with the following broad parameters 
in mind: 
i. 
Firstly, to claim “establishment”, the minority 
community must actually and tangibly bring the 
entirety of the institution into existence. The role 
played by the minority community must be 
predominant, in fact almost complete to the point of 
exclusion of all other forces. The indicia which may 
be illustrative and exhaustive in this regard may be 
the nature of the institution, the legal/statutory basis 
required for establishing the institution, whether the 
establishment required any “negotiation” with 
outside forces, the role in acquiring lands, obtaining 

 and Ors. funds, constructing buildings, and other related 
matters must have been held completely by the 
minority community. Similarly, while teachers, 
curriculum, medium of instruction, etc. can be on 
secular lines, however, the decision-making 
authority regarding hiring teachers, curriculum 
decisions, medium of instruction, admission criteria, 
and similar matters must be the minority 
community. The choice of having secular education 
in the institution must be made expressly by the 
minority community, demonstrating the link 
between institution and the persons claiming to 
establish it. ii. 
Secondly, the purpose of the institution must have 
been to predominantly serve the interests of the 
minority community or the sole betterment of the 
minority community, irrespective of the form of 
education provided and the mode of admission 
adopted. Therefore, as per the choice of the minority 
community, an institution may have secular 
education, but such secular education and the 
resultant institution, must be predominantly meant 
for the overall betterment of the minority 
community. and Ors. iii. 
Thirdly, the institution must be predominantly 
administered as a minority institution with the actual 
functional, executive and policy administration 
vested with the minority. The minority community 
should determine the selection, removal criteria, and 
procedures for hiring teaching, administrative staff, 
and other personnel. The authority to hire and fire 
staff must be from the minority community. Further, 
even if teaching or administrative staff may include 
non-minority persons, the final authority exercising 
functional, directional, and policy control over these 
authorities must be from the minority community. 
This ensures that the thoughts, beliefs, and ideas of 
the minority community regarding administration 
are implemented in reality. This represents the real 
decision-making authority of the institution being of 
the minority community. 
In ascertaining the above, it would be open for the Court 
to look at the true purpose behind each of the above factors 
and to pierce the veil. iv. 
The notion that Azeez Basha [supra] categorically 
prohibits minorities from establishing universities due to 
statutory requirements is unfounded. The bench in Azeez 
Basha [supra] and present bench are faced with a unique 

 and Ors. situation and needs to adopt a suitably modulated 
approach. The judgment in Azeez Basha [supra] does not 
preclude minorities from establishing universities but 
rather highlights the importance of legislative intent and 
statutory provisions in determining an institution's 
character. v. 
The minority community may conceptualize the idea of an 
institution and may advocate for the same, however, if 
during exchange or negotiation, the actual institution 
which was established had primacy of governmental 
efforts and control, then such institution cannot be held to 
be predominantly established by the efforts and actions of 
the minority community. vi. 
In the pre-independence and pre-UGC era, in the absence 
of a provision like Section 23 of the UGC Act, 1956, it was 
open for any institutions to adopt the titles such as 
"university" or in some cases "vidyapeeth" or "jamia" 
asserting their capability to grant degrees. The absence of 
a legislative embargo from private establishment of 
Universities prior to 1956 would be critical for the scope 
of enquiry. vii. 
The use of the phrase ‘establish and incorporate’ by the 
Legislature may be relevant in the larger enquiry but 
cannot be said to be conclusively determinative of the 

 and Ors. factum of establishment or not by the minority community. 
If the intention of the Legislature is to establish or 
incorporate or recognise a minority University, the 
Legislatures have incorporated suitable provisions to 
colour the University with a minority identity. viii. 
There were no rights, fundamental or otherwise, prior to 
the Constitution coming into force and therefore, there is 
no question of surrendering any right. The British Indian 
Government was a supreme Imperial power in the country, 
and the question of surrender is illusionary and does not 
arise in the present case. The coming into force of the 
Constitution and fundamental right after 1950, cannot alter 
the events that occurred during the decade of 1910-1920 
which led to the establishment of the AMU. ix. 
There is no legal requirement for the AMU ‘Court’ to be 
manned by the people from the minority community ever 
since 1951 and therefore, merely because de facto the 
persons from the minority community may have manned 
the posts in the institution, would not be relevant to 
adjudicate the question. x. 
The assertion that ‘neutral’ institutions or non-minority 
institutions would in the natural course of things be 
‘majoritarian’ 
or 
that 
Article 

contemplates 
constitutionally protecting certain educational spaces from 

 and Ors. such ‘majoritarianism-by-default’ tendencies, is wholly 
erroneous. The purpose of Article 30 is not to create 
‘minority only’ ghettos rather provide positive rights to the 
minorities to establish educational institutions of their 
choice and kind. xi. 
Article 30, as a feature of the Constitution, provides 
important rights which function within the larger 
penumbra of fundamental rights. There is substantial 
interplay, intermixing and balancing of rights inter se 
within the fundamental rights and Article 30 is not absolute 
and certainly do not exist in a silo. xii. 
The crux of Article 30(1) lies in its mandate to ensure 
parity between non-minority [or ‘neutral’] institutions and 
minority institutions. Its fundamental aim is to prevent any 
form of discrimination or preferential treatment to non-
minority communities, thereby advocating for equal 
treatment under the law for one and all. This provision 
underscores that no specific category or type of institution 
should be disadvantaged or unduly favoured over another 
within the legal framework. xiii. 
To assume that the minorities of the country require some 
‘safe haven’ for attaining education and knowledge is 
wholly incorrect. The minorities of the country have not 
just joined the mainstream but comprise an important facet 

 and Ors. of the mainstream itself. The institutions of national 
character of the country always serve the interests of the 
minorities and are diverse centers of learning. xiv. 
The UGC Act or the judgment in Yashpal [supra], in no 
manner, comes to the aid of the parties challenging the 
correctness of the judgment in Azeez Basha [supra]. xv. 
The amendment in the NCMEI Act does not come to the 
aid of the parties questioning the correctness of the 
decision in Azeez Basha [supra]. 
 
267. The reference is answered in the above terms. The matters 
may be placed before an appropriate bench as per the prevailing 
rules. 

……………………………………J. 
 [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 
 
NEW DELHI 
NOVEMBER 08, 2024