IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

Civil Appeal Nos. 9486-9487 of 2019 

Central Organisation for Railway Electrification 
 
…Appellant 

Versus 
 
M/s ECI SPIC SMO MCML (JV) A Joint Venture Company …Respondents 

With 

With 

With 

With 

With 
Diary No.7086 of 2024 
 
And With 
Diary No.13670 of 2024 

JUDGMENT 

Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI 
 
Table of Contents 
A. 
Background... 4 
i. 
Background to the reference... 4 
ii. 
The reference... 11 
B. 
Issues... 13 
C. 
Submissions... 13 
D. 
Principles underpinning the Arbitration Act... 18 
i. 
Party autonomy... 20 
ii. 
Mandatory provisions... 22 
iii. 
Appointment of arbitrators... 27 
iv. 
Independence and impartiality of arbitrators... 32 
v. 
Equality in the arbitral proceedings... 39 
vi. 
Public-private arbitration... 41 
E. 
The principle of equality applies at the stage of appointment of arbitrators... 43 
i. 
Arbitration as a quasi-judicial function... 43 
ii. 
Equality applies at the stage of appointment of arbitrators... 48 

F. 
Nemo judex rule and the doctrine of bias... 53 
i. 
Principles of natural justice... 54 
ii. 
Doctrine of bias... 57 
iii. 
Test of real likelihood of bias... 61 
a. 
Automatic disqualification... 61 
b. 
Real likelihood of bias... 63 
iv. 
Indian approach to the bias test... 71 
v. 
Bias and doctrine of necessity in the context of the Arbitration Act... 75 
vi. 
Unilateral appointment of arbitrators is violative of the equality clause 
under Section 18... 83 
G. 
Public-private contracts and public policy... 90 
i. 
Unconscionability under the Contract Act... 90 
ii. 
US jurisprudence on unconscionability of arbitration agreements... 98 
iii. 
Public-private contracts and public policy of arbitration... 102 
H. 
Necessity of maintaining the principle of minimum judicial interference.. 107 
I. 
Prospective Overruling... 109 
J. 
Conclusion... 111 

PART A 

A. 
Background 
1. In the present batch of appeals, this Court has to decide the contours 
defining the independence and impartiality of arbitral tribunals under the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996.1 The Arbitration Act allows parties to 
agree on a procedure for appointment of arbitrators. The sanctity inhering in 
the arbitration agreement underscores the autonomy of parties to settle their 
disputes by arbitrators of their choice. However, the Arbitration Act subjects 
party autonomy to certain mandatory principles such as the equality of 
parties, independence and impartiality of the tribunal, and fairness of the 
arbitral procedure. The reference to the Constitution Bench raises important 
issues of the interplay between party autonomy and independence and 
impartiality of the arbitral tribunal. i. 
Background to the reference 
2. The Law Commission of India in its 246th Report opined that party autonomy 
cannot be stretched to disregard the principles of impartiality and 
independence of the arbitral process, specifically at the stage of constituting 
of an arbitral tribunal.2 Hence, the Law Commission suggested automatic 
 
1 “Arbitration Act” 
2 Law Commission of India, Amendments to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996, Report No. 246 (August 
2014). [The relevant observation reads: 
“57. The balance between procedural fairness and binding nature of these contracts, appears to have been 
tilted in favour of the latter by the Supreme Court, and the Commission believes the present position of law 
is far from satisfactory. Since the principles of impartiality and independence cannot be discarded at any 
stage of the proceedings, specifically at the stage of constitution of the arbitral tribunal, it would be 
incongruous to say that party autonomy can be exercised in complete disregard of these principles – even if 
the same has been agreed prior to the disputes having arisen between the parties. There are certain 
minimum levels of independence and impartiality that should be required of the arbitral process regardless 
of the parties’ apparent agreement. A sensible law cannot, for instance, permit appointment of an arbitrator 

PART A 

disqualification of persons whose relationship with the parties falls under any 
of the categories specified by law. Following upon the recommendations of 
the Law Commission, Parliament enacted the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act 20153 to incorporate Section 12(5)4. Section 12(5) renders 
a person whose relationship with the parties falls under any of the categories 
specified under the Seventh Schedule ineligible for appointment. Given the 
2015 amendment, parties filed applications under Section 11(6) urging the 
invalidation of appointment procedures which gave one party dominance in 
appointing arbitrators. 
3. In Voestalpine Schienen GmbH v. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd.,5 
the arbitration clause required the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation6 to prepare 
a panel of engineers comprising of serving or retired engineers of 
government departments or public sector undertakings. The clause further 
stated that matters where the total value was below Rupees 1.5 million 
should be referred to sole arbitrators, and those exceeding the amount shall 
 
who is himself a party to the dispute, or who is employed by (or similarly dependent on) one party, even if 
this is what the parties agreed. The Commission hastens to add that Mr. PK Malhotra, the ex officio member 
of the Law Commission suggested having an exception for the State, and allow State parties to appoint 
employee arbitrators. The Commission is of the opinion that, on this issue, there cannot be any distinction 
between State and non-State parties. The concept of party autonomy cannot be stretched to a point where 
it negates the very basis of having impartial and independent adjudicators for resolution of disputes. In fact, 
when the party appointing an adjudicator is the State, the duty to appoint an impartial and independent 
adjudicator is that much more onerous – and the right to natural justice cannot be said to have been waived 
only on the basis of a “prior” agreement between the parties at the time of the contract and before arising of 
the disputes.”] 
3 “2015 amendment” 
4 Section 12(5), Arbitration Act. [It reads: 
“(5) Notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary, any person whose relationship, with the parties or 
counsel or the subject-matter of the dispute, falls under any of the categories specified in the Seventh 
Schedule shall be ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator: 
Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes having arisen between them, waive the applicability of this 
sub-section by an express agreement in writing.”] 
5 [2017] 
6 “DMRC” 

PART A 

be arbitrated before a panel of three arbitrators. The relevant clause for 
disputes to be decided by three arbitrators was thus: 
“(c) For the disputes to be decided by three 
Arbitrators, the Purchaser will make out a list of five 
engineers from the aforesaid panel. The supplier 
and Purchaser shall choose one Arbitrator each, and 
the two so chosen shall choose the third Arbitrator 
from the said list, who shall act as the presiding 
Arbitrator.” 
4. The issue before a two-Judge Bench of this Court was whether the panel of 
arbitrators prepared by DMRC violated Section 12 of the Arbitration Act. This 
Court emphasized that an arbitrator appointed in terms of the agreement 
between the parties must be independent of the parties. Further, this Court 
held that Section 12(5) read with the Seventh Schedule does not put an 
embargo on retired government employees from serving as arbitrators. It 
held that “[b]ias or even real likelihood of bias cannot be attributed to such 
highly qualified and experienced persons, simply on the ground that they 
served the Central Government or PSUs.”7 
5. The Court held that the arbitration clause had the following adverse 
consequences: (i) the choice given by DMRC to the other party was limited; 
and (ii) the discretion given to DMRC to curate a panel of five persons gave 
 
7 Voestalpine (supra) [25]. [It reads: 
“26. It cannot be said that simply because the person is a retired officer who retired from the government or 
other statutory corporation or public sector undertaking and had no connection with DMRC (the party in 
dispute), he would be treated as ineligible to act as an arbitrator. Had this been the intention of the legislature, 
the Seventh Schedule would have covered such persons as well. Bias or even real likelihood of bias cannot 
be attributed to such highly qualified and experienced persons, simply on the ground that they served the 
Central Government or PSUs, even when they had no connection with DMRC. The very reason for 
empanelling these persons is to ensure that technical aspects of the dispute are suitably resolved by utilising 
their expertise when they act as arbitrators. It may also be mentioned herein that the Law Commission had 
proposed the incorporation of the Schedule which was drawn from the red and orange list of IBA guidelines 
on conflict of interest in international arbitration with the observation that the same would be treated as the 
guide “to determine whether circumstances exist which give rise to such justifiable doubts”. Such persons do 
not get covered by red or orange list of IBA guidelines either.”] 

PART A 

rise to the suspicion that it “may have picked up its own favourites.” To 
remedy the situation, it was held that a choice must be given to both parties 
to nominate any person from the entire panel of arbitrators. Further, this 
Court observed that in case of a government contract where the authority to 
appoint an arbitrator rests with a government entity, there is an imperative 
to have a “broad based panel”8 to instil confidence in the mind of the other 
party and secure the principle of independence and impartiality at the stage 
of the constitution of the arbitral tribunal.9 
6. In TRF Ltd v. Energo Engineering Projects Ltd,10 the purchase order 
issued by the respondent to the appellant contained an arbitration clause 
that stated that any dispute or difference between the parties in connection 
with the agreement shall be referred “to sole arbitration of the Managing 
Director of Buyer or his nominee.” After a dispute arose between the parties 
about the encashment of the bank guarantee, the Managing Director of the 
respondent appointed a former judge of this Court as the sole arbitrator in 
terms of the arbitration clause. The issue before the Bench of three Judges 
 
8 Voestalpine (supra) [28]. [“28. […] Keeping in view the spirit of the amended provision and in order to instil 
confidence in the mind of the other party, it is imperative that panel should be broadbased. Apart from serving 
or retired engineers of government departments and public sector undertakings, engineers of prominence 
and high repute from private sector should also be included. Likewise panel should comprise of persons with 
legal background like Judges and lawyers of repute as it is not necessary that all disputes that arise, would 
be of technical nature. There can be disputes involving purely or substantially legal issues, that too, 
complicated in nature. Likewise, some disputes may have the dimension of accountancy, etc. Therefore, it 
would also be appropriate to include persons from this field as well.] 
9 Voestalpine (supra) [30] [“30. Time has come to send positive signals to the international business 
community, in order to create healthy arbitration environment and conducive arbitration culture in this country. 
Further, as highlighted by the Law Commission also in its report, duty becomes more onerous in government 
contracts, where one of the parties to the dispute is the Government or public sector undertaking itself and 
the authority to appoint the arbitrator rests with it. In the instant case also, though choice is given by DMRC 
to the opposite party but it is limited to choose an arbitrator from the panel prepared by DMRC. It, therefore, 
becomes imperative to have a much broadbased panel, so that there is no misapprehension that principle of 
impartiality and independence would be discarded at any stage of the proceedings, specially at the stage of 
constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal. We, therefore, direct that DMRC shall prepare a broadbased panel on 
the aforesaid lines, within a period of two months from today.”] 
10 [2017] 

PART A 

was whether the Managing Director was eligible to nominate a sole arbitrator 
because of Section 12(5) of the Arbitration Act. The Court distinguished the 
situation where both the parties appoint their arbitrators from a situation 
where a person ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator nominates a sole 
arbitrator: 
“53. […] when there are two parties, one may 
nominate an arbitrator and the other may appoint 
another. That is altogether a different situation. If 
there is a clause requiring the parties to nominate 
their respective arbitrator, their authority to nominate 
cannot be questioned. What really in that 
circumstance can be called in question is the 
procedural compliance and the eligibility of their 
arbitrator depending upon the norms provided under 
the Act and the Schedules appended thereto. But, 
here is a case where the Managing Director is the 
“named sole arbitrator” and he has also been 
conferred with the power to nominate one who can 
be the arbitrator in his place. Thus, there is subtle 
distinction.” 
7. The Court relied on the maxim qui facit per alium facit per se (what one does 
through another is done by oneself)11 to hold that a person who becomes 
ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator cannot nominate another person 
as an arbitrator: 
“57. […] once the arbitrator has become ineligible 
by operation of law, he cannot nominate another 
as 
an 
arbitrator. 
The 
arbitrator 
becomes 
ineligible as per prescription contained in 
Section 12(5) of the Act. It is inconceivable in law 
that person who is statutorily ineligible can 
nominate a person. …once the identity of the 
Managing Director as the sole arbitrator is lost, 
 
11 As applied by this Court in Pratapchand Nopaji v. Kotrike Venkata Setty, (1975) [9] 

PART A 

the power to nominate someone else as an 
arbitrator is obliterated...” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
8. In Perkins Eastman Architects DPC v. HSCC (India) Ltd.,12 the arbitration 
clause stipulated that disputes or differences between the parties to the 
contract “shall be referred for adjudication through arbitration by a sole 
arbitrator appointed by the CMD HSCC within 30 days from the receipt of 
request from the Design Consultant.” The Bench of two Judges held that the 
test to determine the possibility of bias is directly relatable to the interest the 
person appointing an arbitrator has in the outcome of the dispute. The Court 
held that a person having an interest in the dispute “cannot and should not 
have any role in charting out any course to the dispute resolution by having 
the power to appoint an arbitrator.”13 
9. TRF (supra) and Perkins (supra) both dealt with a situation where a person 
who was rendered ineligible in terms of Section 12(5) was making an 
appointment of a sole arbitrator. Consequently, Perkins (supra) relied on 
TRF (supra) to observe that a person who has an interest in the dispute or 
its outcome should not have the power to unilaterally appoint a sole 
arbitrator: 
“16. […] The next sentences in the paragraph, 
further show that cases where both the parties could 
nominate respective arbitrators of their choice were 
found to be completely a different situation. The 
reason is clear that whatever advantage a party 
may derive by nominating an arbitrator of its 
 
12 [2019] 
13 Perkins (supra) [16] 

PART A 

choice would get counter-balanced by equal 
power with the other party. But, in a case where 
only one party has a right to appoint a sole 
arbitrator, its choice will always have an element 
of exclusivity in determining or charting the 
course for dispute resolution. Naturally, the 
person who has an interest in the outcome or 
decision of the dispute must not have the power 
to appoint a sole arbitrator. That has to be taken 
as the essence of the amendments brought in by the 
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 
(3 of 2016) and recognised by the decision of this 
Court in TRF Ltd.” 

(emphasis supplied) 
 
10. In Central Organisation for Railway Electrification v. ECI-SPIC-SMO-
MCML (JV) A Joint Venture Company,14 the arbitration was to be held 
following Clause 64(3)(b) of the General Conditions of Contract. The clause 
reads thus: 
“64. 
(3)(b) Appointment 
of 
arbitrator 
where 
applicability of Section 12(5) of the A&C Act has not 
been waived off 
The Arbitral Tribunal shall consist of a panel of three 
retired railway officers retired not below the rank of 
SAO officer, as the arbitrator. For this purpose, the 
Railways will send a panel of at least four names of 
retired railway officer(s) empanelled to work as 
railway arbitrator indicating their retirement date to 
the contractor within 60 days from the day when a 
written and valid demand for arbitrators is received 
by the GM. 
Contractor will be asked to suggest to General 
Manager at least two names out of the panel for 
appointment as contractor's nominee within 30 days 
 
14 [2019] [“CORE”] 

PART A 

from the date of dispatch of the request by the 
Railways. The General Manager shall appoint at 
least one out of them as the contractor's nominee 
and will, also simultaneously appoint the balance 
number of arbitrators either from the panel or from 
outside the panel, duly indicating the “presiding 
arbitrator” from amongst the three arbitrators so 
appointed. The GM shall complete this exercise of 
appointing the Arbitral Tribunal within 30 days from 
the receipt of the names of contract's nominees. 
While nominating the arbitrators, it will be necessary 
to ensure that one of them has served in the 
Accounts Department.” 
11. The first relevant issue before the Bench of three Judges was whether the 
appointment of retired railway officers as arbitrators was valid, given Section 
12(5) read with the Seventh Schedule. The Court relied on Voestalpine 
(supra) to observe that Section 12(5) does not bar former employees of 
parties from being appointed as arbitrator. The other issue was whether the 
General Manager could appoint arbitrators. The Court held that the law laid 
down in TRF (supra) and Perkins (supra) was not applicable because “the 
right of the General Manager in formation of Arbitral Tribunal is counter-
balanced by respondent’s power to choose any two from out of the four 
names and the General Manager shall appoint at least one out of them as 
the contractor’s nominee.” The Court upheld the validity of the arbitration 
clause and directed the constitution of the arbitral tribunal in terms of the 
agreement. ii. 
The reference 

PART A 

12. In Union of India v. Tantia Constructions Limited,15 a three Judge Bench 
prima facie disagreed with CORE (supra), observing: 
“1. … on the facts of this case, the judgment of the 
High Court cannot be faulted with (sic). Accordingly, 
the Special Leave Petition is dismissed. However, 
reliance has been placed upon a recent three-
Judge Bench decision of this Court delivered on 
17.12.2019 in Central Organisation for Railway 
Electrification v. ECI-SPIC-SMO-MCML (JV) A 
Joint Venture Company,. We have perused the aforesaid judgment 
and prima facie disagree with it for the basic 
reason that once the appointing authority itself 
is incapacitated from referring the matter to 
arbitration, it does not then follow that 
notwithstanding this yet appointments may be 
valid depending on the facts of the case. 
2. We therefore request the Hon'ble Chief Justice to 
constitute a larger Bench to look into the correctness 
of this judgment.” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
 
13. When the reference came up on 12 July 2023, Mr R Venkataramani, the 
Attorney General for India, submitted that the Union Government had 
constituted an Expert Committee on Arbitration Law16 (chaired by Dr T K 
Viswanathan) to reconsider the provisions of the Arbitration Act. It was 
further submitted that the issues that have been raised in the present 
reference would fall within the broad remit of the Expert Committee. On 17 
January 2024, the Constitution Bench provided three months to the Union 
Government to evaluate the recommendations of the Expert Committee. 
 
15. 
16 “Expert Committee” 

PART B & C 

The Court was informed on 16 April 2024 that the government had not taken 
any decision on the recommendations of the Expert Committee. The 
Constitution Bench decided to take up the reference for final hearing.

B. 
Issues 
14. The following issues fall for the determination of this Court: 
a. Whether an appointment process which allows a party who has an interest 
in the dispute to unilaterally appoint a sole arbitrator, or curate a panel of 
arbitrators and mandate that the other party select their arbitrator from the 
panel is valid in law; 
b. Whether the principle of equal treatment of parties applies at the stage of 
the appointment of arbitrators; and 
c. Whether an appointment process in a public-private contract which allows a 
government entity to unilaterally appoint a sole arbitrator or majority of the 
arbitrators of the arbitral tribunal is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. 
C. 
Submissions 
15. Mr Gourab Banerji, Mr Neeraj Kishan Kaul and Mr S Ravi Shankar, senior 
counsel, and Mr Rohan Talwar, Mr George Poothan Poothicote and Mr 
Anirurdh Krishnan, counsel, made the following submissions: 
a. Party autonomy is subject to the mandatory provisions of the Arbitration Act 
such as Section 18 (equal treatment of parties) and Section 12(5) 
(independence and impartiality of the arbitration proceedings). A panel of 

PART C 

potential arbitrators unilaterally controlled by one party suffers from a lack of 
independence and impartiality; 
b. An arbitration clause that gives one party the power to appoint a sole 
arbitrator will give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias concerning the 
independence and impartiality of the tribunal. The test to determine the 
existence of reasonable apprehension of bias is that of a reasonable third 
person; 
c. Section 12(5) overrides an arbitration agreement because of the non 
obstante clause. Although the statute does not specifically bar an ineligible 
person from appointing an arbitrator, TRF (supra) and Perkins (supra) 
rightly held that an ineligible person could not appoint an arbitrator or curate 
a panel of arbitrators. The thread running through TRF (supra) and Perkins 
(supra) is that if a person has an interest in the outcome of the dispute, such 
person should not have any role in the process of appointing an arbitrator, 
including curation of a panel of potential arbitrators; 
d. TRF (supra) and Perkins (supra) only carved out an exception for situations 
where both parties are permitted to appoint an arbitrator of their choice; 
e. A unilaterally appointed panel is contrary to the principle of equal treatment 
of parties enshrined under Section 18, which is a mandatory provision. 
Although Section 18 is part of Chapter V dealing with the conduct of arbitral 
proceedings, it also applies at the stage of the constitution of arbitral 
tribunals. A lack of mutuality in the appointment process is a violation of 
Section 18 because it gives an unfair advantage to one party; 

PART C 

f. In Lombardi Engineering Limited v. Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Nigam 
Limited,17 this Court held that arbitration agreements must conform with the 
Constitution. An arbitration clause authorizing one party to unilaterally 
appoint an arbitrator or curate a panel of arbitrators is unconscionable and 
violative of Article 14. Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act 187218 also 
prohibits unconscionable contracts; 
g. In Voestalpine (supra), this Court directed the constitution of a broad-based 
panel of arbitrators. However, the constitution of such a panel restricts the 
choice of the other party and falls foul of the requirement of equality and 
impartiality; and 
h. CORE (supra) does not consider Voestalpine (supra), Section 11(8), and 
the principle of an independence and impartiality under Section 12. Further, 
the counter-balancing test evolved in Perkins (supra) is only applicable in 
situations where both parties have an equal and unfettered choice in 
appointing their arbitrators. It does not apply to situations where one party’s 
choice of arbitrators is restricted to a pre-selected list by the other party; and 
i. The prohibition on a person ineligible under Section 12(5) from nominating 
an arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators can be traced to Section 18. Further, if 
the panel of arbitrators is curated and controlled by one party, it gives rise to 
“justifiable doubts” as to the independence and impartiality of the arbitrator 
under Section 12. 
 
17 [2023] 
18 “Contract Act” 

PART C 

16. Mr Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General of India, Mr K M Nataraj, Additional 
Solicitor General of India, Mr Arvind Kamath, Additional Solicitor General of 
India, Mr Mahesh Jethmalani, Ms Madhavi Divan, Mr Guru Krishna Kumar, 
Mr Anand Padmanabhan, Mr Naresh Kaushik, Mr Nakul Dewan, Mr P V 
Dinesh, senior counsel, and Mr Shashank Garg, counsel, made the 
following submissions: 
a. The principle of party autonomy is ingrained in the entire architecture of the 
Arbitration Act. Section 11(2) allows the parties to agree on a procedure for 
appointing arbitrators. The procedure contemplated under Section 11(2) can 
include one party preparing a panel of arbitrators and giving a choice to the 
other party to select its nominee from the panel; 
b. The duty of the Supreme Court or the High Court to appoint an independent 
and impartial arbitrator under Section 11(8) arises only in situations 
contemplated under Sections 11(4), 11(5), and 11(6) where parties fail to 
abide by the agreed procedure. The provision does not hinder the right of 
the parties to agree on a procedure for appointment of arbitrators under 
Section 11(2); 
c. The action of “appointing” or “enlisting” a person as an arbitrator is distinct 
from “acting” as an arbitrator. Section 12(5) expressly prohibits a person who 
is ineligible in terms of the Seventh Schedule from being appointed as an 
arbitrator. However, the Arbitration Act does not expressly prohibit such an 
ineligible person from appointing an arbitrator or enlisting a panel of potential 
arbitrators; 

PART C 

d. The Arbitration Act does not recognize any presumed ineligibility concerning 
arbitrators. The ineligibility must be real and actual according to Section 12; 
e. The equality of treatment under Section 18 does not refer to inter se equality 
between the parties at the stage of agreeing upon a procedure for appointing 
an arbitrator. Section 18 mandates the arbitral tribunal to treat the parties 
with equality and give them a full opportunity to present their case. Further, 
Section 18 only applies after the composition of the arbitral tribunal during 
the conduct of arbitral proceedings; 
f. The Arbitration Act provides adequate statutory safeguards for securing the 
independence and impartiality of arbitrators. These safeguards include: (i) 
Section 12(5) read the Seventh Schedule; (ii) mandatory disclosure under 
Sections 12(1) read with the Fifth Schedule; (iii) challenge procedures under 
Sections 13 and 14; and (iv) judicial review of the decision of an arbitrator 
under Section 34; 
g. Voestalpine (supra) has upheld the maintenance of a panel of potential 
arbitrators by public sector undertakings. It correctly laid down the broad-
based principle for the operation of a panel of arbitrators. Further, it did not 
bar former employees of the parties to the arbitration agreement from 
serving as arbitrators; 
h. TRF (supra) erred by relying on the maxim qui facit per alium facit per se 
which is usually applied in the context of delegation of authority. The act of 
appointing or nominating an arbitrator under an arbitration clause is not an 
act of delegation of the appointing authority’s power. Rather, the arbitrator 

PART D 

exercises an independent power of adjudication within the limits laid down 
by the pertinent arbitration agreement and the Arbitration Act; and 
i. Non-banking financial companies19 include arbitration clauses in the 
standard form contracts entered into with the borrowers. Since the nature of 
the dispute generally involves default in payment by the borrowers, the 
arbitration clause allows the NBFCs to appoint an arbitrator. Nevertheless, 
the arbitrator has to satisfy the criteria laid down under Section 12. 
D. 
Principles underpinning the Arbitration Act 
17. Our courts have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature except where 
cognizance is expressly or impliedly barred.20 Section 28 of the Contract Act 
bars any agreement that prohibits parties from enforcing their rights under 
contract by usual legal proceedings in ordinary tribunals. However, the 
provision makes an exception to a contract by which two or more persons 
agree to refer the disputes that may arise between them in respect of any 
subject or class of subjects to arbitration.21 Thus, parties can contract out of 
 
19 “NBFCs” 
20 Section 9, Code of Civil Procedure 1908. [It reads: 
“9. Courts to try all civil suits unless barred – The Courts shall (subject to the provisions herein contained) 
have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature excepting suits of which their cognizance is either expressly 
or impliedly barred.”] 
21 Section 28, Indian Contract Act 1872. [It reads: 
“28. Agreements in restraint of legal proceedings, void – Every agreement, - 
(a) by which any party thereto is restricted absolutely from enforcing his rights under or in respect of any 
contract, by the usual legal proceedings in the ordinary tribunals, or which limits the time within which he may 
thus enforce his rights; or 
(b) which extinguishes the rights of any party thereto, or discharges any party thereto, from any liability, under 
or in respect of any contract on the expiry of a specified period so as to restrict any party from enforcing his 
rights; 
is void to that extent. 
Exception 1 – Saving of contract to refer to arbitration dispute that may arise – This section shall not render 
illegal a contract, by which two or more person agree that any dispute which may arise between them in 
respect of any subject or class of subjects to arbitration, and that only the amount awarded is such arbitration 
shall be recoverable in respect of the dispute so referred. 
Exception 2 – Saving of contract to refer questions that have already arisen – Nor shall this section render 
illegal any contract in writing, by which two or more person agree to refer to arbitration any question between 

PART D 

the traditional justice dispensing mechanism to refer their disputes to 
arbitration. 
18. The Arbitration Act consolidates and amends the law relating to domestic 
arbitration, international commercial arbitration and enforcement of foreign 
arbitral awards. It brings the domestic arbitration law in consonance with the 
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration 1985.22 One 
of the main objectives of the Arbitration Act is to make provision for an 
arbitral procedure that is fair, efficient and capable of meeting the needs of 
the specific arbitration. 
19. Article 2A of the Model Law enunciates the following principles to interpret 
the provisions of national arbitration laws: (i) regard for the arbitration law’s 
international origin; (ii) the need to promote uniformity in its application; and 
(iii) observance of good faith. It further provides that issues not expressly 
settled under the arbitration law are to be settled in conformity with the 
“general principles” on which the law is based.23 
20. The principles of interpretation suggested by the Model Law require courts 
to assume a global perspective consistent with the prevailing practice in 
courts of other jurisdictions and arbitral tribunals.24 The Model Law 
 
them which has already arisen, or affect any provision of any law in force for the time being as to references 
to arbitration. 
22 “Model Law” 
23 Article 2A, Arbitration Act. [It reads: 
“Article 2A International origin and general principles 
(1) In the interpretation of this Law, regard is to be had to its international origin and to the need to promote 
uniformity in its application and the observance of good faith. 
(2) Questions concerning matters governed by this Law which are not expressly settled in it are to be settled 
in conformity with the general principles on which this Law is based.”] 
24 Ilias Bantekas, ‘International Origin and General Principles’ in UNCITRAL Model Law on International 
Commercial Arbitration: A Commentary (Cambridge University Press, 2020) 44. 

PART D 

encourages resort to “general principles” to fill the gaps in the national 
arbitration laws.25 The term “general principles” is intended to refer to 
principles widely accepted by legal systems.26 The above principles of 
interpretation will also apply when interpreting the provisions of the 
Arbitration Act. i. 
Party autonomy 
21. Section 7 defines an arbitration agreement to mean an agreement by the 
parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have arisen or 
which may arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship, 
whether contractual or not. The arbitration agreement records the consent 
of the parties to submit their disputes to arbitration.27 Arbitration is premised 
on a consensual agreement to submit disputes to (a) a decision-maker 
chosen by or for the parties; (b) to render a binding resolution of the dispute 
following adjudicatory procedures which afford the parties an opportunity to 
be heard. The right to arbitrate is a private right of the parties to adjudicate 
in personam disputes. 
22. The basis of any arbitration is the freedom of the parties to agree to submit 
their disputes to an individual or to a panel of individuals whose judgment 
they are prepared to trust and obey. Party autonomy is fundamental to 
international commercial arbitration because it allows the parties to design 
the arbitration proceedings to suit their needs and commercial reality. Party 
 
25 Ibid, at 48 
26 Gary Born (supra) 2971; Emmanuel Gaillard, Legal Theory of International Arbitration’ (Brill, 2010) 55 
27 Cox and Kings Ltd v. SAP India Pvt Ltd, 2023 INSC 1051 [60] 

PART D 

autonomy has been described by this Court as the “brooding and guiding 
spirit”28 and “backbone”29 of arbitrations. The principle of minimum judicial 
interference supplements the autonomy of parties by prohibiting courts from 
interfering in arbitral proceedings unless mandated by the law.30 This 
principle respects the autonomy of the parties to mutually chart the course 
of the arbitral proceedings. 
23. The Arbitration Act has given pre-eminence to party autonomy throughout 
the arbitral process. The Arbitration Act has used phrases such as “unless 
otherwise agreed by the parties”31, “failing any agreement”32, “the parties are 
free to agree”33, “failing such agreement”34, and “unless the agreement on 
the appointment procedure provides other means”35 to recognise the 
autonomy of parties to determine the arbitral proceedings. The use of the 
above phrases also indicates that an arbitrator is bound by the procedures 
agreed upon between the parties.36 
24. Some of the relevant provisions of the Arbitration Act which reflect the 
principle of party autonomy are encapsulated below: 
a. Section 10 allows parties the freedom to decide the number of arbitrators; 
 
28 Bharat Aluminium Co. v. Kaiser Aluminium Technical Services Inc., (2016) [5] 
29 Centrotrade Minerals & Metals Inc v. Hindustan Copper Ltd., (2017) [38] 
30 Section 5, Arbitration Act. [It reads: 
“5. Extent of judicial intervention – Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, in matters governed by this Part, no judicial authority shall intervene except where so provided in this 
Part.”] 
31 Sections 3, 11(1), 14(2), 15(3), 15(4), 20(3), 21, 23(3), 24(1), 26, 29(1), 31(7a), 33(4), Arbitration Act 
32 Sections 11(3), 11(5), 13(2), 19(3), 20(2), 22(2), Arbitration Act 
33 Sections, 11(2), 13(1), 19(2), 20(1), 22(1), Arbitration Act 
34 Section 34(2)(a)(v), Arbitration Act 
35 Section 11(6), Arbitration Act 
36 N S Nayak and Sons v. State of Goa, (2003) [14]; Sree Kamatchi Amman Constructions v. 
Railways, (2010) [19] 

PART D 

b. Section 11(2) allows parties the freedom to agree on a procedure for 
appointing the arbitrator or arbitrators; 
c. The Proviso to Section 12(5) allows parties to waive the applicability of the 
provision by an express agreement in writing after the dispute has arisen; 
and 
d. Section 14 allows parties to mutually terminate the mandate of an arbitrator. 
25. Additionally, the parties are free to agree on the procedures to be followed 
by the arbitral tribunal,37 the place of arbitration,38 the date of 
commencement of arbitral proceedings,39 the language to be used in the 
arbitral proceedings,40 procedure for hearings and written proceedings,41 
consequence of a default by a party,42 appointment of experts43, and the 
manner of decision making by the arbitral tribunal.44 Thus, the Arbitration Act 
recognises and enforces mutual commercial bargains and understanding 
between the parties at all stages of the arbitration proceedings. However, 
the autonomy of the parties under the Arbitration Act is not without limits. It 
is limited by certain mandatory provisions of the Arbitration Act. ii. 
Mandatory provisions 
 
37 Section 19, Arbitration Act 
38 Section 20, Arbitration Act 
39 Section 21, Arbitration Act 
40 Section 22, Arbitration Act 
41 Section 24, Arbitration Act 
42 Section 25, Arbitration Act 
43 Section 26, Arbitration Act 
44 Section 29, Arbitration Act 

PART D 

26. Part I of the Arbitration Act applies where the place of arbitration is in India.45 
Section 4 deals with a waiver of the right of a party to object in the following 
terms: 
“4. Waiver of right to object. – A party who knows that 
– 
(a) any provision of this Part from which the parties 
may derogate, or 
(b) any requirement under the arbitration agreement, 
has not been complied with and yet proceeds with 
the arbitration without stating his objection to such 
non-compliance without undue delay or, if a time limit 
is provided for stating that objection, within that 
period of time, shall be deemed to have waived his 
right to so object.” 
27. Section 4 is a deeming provision.46 It deems that a party has waived its right 
to object if it proceeds with the arbitration without stating its objection to non-
compliance of any provisions from which the parties may derogate or of any 
requirement under the arbitration agreement.47 Importantly, Section 4 
distinguishes 
between 
derogable 
(non-mandatory) 
and mandatory 
provisions.48 
 
45 Section 2(2), Arbitration Act 
46 Shree Subhlaxmi Fabrics (P) Ltd. v. Chand Mal Baradia, (2005) [9] 
47 BSNL v. Motorola India (P) Ltd., (2002) SCC 337. [“39. Pursuance to Section 4 of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996, a party which knows that a requirement under the arbitration agreement has not been 
complied with and still proceeds with the arbitration without raising an objection, as soon as possible, waived 
their right to object.”] 
48 A/CN.9/246 (44) 

PART D 

28. Section 4 is based on Article 4 of the Model Law.49 The purpose of 
incorporating Section 4 is to inform the arbitrators of the principle of waiver.50 
Peter Binder suggests that Article 4 aims to prohibit the adoption of delay 
tactics by parties and contribute to the fluency of the proceedings.51 A party 
to arbitration has a right to object to any non-compliance with procedural 
requirements. Section 4 implies a waiver of this right under certain 
conditions based on the principle of waiver or estoppel.52 The procedural 
default at issue must be stipulated either in the arbitration agreement or a 
non-mandatory provision under Part I of the Arbitration Act. If the arbitration 
agreement is silent on a procedural point, the provisions of the Arbitration 
Act take effect. According to Section 4, a party cannot insist on compliance 
with non-mandatory provisions of the Arbitration Act if it fails to make a timely 
objection.53 Section 4 of the Arbitration Act necessarily implies that parties 
cannot proceed with arbitration in derogation of a mandatory provision. 
29. The initial draft of Article 4 of the Model Law did not make an exception for 
mandatory provisions. Therefore, suggestions were made to “soften” the 
provision by limiting “the waiver rule to non-compliance with non-mandatory 
provisions.”54 Further, a proposal was also made to include a list of 
 
49 Article 4, Model Law [It reads: 
“A party who knows that any provision of this Law from which the parties may derogate or any requirement 
under the arbitration agreement has not been complied with and yet proceeds with the arbitration without 
stating his objection to such non-compliance without undue delay or, if a time-limit is provided therefor, within 
such period of time, shall be deemed to have waived his right to object.”] 
50 Howard Holtzmann and Joseph Neuhaus, A Guide to the UNCITRAL Model Law on International 
Commercial Arbitration 196 
51 Peter Binder, International Commercial Arbitration and Conciliation in UNCITRAL Model Law Jurisdiction 
(2nd edn, 2005) 49 
52 A/CN.9/264 (17) 
53 Howard Holtzmann and Joseph Neuhaus, A Guide to the UNCITRAL Model Law on International 
Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law) 197 
54 A/CN.9/245 [178] 

PART D 

mandatory provisions under the Model Law. It was suggested that such a 
list “would make it unnecessary to include in the non-mandatory provisions 
such wording as “unless otherwise agreed by the parties.”55 The Secretariat 
considered it unnecessary to include a list of mandatory provisions given the 
overall scheme of the Model Law.56 It was also of the opinion that mandatory 
provisions could be discerned from the content of such provisions. 
30. Holtzmann and Neuhaus give the following examples of mandatory 
provisions under the Model Law: 
“Examples of provisions that appear to be 
mandatory and therefore cannot be waived under 
Article 4 are the following: the requirement that the 
arbitration agreement be in writing (Article 7(2)); the 
requirement that the parties be treated with equality 
and that each party be given a full opportunity of 
presenting his case (Article 18); the requirement that 
a party be given notice of any hearing and be sent 
any materials supplied to the arbitral tribunal by the 
other party (Article 24(2), (3)); the requirement that 
an award – including an award on agreement terms 
– be in writing, that it state its date and place, and 
that it be delivered to the parties (Article 30(2), 31(1), 
(3), (4))”57 
 
55 Composite draft text of a model law on international commercial arbitration: some comments and 
suggestions for consideration, A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.50 
56 Composite draft text of a model law on international commercial arbitration: some comments and 
suggestions for consideration: note by the secretariat (A/CN.9/WG.II/WP.50) [The secretariat gave the 
following reasons for not providing a list of mandatory provisions in the Model Law itself: “Firstly, a 
considerable number of provisions are obviously by their content of a mandatory nature. Secondly, there are 
a number of provisions granting freedom to the parties, accompanied by suppletive rules failing agreement 
by the parties; here the question of mandatory nature seems to be a philosophical one and equally redundant. 
Thirdly, with respect to some draft articles only a part of the provisions (e.g. a time limit) is non-mandatory. 
Fourthly, in respect of some of the provisions already decided to be non-mandatory, the Working Group was 
of the view that this should, for the sake of emphasis, be expressed in the individual provision, despite the 
general listing in article 3. Fifthly, it is suggested that, in addition to the provisions already decided to be non-
mandatory and drafted accordingly, […] there are only few further provisions which may be regarded as non-
mandatory and, if so, could be easily marked as such by adding the words “unless otherwise agreed by the 
parties;”] 
57 Holtzmann and Neuhaus (supra) 198 

PART D 

31. The above extract suggests that an arbitration agreement entered into by 
the parties is subject to certain well-defined and mandatory legal principles. 
For instance, Section 34(2)(a)(v) allows for refusal of enforcement of arbitral 
awards if the composition of the arbitral tribunal or arbitral procedure was 
not following the agreement of the parties unless such agreement conflicts 
with the mandatory provisions of the law.58 The composition of the arbitral 
tribunal or the arbitral procedure must not only be in accordance with the 
agreement of the parties but also be consistent with the mandatory 
standards laid down under the Arbitration Act.59 In case of a conflict, 
mandatory provisions of the Arbitration Act prevail over the arbitration 
agreement between the parties.60 
32. Under the Arbitration Act, the mandatory provisions must be deduced from 
their content. For instance, the use of the phrase “unless otherwise agreed 
by the parties” is an indicator of the fact that the provision is derogable 
because it gives priority to the agreement of the parties. In contrast, the use 
of the word “shall” in a provision is an indicator that the legislature intended 
to give it a mandatory effect. However, the use of “shall” is not the sole 
indicator to determine the mandatory nature of a provision. The provision 
 
58 Section 34(2)(a)(v), Arbitration Act. [It reads: 
“(v) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with agreement of 
the parties, unless such agreement was in conflict with a provision of this Part from which the parties cannot 
derogate, or failing, such agreement, was not in accordance with this Part.”] 
59 Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its eighteenth session 
(3-21 June 1985) Supplement No. 17 (A/40/17) [290]. [The report states: 
“290. As regards the standards set forth in the subparagraph, it was understood that priority was accorded 
to the agreement of the parties. However, where the agreement was in conflict with a mandatory provision of 
“this Law” or where the parties had not made an agreement on the procedural point at issue, the provisions 
of “this Law”, whether mandatory or not, provided the standards against which the composition of the arbitral 
tribunal and the arbitral procedure were to be measured.”] 
60 A/CN.9/246, para 135 

PART D 

must be interpreted by having regard to its text and the context to determine 
its nature.61 
33. As opposed to the Indian approach, the UK Arbitration Act 1996 lists the 
mandatory provisions under Schedule I.62 In this context, Section 4 provides 
that the mandatory provisions have effect notwithstanding any agreement to 
the contrary.63 It further provides that the non-mandatory provisions allow 
the parties to make their arrangements by agreement. Lord Mustill and 
Stewart Boyd term Section 4 as one of the ‘four pillars’ of the UK Arbitration 
Act.64 They observe that the provision is one of the instances indicating the 
influence of the state on the internal law of arbitration.65 
iii. 
Appointment of arbitrators 
34. Section 10 provides that “parties are free to determine the number of 
arbitrators, provided that such number shall not be an even number.”66 If 
 
61 State of UP v. Babu Ram Upadhya, (1961) [29]; Raza Buland Sugar Co. Ltd. v. Municipal 
Board, [8] 
62 Schedule I, UK Arbitration Act 1996. [Section 33 which imposes a legal duty on the tribunal to act fairly and 
impartially is one of the mandatory provisions under the UK legislation.] 
63 Section 4, UK Arbitration Act. [It reads: 
“4. Mandatory and non-mandatory provision. 
(1) The mandatory provisions of this Part are listed in Schedule 1 and have effect notwithstanding any 
agreement to the contrary. 
(2) The other provisions of this Part (the “non-mandatory provisions”) allow the parties to make their own 
arrangements by agreement by provide rules which apply in the absence of such agreement. 
(3) The parties may make such arrangements by agreeing to the implication of institutional rules or providing 
any other means by which a matter may be decided. 
(4) It is immaterial whether or not the law applicable to the parties’ agreement is the law of England and 
Wales or, as the case may be, Northern Ireland. 
(5) The choice of law other than the law of England and Wales or Northern Ireland as the applicable law in 
respect of a matter provided for by a non-mandatory provision of this Part is equivalent to an agreement 
making provision about that matter. 
For this purpose an applicable law determined in accordance with the parties’ agreement, or which is 
objectively determined in the absence of any express or implied choice, shall be treated as chosen by the 
parties.”] 
64 Lord Mustill and Stewart Boyd, Commercial Arbitration (2nd edn, Butterworths 2001) 23. 
65 Ibid, at 57. 
66 Section 10, Arbitration Act. [It reads: 
“10. Number of arbitrators – (1) The parties are free to determine the number of arbitrators, provided that 
such number shall not be an even number. 
(2) Failing the determination referred to in sub-section (1), the arbitral tribunal shall consist of sole arbitrator.”] 

PART D 

parties fail to determine the number of arbitrators, the arbitral tribunal shall 
consist of a sole arbitrator. Section 11 pertains to the appointment of 
arbitrators. Section 11(2) provides that subject to Section 11(6), parties “are 
free to agree on a procedure for appointing the arbitrator or arbitrators.” 
Section 11 provides recourse to the following contingencies if the parties fail 
to adhere to the agreed procedure for the appointment of an arbitrator or 
arbitrators: 
“(3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section 
(2), in an arbitration with three arbitrators, each party 
shall appoint one arbitrator, and the two appointed 
arbitrators shall appoint the third arbitrator who shall 
act as the presiding arbitrator; 
(4) If the appointment procedure in sub-section (3) 
applies and – 
(a) a party fails to appoint an arbitrator within thirty 
days from the receipt of a request to do so from the 
other party; or 
(b) the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree on the 
third arbitrator within thirty days from the date of their 
appointment, 
The appointment shall be made, on an application of 
a party, by the Supreme Court or, as the case may 
be, by the High Court or any person or institution 
designated by such Court. 
(5) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section 
(2), in an arbitration with a sole arbitrator, if the 
parties fail to agree on the arbitrator within thirty days 
from receipt of a request by one party from the other 
party to so agree the appointment shall be made, 
upon request of a party, by the Supreme Court or, as 
the case may be, the High Court or any person or 
institution designated by such Court. 
(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed 
upon by the parties, - 

PART D 

(a) a party fails to act as required under that 
procedure; or 
(b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail 
to reach an agreement expected of them under that 
procedure; or 
(c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform 
any function entrusted to him or it under that 
procedure, 
A party may request the Supreme Court or, as the 
case may be, the High Court or any person or 
institution designated by such Court to take 
necessary measure, unless the agreement on the 
appointment procedure provides other means for 
securing the appointment.” 
35. In terms of the legislative scheme in Section 11, parties are free to agree 
on a procedure for appointing the arbitrator or arbitrators. The procedure for 
appointment agreed by the parties is subject to the power of the Supreme 
Court or the High Courts under Section 11(6) to appoint an arbitrator in 
cases where the parties do not agree on a procedure or if the parties or the 
arbitrator fail to act following the agreed procedure. Thus, Section 11(6) 
allows judicial involvement as a default mechanism and not as an 
independent basis for choosing the arbitrators irrespective of the parties’ 
agreement. Further, parties can invoke Sections 11(3), 11(4) or 11(5), as the 
case may be, only upon the failure of the agreed procedure for appointment 
of arbitrators. 
36. Party autonomy is the governing feature of the constitution of the arbitral 
tribunal.67 The process of selecting a tribunal allows parties to choose 
 
67 UNCITRAL, 2012 Digest of Case Law on the Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration (2012) 

PART D 

arbitrators with peculiar experience or expertise.68 Parties are free to agree 
either on a specified individual or individuals as arbitrators or on a procedure 
for the selection of arbitrators. Most international arbitration statutes give 
primacy to the agreement of parties for the constitution of the arbitral 
tribunal.69 The genesis of this international consensus could be traced to the 
Geneva Protocol on Arbitration Clauses 1923 which stated that the “arbitral 
procedure, including the constitution of the arbitral tribunal, shall be 
governed by the will of the parties and by the law of the country in whose 
territory the arbitration takes place.”70 
37. When appointing an arbitrator under Section 11, the appointing authority has 
to ensure the appointment of independent and impartial arbitrators in terms 
of Section 11(8): 
“(8) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the 
High Court or the person or institution designated by 
such Court shall seek a disclosure in writing from the 
prospective arbitrator in terms of sub-section (1) of 
section 12, and have due regard to – 
(a) any qualifications required for the arbitrator by 
the agreement of the parties; and 
(b) the contents of the disclosure and other 
considerations 
as 
are 
likely 
to 
secure 
the 
appointment of an independent and impartial 
arbitrator.” 
 
68 Gary Born (supra) 1807 
69 Fouchard, Gaillard and Goldman on International Commercial Arbitration (Emmanuel Gaillard and John 
Savage, eds. 1999) 453. 
70 Article 2, Protocol on Arbitration Clauses signed on 24 September 1923 

PART D 

38. Section 11(8) requires an appointing authority to have due regard to the 
qualifications required for the arbitrator as agreed by the parties. For 
instance, if the agreement only allows a professional of a particular class 
such as a chartered accountant to serve as an arbitrator, the appointing 
court should normally abide by this requirement. However, while appointing 
an arbitrator following the agreed qualifications, the appointing court must 
also have due regard for considerations that are likely to secure an 
independent and impartial tribunal. Section 11(8) imposes a duty on the 
appointing court to ensure the appointment of an independent and impartial 
arbitrator. 
39. Section 11 is based on Article 11 of the Model Law. The draft text of the 
Model Law contained a provision which invalidated an arbitration agreement 
if it accorded a predominant position or unfair advantage to one party in the 
appointment of the arbitrator. The provision is extracted below: 
“An arbitration agreement is invalid [if] [to the extent 
that] it accords one of the parties a [predominant 
position] [manifestly unfair advantage] with regard to 
the appointment of arbitrators.”71 
40. The Working Group decided to delete the above paragraph from the draft 
article based on the following reasoning: 
“90. The prevailing view, however, was to delete 
paragraph (2) since (a) there was no real need for 
such a rule in view of the fact that the few instances 
aimed at could appropriately be dealt with by other 
provisions of the model law (e.g., on challenge of 
arbitrator or setting aside of award); (b) the wording 
was too vague and could thus lead to controversy or 
 
71 A/CN.9/233 [17] 

PART D 

dilatory tactics and, above all, to a misinterpretation 
which 
could 
endanger 
well-established 
and 
recognised appointment practices; (c) the legal 
sanction, in particular the idea of partial invalidity, 
was not sufficiently clear. 
91. The Working Group, after deliberation, decided 
to delete paragraph (2). That decision, however, 
should not be understood as condoning 
practices where one party had a clearly greater 
influence on the appointment without good 
reasons.”72 
(emphasis supplied) 
41. The Working Group noted that other provisions in the Model Law such as 
Article 12 (challenge to an arbitrator) and Article 34 (setting aside of an 
arbitral award) implicitly restrict the autonomy of parties to appoint 
arbitrators.73 Thus, an arbitrator may be subject to challenge if the agreed 
procedure for appointment by the parties fails to adhere to the standards of 
independence and impartiality prescribed under Section 12. Gary Born also 
opines that the autonomy of parties to select arbitrators is generally subject 
to certain limitations, including mandatory requirements of equality and due 
process, impartiality and independence, and capacity requirements.74 
iv. 
Independence and impartiality of arbitrators 
42. Section 12 provides the grounds to challenge the appointment of 
arbitrators.75 Section 12(1) mandates that a person who has been 
 
72 ibid 
73 Shahla Ali and Odysseas G Repousis, ‘Appointment of Arbitrators’ in UNCITRAL Model Law on 
International Commercial Arbitration (Ilian Bantekas, et al eds, 2020) 
74 Gary Born, International Commercial Arbitration (3rd edn.,) 1783; Also see Michael Pryles, ‘Limits to Party 
Autonomy in Arbitral Procedure’ (2007) 24(3) Journal of International Arbitration 327-339. 
75 Section 12, Arbitration Act. [It reads: 

PART D 

approached to be appointed as an arbitrator must disclose in writing any 
circumstances that are likely to give rise to “justifiable doubts as to his 
independence or impartiality.” The Fifth Schedule to the Arbitration Act 
specifies circumstances that give rise to justifiable doubts as to the 
independence or impartiality of arbitrators. Section 12(1) also mandates an 
arbitrator to disclose in writing any circumstances that are likely to affect the 
ability to devote sufficient time to the arbitration and in particular the ability 
to complete the entire arbitration within twelve months. The duty of 
disclosure is a continuing duty. Section 12(3) provides that an arbitrator may 
be challenged only if: (i) circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable 
doubts as to independence or impartiality; or (ii) the arbitrator does not 
possess the qualifications agreed to by the parties. 
43. Before the 2015 amendment, this Court generally upheld arbitrator 
appointment clauses which gave one party “unfettered discretion” to appoint 
 
(1) When a person is approached in connection with his possible appointment as an arbitrator, he shall 
disclose in writing any circumstances,— 
(a) such as the existence either direct or indirect, of any past or present relationship with or interest in any of 
the parties or in relation to the subject-matter in dispute, whether financial, business, professional or other 
kind, which is likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality; and 
(b) which are likely to affect his ability to devote sufficient time to the arbitration and in particular his ability to 
complete the entire arbitration within a period of twelve months. 
Explanation 1.—The grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule shall guide in determining whether circumstances 
exist which give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence or impartiality of an arbitrator. 
Explanation 2.—The disclosure shall be made by such person in the form specified in the Sixth Schedule.] 
(2) An arbitrator, from the time of his appointment and throughout the arbitral proceedings, shall, without 
delay, disclose to the parties in writing any circumstances referred to in sub-section (1) unless they have 
already been informed of them by him. 
(3) An arbitrator may be challenged only if— 
(a) circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality; or 
(b) he does not possess the qualifications agreed to by the parties. 
(4) A party may challenge an arbitrator appointed by him, or in whose appointment he has participated, only 
for reasons of which he becomes aware after the appointment has been made. 
(5) Notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary, any person whose relationship, with the parties or 
counsel or the subject-matter of the dispute, falls under any of the categories specified in the Seventh 
Schedule shall be ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator: 
Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes having arisen between them, waive the applicability of this 
sub-section by an express agreement in writing.] 

PART D 

a sole arbitrator.76 It was also held that there was no bar under the Arbitration 
Act for an employee of a government or Public Sector Undertaking77, which 
is a party to an arbitration agreement, to act as an arbitrator.78 However, it 
was observed that there could be justifiable apprehension about the 
independence or impartiality of an employee arbitrator who was the 
“controlling or dealing authority” regarding the subject contract or if the 
arbitrator was a direct subordinate to the officer whose decision was the 
subject-matter of the dispute.79 The Court suggested phasing out arbitration 
clauses providing for the appointment of serving officers as arbitrators to 
“encourage professionalism in arbitration.”80 
44. The 2015 amendment mandates arbitrators to make disclosures before 
their appointment in terms of the categories specified under the Fifth 
Schedule. The Fifth Schedule prescribes thirty-four categories that give rise 
to justifiable doubts as to the independence or impartiality of arbitrators. 
 
76 Datar Switchgears Ltd. v. Tata Finance Ltd., (2000) [23] [“23. When parties have entered into 
a contract and settled on a procedure, due importance has to be given to such procedure. Even though rigor 
of the doctrine of “freedom of contract” has been whittled down by various labour and social welfare 
legislation, still the court has to respect the terms of the contract entered into by parties and endeavour to 
give importance and effect to it. When the party has not disputed the arbitration clause, normally he is bound 
by it and obliged to comply with the procedure laid down under the said clause.”]; 
77 “PSUs” 
78 Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. v. Raja Transport (P) Ltd., (2009) [30] 
79 Raja Transport (supra) [34]; Denel (Proprietary) Ltd. v. Bharat Electronics Ltd., (2010) [21]; 
Bipromasz Birpron Trading Sa v. Bharat Electronics Ltd., (2012) [50] 
80 Union of India v. Singh Builders Syndicate, (2009) [25]. [“25. We find that a provision for serving 
officers of one party being appointed as arbitrator(s) brings out considerable resistance from the other party, 
when disputes arise. Having regard to the emphasis on independence and impartiality in the new Act, 
Government, statutory authorities and government companies should think of phasing out arbitration clauses 
providing for serving officers and encourage professionalism in arbitration.”]; See North Eastern Railway v. 
Tripple Engg. Works, (2014) [8]; Union of India v. UP State Bridge Corporation Ltd., (2015) [20] [“20. Therefore, where the Government assumes the authority and power to itself, in one-sided 
arbitration clause, to appoint the arbitrators in the case of disputes, it should be more vigilant and more 
responsible in choosing the arbitrators who are in a position to conduct the arbitral proceedings in an efficient 
manner, without compromising with their other duties. Time has come when the appointing authorities have 
to take call on such aspects failing which (as in the instant case), Courts are not powerless to remedy such 
situations by springing into action and exercising their powers as contained in Section 11 of the Act to 
constitute an Arbitral Tribunal, so that interest of the other side is equally protected.”] 

PART D 

These categories are classified as follows: (i) the relationship of the 
arbitrator with the parties or counsel; (ii) the relationship of the arbitrator to 
the dispute; (iii) the arbitrator’s direct or indirect interest in the dispute; (iv) 
previous services rendered by the arbitrator to one of the parties or other 
involvement in the case; (v) relationship between an arbitrator and another 
arbitrator or counsel; (vi) relationship between arbitrator and party and 
others involved in the arbitration, and (vii) and other circumstances. 
45. The 2015 amendment has incorporated Section 12(5) to provide for 
ineligibility of a person to be appointed as an arbitrator whose relationship 
with the parties or counsel or the subject matter of the dispute falls under 
any of the categories specified in the Seventh Schedule. Section 12(5) reads 
thus: 
“(5) Notwithstanding any prior agreement to the 
contrary, any person whose relationship, with the 
parties or counsel or the subject-matter of the 
dispute, falls under any of the categories specified in 
the Seventh Schedule shall be ineligible to be 
appointed as an arbitrator: 
Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes 
having arisen between them, waive the applicability 
of this sub-section by an express agreement in 
writing.” 
46. The Seventh Schedule to the Arbitration Act divides the specified categories 
based on three factors: (i) arbitrator’s relationship with the parties or 
counsel; (ii) the relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute; and (iii) 
arbitrator’s direct or indirect interest in the dispute. The categories that are 
relevant for the present reference are as follows: 

PART D 

“1. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor 
or has any other past or present business 
relationship with a party. 
5. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the 
management, or has a similar controlling influence, 
in an affiliate of one of the parties if the affiliate is 
directly involved in the matters in dispute in the 
arbitration.” 
47. Section 12(5) overrides any prior procedure for appointing the arbitrators 
agreed upon between the parties under Section 11(2) due to the non 
obstante clause. However, the proviso to Section 12(5) allows parties to 
waive the applicability of that provision after the dispute has arisen. The 
proviso secures “real and genuine party autonomy” by allowing parties to 
waive the applicability of Section 12(5).81 
48. Section 12(5) does not prescribe a method to challenge the appointment of 
an ineligible person. Section 14 deals with the termination of the mandate of 
an arbitrator who is unable to perform their functions.82 A person who is 
ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator in terms of Section 12(5) becomes 
 
81 Law Commission of India (supra) [“60. The Commission, however, feels that real and genuine party 
autonomy must be respected, and, in certain situations, parties should be allowed to waive even the 
categories of ineligibility as set in the proposed Fifth Schedule. This could be in situations of family arbitrations 
or other arbitrations where a person commands the blind faith and trust of the parties to the dispute, despite 
the existence of objective “justifiable doubts” regarding his independence and impartiality. To deal with such 
situations, the Commission has proposed the proviso to section 12 (5), where parties may, subsequent to 
disputes having arisen between them, waive the applicability of the proposed section 12 (5) by an express 
agreement in writing. In all other cases, the general rule in the proposed section 12 (5) must be followed.”] 
82 Section 14, Arbitration Act. [It reads: 
“14. Failure or impossibility to act – (1) The mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate and he shall be 
substituted by another arbitrator, if – 
(a) he becomes de jure or de facto unable to perform his functions or for other reasons fails to act without 
undue delay; and 
(b) he withdraws from his office or the parties agree to the termination of his mandate. 
(2) If a controversy remains concerning any of the grounds referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1), a party 
may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, apply to the Court to decide on the termination of the mandate. 
(3) If, under this section or sub-section of (3) of section 13, an arbitrator withdraws from his office or a party 
agrees to the termination of the mandate of an arbitrator, it shall not imply acceptance of the validity of any 
ground referred to in this section or sub-section (3) of section 12”] 

PART D 

de jure unable to perform functions according to Section 14. Resultantly, 
the mandate of such an ineligible person gets automatically terminated and 
they are liable to be substituted by another arbitrator under Section 14.83 
49. The disclosure requirement helps prevent the appointment of an 
unacceptable candidate.84 The duty of disclosure is a continuing 
requirement to: (i) provide the information to any party who did not obtain it 
before the arbitrator’s appointment; and (ii) secure information about 
circumstances that only arise at a later stage of the arbitral proceedings, that 
is, new business affiliations or share acquisitions.85 
50. During the drafting of Article 12 of the Model Law, proposals were mooted 
to provide specific circumstances or grounds for challenging the 
appointment of arbitrators. The Secretariat noted that instead of prescribing 
a list of all the possible grounds of challenge, an alternative would be to 
prescribe “a general formula such as “circumstances giving rise to justifiable 
doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence.””86 The Working 
Group did not set forth any comprehensive understanding of the meaning of 
the standard for challenge included under Article 12.87 It acknowledged that 
the general formula is exhaustive and will include most of the grounds of 
 
83 Bharat Broadband Network Ltd. v. United Telecoms Ltd., (2019) [17] [“17. The scheme of 
Sections 12, 13 and 14, therefore, is that where an arbitrator makes a disclosure in writing which is likely to 
give justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality, the appointment of such arbitrator may be 
challenged under Sections 12(1) to 12(4) read with Section 13. However, where such person becomes 
“ineligible” to be appointed as an arbitrator, there is no question of challenge to such arbitrator, before such 
arbitrator. In such a case i.e. a case which falls under Section 12(5), Section 14(1)(a) of the Act gets attracted 
inasmuch as the arbitrator becomes, as a matter of law (i.e. de jure), unable to perform his functions under 
Section 12(5), being ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator. This being so, his mandate automatically 
terminates, and he shall then be substituted by another arbitrator under Section 14(1) itself.”] 
84 A/CN.9/264, page 30 
85 Ibid. 
86 Report of the Secretary-General: possible features of a model law on international commercial arbitration, 
A/CN.9/207, [65]. 
87 Holtzmann and Neuhaus (supra) 388 

PART D 

challenge set forth under national laws.88 According to the Working Group, 
the grounds of challenge under national law applicable to judges, such as a 
financial interest or previous involvement in the subject matter or a certain 
relation to one of the parties, could apply to arbitrators.89 
51. Section 13 prescribes the procedure for challenging an arbitrator in terms of 
Section 12(3).90 Section 13(1) provides that the parties are free to agree on 
a procedure for challenging an arbitrator. If the parties fail to agree on a 
procedure, the arbitral tribunal shall decide on the challenge. In case the 
challenge to the arbitrator is not successful, the arbitral tribunal shall 
continue with the arbitral proceedings and make an arbitral award. A party 
may later make an application for setting aside such an arbitral award under 
Section 34. 

88 A/CN.9/264, page 31. [It reads: 
“4. Paragraph (2), like article 10(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, adopts a general formula for the 
grounds on which an arbitrator may be challenged. This seems preferable to listing all possible connections 
and other relevant situations. As indicated by the word “only”, the grounds for challenge referred to here are 
exhaustive. Although reliance on any specific reason listed in a national law (often applicable to judges and 
arbitrators alike) is precluded, it is submitted that it would be difficult to find any such reason which would not 
be covered by the general formula.”] 
89 Report of the Secretary-General: possible features of a model law on international commercial arbitration, 
A/CN.9/207, [65] 
90 Section 13, Arbitration Act. [It reads: 
“13. Challenge procedure – (1) Subject to sub-section (4), the parties are free to agree on a procedure for 
challenging an arbitrator. 
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (1), a party who intends to challenge an arbitrator shall, 
within fifteen days after becoming aware of the constitution of the arbitral tribunal or after becoming aware of 
any circumstance referred to in sub-section (3) of section 12, send a written statement of the reasons for the 
challenge to the arbitral tribunal. 
(3) Unless the arbitrator challenged under sub-section (2) withdraws from his office or the other party agrees 
to the challenge, the arbitral tribunal shall decide on the challenge. 
(4) If a challenge under any procedure agreed upon by the parties or under the procedure under sub-section 
(2) is not successful, the arbitral tribunal shall continue the arbitral proceedings and make an arbitral award. 
(5) Where an arbitral award is made under sub-section (4), the party challenging the arbitrator may make an 
application for setting aside such an arbitral award in accordance with section 34. 
(6) Where an arbitral award is set aside on an application made under sub-section (5), the Court may decide 
as to whether the arbitrator who is challenged is entitled to any fees.”] 

PART D 

v. 
Equality in the arbitral proceedings 
52. Chapter V of the Arbitration Act deals with the ‘conduct of arbitral 
proceedings.’ Section 18 provides that the parties “shall be treated with 
equality and each party shall be given a full opportunity to present his case.” 
Section 18 establishes two principles: equal treatment of the parties and a 
right to a fair hearing. This provision has been referred to as the “due 
process clause of arbitration.”91 
53. Section 18 is based on Article 18 of the Model Law. Article 18 was initially 
paragraph 3 of Article 19 dealing with the freedom of parties to determine 
the rules of procedure. It was later formed into a separate article considering 
its overall importance. The Working Group stated that the freedom of parties 
is subject to mandatory provisions including the then paragraph 3 of Article 
19: 
“3. The freedom of the parties is subject only to the 
provisions of the model law, that is, to its mandatory 
provisions. The most fundamental of such 
provisions, from which the parties may not 
derogate, is the one contained in paragraph (3). 
Other such provisions concerning the conduct of the 
proceedings or the making of the award are 
contained in articles 23(1), 24(2)-(4), 27, 30(2), 
31(1), (3), (4), 32 and 33(1), (2), (4), (5).” 

(emphasis supplied) 

91 Holtzmann and Neuhaus (supra) 550. 

PART D 

54. Ultimately, paragraph 3 of Article 19 was placed in a separate article in the 
form of Article 18. This was meant to distinguish two distinct issues: party 
autonomy to determine rules of procedure and fairness of arbitral 
proceedings.92 Moreover, the separation was meant to emphasise the 
importance of procedural fairness over the autonomy of parties to determine 
procedural rules. 
55. Article 18 constitutes a fundamental principle that is “applicable to the entire 
arbitral proceedings.”93 The Working Group has also stated that the 
principles of equality and fairness “should be observed not only by the 
arbitral tribunal but also by the parties when laying down any rules of 
procedure.”94 It was the understanding of the Working Group that the 
principle of equality of parties applies to arbitral proceedings in general, 
including aspects such as the composition of arbitral tribunal.95 Article 18 
also operates as a limitation on Article 19 which provides broad autonomy 
to both the parties and, in the absence of an arbitration agreement, to the 
arbitral tribunal when determining the procedure to be followed in conducting 
the arbitral proceedings.96 It imposes a duty on the arbitral tribunal to ensure 
fairness in the arbitral process. 

92 Ilias Bantekas, Equal Treatment of Parties in Ilias Bantekas, et al (eds) UNCITRAL Model Law on 
International Commercial Arbitration (2020, CUP) 524 
93 Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its eighteenth session 
(3-21 June 1985) Supplement No. 17 (A/40/17) [176]. 
94 A/CN.9/246 [62] 
95 Holtzmann and Neuhaus (supra) 552. [It was observed by the Secretariat that: “It had always been the 
understanding of the Working Group … that the fundamental principle enunciated in article 19(3) [Article 18 
in the final text] would apply to arbitral proceedings in general; it would thus govern all provisions in chapter 
V and other aspects, such as the composition of the arbitral tribunal, not directly regulated therein.”] 
96 Holtzmann and Neuhaus (supra) 551 

PART D 

vi. 
Public-private arbitration 
56. Private law is a part of common law which involves relationships between 
individuals by way of contract or tort.97 The demands of the modern market 
economy require the State to contract out certain public tasks to private 
entities. The procurement of goods and services is among the most common 
forms of government contracting with private providers.98 Indian law does 
not provide a special regime governing contracts by public authorities. 
Generally, the resolution of disputes the contractual terms of a 
public-private contract is subject to ordinary civil law remedies.99 Arbitration 
is one of the preferred private dispute resolution mechanisms adopted in 
public-private contracts. 
57. An arbitration involving a company owned or controlled by government 
would likely involve public interest, considering the impact of an arbitral 
award on public finances. However, the Arbitration Act does not make a 
distinction between public-private arbitrations and private arbitrations. This 
lack of differentiation also extends to other aspects of arbitration including 
appointment of arbitrators, conduct of arbitration proceedings, and setting 
aside and enforcement of arbitral awards.100 Since the grounds for setting 
aside an arbitral award have been narrowly framed, the thrust of this 
privately ordered legal system is on the decision made by the arbitral 
tribunal. Moreover, the Arbitration Act mandates the arbitration proceedings 
 
97 K K Saksena v. International Commission on Irrigation & Drainage, (2015) [43] 
98 Jody Freeman, ‘The Contracting State’ (2000) 28(1) Florida State University Law Review 155 
99 Subodh Kumar Singh Rathour v. Chief Executive Officer, 
100 Stavros Brekoulakis and Margaret Devaney, ‘Public-private arbitration and the public interest under 
English law’ (2017) 80(1) Modern Law Review 22, 30. 

PART D 

to be conducted following two main principles: (i) equality of parties; and (ii) 
independence and impartiality of arbitral proceedings. 
58. In Pam Developments Private Limited v. State of West Bengal101, the 
arbitrator made an award in favour of the contractor. When the contractor 
sought to enforce the award, the State government obtained a stay by 
relying on Order XXVII Rule 8-A of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908.102 This 
Court held that since the Arbitration Act is a self-contained code, the 
provisions of the CPC “will apply only insofar as the same are not 
inconsistent with the spirit and provisions of the Arbitration Act.” Noting that 
no special treatment can be given to the government under the Arbitration 
Act, the Court observed: 
“26. Arbitration proceedings are essentially alternate dispute 
redressal system meant for early/quick resolution of disputes and in 
case a money decree — award as passed by the arbitrator against 
the Government is allowed to be automatically stayed, the very 
purpose of quick resolution of dispute through arbitration would be 
defeated as the decree-holder would be fully deprived of the fruits of 
the award on mere filing of objection under Section 34 of the 
Arbitration Act. The Arbitration Act is a special Act which 
provides for quick resolution of disputes between the parties 
and Section 18 of the Act makes it clear that the parties shall be 
treated with equality. Once the Act mandates so, there cannot 
be any special treatment given to the Government as a party. 
As such, under the scheme of the Arbitration Act, no distinction 
is made nor any differential treatment is to be given to the 
Government, while considering an application for grant of stay 
of a money decree in proceedings under Section 34 of the 
Arbitration Act. As we have already mentioned above, the 
reference to CPC in Section 36 of the Arbitration Act is only to guide 
the court as to what conditions can be imposed, and the same have 
to be consistent with the provisions of the Arbitration Act.” 

(emphasis supplied)
 
101 (2019) 
102 “CPC” 

PART E 

Therefore, the Arbitration Act does not provide different or special treatment 
to the government in arbitrations by or against the government.103 
E. 
The principle of equality applies at the stage of appointment of 
arbitrators 
i. 
Arbitration as a quasi-judicial function 
59. According to well-established legal principles, an act of a statutory authority 
will be a quasi-judicial if: (i) the authority is empowered under a statute; (ii) 
the mandate is to decide disputes a claim made by one party 
which is opposed by another party; and (iii) the body which decides has to 
determine the rights of contesting parties who are opposed to each other.104 
A quasi-judicial function is required to be exercised judicially, that is, 
following the principles of natural justice because of its impact on the rights 
of persons affected.105 In Jaswant Sugar Mills Ltd. v. Lakshmi Chand,106 
a Constitution Bench has identified the following criteria to determine 
whether an act is judicial: 
“(1) it is in substance a determination upon 
investigation of a question by the application 
 
103 Pam Developments Pvt Ltd (supra) [27-28] [“28. Section 36 of the Arbitration Act also does not provide 
for any special treatment to the Government while dealing with grant of stay in an application under 
proceedings of Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. Keeping the aforesaid in consideration and also the 
provisions of Section 18 providing for equal treatment of parties, it would, in our view, make it clear that there 
is no exceptional treatment to be given to the Government while considering the application for stay under 
Section 36 filed by the Government in proceedings under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act.”] 
104 Province of Bombay v. Khushaldas Advani,. [Justice S R Das (as the learned Chief Justice 
then was) observed: 80.1.(i) that if a statute empowers an authority, not being a court in the ordinary sense, 
to decide disputes a claim made by one party under the statute which claim is opposed by 
another party and to determine the respective rights of the contesting parties who are opposed to each other, 
there is a lis and prima facie and in the absence of anything in the statute to the contrary it is the duty of the 
authority to act judicially and the decision of the authority is a quasi-judicial act; 
105 Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India v. Delhi International Airport Limited, [37] 
106 [13] 

PART E 

objective standards to facts found in the light of pre-
existing legal rules; 
(2) it declares rights or imposes upon parties 
obligations affecting their civil rights; and 
(3) that the investigation is subject to certain 
procedural attributes contemplating an opportunity 
of presenting its case to a party, ascertainment of 
facts by means of evidence if a dispute be on 
questions of fact, and if the dispute be on question 
of law on the presentation of legal argument, and a 
decision resulting in the disposal of the matter on 
findings based upon those questions of law and 
fact.” 
60. An arbitrator’s relationship with parties is contractual. The rights and 
obligations of an arbitrator are principally the result of the contractual 
relations with the parties.107 However, the position under common law is that 
the rights and duties of an arbitrator are derived from a conjunction of 
contract and quasi-judicial status granted by national laws. In Norjarl v. 
Hyundai Heavy Industries, Lord Browne-Wilkinson observed that it is 
impossible to distinguish contractual matters from those of quasi-judicial 
status.108 Similarly, in ONGC v. Afcons Gunanusa JV, this Court 
recognized that the rights and duties of arbitrators flow from: (i) the national 
laws governing arbitration which give a quasi-judicial status to arbitrators 
wheres they have to act as impartial adjudicators; and (ii) the arbitrator’s 
contract with the parties which governs many aspects of the arbitrator-party 
 
107 Gary Born (supra) 2111 
108 K/S Norjarl A/S v. Hyundai Heavy Industries Co. Ltd., [1992] QB 863 [Lord Browne-Wilkinson in his opinion 
observed that it is “impossible to divorce the contractual and status considerations: in truth the arbitrator’s 
rights and duties flow from the conjunction of those two elements.”] 

PART E 

relationship including remuneration, confidentiality, and timelines for 
completion of arbitral proceedings.109 
61. An arbitral tribunal performs a quasi-judicial function because it substantially 
determines the rights and liabilities of competing parties through 
adjudicative means.110 The tribunal is generally required to arrive at 
decisions or awards based on procedural and substantive law. The 
Arbitration Act allows flexibility to parties to select the procedural and 
substantive law to be followed by the arbitral tribunal. During the arbitration 
process, the arbitral tribunal generally meets at a place agreed upon by the 
parties, considers the statement of claim and defence, conducts oral 
hearings, and may appoint experts. Thus, arbitral tribunals act judicially to 
adjudicate the rights of parties. 
62. The Arbitration Act is a self-contained code.111 The legal framework 
contained under the Arbitration Act and the Contract Act recognises and 
enforces the contractual intention of parties to entrust an arbitral tribunal with 
the authority to settle their disputes. Section 8 of the Arbitration Act 
mandates judicial authorities to refer parties to arbitration where there is an 
arbitration agreement. The other provisions of the Arbitration Act are also 
geared towards ensuring minimal judicial interference112 in arbitral 
 
109 ONGC Ltd. v. Afcons Gunanusa JV, (2024) [102] 
110 Srei Infrastructure Finance Ltd. v. Tuff Drilling Private Limited, (2018) [14] 
111 In re Interplay between Arbitration Agreements under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 and the 
Indian Stamp Act 1899, 2023 INSC 1066 [85] 
112 Section 5, Arbitration Act 

PART E 

proceedings and recognizing the competence of the arbitral tribunals to rule 
on their jurisdiction.113 
63. Although the Arbitration Act recognizes the autonomy of parties to decide on 
all aspects of arbitration, it also lays down a procedural framework to 
regulate the composition of the arbitral tribunal and conduct of arbitral 
proceedings. The incorporation of Section 12(5) is a recognition of the well-
established principle that quasi-judicial proceedings should be conducted 
consistent with the principles of natural justice. Section 18 serves as a 
guide for arbitral tribunals to follow the principles of equality and fairness 
during the conduct of arbitral proceedings. Thus, the Arbitration Act requires 
the arbitral tribunals to act judicially in determining disputes between 
parties.114 
64. Since arbitral proceedings have “trappings of a court”, the law requires 
arbitral tribunals to act objectively and “exercise their discretion in a judicial 
manner, without caprice, and according to the general principles of law and 
rules of natural justice.”115 An arbitral award can be set aside if the 
composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure violates the 
mandatory provisions of the Arbitration Act, including Sections 12 and 18. 
Thus, the Arbitration Act emphasizes that the substance of the law cannot 
be divorced from the procedure. 
 
113 Section 16, Arbitration Act 
114 Engineering Mazdoor Sabha v. Hind Cycles Ltd., [5]; Dewan Singh v. Champat 
Singh, (1969) [9] 
115 Grindlays Bank Ltd. v. Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal, 1980 Supp SCC 420 [8] 

PART E 

65. Section 31 mandates that an award made by an arbitrator shall be in writing 
and signed by all members of the arbitral tribunal.116 The provision further 
provides that an arbitral award shall state the reasons upon which it is 
based, unless the parties have agreed that no reasons are to be given. This 
provision is consistent with the principle that a quasi-judicial authority must 
generally record its reasons in support of the order it makes.117 Further, the 
decision rendered by an arbitral tribunal is binding and enforceable “in the 
same manner as if it were a decree of the court.”118 
66. Arbitral tribunals serve as effective alternatives to traditional justice 
dispensing mechanisms. The purpose of arbitral tribunals is to be 
expeditious where the law is slow, cheap where the law is costly, simple 
where the law is technical, and a peace-maker instead of a stirrer up of 
strife.119 Arbitral tribunals can inspire confidence in their adjudicatory 
process by conducting fair and impartial hearings and providing sufficient 
and cogent reasons for their decisions.120 Given the adjudicatory functions 
 
116 Section 31, Arbitration Act 
117 Siemens Engg. & Mfg. Co. of India Ltd. v. Union of India, (1976). 
118 Section 36, Arbitration Act. [It reads: 
36. Enforcement (1) Where the time for making an application to set aside the arbitral award under section 
34 has expired, then, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), such award shall be enforced in accordance 
with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in the same manner as if it were a 
decree of the court.”] 
119 Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration (7th edition, 2022) 3 
120 Siemens Engg. (supra) [6]. [6. […] If courts of law are to be replaced by administrative authorities and 
tribunals, as indeed, in some kinds of cases, with the proliferation of Administrative Law, they may have to 
be so replaced, it is essential that administrative authorities and tribunals should accord fair and proper 
hearing to the persons sought to be affected by their orders and give sufficiently clear and explicit reasons in 
support of the orders made by them. Then alone administrative authorities and tribunals exercising quasi-
judicial function will be able to justify their existence and carry credibility with the people by inspiring 
confidence in the adjudicatory process. The rule requiring reasons to be given in support of an order is, like 
the principle of audi alteram partem, a basic principle of natural justice which must inform every quasi-judicial 
process and this rule must be observed in its proper spirit and mere pretence of compliance with it would not 
satisfy the requirement of law.] 

PART E 

performed by arbitral tribunals, the decisions which emanate from them 
must be grounded in a process that is independent and impartial. ii. 
Equality applies at the stage of appointment of arbitrators 
67. Section 18 contains the principle of natural justice to give full opportunity to 
parties to present their case.121 In Union of India v. Vedanta Ltd., Justice 
Indu Malhotra, writing for a three Judge Bench, observed that the “[f]air and 
equal treatment of the parties is a non-derogable and mandatory provision, 
on which the entire edifice of the alternate dispute resolution mechanism is 
based.”122 The purpose of Section 18 is to give the arbitral process a 
semblance of judicial proceedings by infusing the principles of equality and 
fairness.123 The theoretical basis for this understanding stems from the fact 
that arbitrators are authorities vested with powers to resolve disputes under 
the law.124 
68. The first part of Section 18 provides that “parties shall be treated with 
equality.” The broad nature of the prescription has to be complied with not 
only by arbitral tribunals, but also by parties while giving expression to party 
autonomy. The principle has to be followed in all procedural contexts of 
arbitral proceedings, including the stage of appointment of arbitrators.125 
According to Peter Binder, the principle of equal treatment of parties “means 
that no party may be given preference in the arbitrator-selection process 
 
121 Associate Builders v. DDA, (2015) [30]; Srei Infrastructure Finance Ltd. v. Tuff Drilling (P) Ltd., 
(2018) [16]; 
122 (2020) [121] 
123 Mustill and Boyd (supra) 58 
124 Ilias Bantekas, ‘Equal treatment of parties in International Commercial Arbitration’ (2020) 69(4) 
International & Comparative Law Quarterly 991, 992. 
125 Fouchard Gaillard Goldman on International Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 1999) 465 

PART E 

regardless of how strong its bargaining power may be.”126 Countries such 
as Germany,127 the Netherlands,128 Spain,129 and Estonia130 allow the party 
that has been disadvantaged by an asymmetric appointment clause to 
request courts to appoint an arbitrator or arbitrators. The underlying principle 
is that the courts should not recognise and enforce agreements that are 
unfair and biased. 
69. In Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. v. Raja Transport (P) Ltd.,131 the arbitration 
clause provided that any disputes arising between the parties shall be 
referred to the “sole arbitration of the Director, Marketing of the Corporation 
or of some officer of the Corporation who may be nominated by the Director, 
Marketing.” It was contended that an arbitration clause which allows one 
party to nominate its officer as the sole arbitrator is against the principle of 
 
126 Peter Binder, International Commercial Arbitration and Conciliations in UNCITRAL Model Law 
Jurisdictions (2nd edn, Sweet and Maxwell 2005) 109 
127 Section 1034(2) of the German Code of Civil Procedure 1877. [It reads: 
“Section 1034 – Composition of the arbitral tribunal 
(1) The parties are free to agree on the number of arbitrators. Absent such agreement, the number of 
arbitrators is three. 
(2) If the arbitration agreement grants preponderant rights to one party with regard to the composition of the 
arbitral tribunal, thus placing the other party at a disadvantage, the latter party may request that the court 
appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators in derogation from the appointment or appointments already made or in 
derogation from the appointment procedure agreed. The application is to be made no later than the expiry of 
two weeks after the party has become aware of the composition of the arbitral tribunal. Section 1032(3) 
applies accordingly.”] 
128 Article 1028(1) of the Dutch Code of Civil Procedure, 2003. [It reads: 
“If the arbitration agreement gives one of the parties a privileged position with regard to the appointment of 
the arbitrator or arbitrators, the other party may, despite the method of appointment laid down in that 
agreement, request the Provisional Relief Judge of the District Court within one month after the 
commencement of the arbitration to appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators. The other party shall be given an 
opportunity to be heard. The provisions of Article 1027(4) shall apply accordingly.”] 
129 Article 15(2), Spanish Arbitration Act 2003. [It reads: 
“Article 15: Appointment of arbitrators 
2. The parties are able to freely agree on the procedure for the appointment of the arbitrators, provided that 
there is no violation of the principle of equal treatment.”] 
130 Section 721(2), Estonian Code of Civil Procedure. [It reads: 
“(2) If an arbitral agreement gives one of the parties, in the formation of an arbitral tribunal, an economic or 
other advantage over the other party which is materially damaging to the other party, such party may request 
that the court appoint one arbitrator or several arbitrators differently from the appointment which already took 
place of from the rules of appointment agreed upon earlier.”] 
131 (2009) 3 SCC (Civ) 460 

PART E 

independence and impartiality contained in Sections 11(8), 12, and 18. A 
two-Judge Bench of this Court rejected this contention by holding that 
Sections 11, 12, and 18 do not prohibit an employee of either of the parties 
from acting as an arbitrator: 
“32. Section 18 requires the arbitrator to treat the 
parties with equality (that is to say without bias) and 
give each party full opportunity to present his case. 
Nothing in Sections 11, 12, 18 or other provisions of 
the Act suggests that any provision in an arbitration 
agreement, naming the arbitrator will be invalid if 
such named arbitrator is an employee of one of the 
parties to the arbitration agreement.” 
Raja Transport (supra) was delivered before the 2015 amendment. Section 
12(5) now renders an employee of either of the parties ineligible for being 
appointed as an arbitrator. 
70. The concept of equality under Article 14 enshrines the principle of equality 
of treatment. The basic principle underlying Article 14 is that the law must 
operate equally on all persons under like circumstances.132 The implication 
of equal treatment in the context of judicial adjudication is that “all litigants 
similarly situated are entitled to avail themselves of the same procedural 
rights for relief, and for defence with like protection and without 
discrimination.”133 In Union of India v. Madras Bar Association,134 a 
Constitution Bench held that the right to equality before the law and equal 
protection of laws guaranteed by Article 14 of the Constitution includes a 
right to have a person’s rights adjudicated by a forum which exercises 
 
132 M Nagaraj v. Union of India, (2006) [106] 
133 Shree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. v. A V Visvanatha Sastri, (1954) [6] 
134 (2010) [102] 

PART E 

judicial power impartially and independently. Thus, the constitutional norm 
of procedural equality is a necessary concomitant to a fair and impartial 
adjudicatory process. 
71. Arbitration is an adversarial system. It relies on the parties to produce facts 
and evidence before the arbitral tribunal to render a decision. Procedural 
equality is generally considered to contain the following indicia: (i) equal 
capability of parties to produce facts and legal arguments; (ii) equal 
opportunities to parties to present their case; and (iii) neutrality of the 
adjudicator.135 In an adversarial process, formal equality is important 
because it helps secure legitimate adjudicative outcomes and create a level 
playing field between parties.136 
72. The defining characteristic of arbitration law (particularly ad hoc arbitration) 
is that it allows freedom to the parties to select their arbitrators. This is unlike 
domestic courts or tribunals where the parties have to litigate their claims 
before a pre-selected and randomly allocated Bench of judges. Section 
11(2) of the Arbitration Act allows parties to agree on a procedure for 
appointing the arbitrators. The “procedure” contemplated under Section 
11(2) is a set of actions which parties undertake in their endeavour to 
appoint arbitrators to adjudicate their dispute independently and impartially. 
Without formal equality at the stage of appointment of arbitrators, a party 
 
135 Jerry L Mashaw, ‘The Supreme Court’s Due Process Calculus for Administrative Adjudication in Mathews 
v Eldridge: Three Factors in Search of a Theory of Value’ (1976) 44(28) University of Chicago Law Review 
29, 52. [Professor Mashaw states that “insofar as adjudicatory procedure is perceived to be adversarial and 
dispute resolving, the degree to which procedures facilitate equal opportunities for the adversaries to 
influence the decision may be the most important criterion by which fairness is evaluated.”] 
136 William B Rubenstein, ‘The Concept of Equality in Civil Procedure’ (2001-2002) 23 Cardozo Law Review 
1865, 1890. 

PART E 

may not have an equal say in facilitating the appointment of an unbiased 
arbitral tribunal. In a quasi-judicial process such as arbitration, the 
appointment of an independent and impartial arbitrator ensures procedural 
equality between parties during the arbitral proceedings. This is also 
recognised under Section 11(8) which requires the appointing authority to 
appoint independent and impartial arbitrators. 
73. The 2015 amendment has introduced concrete standards of impartiality and 
independence of arbitrators. One of the facets of impartiality is procedural 
impartiality. Procedural impartiality implies that the rules constitutive of the 
decision-making process must favour neither party to the dispute or favour 
or inhibit both parties equally.137 Further, a procedurally impartial 
adjudication entails equal participation of parties in all aspects of 
adjudication for the process to approach legitimacy.138 Participation in the 
adjudicatory process is meaningless for a party against whom the arbitrator 
is already prejudiced.139 Equal participation of parties in the process of 
appointment of arbitrators ensures that both sides have an equal say in the 
establishment of a genuinely independent and impartial arbitral process. 
74. Under Sections 12(1) and 12(5), the Arbitration Act recognises certain 
mandatory standards of independent and impartial tribunals. The parties 
 
137 William Lucy, The Possibility of Impartiality (2005) 25(1) Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 3, 11 
138 Ibid, at 22. 
139 Lon Fueller, ‘The Forms and Limits of Adjudication’ (1978) 92(2) Harvard Law Review 353, 364. [Professor 
Fueller states: “…whole analysis will derive from one simple proposition, namely, that the distinguishing 
characteristic of adjudication lies in the fact that it confers on the affected party a peculiar form of participation 
in the decision, that of presenting proofs and reasoned arguments for decision in his favor. Whatever 
heightens the significance of this participation lifts the adjudication towards its optimum expression. Whatever 
destroys the meaning of that participation destroys the integrity of adjudication itself. Thus, participation 
through reasoned argument loses its meaning if the arbiter of the dispute is inaccessible to reason because 
he is insane, has been bribed, or is hopelessly prejudiced.”] 

PART F 

have to challenge the independence or impartiality of the arbitrator or 
arbitrators in terms of Section 12(3) before the same arbitral tribunal under 
Section 13.140 If the tribunal rejects the challenge, it has to continue with the 
arbitral proceedings and make an award. Such an award can always be 
challenged under Section 34. However, considerable time and expenses are 
incurred by the parties by the time the award is set aside by the courts. Equal 
participation of parties at the stage of the appointment of arbitrators can thus 
obviate later challenges to arbitrators. 
75. Independence and impartiality of arbitral proceedings and equality of parties 
are concomitant principles. The independence and impartiality of arbitral 
proceedings can be effectively enforced only if the parties can participate 
equally at all stages of an arbitral process. Therefore, the principle of equal 
treatment of parties applies at all stages of arbitral proceedings, including 
the stage of the appointment of arbitrators. 
 
F. 
Nemo judex rule and the doctrine of bias 
76. The principles of natural justice principally consist of two rules: (i) no one 
shall be a judge in their own cause (nemo judex in causa sua); and (ii) no 
decision shall be given against a party without affording a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard.141 Adherence to the principles of natural justice 
is a facet of procedural fairness. A decision made by the State to the 
 
140 Chennai Metro Rail Ltd. v. Transtonnelstroy Afcons (JV), (2024) [33] 
141 Express Newspaper (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, [95]; A K Kraipak v. Union of India, 
(1969) [20]; Mohinder Singh Gill v. Chief Election Commissioner, (1978) [52]; 
Swadeshi Cotton Mills v. Union of India, (1981) [27] 

PART F 

prejudice of a person must be after following the basic rules of justice and 
fair play.142 The principles of natural justice are applied because 
administrative or quasi-judicial proceedings can abridge or take away 
rights.143 Application of the principles of natural justice prevents miscarriage 
of justice.144 Natural justice has both an intrinsic and an instrumental 
function. The intrinsic function values natural justice as an end in itself. It 
values natural justice as an essential feature of fairness. In its instrumental 
element, natural justice is viewed as a means to achieving just outcomes. 
77. The principle of nemo judex is based on the precept that justice should not 
only be done but manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done.145 The 
principle of nemo judex applies to judicial, quasi-judicial, and administrative 
proceedings.146 An adjudicator should be disinterested and unbiased.147 A 
bias is a predisposition to decide for or against one party, without proper 
regard to the true merits of the dispute.148 
i. 
Principles of natural justice 
78. Article 14 of the Constitution provides that the State shall not deny to any 
person equality before the law or equal protection of the laws within the 
territory of India. Article 14 is founded on a sound public policy to secure to 
all persons, citizens or non-citizens, the equality of status and opportunity.149 
 
142 State of Orissa v. Binapani Dei, [9] 
143 Union of India v. K P Joseph, (1973) [10] 
144 A K Kraipak (supra) [20] 
145 The King v. Sussex Justices, [1924] 1 KB 256 
146 J Mohapatra & Co. v. State of Orissa, (1984) [9] 
147 A K Roy v. Union of India, (1982) [97]; 
148 Government of TN v. Munuswamy Mudaliar, 1988 Supp SCC 651 [12] 
149 Basheshar Nath v. CIT,; In Re Special Courts Bill, 1978; (1979) [72]. 
[“72. […] (1) The first part of Article 14, which was adopted from the Irish Constitution, is a declaration of 
equality of the civil rights of all persons within the territories of India. It enshrines a basic principle of 

PART F 

One of the dimensions of the equality jurisprudence evolved by this Court is 
that arbitrariness is antithetical to equality.150 State action must be based on 
principles of fairness and equality of treatment.151 Article 14 strikes at 
arbitrary actions and ensures fairness and equality of treatment.152 Violation 
of the principles of natural justice results in arbitrariness.153 The principle of 
reasonableness is an essential element of equality.154 Resultantly, a 
procedure contemplated under Article 21 must be just, fair, and non-
arbitrary. This Court has recognized that the concept of reasonableness and 
non-arbitrariness pervades the entire constitutional scheme.155 
79. In Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel,156 a Constitution Bench of this Court 
observed that violation of the principles of natural justice results in 
arbitrariness: 
“95. The principles of natural justice have thus come 
to be recognized as being a part of the guarantee 
contained in Article 14 because of the new and 
dynamic interpretation given by this Court to the 
concept of equality which is the subject-matter of 
that article. Shortly put, the syllogism runs thus: 
violation of a rule of natural justice results in 
arbitrariness which is the same as discrimination; 
where discrimination is the result of State action, it is 
a violation of Article 14: therefore, a violation of a 
principle of natural justice by a State action is a 
violation of Article 14. Article 14, however, is not the 
sole repository of the principles of natural justice. 
What it does is to guarantee that any law or State 
 
republicanism. The second part, which is a corollary of the first and is based on the last clause of the first 
section of the Fourteenth Amendment of the American Constitution, enjoins that equal protection shall be 
secured to all such persons in the enjoyment of their rights and liberties without discrimination of favouritism. 
It is a pledge of the protection of equal laws, that is, laws that operate alike on all persons under like 
circumstances.”] 
150 State of Andhra Pradesh v. Nalla Raja Reddy, [24] 
151 E P Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, (1974) [85] 
152 Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) [7] 
153 Satyavir Singh v. Union of India, (1958) [26] 
154 Maneka Gandhi (supra) [7] 
155 Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, (1981) [16] 
156 (1985) 

PART F 

action violating them will be struck down. The 
principles of natural justice, however, apply not only 
to legislation and State action but also where any 
tribunal, authority or body of men, not coming within 
the definition of State in Article 12, is charged with 
the duty of deciding a matter. In such a case, the 
principles of natural justice require that it must 
decide such matter fairly and impartially.” 
80. Article 14 is an important facet of administrative, judicial and quasi-judicial 
decision-making in India and demands fair play in action.157 The object of 
observing the principles of natural justice is to ensure that “every person 
whose rights are going to be affected by the proposed action gets a fair 
hearing.”158 The non-observance of natural justice is itself a prejudice to any 
person who has been denied justice depending upon the facts and 
circumstances of each case.159 The principle of procedural fairness is rooted 
in the principles of the rule of law and good governance.160 In Madhyamam 
Broadcasting Limited v. Union of India,161 this Court held that the 
requirement of procedural fairness “holds an inherent value in itself.” It was 
further observed: 
“42. Inherent value in fair procedure: Fair procedure 
is not only a means to the end of achieving a fair 
outcome but is an end it itself. Fair procedure 
induces 
equality 
in 
the 
proceedings. 
The 
proceedings ‘seem’ to be and are seen to be fair.” 
81. We recognize that arbitration is a private dispute settlement mechanism. 
Yet, it is statutorily subject to the principles of equality and fairness contained 
 
157 K L Tripathi v. State Bank of India, (1984) [32] 
158 Bank of Patiala v. S K Sharma, (1996) [29] 
159 S L Kapoor v. Jagmohan, (1980) [24] 
160 Dharampal Satyapal Ltd. v. CCE, (2015) [26] 
161 [53] 

PART F 

under the Arbitration Act. Section 18 of the Arbitration Act mandates the 
equal treatment of parties and fairness in arbitral proceedings as a 
mandatory principle governing the conduct of arbitration. Thus, the 
resolution of disputes arising in a private contractual relationship is subject 
to certain inherent principles which a quasi-judicial body like an arbitral 
tribunal is required to adhere to. Resolution of private disputes following the 
minimum statutory standards of equality and fairness is essential not only in 
the interest of justice, but also to uphold the integrity of arbitration in India. ii. 
Doctrine of bias 
82. In A K Kraipak v. Union of India,162 the Central Government constituted a 
Special Selection Board for selecting officers to the Indian Forest Service in 
the senior scale and junior scale from the serving officers of the Forest 
department of the State of Jammu and Kashmir. One of the members of the 
selection board was the officiating Chief Conservator of Forests of Jammu 
and Kashmir. However, the Chief Conservator was also one of the 
candidates in contention for the posts in the Indian Forest Service. Although 
the Chief Conservator was not present when his name was considered for 
selection by the board, he was present and participated in the deliberations 
when the names of other candidates were being considered. 
83. The Constitution Bench held that the real question was not whether the Chief 
Conservator was biased, but whether there was a reasonable ground for 
believing that he was likely to have been biased. It was observed that a 
 
162 (1969) 

PART F 

reasonable likelihood of bias has to be determined by taking into 
consideration human probabilities and the ordinary course of human 
conduct.163 It was observed that the Chief Conservator had an interest in 
keeping his rivals out and securing the position for himself. Further, it was 
held that the other members of the selection board would have been 
influenced by the Chief Conservator’s opinion about other candidates. 
Resultantly, this Court struck down the entire selection made by the board. 
84. In J Mohapatra v. State of Orissa,164 the State government had constituted 
a committee to select books for general reading to be kept in school and 
college libraries. For the years 1980 to 1982, the committee selected and 
purchased books in a prescribed manner. The list of books prepared by the 
committee was challenged before the High Court. One of the grounds of 
challenge was that some of the members of the committee were themselves 
authors of books that were selected and purchased. The High Court rejected 
the challenge on two grounds: (i) the decision of the committee was subject 
to the approval of the State government; and (ii) the role played by an 
individual member of the committee was insignificant and could not have 
influenced the decision of the committee. 
 
163 A K Kraipak (supra) [15]. [15. […] But then the very fact that he was a member of the selection board must 
have had its own impact on the decision of the selection board. Further admittedly he participated in the 
deliberations of the selection board when the claims of his rivals particularly that of Basu was considered. 
He was also party to the preparation of the list of selected candidates in order of preference. At every stage 
of his participation in the deliberations of the selection board there was a conflict between his interest and 
duty. Under those circumstances it is difficult to believe that he could have been impartial. The real question 
is not whether he was biased. It is difficult to prove the state of mind of a person. Therefore what we have to 
see is whether there is reasonable ground for believing that he was likely to have been biased. We agree 
with the learned Attorney General that a mere suspicion of bias is not sufficient. There must be a reasonable 
likelihood of bias. In deciding the question of bias we have to take into consideration human probabilities and 
ordinary course of human conduct. It was in the interest of Naqishbund to keep out his rivals in order to 
secure his position from further challenge. Naturally he was also interested in safeguarding his position while 
preparing the list of selected candidates.] 
164 (1984) 

PART F 

85. This Court observed that a person who has written a book that is submitted 
for selection has an interest in the matter of selection. It was further 
observed that there is a direct correlation between the selection of books by 
the committee and an increase in sales of the books. The increased sales 
resulted in increased royalties for the authors. Therefore, it was held that an 
author benefits financially if their book is selected by the committee. This 
Court further disagreed with the finding of the High Court that the author-
member had an insignificant role in the book selection process, by 
observing: 
“11. […] to say that such author-member is only one 
of the members of the Assessment Sub-Committee 
is to overlook the fact that the author-member can 
subtly influence the minds of the other members 
against selecting books by other authors in 
preference to his own. It can also be that books by 
some of the other members may also have been 
submitted for selection and there can be between 
them a quid pro quo or, in other words, you see that 
my book is selected and in return I will do the same 
for you. In either case, when a book of an author-
member comes up for consideration, the other 
members would feel themselves embarrassed in 
frankly discussing its merits. Such author-member 
may also be a person holding a high official position 
whom the other members may not want to displease. 
It can be that the other members may not be 
influenced by the fact that the book which they are 
considering for approval was written by one of their 
members. Whether they were so influenced or not is, 
however, a matter impossible to determine. It is not, 
therefore, the actual bias in favour of the author-
member that is material but the possibility of 
such bias.” 

(emphasis supplied) 

PART F 

86. In J Mohapatra (supra), it was observed that a decision-maker who is 
prejudiced can possibly influence the decision of the authority in tangible 
and intangible ways. This Court recognized that the doctrine of necessity 
serves as an exception to the nemo judex rule. An adjudicator, who is subject 
to disqualification on the ground of bias or interest in the matter which he 
has to decide, may be required to adjudicate in three situations: (i) if there 
is no other person who is competent or authorized to adjudicate; (ii) if a 
quorum cannot be formed without him; or (iii) if no other competent tribunal 
can be constituted. 
87. In Ashok Kumar Yadav v. State of Haryana,165 some members of the 
selection committee of the Haryana Public Service Commission were 
related to the candidates who appeared for the viva voce examination. 
Although the members did not participate when their relatives were being 
interviewed, they participated in the interviews of other candidates. The 
court observed that the test “is not that the decision is actually tainted with 
bias, but that the circumstances are such as to create a reasonable 
apprehension in the mind of others that there is a likelihood of bias affecting 
the decision.” The Court observed that the nemo judex rule extends to all 
cases where an independent mind has to be applied to arrive at a fair and 
just decision between rival claims of parties. However, the court resorted to 
the doctrine of necessity to hold that the decision of the state Public Service 
Commission, being a constitutional authority, was not vitiated.166 
 
165 (1985) 
166 Ashok Kumar Yadav (supra) [18]. [18. We do not think that the principle which requires that a member of 
a Selection Committee whose close relative is appearing for selection should decline to become a member 

PART F 

88. The principle governing the doctrine of bias is that a member of a judicial 
body with a predisposition in favour of or against any party to a dispute or 
whose position in relation to the subject matter or a disputing party is such 
that a lack of impartiality would be assumed to exist should not be a part of 
a tribunal composed to decide the dispute.167 This principle is applicable to 
authorities who have to act judicially in deciding rights and liabilities and 
bodies discharging quasi-judicial functions. A quasi-judicial authority 
empowered to decide a dispute between opposing parties “must be one 
without bias towards one side or the other in the dispute.”168 A member of a 
tribunal which is called upon to try issues in judicial or quasi-judicial 
proceedings must act impartially, objectively, and without bias.169 
iii. 
Test of real likelihood of bias 
a. Automatic disqualification 
89. Bias is generally classified under three heads: (i) legal interest, which means 
a judge is “in such a position that a bias must be assumed”; (ii) pecuniary 
interest; and (iii) personal bias.170 A pecuniary or proprietary interest, 
however small, automatically disqualifies a person.171 A person who has an 
 
of the Selection Committee or withdraw from it leaving it to the appointing authority to nominate another 
person in his place, need be applied in case of a constitutional authority like the Public Service Commission, 
whether Central or State. If a member of a Public Service Commission were to withdraw altogether from the 
selection process on the ground that a close relative of his is appearing for selection, no other person save 
a member can be substituted in his place. And it may sometimes happen that no other member is available 
to take the place of such member and the functioning of the Public Service Commission may be affected.] 
167 Gullapalli Nageswara Rao v. State of A P, [6]; relied in Mineral Development Ltd. v. State of Bihar, [10] 
168 Gullapalli Nageswara Rao v. A P State Road Transport Corporation, [30] 
169 Manak Lal v. Dr. Prem Chand Sighvi, 
170 G Sarana v. University of Lucknow, (1976) [12]; Union of India v. B N Jha, (2003) 
[28] 
171 R v. Rand, (1866) LR 1 QB 230, 232. [Blackburn J. observed that “[t]here is no doubt that any direct 
pecuniary interest, however small, in the subject of inquiry, does disqualify a person from acting as a judge 
in the matter.”]; R v. Camborne Justices, ex parte Pearce, [1955] 1 QB 41. 

PART F 

interest in the outcome of an issue that is to be resolved would be acting as 
a judge in their own cause.172 The question is not whether a judge has some 
link with parties involved in a cause before the judge but whether the 
outcome of that cause could realistically affect the judge’s interest.173 This 
principle has been authoritatively stated by the House of Lords in Dimes v. 
Grand Junction Canal.174 In that case, the Lord Chancellor decreed in 
favour of a canal company in which he held substantial shares. The House 
of Lords observed that the principle that no person should be judge in their 
own cause “is not to be confined to a cause in which he is a party, but applies 
to a cause in which he has an interest.”175. 
90. In R v. Bow Street Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate, ex parte 
Pinochet Ugarte (No. 2),176 the House of Lords held that the former head 
of Chile was not immune from extradition to Spain for trial of alleged crimes 
against humanity. Lord Hoffman was one of the five members who agreed 
with the majority. During the hearings, Amnesty International,177 a human 
rights body, intervened and participated in the proceedings. It came to light 
after the judgment that Lord Hoffman was a director and chairman of 
Amnesty International Charity Limited,178 which was wholly owned and 
 
172 Dimes v. The Proprietors of the Grand Junction Canal, (1852) 3 HLC 759; Locabail (UK) Ltd. v. Bayfield 
Properties Ltd, [1999] EWCA Civ 3004 
173 Locabail (supra) [8] 
174 (1852) 3 HL Cas 759 
175 Dimes (supra) 793. [Lord Campbell observed: “No one can suppose that Lord Cottenham [Lord 
Chancellor] could be, in the remotest degree, influenced by the interest that he had in this concern; but, my 
Lords, it is of the last importance that the maxim that no man is to be a judge in his own cause should be 
held sacred. And that is not confined to a cause in which he is a party, but applies to a cause in which he has 
an interest.”] 
176 [1999] UKHL 1 
177 “AI” 
178 “AICL” 

PART F 

controlled by AI. Resultantly, the House of Lords set aside its previous 
decision and directed a rehearing of the matter. 
91. Lord Browne-Wilkinson observed that AI and AICL were all “parts of an entity 
or movement” working in different fields to establish that Pinochet was not 
immune from extradition as a former head of State. This interest of the 
organizations was termed as a non-pecuniary interest to achieve a particular 
result. The rationale of automatic disqualification was held to extend to 
situations where a judge’s decision will lead to the promotion of a cause in 
which the judge is involved with one of the parties.179 In re Pinochet (supra) 
extended automatic disqualification to situations where a judge has an 
interest in the cause, which is being promoted by one of the parties to the 
case. b. Real likelihood of bias 
92. The nemo judex rule may be applicable where a judge’s conduct or 
circumstances give rise to an apprehension of bias. In such situations, the 
judge does not have a financial or cause-based interest in the outcome of 
the dispute but provides benefit to a party by failing to be neutral and 
 
179 In re Pinochet (supra) [Lord Browne-Wilkinson held: “My Lords, in my judgment, although the cases have 
all dealt with automatic disqualification on the grounds of pecuniary interest, there is no good reason in 
principle for so limiting automatic disqualification. The rationale of the whole rule is that a man cannot be a 
judge in his own cause. In civil litigation the matters in issue will normally have an economic impact; therefore 
a judge is automatically disqualified if he stands to make a financial gain as a consequence of his own 
decision of the case. But if, as in the present case, the matter at issue does not relate to money or economic 
advantage but is concerned with the promotion of the cause, the rationale disqualifying a judge applies just 
as much if the judge's decision will lead to the promotion of a cause in which the judge is involved together 
with one of the parties. Thus in my opinion if Lord Hoffmann had been a member of AI he would have been 
automatically disqualified because of his non-pecuniary interest in establishing that Senator Pinochet was 
not entitled to immunity.”]; Lord Hutton, in his concurring opinion observed: “I am of opinion that there could 
be cases where the interest of the judge in the subject matter of the proceedings arising from his strong 
commitment to some cause or belief or his association with a person or body involved in the proceedings 
could shake public confidence in the administration of justice as much as a shareholding (which might be 
small) in a public company involved in the litigation.”] 

PART F 

impartial. The determination of bias does not depend upon actual proof of 
bias but whether there is a real possibility of bias based on the facts and 
circumstances. 
93. In R v. Sussex Justices,180 the applicant was charged with the offence of 
dangerous driving, which involved a collision with another vehicle. The 
prosecution brought a case against the applicant before the Magistrate’s 
court. Simultaneously, the driver of the other vehicle also instituted civil 
proceedings against the applicant. The solicitor hired by the other driver in 
civil proceedings was also acting as the Magistrate’s clerk in the criminal 
proceedings. At the conclusion of the evidence before the Magistrate, the 
acting clerk retired with the judges to their chambers. The Magistrate 
convicted the applicant without consulting the clerk. In appeal, the Divisional 
Court quashed the conviction. Lord Hewart CJ held that the clerk’s 
involvement in the civil proceedings made him unfit in the circumstances to 
serve as clerk to the Magistrate in the criminal matter. Lord Hewart CJ 
observed that the question depended not upon what actually was done but 
upon what might appear to be done and the judicial proceedings will be 
vitiated if there is “even a suspicion that there has been improper 
interference with the course of justice.” 
94. Over the course of time, the English courts have preferred the test of real 
likelihood to determine bias. In R v. Barnsley Licencing Justices,181 Devlin 
LJ observed that “real likelihood” depends on the impression that the court 
 
180 [1924] 1 KB 256 
181 (1960) 2 Q.B. 187 

PART F 

gets from the circumstances in which the justices were sitting. However, in 
Metropolitan Properties Company v. Lannon,182 Lord Denning expressed 
the test of the real likelihood of bias as being whether a reasonable person 
would think it “likely or probable” that a judge or member of a tribunal was 
biased. 
95. In Regina v. Gough,183 the House of Lords observed that the probability 
standard laid down by Lord Denning in Metropolitan Properties (supra) 
was “too rigorous a test.” It reconciled the real likelihood of bias test by 
grounding it in terms of possibility rather than the probability of bias. 
Therefore, it restated the test in terms of the real danger of bias: 
“[…] having ascertained the relevant circumstances, 
the court should ask itself whether, having regard to 
those circumstances, there was a real danger of bias 
on the part of the relevant member of the tribunal in 
question, in the sense that he might unfairly regard 
(or having regarded with favour), or disfavour, the 
case of a party to the issue under consideration by 
him.” 
The House of Lords observed that the court “personifies the reasonable man” 
to ascertain the relevant circumstances from the available evidence. The real 
danger of the bias test was criticized by courts in other jurisdictions such as 
 
182 [1968] EWCA Civ 5 [Lord Denning observed: “It brings home this point: in considering whether there was 
a real likelihood of bias, the Court does not look at the mind of the Justice himself or at the mind of the 
Chairman of the Tribunal, or whoever it may be, who sits in a judicial capacity. It does not look to see if there 
was a real likelihood that he would, or did, in fact favour one side at the expense of the other. The Court looks 
at the impression which would be given to other people. Even if he was as impartial as could be, nevertheless 
if right-minded persons would think that, in the circumstances, there was a real likelihood of bias on his part, 
then he should not sit.”] 
183 [1993] UKHL 1 

PART F 

Australia and South Africa for emphasising the court’s view of the 
circumstances rather than the public perception of the bias.184 
96. In Locabail (UK) Ltd. v. Bayfield Properties Ltd.,185 the Court of Appeal 
observed that the test of real danger of bias could reach the same results 
as the test of real possibility of bias since the court is taken to personify the 
reasonable man. It further listed a few circumstances which might give rise 
to real danger of bias: 
“By contrast, a real danger of bias might well be 
thought to arise if there were personal friendship or 
animosity between the judge and any member of the 
public involved in the case; or if the judge were 
closely acquainted with any member of the 
public involved in the case, particularly if the 
credibility of that individual could be significant 
in the decision of the case; or if, in a case where 
the credibility of any individual were an issue to be 
decided by the judge, he had in a previous case 
rejected the evidence of that person in such 
outspoken terms as to throw doubt on his ability to 
approach such person's evidence with an open mind 
on any later occasion; or if on any question at issue 
in the proceedings before him the judge had 
expressed views, particularly in the course of the 
hearing, in such extreme and unbalanced terms as 
to throw doubt on his ability to try the issue with an 
objective judicial mind; or if, for any other reason, 
there were real ground for doubting the ability of the 
judge 
to 
ignore 
extraneous 
considerations, 
prejudices and predilections and bring an objective 
judgment to bear on the issues before him.” 

(emphasis supplied) 
 
184 Webb v. The Queen, (1994) 181 CLR 41. 
185 [1999] EWCA Civ 3004 [25] 

PART F 

97. In re Medicaments and Related Classes of Goods (No. 2),186 the Court of 
Appeal made a “modest adjustment” to the real danger of bias test laid down 
in Gough (supra) by holding that the court must determine whether the 
circumstances “would lead a fair-minded and informed observer to conclude 
that there was a real possibility, or a real danger, the two being the 
same, that the tribunal was biased.” In Porter v. Magill,187 the House of 
Lords approved the adjustment made to the real danger of bias test. Lord 
Craighead stated the bias test thus: 
“103. […] The question is whether the fair-minded 
and informed observer, having considered the facts, 
would conclude that there was a real possibility that 
the tribunal was biased.” 
98. The shift in the bias test in the UK has “at its core the need for the confidence 
which must be inspired by the courts in a democratic society.”188 In Lawal v. 
Northern Spirit Limited,189 Lord Bingham observed that a “fair-minded and 
informed observer”190 will adopt a balanced approach and as “a reasonable 
 
186 [2001] 1 WLR 700 
187 [2002] 2 AC 357 
188 Lawal v. Northern Spirit Limited, [2003] UKHL 25 [14] 
189 Northern Spirit Limited (supra) [14] 
190 In Helow v. Secretary of State, [2008] UKHL 62. [Lord Hope of Craighead observed: 
“2. The observer who is fair-minded is the sort of person who always reserves judgment on every point until 
she has seen and fully understood both sides of the argument. She is not unduly sensitive or suspicious, as 
Kirby J observed in Johnson v Johnson (2000) 201 CLR 488, 509, para 53. Her approach must not be 
confused with that of the person who has brought the complaint. The “real possibility” test ensures that there 
is this measure of detachment. The assumptions that the complainer makes are not to be attributed to the 
observer unless they can be justified objectively. But she is not complacent either. She knows that fairness 
requires that a judge must be, and must be seen to be, unbiased. She knows that judges, like anybody else, 
have their weaknesses. She will not shrink from the conclusion, if it can be justified objectively, that things 
that they have said or done or associations that they have formed may make it difficult for them to judge the 
case before them impartially. 
3. Then there is the attribute that the observer is “informed". It makes the point that, before she takes a 
balanced approach to any information she is given, she will take the trouble to inform herself on all matters 
that are relevant. She is the sort of person who takes the trouble to read the text of an article as well as the 
headlines. She is able to put whatever she has read or seen into its overall social, political or geographical 
context. She is fair-minded, so she will appreciate that the context forms an important part of the material 
which she must consider before passing judgment.”] 

PART F 

member of the public is neither complacent nor unduly sensitive or 
suspicious.” The above discussion shows that the bias test has undergone 
significant development in the UK over the last four decades. The current 
bias test in the UK is the real possibility of a bias test. 
99. The real likelihood of bias test has also been applied by the UK Supreme 
Court in the case of arbitral bias. In Haliburton Company v. Chubb 
Bermuda Insurance Ltd.,191 the issue before the UK Supreme Court was 
whether or not the UK Arbitration Act imposed a legal obligation on 
arbitrators to disclose facts and circumstances known to the arbitrator which 
would give rise to justifiable doubts as to their impartiality. Although the UK 
Arbitration Act does not expressly impose a duty of disclosure on arbitrators 
or potential arbitrators, the UK Supreme Court read the general duty under 
Section 33 of the legislation. Section 33 requires an arbitrator to act fairly 
and impartially in conducting arbitral proceedings.192 It was held that the 
statutory duty of fairness and impartiality “gives rise to an implied term in the 
contract between the arbitrator and the parties” to make that disclosure. 
Hence, it was held a legal obligation to disclose is encompassed within the 
 
191 [2020] UKSC 48 [52] 
192 UK Arbitration Act, 1996. [It reads: 
“33. General duty of the tribunal – 
(1) The tribunal shall – 
(a) act fairly and impartially as between the parties, giving each party a reasonable opportunity of putting his 
case and dealing with that of his opponent, and 
(b) adopt procedures suitable to the circumstances of the particular case, avoiding unnecessary delay or 
expense, so as to provide a fair means for the resolution of the matters falling to be determined. 
(2) The tribunal shall comply with that general duty in conducting the arbitral proceedings, in its decisions on 
matters of procedure and evidence and in the exercise of all other powers conferred on it.”] 

PART F 

statutory obligation of fairness unless the parties have expressly or implicitly 
waived their right to disclosure.193 
100. 
Recently, the UK Law Commission suggested that the ruling in 
Haliburton (supra) has limitations because: (i) an arbitrator may not owe a 
duty of disclosure to parties who may not have signed the arbitration 
agreement (non-signatory parties); and (ii) a contract of appointment cannot 
create a duty of disclosure before the appointment of the arbitrator.194 
Therefore, the UK Law Commission has recommended codification of the 
duty of disclosure to ensure that the duty applies at the pre-appointment 
stage.195 There are two important distinctions between the position of law in 
India and the UK: First, the UK Arbitration Act does not require an arbitrator 
to be completely independent of the parties;196 and second, Section 12 of 
the Indian Arbitration Act already imposes a mandatory duty of disclosure on 
potential arbitrators. 
101. 
Other jurisdictions also apply a real possibility of bias or reasonable 
apprehension of bias test to determine judicial and arbitral bias. Article 6 of 
 
193 Haliburton (supra) [78]. [“78. Unless there is a disclosure, the parties may often be unaware of matters 
which could give rise to justifiable doubts about an arbitrator’s impartiality and entitle them to a remedy from 
the court under section 24 of the 1996 Act. Those remedies are necessary in the public interest. A legal 
obligation to disclose such matters is encompassed within the statutory obligation of fairness. It is also 
essential corollary of the statutory obligation of impartiality: an arbitrator who knowingly fails to act in a way 
which fairness requires to the potential detriment of a party is guilty of partiality. Unless the parties have 
expressly or implicitly waived their right to disclosure, such disclosure is not just a question of best practice 
but is a matter of legal obligation.”] 
194 UK Law Commission, ) 

195 ibid 
196 UK Law Commission (supra) [The Law Commission observed: “3.18 We continue to think that complete 
independence is not possible. This is so especially where arbitrators are drawn from a small pool with 
specialist expertise, or where they are expected to have immersive experience in a particular area of activity. 
Any duty of independence might involve defining a required level of independence, which in turn would be 
impossible, or it might involve defining independence in terms of impartiality after all, which we note is the 
approach of some foreign legislation.”] 

PART F 

the European Convention on Human Rights states that “everyone is entitled 
to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and 
impartial tribunal established by law” in the determination of their civil rights 
and obligations. The European Court of Human Rights197 determines the 
existence of impartiality for Article 6 by applying (i) a subjective test which 
considers whether the judge holds any personal prejudice or bias in a given 
case; and (ii) an objective test to ascertain whether the tribunal’s 
composition offers significant guarantees to exclude any legitimate doubt in 
respect of its impartiality.198 
102. 
In the vast majority of cases, the ECtHR has focused on the objective 
test, which requires the court to determine “whether, quite apart from the 
judge’s conduct, there are ascertainable facts which may raise doubts as to 
his or her impartiality.”199 The objective test takes into consideration 
hierarchical and other links between a judge and the parties to the 
proceedings. The ECtHR’s approach, therefore, emphasizes determining 
“whether the relationship in question is of such a nature and degrees as to 
indicate a lack of impartiality on the part of the tribunal.”200 The real 
possibility of bias test as evolved by the English courts is in alignment with 
the bias test evolved by the ECHR.201 The ECtHR has held that an arbitration 
agreement does not constitute a waiver of the fair procedure guarantees 
 
197 “ECtHR” 
198 Nicholas v. Cyprus, Application No. 63246/10 [49] 
199 Morice v. France, Application No. 29369/10 
200 Micallef v. Malta, Application No. 17056/06; Morice (supra) [77]; 
201 See William Wade and Christopher Forsyth, Administrative Law (12th edn, Oxford University Press) 371 

PART F 

contained in Article 6, particularly the right to have disputes settled by an 
independent and impartial tribunal.202 
iv. 
Indian approach to the bias test 
103. 
This Court has consistently adopted the real likelihood test to 
determine bias.203 In Manak Lal v. Dr. Prem Chand Singhvi,204 Justice P B 
Gajendragadkar (as the learned Chief Justice then was) observed that the 
test to determine bias is whether a litigant could reasonably apprehend that 
a bias attributable to a member of the tribunal might have operated against 
him in the final decision. In S Parthasarathi v. State of AP,205 Justice KK 
Mathew observed that the test of likelihood of bias is based on the 
reasonable apprehension of a reasonable man fully cognizant of the facts. 
The learned Judge further observed that the question of whether the real 
likelihood of bias exists is to be determined on the probabilities to be inferred 
from the objective circumstances by a court or based on impressions that 
might reasonably be left on the minds of the aggrieved party or the public at 
large.206 The legal development under English law about the real danger of 
bias test was also accepted by this Court. 
 
202 BEG S.P.A. v. Italy, Application No. 5312/11 (20 May 2021) 
203 Rattan Lal Sharma v. Managing Committee, Dr. Hari Ram (Co-Education) Higher Secondary School, 
(1993) [11] 
204 [4] 
205 (1974) [14] 
206 S Parthasarathi (supra) [16]. [It was observed: “16. The tests of “real likelihood” and “reasonable suspicion” 
are really inconsistent with each other. We think that the reviewing authority must make a determination on 
the basis of the whole evidence before it, whether a reasonable man would in the circumstances infer that 
there is real likelihood of bias. The Court must look at the impression which other people have. This follows 
from the principle that justice must not only be done but seen to be done. If right minded persons would think 
that there is real likelihood of bias on the part of an inquiring officer, he must not conduct the enquiry; 
nevertheless, there must be a real likelihood of bias. Surmise or conjecture would not be enough. There must 
exist circumstances from which reasonable men would think it probable or likely that the inquiring officer will 
be prejudiced against the delinquent. The Court will not inquire whether he was really prejudiced. If a 

PART F 

104. 
In Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigam Ltd. v. Girja Shankar Pant,207 this 
Court observed that the real danger of bias is essentially based on deciding 
bias based on the facts and circumstances of the individual case.208 In M P 
Special Police Establishment v. State of M P,209 a Constitution Bench 
referred with approval to Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigam Ltd. (supra). 
105. 
Subsequently, the decision in P D Dinakaran v. Judges Inquiry 
Committee,210 traced the evolution of the bias test under Indian 
jurisprudence to state the following principles: 
“71. […] To disqualify a person from adjudicating on the 
ground of interest in the subject-matter of lis, the test of 
real likelihood of the bias is to be applied. In other words, 
one has to enquire as to whether there is real danger 
of bias on the part of the person against whom such 
apprehension is expressed in the sense that he might 
favour or disfavour a party. In each case, the court has 
to consider whether a fair-minded and informed 
person, having considered all the facts would 
reasonably apprehend that the Judge would not act 
impartially. To put it differently, the test would be whether 
a reasonably intelligent man fully apprised of all the facts 
would have a serious apprehension of bias.” 

 (emphasis supplied) 
 
reasonable man would think on the basis of the existing circumstances that he is likely to be prejudiced, that 
is sufficient to quash the decision.”] 
207 (2001) 
208 Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigam (supra) [35] [“35. The test, therefore, is as to whether a mere apprehension 
of bias or there being a real danger of bias and it is on this score that the surrounding circumstances must 
and ought to be collated and necessary conclusion drawn therefrom — in the event however the conclusion 
is otherwise inescapable that there is existing a real danger of bias, the administrative action cannot be 
sustained: If on the other hand, the allegations pertaining to bias is rather fanciful and otherwise to avoid a 
particular court, Tribunal or authority, question of declaring them to be unsustainable would not arise. The 
requirement is availability of positive and cogent evidence and it is in this context that we do record our 
concurrence with the view expressed by the Court of Appeal in Locabail case.”] 
209 (2004) [14. […] The question in such cases would not be whether they would be biased. The 
question would be whether there is reasonable ground for believing that there is likelihood of apparent bias. 
Actual bias only would lead to automatic disqualification where the decision-maker is shown to have an 
interest in the outcome of the case. The principle of real likelihood of bias has now taken a tilt to “real danger 
of bias” and “suspicion of bias”.] 
210 (2011) 

PART F 

106. 
In Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association v. Union of 
India,211 Justice J Chelameswar, writing for himself and Justice A K Goel, 
summarized the following principles of the bias test in India: 
“25.1. If a Judge has a financial interest in the 
outcome of a case, he is automatically disqualified 
from hearing the case. 
25.2. In cases where the interest of the Judge in the 
case is other than financial, then the disqualification 
is not automatic but an enquiry is required whether 
the existence of such an interest disqualifies the 
Judge tested in the light of either on the principle of 
“real danger” or “reasonable apprehension” of bias. 
25.3. The Pinochet case added a new category i.e. that the Judge is automatically disqualified from 
hearing a case where the Judge is interested in a 
cause which is being promoted by one of the parties 
to the case.” 
107. 
Although there have been vacillations about the test in England, the 
Indian courts have been largely consistent in their approach by applying the 
test of real likelihood of bias or reasonable apprehension of bias. Recently, 
the court has used the real danger of bias test. However, the above 
discussion shows that there is no significant difference between the real 
danger of bias test and the real possibility of bias test if the question of bias 
is inferred from the perspective of a reasonable or fair-minded person. 
108. 
This Court has consistently applied the test of real likelihood of bias 
to determine arbitrator bias. In HRD Corporation v. GAIL (India),212 the 
 
211 (2016) [25] 
212 (2018) [20] 

PART F 

Court explained the application of the real likelihood of bias test to determine 
the issue of arbitrator bias thus: 
“20. […] As has been pointed out by us hereinabove, 
the items contained in the Schedules owe their origin 
to the IBA Guidelines, which are to be construed in 
the light of the general principles contained therein—
that every arbitrator shall be impartial and 
independent of the parties at the time of accepting 
his/her appointment. Doubts as to the above are 
only justifiable if a reasonable third person 
having knowledge of the relevant facts and 
circumstances would reach the conclusion that 
there is a likelihood that the arbitrator may be 
influenced by factors other than the merits of the 
case in reaching his or her decision. This test 
requires taking a broad commonsensical approach 
to the items stated in the Fifth and Seventh 
Schedules. This approach would, therefore, require 
a fair construction of the words used therein, neither 
tending to enlarge or restrict them unduly.” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
 
109. 
In Government of Haryana v. GF Toll Road Private Ltd.,213 the 
Court had to decide whether a retired government employee could be 
appointed as an arbitrator by the state government. Justice Indu Malhotra, 
writing for the two-Judge Bench, observed that the test to be applied for bias 
is whether the circumstances are such as would lead a fair-minded and 
informed person to conclude that the arbitrator was in fact biased. It was 
held that the Arbitration Act does not disqualify a former employee from 
acting as an arbitrator, provided there are no justifiable doubts as to their 
independence and impartiality.214 Thus, in India, the sanctity and integrity of 
 
213 (2019) 
214 GF Tolls Road Private Ltd. (supra) [23] [“23. An arbitrator who has “any other” past or present “business 
relationship” with the party is also disqualified. The word “other” used in Entry 1, would indicate a relationship 

PART F 

the arbitral process are held to the same standard of bias as that applicable 
to judicial authorities. v. 
Bias and doctrine of necessity in the context of the Arbitration Act 
110. 
In comparison to other jurisdictions, the Arbitration Act has adopted a 
different approach to deal with the issue of arbitrator bias. Through the 2015 
amendment, the Arbitration Act provides an extensive list of circumstances 
which may give rise to justifiable doubts as to an arbitrator’s independence 
or impartiality. The enumeration of categories under the Fifth and Seventh 
Schedules is inspired by the Orange and Red List of the IBA Guidelines on 
Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration.215 In HRD Corporation 
(supra) this Court observed that the categories listed under the Fifth and 
Seventh Schedules must be construed by taking a “broad commonsensical 
approach” without restricting or enlarging the words. 
111. 
Section 12 of the Arbitration Act places a duty on a person who is 
approached for appointment as an arbitrator to disclose in writing any direct 
or indirect circumstances such as: (i) the existence of any direct or indirect 
past or present relationship with any of the parties; (ii) interest in any of the 
parties; or (iii) interest in relation to the subject-matter in dispute, whether 
financial, business, professional, or other kind. The disclosure of 
circumstances made by an arbitrator is a procedural safeguard which allows 
the parties to assess whether disqualification of the arbitrator is required for 
 
other than an employee, consultant or an advisor. The word “other” cannot be used to widen the scope of 
the entry to include past/former employees.”] 
215 IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration (25 May 2024) available at: 
https://www.ibanet.org/document?id=Guidelines-on-Conflicts-of-Interest-in-International-Arbitration-2024 

PART F 

a case.216 Disclosure allows an arbitrator to overcome an appearance of 
bias. The parties may challenge the appointment of an arbitrator if the 
circumstances give rise to “justifiable doubts” as to their independence or 
impartiality. 
112. 
In Voestalpine (supra), this Court explained the distinction between 
independence and impartiality thus: 
“22. Independence and impartiality are two different 
concepts. An arbitrator may be independent and yet, 
lack impartiality, or vice versa. Impartiality, as is well 
accepted, is a more subjective concept as compared 
to independence. Independence, which is more an 
objective 
concept, 
may, 
thus, 
be 
more 
straightforwardly ascertained by the parties at the 
outset of the arbitration proceedings in light of the 
circumstances disclosed by the arbitrator, while 
partiality will more likely surface during the 
arbitration proceedings.” 
113. 
The fundamental premise of arbitration is the impartial resolution of 
disputes between parties according to the arbitration agreement.217 Unlike a 
judge, an arbitrator is generally engaged in occupations and professions 
before, during, and after the arbitral proceedings. The arbitrators may also 
have had prior commercial or professional contacts and relationships with 
either of the parties to the dispute. In such circumstances, arbitration law 
has evolved safeguards and mechanisms to ensure the independence and 
impartiality of the arbitral procedure. The independence of an arbitrator is 
 
216 Koulis v. Cyprus, Application No. 48781/12. [“63. Given the importance of appearances, however, when 
such a situation (which can give rise to a suggestion or appearance of bias) arises, that situation should be 
disclosed at the outset of the proceedings and an assessment should be made, taking into account the 
various factors involved in order to determine whether disqualification is actually necessitated in the case. 
This is an important procedural safeguard which is necessary in order to provide adequate guarantees in 
respect of both objective and subjective impartiality.”] 
217 Jivraj v. Hashwani, [2011] UKSC 40 [45] 

PART F 

generally considered with respect to the relationships or links between the 
arbitrator and one of the parties, whether financial, professional, 
employment or personal.218 The independence of an arbitrator can be 
deduced objectively because the dependence arises from the relationship 
between an arbitrator and one of the parties, or somebody closely 
connected with one of the parties.219 In comparison, the existence of 
impartiality is inferred from facts and circumstances surrounding an 
arbitrator’s exercise of quasi-judicial functions.220 
114. 
An arbitrator will not be automatically disqualified in situations where 
the relationship of an arbitrator with parties does not fall under the categories 
mentioned under the Seventh Schedule. Yet, either of the parties may have 
“justifiable doubts” about the independence or impartiality of the arbitrator. 
The party challenging the appointment of an arbitrator does not need to 
demonstrate that the arbitrator lacks independence or impartiality. It only 
needs to show that there are possible “doubts” as to an arbitrator’s 
independence or impartiality.221 The purpose behind incorporating the word 
“justifiable” under Section 12 was to establish an objective standard for 
impartiality and independence.222 Resultantly, the possibility of “doubts” 
 
218 Redfern and Hunter (supra) 226 
219 Article 3, IBA Rules of Ethics for International Arbitrator 1987 
220 Peter Binder (supra) 117 
221 Gary Born (supra) 1911, 1912. [Gary Born suggests that: “Statutory (and judicial) references to the “risks” 
or “possibility” of partiality are preferable to formulations including “doubt” or “suspicion.” The latter phrases 
connote a subjective inquiry, as well as a flavor of speculation, which are misleading. The better approach is 
instead to consider what objective risk (or possibility) of unacceptable partiality exists.”] 
222 David Caron and Lee Caplan, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: A Commentary (2nd edn, Oxford 
University Press, 2013) 208 

PART F 

must be “real” in the sense that they should be derived from the objective 
circumstances disclosed by an arbitrator. 
115. 
The consideration of possible “doubts” must be undertaken from the 
perspective of a “fair-minded and informed person” rather than the 
subjective views of the parties or the arbitrators. According to Gary Born, the 
standard of proof adopted under Article 12 of the Model Law is relatively low 
to ensure “the integrity of the arbitral tribunal and arbitral process, 
particularly given the extremely limited review available for substantive or 
procedural errors by the arbitrators.”223 The issue of arbitrator bias is to be 
resolved by applying the test of the real likelihood of bias in the given facts 
and circumstances. 
116. 
Section 12(5) automatically disqualifies any person whose 
relationship with the parties or counsel or subject matter of the dispute falls 
under any of the categories mentioned under the Seventh Schedule. The 
categories listed in the Seventh Schedule in essence denote situations 
where an arbitrator might have a pecuniary, proprietary, or cause-based 
interest in the arbitration. For instance, employees of either of the parties 
are barred from acting as an arbitrator because they have an immediate 
financial and cause-based interest in the arbitration. If such an employee is 
appointed as an arbitrator, they would be sitting as a judge in their cause 
because they have a pecuniary interest in the outcome of the case. 
 
223 Garn Born (supra) 1912 

PART F 

117. 
In Voestalpine (supra), this Court observed that an individual who 
had previously served the government, a public sector corporation or a 
statutory corporation but had no connection to the party in dispute could not 
be held to be ineligible for appointment as an arbitrator. The Court observed: 
“25. It cannot be said that simply because the person 
is a retired officer who retired from the government 
or other statutory corporation or public sector 
undertaking and had no connection with DMRC (the 
party in dispute), he would be treated as ineligible to 
act as an arbitrator. Had this been the intention of the 
legislature, the Seventh Schedule would have 
covered such persons as well. Bias or even real 
likelihood of bias cannot be attributed to such highly 
qualified and experienced persons, simply on the 
ground that they served the Central Government or 
PSUs, even when they had no connection with 
DMRC. The very reason for empanelling these 
persons is to ensure that technical aspects of the 
dispute are suitably resolved by utilising their 
expertise when they act as arbitrators. It may also be 
mentioned herein that the Law Commission had 
proposed the incorporation of the Schedule which 
was drawn from the red and orange list of IBA 
guidelines on conflict of interest in international 
arbitration with the observation that the same would 
be treated as the guide “to determine whether 
circumstances exist which give rise to such 
justifiable doubts”. Such persons do not get covered 
by red or orange list of IBA guidelines either.” 
The Court refers to the fact that the individual had no connection with DMRC, 
the party in dispute, at two places in the above extract. Hence, the fact that 
he had previously been employed with government or a corporation controlled 
by government (but not DMRC which was the disputant) was held not to 
render the individual ineligible. 
118. 
In G F Toll Road (supra), the arbitration contract between the State 
government and the contractor allowed for the constitution of a three-

PART F 

member arbitral tribunal “of whom each party shall select one and the third 
arbitrator shall be appointed under the Rules of Arbitration of the Indian 
Council of Arbitration.” After disputes arose between the parties, the State 
government appointed a retired Engineer-in-Chief as their arbitrator. The 
contractor and the Indian Council of Arbitration224 challenged the 
appointment of the State’s arbitrator on the ground that he was a former 
employee of the State government. The issue before this Court was whether 
Section 12(5) read with the Seventh Schedule disqualifies a former 
employee from being appointed as an arbitrator. 
119. 
Justice Indu Malhotra, writing for the Bench of two judges, held that 
the apprehension of bias against the State’s arbitrator was unjustified 
because: (i) the arbitrator was employed by the State over ten years ago; (ii) 
the use of the expression “is an” under Entry 1 of the Seventh Schedule 
indicates that an arbitrator is disqualified only if they are current employees 
of one of the parties; and (iii) the expression “other” under the said entry 
indicates a relationship other than an employee. It was observed that the 
expression “other” cannot “be used to widen the scope of the entry to include 
past/former employees.”225 
120. 
The categories mentioned under the Seventh Schedule are such that 
it is difficult to distinguish the interests of an arbitrator from those of a party 
to which an arbitrator is connected. In such cases, the issue is whether the 
outcome of the arbitration will realistically affect the arbitrator’s interests. The 
 
224 “ICA” 
225 G F Toll Road (supra) [23] 

PART F 

law prioritises the objective criterion of independence over the subjective 
criterion of impartiality. Once it is established that an arbitrator falls under 
any of the categories mentioned in the Seventh Schedule, they are 
automatically disqualified without any investigation into whether or not there 
is any real likelihood of bias. Since the ineligibility envisaged under Section 
12(5) goes to the root of the appointment, an application may be filed under 
Section 14(2) of the Arbitration Act to the court to decide on the termination 
of the arbitrator’s mandate.226 
121. 
An objection to the bias of an adjudicator can be waived.227 A waiver 
is an intentional relinquishment of a right by a party or an agreement not to 
assert a right.228 The Arbitration Act allows parties to waive the application 
of Section 12(5) by an express agreement after the disputes have arisen. 
However, the waiver is subject to two factors. First, the parties can only 
waive the applicability of Section 12(5) after the dispute has arisen. This 
allows parties to determine whether they will be required or necessitated to 
draw upon the services of specific individuals as arbitrators to decide upon 
specific issues. To this effect, Explanation 3 to the Seventh Schedule 
recognizes that certain kinds of arbitration such as maritime or commodities 
arbitration may require the parties to draw upon a small, specialized pool.229 
The second requirement of the proviso to Section 12(5) is that parties must 
 
226 HRD Corporation v. GAIL (India) Ltd., (2018) [12] 
227 Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association (supra) [30] 
228 State of Punjab v. Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar, (2011) [41] 
229 “Explanation 3 – For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that it may be the practice in certain specific kinds 
of arbitration, such as maritime or commodities arbitration, to draw arbitrators from a small, specialized pool. 
If in such field it is the custom and practice for parties frequently to appoint the same arbitrator in difference 
cases, this is a relevant fact to be taken into account while applying the rules set out above.”] 

PART F 

consciously abandon their existing legal right through an express 
agreement. Thus, the Arbitration Act reinforces the autonomy of parties by 
allowing them to override the limitations of independence and impartiality by 
an express agreement in that regard. 
122. 
The proviso to Section 12(5) is a reflection of the common law 
doctrine of necessity. The nemo judex rule is subject to the doctrine of 
necessity and yields to it.230 The doctrine of necessity allows an adjudicator 
who may be disqualified because of their interest in the matter to continue 
to adjudicate because of the necessity of the circumstances.231 The proviso 
to Section 12(5) allows parties to exercise their autonomy to determine if 
there is a necessity to waive the applicability of the ineligibility prescribed 
under Section 12(5). Thus, common law principles and doctrines are 
adjusted to subserve the fundamental principles of arbitration by giving 
priority to the autonomy of parties. 
123. 
In Bharat Broadband Network Ltd. (supra), this Court held that the 
proviso to Section 12(5) requires an express agreement in writing, that is, 
an agreement made in words as opposed to an agreement that can be 
inferred by conduct.232 It was explained that such an agreement must be 
made by both parties with full knowledge of the fact that although a particular 
person is ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator, the parties still have full 
faith and confidence in them to continue as an arbitrator.233 The principle of 
 
230 Tulsiram Patel (supra) [101]; Swadeshi Cotton Mills v. Union of India, (1981) [44] 
231 Charan Lal Sahu v. Union of India, (1990) [105] 
232 Bharat Broadband Network Ltd. (supra) [20] 
233 Bharat Broadband Network Ltd. (supra) [20] [This Court observed: “20. […] It is thus necessary that there 
be an “express” agreement in writing. This agreement must be an agreement by which both parties, with full 

PART F 

express waiver contained under the proviso to Section 12(5) also applies to 
situations where the parties seek to waive the allegation of bias against an 
arbitrator appointed unilaterally by one of the parties. After the disputes have 
arisen, the parties can determine whether there is a necessity to waive the 
nemo judex rule. This balances the autonomy of parties and the principles 
of an independent and impartial arbitral tribunal. vi. 
Unilateral appointment of arbitrators is violative of the equality 
clause under Section 18 
124. 
The doctrine of bias as evolved in English and Indian law emphasizes 
independence and impartiality in the process of adjudication to inspire the 
confidence of the public in the adjudicatory processes. Although Section 12 
deals with the quality of independence and impartiality inherent in the 
arbitrators, the provision’s emphasis is to ensure an independent and 
impartial arbitral process. 
125. 
Fali Nariman, distinguished lawyer and erudite jurist, in an article on 
‘Standards of Behaviour of Arbitrators’,234 opined that the level of probity 
expected of arbitrators is no less, and perhaps more stringent than what is 
expected of judges: 
“Though litigation is compulsory and arbitration is 
consensual, both are judicial processes of an 
adversarial character. That is why arbitration has 
always been regarded as quasi-judicial. Standards 
of behaviour expected of arbitrators – with reference 
to their impartiality and their independence – are no 
less stringent than that demanded of judges; in fact, 
 
knowledge of the fact that Shri Khan is ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator, still go ahead and say that 
they have full faith and confidence in him to continue as such.”] 
234 Fali Nariman, ‘Standards of Behaviour of Arbitrators’ (1988) 4(4) Arbitration International 311, 312. 

PART F 

arbitrators are expected to behave a shade better 
since judges are institutionally insulated by the 
established court-system, their judgments being also 
subjected to the corrective scrutiny of an appeal.” 
126. 
The agreement on the number of arbitrators is a matter of party 
autonomy. However, the choice of arbitrators has a direct effect on the 
conduct of arbitral proceedings. In commercial cases, the choice of the 
number of arbitrators is usually between one and three. The parties select 
the number of arbitrators by considering factors such as the needs of a 
particular dispute, costs, and efficiency.235 In case parties cannot agree upon 
the number of arbitrators, national arbitration legislation specifies the 
number of arbitrators to be appointed. For instance, Article 10(2) of the 
Model Law provides that if the parties fail to determine the number of 
arbitrators, three arbitrators will be appointed.236 Interestingly, the Arbitration 
Act departs from the Model Law by providing that the arbitral tribunal shall 
consist of a sole arbitrator if parties fail to determine the number of 
arbitrators.237 
127. 
Reference of disputes to a sole arbitrator has various advantages, 
including easy arrangements of meetings or hearings, reduced expenses 
since the parties will only have to bear the expense of one arbitrator, and 
 
235 Redfern and Hunter (supra) 210 
236 Article 10(2), Model Law. [It reads: 
“Article 10. Number of arbitrators 
(1) The parties are free to determine the number of arbitrators. 
(2) Failing such determination, the number of arbitrators shall be three.”] 
237 Section 10, Arbitration Act [It reads: 
“10. Number of arbitrators – (1) The parties are free to determine the number of arbitrators, provided that 
such number shall not be an even number. 
(2) Failing the determination referred to in sub-section (1), the arbitral tribunal shall consist of a sole 
arbitrator.”] 

PART F 

speedy decision-making.238 In the case of the appointment of a sole 
arbitrator, the decision-making vests in the hands of one person. This poses 
a greater risk of bias against the weaker party, especially if the arbitrator is 
unilaterally appointed by the other party. 
128. 
If a person having a financial interest in the outcome of the arbitral 
proceedings unilaterally nominates a sole arbitrator, it is bound to give rise 
to justifiable doubts on the independence and impartiality of the arbitrator. 
The possibility of bias by the arbitrator is real because the person who has 
an interest in the subject matter of the dispute can chart out the course of 
the entire arbitration proceeding by unilaterally appointing a sole arbitrator. 
A party may select a particular person to be appointed as a sole arbitrator 
because of a quid pro quo arrangement between them. Moreover, the fact 
that the sole arbitrator owes the appointment to one party may make it 
difficult to decide against that party for fear of displeasure. It is not possible 
to determine whether the sole arbitrator will be prejudiced, but the 
circumstances of the appointment give rise to the real possibility of bias. 
129. 
Equal treatment of parties at the stage of appointment of an arbitrator 
ensures impartiality during the arbitral proceedings. A clause that allows 
one party to unilaterally appoint a sole arbitrator is exclusive and hinders 
equal participation of the other party in the appointment process of 
arbitrators. Further, arbitration is a quasi-judicial and adjudicative process 
where both parties ought to be treated equally and given an equal 
 
238 Redfern and Hunter (supra) 211 

PART F 

opportunity to persuade the decision-maker of the merits of the case. An 
arbitral process where one party or its proxy has the power to unilaterally 
decide who will adjudicate on a dispute is fundamentally contrary to the 
adjudicatory function of arbitral tribunals.239 
130. 
In comparison, a three-member arbitral tribunal usually allows each 
party to nominate one arbitrator of their choice, with the third arbitrator being 
appointed either by the two party-appointed arbitrators or by agreement of 
parties.240 The fact that both parties nominate their respective arbitrators 
gives them “a sense of investment in the arbitral tribunal.”241 A three-member 
arbitral tribunal also enhances the quality of the adjudicative deliberations 
and ensures compliance with due process.242 According to Gary Born, the 
major advantage of a three-member tribunal is that the parties can 
participate in the selection of the tribunal to the maximum extent possible.243 
131. 
In a three-member tribunal, each of the parties seeks to appoint a co-
arbitrator. However, the third arbitrator is usually appointed by a process 
which allows equal participation of both parties in the appointment process. 
The equal participation of parties enables the appointment of an 
independent and impartial third arbitrator. Hence, any perceived tilt of an 
arbitrator in favour of the party which nominated that arbitrator is offset by 
the appointment of the third arbitrator in the course of a deliberative process 
involving both the arbitrators or as envisaged in the agreement between 
 
239 Gary Born (supra) 1952 
240 Ibid, 211 
241 Ibid. 
242 Gary Born (supra) 1794 
243 Ibid, at 1796. 

PART F 

parties. Perkins (supra) rightly observed that whatever advantage a party 
may derive by nominating an arbitrator of its choice would get counter-
balanced by equal power with the other party.244 This counter-balancing will 
ideally apply only in situations where the arbitrators are appointed by the 
parties in the exercise of their genuine party autonomy. TRF (supra) and 
Perkins (supra) have been relied upon by this Court on numerous 
occasions, including in Glock Asia-Pacific Limited v. Union of India245 and 
Lombardi Engg Ltd. v. Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Nigam Ltd.246 
132. 
In Voestalpine (supra) and CORE (supra), one of the parties curated 
a panel of arbitrators and mandated the other party to select their arbitrator 
from the panel. Since the curation of the list is exclusively undertaken by 
one party, the other party is effectively excluded from the process of curating 
the panel from which exclusively, the appointment of an arbitrator is to be 
made. The other party has to mandatorily select its arbitrator from a curated 
panel, restricting their freedom to appoint an arbitrator of their choice. This 
is against the principle of equal treatment contained under Section 18. In 
this situation, there is no effective counter-balance because both parties do 
not participate equally in the process of appointing arbitrators. The party 
curating the panel can restrict the choice of the party only to a person who 
is on the panel selected by the other party and to no other person. 
133. 
Many PSUs are regularly involved in arbitration disputes and 
constantly need the services of arbitrators. Such institutions often maintain 
 
244 Perkins (supra) [16] 
245 (2023) [20] 
246 (2024) [85] 

PART F 

a pool of potential arbitrators with the sole object of having a ready pool of 
qualified professionals who have committed their time and consented to act 
as arbitrators for fixed fees. The Arbitration Act does not prohibit parties to 
an arbitration agreement from maintaining a curated panel of potential 
arbitrators. However, the problem arises when the PSUs make it mandatory 
for other parties to select their nominees from the curated panel of 
arbitrators. When a PSU exercises its discretion to curate a panel, the very 
factor that the PSU is choosing only a certain number of persons as potential 
arbitrators and not others will raise a reasonable doubt in the mind of a fair-
minded person. The PSUs may conceivably have nominated a person on 
the panel of potential arbitrators because they have a certain predisposition 
in favour of the former. This doubt is reinforced when the other party is given 
no choice but to select its arbitrator from the curated panel. 
134. 
In CORE (supra), the three-member tribunal was sought to be 
constituted in the following manner: (i) the Railways would suggest at least 
four names of retired railway officers; (ii) the contractor would select two 
names out of the panel for appointment as their arbitrator; (iii) The General 
Manager (of the Railways) would thereafter choose at least one person out 
of the two to be appointed as the contractor’s arbitrator; and (iv) The General 
Manager would proceed to appoint the balance arbitrators from the panel or 
outside the panel and also indicate the presiding arbitrator. 
135. 
Such an arbitrator-appointment clause is likely to give rise to 
justifiable doubts as to the independence and impartiality of arbitrators for 
two reasons: (i) the contractor is restricted to choosing its arbitrator from 

PART F 

the panel of four arbitrators nominated by the party who is a disputant; and 
(ii) the contractor’s choice is further constrained because it is made subject 
to the decision of the General Manager who will choose one among the two 
persons suggested by the party. Since the contractor has to select its 
arbitrator from a curated panel, the arbitration clause does not allow the 
contractor equal participation in the appointment of their arbitrator. 
Moreover, the clause allows the General Manager to appoint the balance 
arbitrators from either the panel or outside the panel. Thus, the process of 
appointing the arbitrators is unequal because the General Manager can go 
beyond the panel of four potential arbitrators, while the contractor is bound 
by the names enlisted in the panel. 
136. 
In a three-member tribunal, the independence and impartiality of a 
third or presiding arbitrator are prerequisites to the integrity of the arbitral 
proceedings. In CORE (supra), the arbitration clause allowed the General 
Manager to unilaterally nominate the presiding officer out of the panel of 
three arbitrators. The clause does not countenance any participation from 
the contractor in the process of appointing or nominating the presiding 
officer. Thus, the process of appointing and nominating the presiding officer 
is unequal and prejudiced in favour of the Railways. The fact that the 
General Manager is nominating the presiding officer gives rise to a 
reasonable doubt about the independence and impartiality of the entire 
arbitration proceedings. 
137. 
Given the above discussion, it needs reiteration that the Arbitration 
Act does not prohibit PSUs from empanelling potential arbitrators. However, 

PART G 

an arbitration clause cannot mandate the other party to select its arbitrator 
from the panel curated by PSUs. The PSUs can give a choice to the other 
party to select its arbitrators from the curated list provided the other party 
expressly waives the applicability of the nemo judex rule. 
G. 
Public-private contracts and public policy 
138. 
An arbitration is a creature of contract between the parties. An 
arbitration agreement must meet the criteria laid down under Section 7, in 
addition to satisfying the principles of contract law prescribed under the 
Contract Act to be considered valid.247 According to the Contract Act, a 
promisor makes a proposal when they signify to the promisee their 
willingness to do or abstain from doing anything, to obtain the assent of the 
promisee to such act or abstinence. The proposal is said to be accepted 
when the promisee signifies their assent. A proposal becomes a promise 
upon acceptance. Every promise and every set of promises, forming the 
consideration248 for each other, is an agreement. An agreement enforceable 
by law is a contract. i. 
Unconscionability under the Contract Act 
139. 
The Contract Act accounts for unconscionability under Section 16 
relating to undue influence. It provides that a contract induced by undue 
influence is unconscionable. A contract is induced by undue influence where 
the relations subsisting between the parties are such that one of the parties 
 
247 See Cox and Kings [63]. 
248 Section 2(d) defines consideration as follows: [“(d) When, at the desire of the promisor, the promise or 
any other person has done or abstained from doing, or does or abstains from doing, or promises to do or to 
abstain from doing, something, such act or abstinence or promise is called a consideration for the promise;”] 

PART G 

is in a position to dominate the will of the other and uses that position to 
obtain an unfair advantage.249 A contract induced by undue influence is 
voidable at the option of the party whose consent was caused by undue 
influence.250 Illustration (c) to Section 16 pertains to an unconscionable 
bargain: 
“(c) A, being in debt to B, the money-lender of his 
village, contracts a fresh loan on terms which appear 
to be unconscionable. It lies on B to prove that the 
contract was induced by undue influence.” 
140. 
Section 23 pertains to unlawful consideration or object of an 
agreement: 
“23. What considerations and objects are lawful, and 
what not – The consideration or object of an 
agreement is lawful, unless – 
it is forbidden by law; or 
is of such a nature that if permitted, it would defeat 
the provisions of any law; or 
 
249 Section 16, Contract Act. [It reads: 
“16. “Undue Influence” defined – (1) A contract is said to be induced by “undue influence” where the relations 
subsisting between the parties are such that one of the parties is in a position to dominate the will of the other 
and uses that position to obtain an unfair advantage over the other. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing principle, a person is deemed to be 
in a position to dominate the will of another – 
(a) where he hold a real or apparent authority over the other or where he stands in a fiduciary relation to the 
other; or 
(b) where he makes a contract with a person whose mental capacity is temporarily or permanently affect by 
reason of age, illness, or mental or bodily distress. 
(3) Where a person who is in a position to dominate the will of another, enters into a contract with him, and 
the transaction appears, on the face of it or on the evidence adduced, to be unconscionable, the burden of 
proving that such contract was not induced by undue influence shall lie upon the person in a position to 
dominate the will of the other. 
Nothing in this sub-section shall affect the provision of Section 111 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1871 (I of 
1872).”] 
250 Section 19A, Contract Act. 

PART G 

is fraudulent; or 
involves or implies injury to the person or property of 
another; or 
the Court regards it as immoral, or opposed to public 
policy.” 
141. 
Although the Contract Act does not define the expression “public 
policy”, it has generally been defined as a principle of judicial legislation or 
interpretation founded on the current needs of the community.251 Section 23 
codified the common law position that “all contracts and agreements which 
have as their object anything contrary to principles of sound policy are 
void.”252 The prevalent view in the nineteenth century was that the doctrine 
of public policy should be governed by precedent and courts should refrain 
from inventing new heads of public policy. The purpose behind limiting the 
grounds of public policy was to respect the freedom of contract of parties, 
which was also considered as a paramount policy in common law.253 Under 
the common law, a contract for marriage brokerage, creation of a perpetuity, 
in restraint of trade, gaming or wagering, or assisting the King’s enemies 
were unlawful and opposed to public policy.254 
142. 
This Court has adopted a flexible approach to the application of the 
doctrine of public policy to contracts. In Gherulal Parakh v. Mahadeodas 
Maiya,255 this Court had to decide on the validity of a wagering contract 
 
251 Percy H Winfield, ‘Public Policy in the English Common Law’ (1928) 42(1) Harvard Law Review 76, 92. 
252 Stephen Waddams, Principle and Policy in Contract Law (Cambridge University Press, 2011) 152. 
253 Ibid, at 158 
254 Janson v. Driefontein Consolidated Mines, Limited, [1902] 2 AC 484 

PART G 

under Section 23 of the Contract Act. The three-Judge Bench observed that 
public policy is a branch of common law and can be applied in clear and 
incontestable cases of harm to the public. It was further observed that the 
doctrine could be invoked by evolving “a new head under exceptional 
circumstances of a changing world.” The court must determine public policy 
by considering the welfare of society and the social consequences of the 
rule propounded, especially in light of the factual evidence available to its 
probable result.256 In Delhi Transport Corporation v. DTC Mazdoor 
Congress,257 this Court held that courts can rely upon the Constitution as a 
source of public policy. In his concurring opinion, Justice Ramaswamy 
observed: 
“292. From this perspective, it must be held that in 
the absence of specific head of public policy which 
covers a case, then the court must in consonance 
with public conscience and in keeping with public 
good and public interest invent new public policy and 
declare such practice or rules that are derogatory to 
the Constitution to be opposed to public policy. The 
rules which stem from the public policy must of 
necessity be laid to further the progress of the 
society in particular when social change is to bring 
about an egalitarian social order through rule of law. 
In deciding a case which may not be covered by 
authority courts have before them the beacon light of 
the trinity of the Constitution and the play of legal 
light and shade must lead on the path of justice, 
social, economic and political. Lacking precedent, 
the court can always be guided by that light and the 
guidance thus shed by the trinity of our Constitution.” 
 
256 Murlidhar Aggarwal v. State of UP, (1974) [32] 
257 1991 Supp (1) SCC 600 

PART G 

143. 
In Central Inland Water Transport Corporation v. Brojo Nath 
Ganguly,258 this Court had to decide on the validity of Rule 9 of Central 
Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd Service Discipline and Appeal Rules 
1979 which empowered the corporation to terminate the employment of its 
permanent employees with three months’ notice. These rules constituted 
part of the contract of employment between the Corporation and its 
employees. The issue before this Court was whether Rule 9 was void under 
Section 23 of the Contract Act for being opposed to public policy. It was held 
that the court could refuse to enforce an unfair and unreasonable clause in 
a contract entered into between parties who are not equal in bargaining 
power: 
“89. […] The Constitution was enacted to secure to 
all the citizens of this country social and economic 
justice. Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees to 
all persons equality before the law and the equal 
protection of the laws. The principle deducible from 
the above discussions on this part of the case is in 
consonance with right and reason, intended to 
secure social and economic justice and conforms to 
the mandate of the great equality clause in Article 14. 
This principle is that the courts will not enforce and 
will, when called upon to do so, strike down an unfair 
and unreasonable contract, or an unfair and 
unreasonable clause in a contract, entered into 
between parties who are not equal in bargaining 
power. It is difficult to give an exhaustive list of all 
bargains of this type. No court can visualize the 
different situations which can arise in the affairs of 
men. One can only attempt to give some 
illustrations. For instance, the above principle will 
apply where the inequality of bargaining power is the 
result of the great disparity in the economic strength 
of the contracting parties. It will apply where the 
inequality is the result of circumstances, whether of 
the creation of the parties or not. It will apply to 
situations in which the weaker party is in a position 
 
258 (1986) 

PART G 

in which he can obtain goods or services or means 
of livelihood only upon the terms imposed by the 
stronger party or go without them. It will also apply 
where a man has no choice, or rather no meaningful 
choice, but to give his assent to a contract or to sign 
on the dotted line in a prescribed or standard form or 
to accept a set of rules as part of the contract, 
however unfair, unreasonable and unconscionable a 
clause in that contract or form or rules may be. This 
principle, however, will not apply where the 
bargaining power of the contracting parties is 
equal or almost equal. This principle may not 
apply where both parties are businessmen and 
the contract is a commercial transaction. In 
today's complex world of giant corporations with their 
vast infrastructural organizations and with the State 
through its instrumentalities and agencies entering 
into almost every branch of industry and commerce, 
there can be myriad situations which result in unfair 
and 
unreasonable 
bargains 
between 
parties 
possessing wholly disproportionate and unequal 
bargaining power. These cases can neither be 
enumerated nor fully illustrated. The court must 
judge 
each 
case 
on 
its 
own 
facts 
and 
circumstances.” 

(emphasis supplied) 
 
144. 
The Court held that Rule 9(i) was void under Section 23 of the 
Contract Act for being opposed to public policy. The principle of 
unconscionability cannot be applied to contracts where: (i) the bargaining 
power of the contracting parties is equal or almost equal;259 and (ii) both 
parties are businessmen and the contract is a commercial transaction. This 
 
259 See Indian Bank v. Blue Jaggers Estates Ltd., (2010) [23] [“23. It must be remembered that 
the respondents were not in a position of disadvantage vis-à-vis the appellant. If they so wanted, the 
respondents could have declined to avail loan and other financial facilities made available by the appellant. 
However, the fact of the matter is that they had signed the agreement with open eyes and agreed to abide 
by the terms on which the loan, etc. was offered by the appellant. Therefore, the doctrine of unconscionable 
contract cannot be invoked for frustrating the action initiated by the appellant for recovery of its dues.”]; 
ICOMM Tele Ltd. v. Punjab State Water Supply and Sewerage Board, (2019) [11]. 

PART G 

Court has held that the doctrine of unequal bargaining of parties does not 
generally apply to arbitration agreements, which are in the nature of 
commercial contracts.260 However, the principles of non-arbitrariness 
continue to apply in situations where a government instrumentality enters 
into a contract with a private party. 
145. 
The government has the freedom to enter into contracts with private 
parties. However, the award of governmental contracts is subject to the 
exercise of judicial review to prevent arbitrariness or favouritism.261 The 
government has to abide by the principles laid down under Article 14 while 
awarding contracts.262 In Food Corporation of India v. Kamdhenu Cattle 
Feed Industries,263 this Court held that in the “contractual sphere as in all 
other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to 
Article 14 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet.” 
It was further observed that since a public authority possesses powers only 
to use them for the public good, they have a duty to act fairly and “to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fair play in action’.”264 
146. 
In Tata Cellular v. Union of India,265 this Court held that contractual 
decisions of government and its instrumentalities “must be free from 
 
260 S K Jain v. State of Haryana, (2009) [8] [“8. It is to be noted that the plea relating to unequal 
bargaining power was made with great emphasis based on certain observations made by this Court 
in Central Inland Water Transport Corpn. Ltd. v. Brojo Nath Ganguly [(1986): 1986 SCC (L&S) 
429: (1986) 1 ATC 103]. The said decision does not in any way assist the appellant, because at para 89 it 
has been clearly stated that the concept of unequal bargaining power has no application in case of 
commercial contracts.”] 
261 Mahabir Auto Stores v. Indian Oil Corporation, (1990) [12]; Directorate of Education v. 
Educomp Datamatics Ltd., (2004) [9] 
262 Tata Cellular v. Union of India, (1994) [70]; Air India Ltd. v. Cochin International Airport Ltd., 
(2000) [7] 
263 (1993) [7] 
264 Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries (supra) [7] 
265 (1994) [94] 

PART G 

arbitrariness not affected by bias or actuated by mala fides.” In a public-
private contract, the state must act fairly, justly, and reasonably.266 When a 
state acts contrary to the public good or public interest, it acts contrary to 
Article 14.267 
147. 
In ICOMM Tele Ltd. v. Punjab State Water Supply and Sewerage 
Board,268 this Court had to adjudicate on the validity of a pre-deposit arbitral 
clause in a public-private contract. According to the pre-deposit clause, a 
party invoking arbitration was required to furnish a “deposit-at-call” for ten 
percent of the amount claimed. To determine the validity of the clause from 
the viewpoint of arbitrariness, this Court held that a contractual clause would 
be arbitrary “which would be unfair and unjust and which no reasonable man 
would agree to.”269 This Court termed the pre-deposit clause to be violative 
of Article 14 for being excessive and disproportionate. Importantly, the Court 
held that the pre-deposit requirement was contrary to the object of arbitration 
because it served as a deterrent for a party to invoke arbitration.270 The pre-
deposit clause was termed arbitrary for defeating the purpose of arbitration. 
148. 
In Lombardi (supra), a decision of a three-Judge Bench of this Court, 
a term of contract mandated “the party initiating the arbitration claim […] to 
deposit 7% of the arbitration claim in the shape of fixed deposit receipt as 
 
266 ABL International Ltd. v. Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd., (2004) [23] 
267 ABL International (supra) [53]. [“53. From the above, it is clear that when an instrumentality of the State 
acts contrary to public good and public interest, unfairly, unjustly and unreasonably, in its contractual, 
constitutional or statutory obligations, it really acts contrary to the constitutional guarantee found in Article 14 
of the Constitution.”] 
268 (2019) 
269 ICOMM Tele (supra) [23] 
270 ICOMM Tele (supra) [27] [“27. Deterring a party to an arbitration from invoking this alternative dispute 
resolution process by a pre-deposit of 10 per cent would discourage arbitration, contrary to the object of de-
clogging the court system, and would render the arbitral process ineffective and expensive.”] 

PART G 

security deposit” in a public-private arbitration agreement. This Court 
observed that an arbitration agreement has to comply with the “operation of 
law”, which includes the grundnorm. It was observed that the layers of 
grundnorm in the context of an arbitration agreement include (i) the 
Constitution of India; (ii) the Arbitration Act and any other Central and State 
law; and (iii) the arbitration agreement entered into by the parties under 
Section 7 of the Arbitration Act.271 Further, this Court observed that party 
autonomy “cannot be stretched to an extent where it violates the 
fundamental rights under the Constitution.”272 It was concluded that the pre-
deposit clause violated Article 14 of the Constitution. ii. 
US jurisprudence on unconscionability of arbitration agreements 
149. 
Section 2 of the Federal Arbitration Act provides that an agreement in 
writing to submit to arbitration an existing controversy a 
contract shall be “valid, irrevocable, and enforceable, save upon such 
grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract.”273 The 
US Supreme Court has held that issues concerning validity, irrevocability, 
and enforceability of arbitration agreements will be decided with reference 
 
271 Lombardi (supra) [80] 
272 Lombardi (supra) [83] [“83. The concept of “party autonomy” as pressed into service by the respondent 
cannot be stretched to an extent where it violates the fundamental rights under the Constitution. For an 
arbitration clause to be legally binding it has to be in consonance with the “operation of law” which includes 
the Grundnorm i.e. the Constitution. It is the rule of law which is supreme and forms parts of the basic 
structure. The argument canvassed on behalf of the respondent that the petitioner having consented to the 
pre-deposit clause at the time of execution of the agreement, cannot turn around and tell the Court in a 
Section 11(6) petition that the same is arbitrary and falling foul of Article 14 of the Constitution is without any 
merit.”] 
273 Section 2, Federal Arbitration Act. [It reads: 
A written provision in any maritime transaction or a contract evidencing a transaction involving commerce to 
settle by arbitration a controversy thereafter such contract or transaction, or the refusal to 
perform the whole or any part thereof, or an agreement in writing to submit to arbitration an existing 
controversy such a contract, transaction, or refusal, shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable, 
save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract. 

PART G 

to the state law grounds such as fraud, duress, and unconscionability.274 The 
doctrine of unconscionability has been codified by the Uniform Commercial 
Code and is now a part of American contract law. Section 2-302 of the 
Uniform Commercial Code allows courts to refuse enforcement of 
unconscionable contracts or limit the application of an unconscionable 
clause to avoid any unconscionable result.275 
150. 
The doctrine of unconscionability has roots in equity. An 
unconscionable contract “is a contract which no man in his senses, not 
under delusion, would make, on the one hand, and which no fair and honest 
man would accept on the other.”276 Unconscionability has also been defined 
to include: (i) an absence of meaningful choice on the part of one of the 
parties; and (ii) unreasonable contractual terms favourable to one party.277 
The unconscionability doctrine seeks to balance the freedom of contract with 
the values of protecting the weaker parties from imposition and 
oppression.278 
151. 
Unconscionability focuses on abuses relating to the contract 
formation process (procedural unconscionability) and the substantive terms 
of the contract (substantive unconscionability).279 In determining procedural 
 
274 Perry v. Thomas, 482 US 483 (1987); Doctor’s Associates Inc v. Casarotto, 517 US 681 (1996). 
275 Section 2-302, Uniform Commercial Code. [It reads: 
(1) If the court as a matter of law finds the contractor or any clause of the contract to have been 
unconscionable at the time it was made the court may refuse to enforce the contract, or it may enforce the 
remainder of the contract without unconscionable clause, or it may so limit the application of any 
unconscionable clause as to avoid any unconscionable result. 
(2) When it is claimed or appears to the court that the contract or any clause thereof may be unconscionable 
the parties shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to present evidence as to its commercial setting, 
purpose and effect to aid the court in making the determination.”] 
276 Hume v. United States, 132 US 406 (1889) 
277 Williams v. Walker-Thomas Furniture Co., 350 F.2d 445 (D C Cir. 1965) 
278 S M Waddams, ‘Unconscionability in Contracts’ (1976) 39(4) Modern Law Review 369, 369. 
279 John A Spanogle, ‘Analyzing Unconscionability Problems’ (1969) 117(7) University of Pennsylvania Law 
Review 931, 932. 

PART G 

unconscionability, the court is concerned with factors such as the relative 
bargaining power of the parties and whether the parties had a meaningful 
choice. Substantive unconscionability is geared towards pitting the 
substance of the contractual terms against the legitimate interests of the 
parties and considerations of public policy.280 
152. 
 US courts have consistently held that an arbitration agreement which 
provides for the unilateral formation of a panel of arbitrators by one of the 
parties is inherently inequitable and unconscionable.281 The reason is that 
a unilateral arbitrator selection clause is inimical to the principle of 
arbitration, that is, the resolution of disputes through a fair and impartial 
tribunal. It has been held that an arbitration agreement that allows one of 
the parties to unilaterally control the arbitral tribunal conflicts with the 
“fundamental notions of fairness”282 and does not meet the “minimum levels 
of integrity which we must demand of a contractually structured substitute 
for judicial proceedings.”283 The US courts have emphasised the importance 
of equality in the appointment process as a means to secure fairness in the 
arbitration proceedings.284 
153. 
In Hooters of Am. Inc. v. Phillips,285 the US Court of Appeals for the 
Fourth Circuit had to determine the validity of an arbitration agreement for 
employment-related disputes. The arbitration agreement provided for the 
 
280 Arthur Allen Leff, ‘Unconscionability and the Code-Emperor’s New Clause’ (1967) 115(4) University of 
Pennsylvania Law Review 485, 487. 
281 Board of Education of Berkely County v. W Harley Miller Inc, 236 S.E.2d 439 (1977) 
282 Ditto v. Remax Preferred Props, 861 P.2d 1000, 1004; Harold Allen’s Mobile Home Factory Outlet Inc v. 
Butler, 825 So.2d 779, 783 (Ala 2002) 
283 Graham v. Scissor Tail Inc, 28 Cal 3d 807 
284 Rosenberg v. Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Inc, 995 F.Supp 190, 208 (D. Mass 1998) 
285 173 F.3d 933 

PART G 

formation of a three-member arbitral tribunal. The employer and employee 
select their arbitrators, who in turn select the third arbitrator. However, the 
employee’s arbitrator and the third arbitrator were selected from a list of 
arbitrators created exclusively by the employer. The Court observed that the 
arbitration agreement gave Hooters “control over the entire panel and places 
no limits whatsoever on whom Hooters can put on the list.” It was further 
observed: 
“Under the rules, Hooters is free to devise lists of 
partial arbitrators who have existing relationships, 
financial 
or 
familial, 
with 
Hooters 
and 
its 
management. In fact, the rules do not even prohibit 
Hooters from placing its managers themselves on 
the list. Further, nothing in the rules restricts Hooters 
from punishing arbitrators who rule against the 
company by removing them from the list. Given the 
unrestricted control that one party (Hooters) has 
over the panel, the selection of an impartial 
decisionmaker would be a surprising result.” 
The Court noted that arbitration is a system where disputes between parties 
are resolved by an impartial third party and allowing one party to control the 
arbitral tribunal was against the principles of arbitration.286 
154. 
In McMullen v. Meijer,287 the issue before the US Court of Appeals 
for the Sixth Circuit was whether the arbitration agreement provided the 
employee “an effective substitute for the judicial forum”. The agreement 
allowed the employer to unilaterally select a pool of at least five potential 
arbitrators. The employer and employee were required to mutually select a 
sole arbitrator from that pool of arbitrators by alternatively striking names 
 
286 Hooters of Am Inc (supra) 939 
287 355 F.3d 485, 493 

PART G 

until only one remained. The Court held that the process of selection of the 
arbitrator prevented the arbitration from being an effective substitute for a 
judicial forum because: (i) the employer exercised unilateral control over the 
entire panel; (ii) the arbitrator selection procedure allowed the employer to 
create a symbiotic relationship with its arbitrators, which promulgated bias; 
and (iii) the arbitrator selection procedure inherently lacked fairness and 
neutrality. iii. 
Public-private contracts and public policy of arbitration 
155. 
Although arbitration law is an autonomous legal field,288 it functions 
within the boundaries prescribed by the state. For instance, adjudication of 
certain proceedings is reserved by the legislature exclusively for the courts 
as a matter of public policy.289 The non-arbitrable proceedings generally 
include disputes relating to rights and liabilities that give rise to or arise out 
of criminal offences, matrimonial disputes relating to divorce, judicial 
separation, restitution of conjugal rights, child custody, and guardianship 
matters.290 The safeguards of public policy ensure that arbitration 
proceedings, which are effective substitutes for civil courts, are conducted 
within a framework in the broader public interest.291 
 
288 Cox and Kings (supra) [95] 
289 Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc. v. SBI Home Finance Ltd., (2011) [35]; A Ayyasamy v. A 
Paramasivam, (2016) [38]; Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corporation, (2021) [76] 
290 Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc. (supra) [36]. [36. The well-recognised examples of non-arbitrable disputes are: 
(i) disputes relating to rights and liabilities which give rise to or arise out of criminal offences; (ii) matrimonial 
disputes relating to divorce, judicial separation, restitution of conjugal rights, child custody; (iii) guardianship 
matters; (iv) insolvency and winding-up matters; (v) testamentary matters (grant of probate, letters of 
administration and succession certificate); and (vi) eviction or tenancy matters governed by special statutes 
where the tenant enjoys statutory protection against eviction and only the specified courts are conferred 
jurisdiction to grant eviction or decide the disputes.] 
291 Redfern and Hunter (supra) 552 

PART G 

156. 
Section 34 of the Arbitration Act specifies the grounds for setting aside 
an arbitral award. The grounds are separated into two categories: (i) Section 
34(2)(a) contains those grounds that have to be proved by the parties; and 
(ii) Section 34(2)(b) contains grounds that a court has to examine ex officio. 
The challenge of arbitral awards on ex officio grounds is “of fundamental 
importance to the institution of arbitration as a whole.”292 
157. 
Section 34(2)(b) specifically provides that an arbitral award may be 
set aside if the court finds that the arbitral award conflicts with the public 
policy of India. The provision further clarifies “public policy of India” to only 
mean that: (i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or 
corruption or was in violation of section 75 or section 81; (ii) it is in 
contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or (iii) it is in conflict 
with the most basic notions of morality or justice. 
158. 
This Court has construed the expression “public policy of India” 
appearing under Section 34 to mean the “fundamental policy of Indian 
law”.293 The concept of “fundamental policy of Indian law” has been held to 
cover compliance with statutes and judicial precedents, adopting a judicial 
approach, and compliance with the principles of natural justice.294 In OPG 
Power Generation Private Limited v. Enexio Power Cooling Solutions 
India Private Limited,295 this Court explained the concept of “fundamental 
policy of Indian law” thus: 
 
292 Peter Binder (supra) 274 
293 Ssangyong Engg. & Construction Co. Ltd. v. NHAI, (2019) [34]; NHAI v. P Nagaraju, (2022) 
 [39] 
294 MMTC v. Vedanta Ltd., (2019) [11]; 

PART G 

“The 
expression 
“in 
contravention 
with 
the 
fundamental policy of Indian law” by use of the word 
‘fundamental’ before the phrase ‘policy of Indian law’ 
makes the expression narrower in its application 
than the phrase “in contravention with the policy of 
Indian law”, which means mere contravention of law 
is not enough to make an award vulnerable. To bring 
the contravention within the fold of fundamental 
policy of Indian law, the award must contravene all 
or any of such fundamental principles that provide a 
basis for administration of justice and enforcement 
of law in this country. Without intending to 
exhaustively 
enumerate 
instances 
of 
such 
contravention, by way of illustration, it could be said 
that (a) violation of the principles of natural justice; 
(b) disregarding orders of superior courts in India or 
the binding effect of the judgment of a superior court; 
and (c) violating law of India linked to public good or 
public interest, are considered contravention of the 
fundamental policy of Indian law.” 
159. 
In Avitel Post Studioz Ltd. v. HSBC PI Holdings (Mauritius) Ltd.,296 
this Court held that the most basic notions of morality and justice under the 
concept of “public policy” will include bias. 
160. 
The provisions of the statute, including Section 34, highlight the 
important role played by the Indian legal system in recognising and 
enforcing arbitral awards. It is one such instance where the Indian courts 
exercise a measure of control over the private arbitral process.297 This 
control over the arbitral process ensures that the arbitral awards are made 
by following certain minimum standards of due process and justice.298 Thus, 
the courts must ensure that the arbitral awards are consistent with the 
fundamental policy of Indian law such as compliance with the principles of 
 
296 (2024) [34] 
297 Redfern and Hunter (supra) 58 
298 Ibid. 

PART G 

natural justice. As a corollary, Section 34 places a responsibility on the 
arbitral tribunals to ensure that the arbitral proceedings are consistent with 
the fundamental policy of Indian law.299 
161. 
By agreeing to arbitrate in a public-private contract, the government 
or its companies agree to settle their disputes with private contractors 
through arbitration. Since the activities of the government have a public 
element, it is incumbent upon the government to ensure that it enters into a 
contract with the public without adopting any unfair or unreasonable 
procedure.300 Every action of a public authority or a person acting in the 
public interest or any act that gives rise to a public element must be based 
on principles of fairness and non-arbitrariness.301 Therefore, government 
agencies have to consider the principles of equality and non-arbitrariness 
when crafting arbitration procedures, including the procedure for the 
appointment of arbitrators. The terms of the arbitration agreement must 
 
299 Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corporation, (2021) [70] [“70. Arbitrators, like the courts, are equally 
bound to resolve and decide disputes in accordance with the public policy of the law. Possibility of failure to 
abide by public policy consideration in a legislation, which otherwise does not expressly or by necessary 
implication exclude arbitration, cannot form the basis to overwrite and nullify the arbitration agreement. This 
would be contrary to and defeat the legislative intent reflected in the public policy objective behind the 
Arbitration Act. Arbitration has considerable advantages as it gives freedom to the parties to choose an 
arbitrator of their choice, and it is informal, flexible and quick. Simplicity, informality and expedition are 
hallmarks of arbitration. Arbitrators are required to be impartial and independent, adhere to natural justice, 
and follow a fair and just procedure. Arbitrators are normally experts in the subject and perform their tasks 
by referring to facts, evidence, and relevant case law.”] 
300 Eurasian Equipment & Chemicals Ltd. v. State of West Bengal, (1975) [17]; Ramana Dayaram 
Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India, (1979) [12] [12. It must, therefore, be taken to be 
the law that where the Government is dealing with the public, whether by way of giving jobs or entering into 
contracts or issuing quotas or licences or granting other forms of largesse, the Government cannot act 
arbitrarily at its sweet will and, like a private individual, deal with any person it pleases, but its action must be 
in conformity with standard or norms which is not arbitrary, irrational or irrelevant. The power or discretion of 
the Government in the matter of grant of largesse including award of jobs, contracts, quotas, licences, etc. must be confined and structured by rational, relevant and non-discriminatory standard or norm and if the 
Government departs from such standard or norm in any particular case or cases, the action of the 
Government would be liable to be struck down, unless it can be shown by the Government that the departure 
was not arbitrary, but was based on some valid principle which in itself was not irrational, unreasonable or 
discriminatory.] 
301 LIC v. Consumer Education & Research Centre, (1995) [23] 

PART G 

meet the minimum standards of equality and fairness. In a public-private 
contract, the government and its instrumentalities must ensure that the 
arbitral process contemplated by the contract is also fair to the other party 
to avoid arbitrariness. 
162. 
The possibility of bias is real in situations where an arbitration clause 
allows a government company to unilaterally appoint a sole arbitrator or 
control the majority of the arbitrators. Since the government has control over 
the arbitral tribunal, it can chart the course of the arbitration proceedings to 
the prejudice of the other party. Resultantly, unilateral appointment clauses 
fail to provide an effective substitute for judicial proceedings in India. Further, 
a unilateral appointment clause is inherently exclusionary and violates the 
principle of equal treatment of parties and procedural equality. 
163. 
Unilateral appointment clauses in a public-private contract fail to 
provide the minimum level of integrity required in authorities performing 
quasi-judicial functions such as arbitral tribunals. Therefore, a unilateral 
appointment clause is against the principle of arbitration, that is, impartial 
resolution of disputes between parties. It also violates the nemo judex rule 
which constitutes the public policy of India in the context of arbitration. 
Therefore, unilateral appointment clauses in public-private contracts are 
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution for being arbitrary in addition to 
being violative of the equality principle under the Arbitration Act. 

PART H 

H. 
Necessity of maintaining the principle of minimum judicial interference 
164. 
In re Interplay Between Arbitration Agreements under Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act 1996 and the Stamp Act 1899,302 a seven judge 
Bench of this Court emphasized the importance of minimal judicial 
interference by the courts at the Section 11 stage. This Court held that the 
scope of the proeceeding under Section 11 must be confined to the 
existence of an arbitration agreement. The Court further observed: 
“165. The legislature 
confined 
the 
scope 
of 
reference under Section 11(6-A) to the examination 
of the existence of an arbitration agreement. The use 
of the term “examination” in itself connotes that the 
scope of the power is limited to a prima facie 
determination. Since the Arbitration Act is a self-
contained code, the requirement of “existence” of an 
arbitration agreement draws effect from Section 7 of 
the Arbitration Act. In Duro Felguera [Duro Felguera, 
S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd., (2017): 
(2017) 4 SCC (Civ) 764], this Court held that the 
Referral Courts only need to consider one aspect to 
determine the existence of an arbitration agreement 
— whether the underlying contract contains an 
arbitration agreement which provides for arbitration 
pertaining to the disputes which have arisen 
between the parties to the agreement. Therefore, 
the scope of examination under Section 11(6-A) 
should be confined to the existence of an 
arbitration agreement on the basis of Section 7. 
Similarly, 
the 
validity 
of 
an 
arbitration 
agreement, in view of Section 7, should be 
restricted to the requirement of formal validity 
such as the requirement that the agreement be 
in writing. This interpretation also gives true 
effect 
to 
the 
doctrine 
of 
competence-
competence by leaving the issue of substantive 
existence 
and 
validity 
of 
an 
arbitration 
agreement to be decided by Arbitral Tribunal 
under Section 16. 
 
302 2023 INSC 1066 

PART H 

166. The burden of proving the existence of 
arbitration agreement generally lies on the party 
seeking to rely on such agreement. In jurisdictions 
such as India, which accept the doctrine of 
competence-competence, only prima facie proof of 
the existence of an arbitration agreement must be 
adduced before the Referral Court. The Referral 
Court is not the appropriate forum to conduct a mini-
trial by allowing the parties to adduce the evidence 
in regard to the existence or validity of an arbitration 
agreement. The determination of the existence and 
validity of an arbitration agreement on the basis of 
evidence ought to be left to the Arbitral Tribunal. This 
position of law can also be gauged from the plain 
language of the statute. 
167. Section 
11(6-A) 
uses 
the 
expression 
“examination of the existence of an arbitration 
agreement”. The purport of using the word 
“examination” connotes that the legislature intends 
that the Referral Court has to inspect or scrutinise 
the dealings between the parties for the existence of 
an 
arbitration 
agreement. 
Moreover, 
the 
expression “examination” does not connote or 
imply a laborious or contested inquiry. On the 
other hand, Section 16 provides that the Arbitral 
Tribunal can “rule” on its jurisdiction, including 
the existence and validity of an arbitration 
agreement. A “ruling” connotes adjudication of 
disputes after admitting evidence from the 
parties. Therefore, it is evident that the Referral 
Court is only required to examine the existence 
of arbitration agreements, whereas the Arbitral 
Tribunal ought to rule on its jurisdiction, 
including the issues pertaining to the existence 
and validity of an arbitration agreement.” 

(emphasis supplied) 
The Constitution Bench held that the nature of objections to the jurisdiction of 
an arbitral tribunal on the basis that stamp duty has not been paid or is 

PART I 

inadequate cannot be decided on a prima facie basis.303 Hence, it was 
observed that objections of such a kind will require a detailed consideration 
of evidence and submissions and a finding as to the law as well as the facts. 
165. 
At the Section 11 stage, a referral court only has to determine the 
existence of arbitration agreement. The validity of the arbitration clause 
providing for the procedure for appointment of arbitrators will require the 
referral court to enter into a detailed consideration of evidence and render a 
finding as to law and facts. This issue should be left to be decided by the 
arbitral tribunal in view of the doctrine of competence-competence. The 
arbitral tribunal is competent to rule on its jurisdiction, including the issue of 
validity of the arbitration clause for violating the equality principle under the 
Arbitration Act. 
I. 
Prospective Overruling 
166. 
A decision of this Court has retrospective effect unless expressly 
given a prospective effect. Commercial relations are structured on the basis 
of law. A change in law may have the effect of distorting established rights 
and commercial bargains between parties.304 To avoid large-scale social and 
economic disruption, this Court can exercise its discretionary jurisdiction 
under Article 142 to give prospective effect to its decisions.305 The 
application of the doctrine of prospective overruling results in the application 
of the law declared by this Court to cases arising in future.306 In Mineral 
 
303 In re Interplay between Arbitration Agreements under Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 and Stamp Act 
1899 (supra) [196] 
304 Somaiya Organics (India) Ltd. v. State of UP, (2001) [46] 
305 Belsund Sugar Co. Ltd. v. State of Bihar, (1999) [112] 
306 Sarwan Kumar v. Madan Lal Aggarwal, (2003) [15] 

PART I 

Area Development Authority v. Steel Authority of India,307 eight Judges 
of this Court held that the doctrine of prospective overruling is applied to 
bring about a smooth transition of the operation of law without unduly 
affecting the rights of people who acted upon the overruled law. 

167. 
In Bharat Aluminium Company v. Kaiser Aluminium Technical 
Services,308 a Constitution Bench of this Court prospectively overruled 
Bhatia International v. Bulk Trading S A309 observing: 
“197. The judgment in Bhatia International [(2002) ] was rendered by this Court on 13-3-2002. 
Since then, the aforesaid judgment has been 
followed by all the High Courts as well as by this 
Court on numerous occasions. In fact, the judgment 
in Venture Global Engg. [(2008) ] has 
been rendered on 10-1-2008 in terms of the ratio of 
the decision in Bhatia International [(2002) ]. Thus, in order to do complete justice, we 
hereby order, that the law now declared by this Court 
shall apply prospectively, to all the arbitration 
agreements executed hereafter.” 

168. 
In the present reference, we have upheld the decisions of this Court 
in TRF (supra) and Perkins (supra) which dealt with situations dealing with 
sole arbitrators. Thus, TRF (supra) and Perkins (supra) have held the field 
for years now. However, we have disagreed with Voestalpine (supra) and 
CORE (supra) which dealt with the appointment of a three-member arbitral 
tribunal. We are aware of the fact that giving retrospective effect to the law 

308 (2012) 
309 (2002) 

PART J 

laid down in the present case may possibly lead to the nullification of 
innumerable completed and ongoing arbitration proceedings involving 
three-member tribunals. This will disturb the commercial bargains entered 
into by both the government and private entities. Therefore, we hold that the 
law laid down in the present reference will apply prospectively to arbitrator 
appointments to be made after the date of this judgment. This direction only 
applies to three-member tribunals. 

J. 
Conclusion 
 
169. 
In view of the above discussion, we conclude that: 
 
a. The principle of equal treatment of parties applies at all stages of arbitration 
proceedings, including the stage of appointment of arbitrators; 
 
b. The Arbitration Act does not prohibit PSUs from empanelling potential 
arbitrators. However, an arbitration clause cannot mandate the other party 
to select its arbitrator from the panel curated by PSUs; 
 
c. A clause that allows one party to unilaterally appoint a sole arbitrator gives 
rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence and impartiality of the 
arbitrator. Further, such a unilateral clause is exclusive and hinders equal 
participation of the other party in the appointment process of arbitrators; 

PART J 

d. In the appointment of a three-member panel, mandating the other party to 
select its arbitrator from a curated panel of potential arbitrators is against the 
principle of equal treatment of parties. In this situation, there is no effective 
counterbalance because parties do not participate equally in the process of 
appointing arbitrators. The process of appointing arbitrators in CORE 
(supra) is unequal and prejudiced in favour of the Railways; 
 
e. Unilateral appointment clauses in public-private contracts are violative of 
Article 14 of the Constitution; 
 
f. The principle of express waiver contained under the proviso to Section 12(5) 
also applies to situations where the parties seek to waive the allegation of 
bias against an arbitrator appointed unilaterally by one of the parties. After 
the disputes have arisen, the parties can determine whether there is a 
necessity to waive the nemo judex rule; and 
 
g. The law laid down in the present reference will apply prospectively to 
arbitrator appointments to be made after the date of this judgment. This 
direction applies to three-member tribunals. 

PART J 

170. 
The reference is answered in the above terms. 
171. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

…….……………………………………CJI 
 [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud] 

….….………………………………………J 
 [J B Pardiwala]..….…………………………………………J 
 [Manoj Misra] 

New Delhi; 
November 08, 2024. 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CIVIL APPEAL Nos. 9486-9487 of 2019 

CENTRAL ORGANISATION FOR 
RAILWAY ELECTRIFICATION 

VERSUS 
M/S ECI SPIC SMO MCML (JV) 
A JOINT VENTURE COMPANY 

WITH 
 
SLP(C) No. 15936 of 2020 
SLP(C) No. 6125 of 2021 
SLP(C) No. 9462 of 2022 
SLP(C) No. 21131 of 2023 
Diary No. 7086 of 2024 
Diary No. 13670 of 2024 
 
JUDGMENT 
Hrishikesh Roy, J. 
1. I have read the scholarly judgment of the learned Chief 
Justice DY Chandrachud and also the erudite one authored by 
brother Justice PS Narasimha. 

2. I am in agreement with the view of the learned Chief Justice 
that the principle of equality under Section 18 of the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act,1996(for short ‘Arbitration Act’) applies at all 
stages of the proceedings including the stage of appointment of 
arbitrators. His judgment offers a thorough examination (in Part 
D) of the mandatory provisions within the Model Law and the 
Arbitration Act, which underscores the applicability of the 
equality principle and the same is not reiterated here for the sake 
of brevity. It is also correct to say that the Arbitration Act does 
not provide special or different treatment to government or 
government undertakings involved in arbitration. 
3. Nonetheless, it is not possible for me to agree with the view 
canvassed that the principles of constitutional law can be 
invoked to reinforce the equality doctrine in the realm of 
arbitration. On this aspect, Justice Narasimha has rightly opined 
that public law principles evolved in Constitutional and 
Administrative law, should not generally be imported to 
arbitration law. 
4. Anchoring the principle of equality amongst the arbitrating 
parties from the framework of the Arbitration Act, rather than 
invoking constitutional and administrative law principles, in my 
opinion, will not only preserve impartiality in the appointment of 

arbitrator but will also ensure party autonomy. It is also 
imperative to observe that Courts should exercise judicial 
restraint at the threshold stage of appointing an arbitrator. This 
will then safeguard the core principles of equality, party 
autonomy, and minimal judicial intervention in the arbitration 
domain. 
5. The notion that Alternative Dispute Resolution offers ‘rough 
justice’ rather than true justice, is no more in vogue although 
some scepticism towards arbitration was earlier noticed, across 
various jurisdictions1. Trusting the arbitral process is essential 
and we must dispel the notion that arbitration provides ‘second-
hand justice’. To lend credibility to the arbitral process, statutory 
procedural safeguards promoting basic fairness must be given 
full play. A key factor in establishing arbitration’s legitimacy lies 
in ensuring independence and impartiality at all stages of the 
arbitral process. At the same time, excessive judicial intervention 
must be avoided. By striking this balance between procedural 
protections and judicial restraint, we can reinforce arbitration’s 
role as an autonomous system capable of delivering justice on 
par with traditional courts. 
 
1 Gary Born, International Commercial Arbitration (2nd edn, Kluwer 2014) 

Scope of Judicial Interference 
6. The principle of minimal judicial intervention in the arbitral 
process is an integral element of the Indian arbitration law. The 
relevant part of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the 
Arbitration Act is extracted below to press home this aspect: 
“(i) to comprehensively cover international commercial 
arbitration and conciliation as also domestic arbitration 
and conciliation; 
(ii) to make provision for an arbitral procedure which is 
fair, efficient and capable of meeting the needs of the 
specific arbitration; 
(iii)to provide that the arbitral tribunal gives reasons for its 
arbitral award; 
(iv)to ensure that the arbitral tribunal remains within the 
limits of its jurisdiction; 
(v) to minimise the supervisory role of courts in the 
arbitral process; 
(vi)to permit an arbitral tribunal to use mediation, 
conciliation or other procedures during the arbitral 
proceedings to encourage settlement of disputes; 
(vii) to provide that every final arbitral award is enforced in 
the same manner as if it were a decree of the court; 
(viii) to provide that a settlement agreement reached by the 
parties as a result of conciliation proceedings will have the 
same status and effect as an arbitral award on agreed 
terms on the substance of the dispute rendered by an 
arbitral tribunal; and 
(ix) to provide that, for purposes of enforcement of foreign 
awards, every arbitral award made in a country to which 
one of the two International Conventions relating to foreign 
arbitral awards to which India is a party applies, will be 
treated as a foreign award.” 

[emphasis supplied] 

7. Article 5 of the UNCITRAL Model Law(for short ‘Model law’) 
and Section 5 of the Arbitration Act is extracted below: 
“ Article 5. Extent of Court intervention- In matters 
governed by this Law, no court shall intervene except 
where so provided in this Law.” 
“Section 
5. 
Extent 
of 
judicial 
intervention.—
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, in matters governed by this Part, 
no judicial authority shall intervene except where so 
provided in this Part.” 
 
8. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Arbitration Act 
read along with Section 5 of the Act makes it clear that the 
legislative intent behind the Arbitration Act was to, inter alia, 
minimise the intervention of the Courts and provide for timely 
resolution of disputes. It is also crucial to note that the 
Parliament in Section 5, made a significant departure from 
Article 5 of Model law by adding a non-obstante clause, 
‘Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law’, 
emphasizing that the Courts should exercise restraint and other 
laws should not be made the basis for court’s intervention with 
the agreed arbitral process. 
9. Section 11 deals with ‘Appointment of Arbitrator’. Section 
11(2) provides that subject to Section 11(6), parties are ‘free to 
agree on a procedure for appointing the arbitrator or arbitrators’. 

At this stage, the language in Section 11(6) of the Arbitration Act 
needs to be noticed which reads thus: 
“(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon 
by the parties,— 
(a) a party fails to act as required under that procedure; 
or (b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail to 
reach an agreement expected of them under that 
procedure; or 
(c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform 
any function entrusted to him or it under that procedure” 
 
10. 
The consideration to be given to the agreed procedure is 
also clear from Section 11(8) of the Arbitration Act: 
 [11(8) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, 
the High Court or the person or institution 
designated by such Court, before appointing an 
arbitrator, shall seek a disclosure in writing from the 
prospective arbitrator in terms of sub-section (1) of 
section 12, and have due regard to— 
(a) any qualifications required for the arbitrator by 
the agreement of the parties; and 
(b) the contents of the disclosure and other 
considerations 
as 
are 
likely 
to 
secure 
the 
appointment of an independent and impartial 
arbitrator.] 

[emphasis supplied] 
11. 
In ad-hoc arbitration, the parties have the option to choose 
the arbitrator as per the procedure agreed between parties. It is 
only when ‘a party fails to act as required under that procedure’ 
as contemplated in Section 11(6) of the Act that the court’s 
intervention is expected. However, the term “fail(ure) to act” 

should not be interpreted to allow Courts to intervene particularly 
at the Section 11 stage. It is also essential to bear in mind that 
under Section 11(8) the Court, ‘shall seek a disclosure in writing 
from the prospective arbitrator in terms of sub-section (1) of 
section 12’, thereby underscoring the importance of impartiality 
and independence in the appointment of arbitrators. Therefore, 
essential safeguards are also provided under Section 11 for the 
appointment of arbitrator. 
12. 
In the context of Article 11, UNCITRAL Digest of Case Law 
on the Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration2 
provides as under: 
“20. Securing an independent and impartial tribunal was 
said in one case to be the major objective that ought to be 
pursued by the court or competent authority intervening 
on the basis of article 11, while in another case it was said 
to be the paramount consideration. It has also been 
explicitly identified as an important consideration in 
several other cases.” 

13. 
The Commentary on Article 11 by Howard M. Holtzmann 
and Joseph E. Neuhaus3 provides: 
 
2 UNCITRAL 2012 Digest of Case Law on the Model Law on International 
Commercial Arbitration 
3 Howard M. Holtzmann and Joseph E. Neuhaus, A Guide to the UNCITRAL Model 
Law on International Commercial Arbitration, at 479 (Kluwer 1989) 

“….. the working group cited as examples two articles that 
give rise to such restrictions: Article 12 concerning grounds 
for challenging arbitrators and Article 34 concerning court’s 
power to set aside arbitral awards. Thus, for example, if the 
procedure agreed on results in an arbitral tribunal that fails 
to meet the standard of impartiality and independence 
established by Article 12 the arbitrator would be subjected 
to challenge. ….The working group considered at some 
length adding to Article 11 an explicit on the parties’ freedom 
to determine the procedures for selection of arbitrators. The 
provision would have stated that a procedure agreed upon 
by the parties would be invalid if or to the extent that it gave 
one party a ‘predominant position’ or in the words of an 
alternate draft a ‘manifestly unfair advantage’ with regard to 
the appointment of arbitrators. This provision was later 
deleted because (1)the problem did not arise frequently; 
(2)other provisions of the law such as Article 12 and 34, 
could be used to address the problem and (3) the wording 
was regarded as too vague and thus could lead to dilatory 
tactics and potentially invalidation of ‘well-established and 
recognized appointment practices’’ 
14. 
The court’s role in ensuring an arbitrator’s impartiality 
and independence is indeed essential. However, this duty, as is 
clear from above, must be grounded in Section 12 of the 
Arbitration Act which provides adequate standards for dealing 
with potential conflicts or biases. By setting specific parameters 
for impartiality, Section 12 effectively limits arbitrary or 
unjustified challenges while still safeguarding the fairness of 
arbitration. 
15. 
If the criteria for fairness, impartiality, or independence 
are not clearly defined, a party may challenge the appointment of 

an arbitrator on the ground that the procedure is "manifestly 
unfair" or that the other party holds a "predominant position." In 
such cases, a party looking to delay proceedings could file 
baseless objections against appointments, leading to unnecessary 
judicial intervention and thereby delaying arbitration until these 
challenges are resolved. This tactic can effectively halt the 
arbitration process, leading to avoidable delays in resolution- a 
problem exacerbated by the broader issue of judicial backlog in 
India. 
16. 
Section 11(6A) was inserted in the Arbitration Act through 
the 2015 Amendment: 
“ 11(6A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High 
Court, while considering any application under sub-section 

or 
sub-section 

or 
sub-section 
(6), 
shall, 
notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any 
Court, confine to the examination of the existence of an 
arbitration agreement.” 

[emphasis supplied] 
17. 
The language in Section 11(6A) read with Section 5 of the 
Arbitration Act, and an interpretation focusing on the legislative 
intent informs us about the narrow scope for court’s scrutiny 
under Section 11(6A), at the stage of appointment of arbitrators,. 

18. 
In Mayavati Trading (P) Ltd. v. Pradyuat Deb Burman4, a 
three-Judge Bench of this Court affirmed the reasoning in Duro 
Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd5. by observing that the 
examination under Section 11(6A) is “confined to the 
examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement and is 
to be understood in the narrow sense.” It was also held that the 
position of law prior to the 2015 Amendment Act, as set forth 
by the decisions of this Court in SBP & Co. v Patel Engineering6 
and National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd7, 
which widened the scope of judicial intervention, are 
legislatively overruled. 
19. 
In the concurring opinion in A.Ayyasamy vs A. 
Paramasivam8, it was observed as under: 
 “53. The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, should 
in my view be interpreted so as to bring in line the 
principles underlying its interpretation in a manner that 
is consistent with prevailing approaches in the common 
law world. Jurisprudence in India must evolve towards 
strengthening the institutional efficacy of arbitration. 
Deference to a forum chosen by parties as a complete 
remedy for resolving all their claims is but part of that 
evolution. Minimising the intervention of courts is 
again a recognition of the same principle.” 
 [emphasis supplied] 
 
4 (2019) 
5 (2017) 
6 (2005) 
7 (2009) 
8 (2016) 

20. 
In the significant decision on the Interplay Between 
Arbitration Agreements under A&C Act, 1996 & Stamp Act, 
18999, 7 judges of this Court had emphasized on the minimal 
supervisory roles of Court in arbitral process: 
“ 81. One of the main objectives behind the enactment 
of the Arbitration Act was to minimize the supervisory 
role of courts in the arbitral process by confining it only 
to the circumstances stipulated by the legislature. For 
instance, Section 16 of the Arbitration Act provides that 
the arbitral tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction 
“including ruling on any objection with respect to the 
existence or validity of the arbitration agreement.” The 
effect of Section 16, bearing in view the principle of 
minimum 
judicial 
interference, 
is 
that 
judicial 
authorities cannot intervene in matters dealing with the 
jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal. Although Sections 8 
and 11 allow courts to refer parties to arbitration or 
appoint arbitrators, Section 5 limits the courts from 
dealing with substantive objections pertaining to the 
existence and validity of arbitration agreements at the 
referral or appointment stage. A referral court at Section 
8 or Section 11 stage can only enter into a prima facie 
determination. The legislative mandate of 1prima facie 
determination ensures that the referral courts do not 
trammel the arbitral tribunal’s authority to rule on its 
own jurisdiction.” 

21. 
While reiterating on the limited scrutiny of courts at the 
stage of initiating the arbitral process, the 7-judge bench also 
emphasized that while Section 16 deals with both ‘existence’ and 
 
9 (2024) 

‘validity’, Section 11 deals only with ‘existence’ of the arbitration 
agreement. 
22. 
In view of the above authoritative pronouncement by the 
7-Judge bench, critical scrutiny at the Section 11 stage would 
be antithetical to the objective of the Arbitration Act and this will 
also impinge on the principle of party autonomy. As we have 
noted earlier, Section 11(8) itself provides for the requirement of 
disclosure under Section 12 and therefore importing principles 
of constitutional law to justify intervention at the Section 11 
stage, would surely defeat the very objective of the Arbitration 
Act. This will also be a departure from the expected norm of 
minimal judicial intervention. 
Unilateral Appointments- Whether Permissible? 
23. 
One of the core issues to be considered here is whether 
unilateral appointment of arbitrators is permissible. While such 
appointments were a norm and approved by Courts prior to the 
2015 Amendment10, the legal terrain has been altered with the 
changed provisions. 
 
10 Executive Engineer, Irrigation Division, Puri v. Gangaram Chhapolia, [1984]; Secretary to Government Transport Department, Madras v. 
Munusamy Mudaliar, [1988] (Supp) SCC 651; International Authority of India 
v. K.D. Bali and Anr, [1988] 

24. 
Significantly, the 246th Report of the Law Commission 
addressed the issue of party autonomy and the independence 
and impartiality of arbitrators in the following words: 
“the principles of impartiality and independence cannot 
be discarded at any stage of the proceedings, 
specifically at the stage of constitution of the Arbitral 
Tribunal, it would be incongruous to say that party 
autonomy can be exercised in complete disregard of 
these principles — even if the same has been agreed 
prior to the disputes having arisen between the 
parties.” 

25. 
The Law Commission report also made the following 
critical observation: 
 
“60. The Commission, however, feels that real and 
genuine party autonomy must be respected, and, in 
certain situations, parties should be allowed to waive 
even the categories of ineligibility as set in the 
proposed Fifth Schedule. This could be in situations of 
family arbitrations or other arbitrations where a person 
commands the blind faith and trust of the parties to the 
dispute, despite the existence of objective “justifiable 
doubts” regarding his independence and impartiality. To 
deal with such situations, the Commission has 
proposed the proviso to section 12 (5), where parties 
may, subsequent to disputes having arisen between 
them, waive the applicability of the proposed section 12 
(5) by an express agreement in writing. In all other 
cases, the general rule in the proposed section 12 (5) 
must be followed. In the event the High Court is 
approached in connection with appointment of an 
arbitrator, the Commission has proposed seeking the 
disclosure in terms of section 12 (1). and in which 

context the High Court or the designate is to have “due 
regard” to the contents of such disclosure in appointing 
the arbitrator.” 

[emphasis supplied] 
 
26. 
The Law Commission also significantly noted that if the 
appointing authority is the State, it is even more essential to 
have an independent and impartial tribunal. Weighing the 
observations of the 246th Report of the Law commission, India 
has formally incorporated the International Bar Association(IBA) 
Guidelines 
into its 
statutory framework, introducing a 
comprehensive system of checks and balances11. 
27. 
 Section 12 of the Arbitration Act provides a mechanism 
to address issues, if any, that may arise pertaining to impartiality 
of arbitrators. An amendment was carried out in Section 12 and 
significantly, the Fifth and Seventh Schedule were adopted in the 
Arbitration Act which provides a statutory reference point to 
determine independence and eligibility. Section 12(5) reads as 
under: 
[(5) Notwithstanding any prior agreement to the 
contrary, any person whose relationship, with the 
parties or counsel or the subject-matter of the dispute, 
falls under any of the categories specified in the 
Seventh Schedule shall be ineligible to be appointed as 
an arbitrator: 
 
11 HRD Corporation (Marcus Oil and Chemical Division) v. GAIL (India) Ltd., 

Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes 
having arisen between them, waive the applicability of 
this subsection by an express agreement in writing.]” 
 
28. 
The Fifth Schedule adopts the Orange List from the IBA 
Guidelines 
on 
Conflicts 
of 
Interest 
in 
International 
Arbitration(for short ‘IBA Guidelines’) requiring arbitrators to 
disclose any circumstances that might reasonably affect their 
impartiality, including relationships with the parties, counsel, or 
subject matter of the dispute. The Sixth Schedule specifies the 
requirement of disclosure to be made by an arbitrator. The 
Seventh Schedule incorporates the ‘Red List’ of the IBA 
Guidelines, outlining scenarios of relationship conflict that 
would result in de jure ineligibility of the arbitrator. Therefore, 
the 
interpretation 
that 
all 
unilateral 
appointments 
are 
automatically nullified under Section 12(5) of the Act, would go 
way beyond the legislative intent of the Arbitration Act. If the 
Legislature had intended such a rigid restriction, there would be 
no need for the proviso to Section 12(5), which explicitly permits 
parties to waive this requirement through an agreement in 
writing. This again underscores the emphasis on party 
autonomy, in the arbitral process. 

29. 
Section 13 outlines the challenge to the procedure in 
respect of grounds under Section 12(3). Section 13(1) states that 
parties are free to agree on a procedure to challenge an 
arbitrator. Section 13(2) provides as under: 
“13(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section 
(1), a party who intends to challenge an arbitrator shall, 
within fifteen days after becoming aware of the 
constitution of the arbitral tribunal or after becoming 
aware of any circumstances referred to in sub-section 
(3) of section 12, send a written statement of the reasons 
for the challenge to the arbitral tribunal.” 
 
Section 13(4) next states that if a challenge to an arbitrator 
under 13(1) or 13(2) is not successful; the tribunal shall 
continue with the proceedings. 
30. 
Section 14 is titled ‘Failure or impossibility to Act’. It 
provides for the termination of an arbitrator’s mandate if he, de 
facto or de jure, becomes unable to perform his functions or for 
other reasons, fails to act without undue delay. Unless agreed 
otherwise, one can apply to ‘Court’ to decide on the termination 
of a mandate. It is crucial to note that the term ‘Court’ herein is 
not the Section 11 Court. 
31. 
Section 15 is titled ‘Termination of mandate and 
Substitution of Arbitrator’. Section 15(1) states that in addition 
to the circumstances mentioned in Section 13 and 14, the 

mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate when he withdraws from 
office for any reason, or by (or pursuant to) an agreement of the 
parties. Section 31 provides for the form and contents of the 
arbitral award. Section 32 provides for the termination of the 
arbitrator’s mandate, either by delivery of a final award or any of 
the circumstances mentioned in Section 32(2) such as 
withdrawal of the claim by the claimant, agreement between 
parties to terminate proceedings, or continuation of proceedings 
having become unnecessary or impossible. 
32. 
What follows from the above is that if the Arbitrator has 
any relationship with any of the parties that raises a reasonable 
apprehension of bias, such an arbitrator can anyway be de jure 
barred under Sections 12 and 14, read with the Fifth and the 
Seventh Schedules of the Arbitration Act. Post-appointment also, 
a challenge can be made under Section 13(2) of the Arbitration 
Act against appointment. It is also possible to finally set aside 
an award for procedural violations, under Section 34(2)(iii) or 
34(2)(v) of the Arbitration Act. 
33. 
Importantly, the Arbitration Act does not per se prohibit 
unilateral appointment of arbitrators. If those nominated in the 
panel fit into the limiting factors, underscored in Section 12(5) 
read with the Fifth and Seventh Schedule of the Act, the same 

will not upset the level playing field to be provided to the 
arbitrating parties. The 2015 Amendment, addressed specific 
concerns regarding fairness, potential advantage to one party as 
well as independence and impartiality of an unilaterally 
appointed arbitrator under the IBA Guidelines. An eligible 
arbitrator, not otherwise disqualified under Schedule VII of the 
Act, can be appointed unilaterally, and courts should refrain 
from imposing their own opinion countermanding the clear 
intent of the parties. The statutory safeguards, under the 
Arbitration Act provide a checklist and a counterbalance and 
thereby rule out inequality for the arbitrating parties. 
34. 
The judgments in Voestalpine Schienen GmbH v. Delhi 
Metro Rail Corpn. Ltd12 (for short ‘Voestalpine’), TRF Ltd. v. Energo 
Engg. Projects Ltd13 (for short ‘TRF’), Perkins Eastman Architects 
DPC v. HSCC (India) Ltd14.(for short ‘Perkins’), and Central 
Organisation for Railway Electrification v. ECI-SPIC-SMO-MCML 
(JV)15, (for short ‘CORE’) have been discussed in detail in the 
respective judgments of my learned Brothers and therefore, only 
 
12 2017) 
13 (2017) 
14 (2020) 
15 (2020) 

references to the said decisions to support the present opinion 
are being made. 
35. 
In Voestalpine(supra), the issue before the bench of two 
judges was whether the panel of arbitrators prepared by DMRC 
violated Section 12 of the Arbitration Act. It was held that Section 
12(5) read with the Seventh Schedule does not bar retired 
government employees, from serving as arbitrators. It however 
held that in the case of a government contract where the authority 
to appoint arbitrators rests with a government entity, it is 
imperative to have a ‘broad-based’ panel to secure the principle of 
impartiality and independence of the Arbitrator. It is relevant to 
note that the basis on which such a panel was upheld in 
Voestalpine(supra) was that the persons who have been 
nominated are subject to the rigours of Section 12. 
36. 
In Perkins (supra), the question before the 3-judge bench 
was whether the Managing Director of the Respondent, who is 
ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator under Section 12(5) 
read with Seventh Schedule, can nominate the sole arbitrator. 
Therefore, the Court was only concerned with the authority or 
power of the Managing Director and cannot be understood to 
conclude that unilateral appointments are impermissible. The 

distinction between ‘ineligibility’ and ‘unilateral’ appointments 
must be borne in mind. 
37. 
Similarly, the question before the Court in TRF(supra) 
was in the context of the ineligibility of the arbitrator and should 
not 
be 
interpreted 
as 
conclusively 
deciding 
on 
the 
impermissibility of unilateral appointments. 
38. 
In CORE(supra), the three-judge bench endorsed an 
arbitration clause that provided for current and former 
employees of one party to be appointed by the other party by 
asserting that such an appointment was balanced by an equal 
power of selection granted to the other party. As already noted by 
Justice Narasimha, the Court relied on Union of India Vs. Parmar 
Construction Company16 and Union of India vs. Pradeep Vinod 
Construction Company17but did not consider that these cases 
interpreted clause 34 of the General Conditions of Contract 
(GCC), prior to the 2015 amendment. The prescription for a 
broad- based panel as set out in Voestalpine(supra) was also not 
noted. The issue with the arbitration clause in CORE(supra) is 
that it exemplifies a situation where there may be an imbalance 
of bargaining power, particularly in contracts involving public 
 
16 (2019) 
17 (2020) 

sector undertakings or large private corporations. In such cases, 
one party may wield disproportionate influence over the selection 
of the arbitrator, undermining the fairness of the arbitration 
process. This imbalance of power makes it imperative that the 
appointment process be scrutinized carefully to uphold the 
principle of equality, as laid down in Section 18 of the Arbitration 
Act. Therefore, the Court erred in refusing to exercise its power 
under Section 11(6) to appoint an arbitrator, in such a case of 
complete lack of consensus between the parties. 
39. 
Concerns about the presumed bias of an arbitrator 
nominated by the claimant must also be tested against the 
objective standard of independence and impartiality, provided 
under the Seventh Schedule of the Arbitration Act. The 
appointment of arbitrators must scrupulously be made through 
the consent of the parties. The recourse to Section 11 must not 
be readily inferred in view of the remedies contained in Sections 
12, 13, 14 and 15 of the Act. In any case, the scrutiny on whether 
to intervene has to be on a case-to-case basis. 
40. 
Arbitration without party autonomy prevailing, will be 
like a redressal mechanism, without spirit. Liberty for the parties 
opting for Arbitration without equality being enshrined from the 
stage of inception to conclusion would be like a soulless process. 

The Arbitration Act as discussed earlier provides for adequate 
guard rails to ensure that the arbitrator(s) to be appointed are 
capable of independently discharging their responsibilities. The 
Sixth and Seventh Schedule requires the proposed arbitrator(s) 
to disclose any circumstances that might reasonably affect their 
impartiality, including relationship with the parties, the counsel 
or the subject matter of the dispute. In this scenario, since 
parties opt for the arbitration route to avoid redressal in Court, 
minimal judicial intervention should be the norm. 
41. 
In my view, all unilateral appointments must not be 
declared void by way of a declaration of this Court. The 2015 
Amendment in Section 12(5) itself provides for a specific waiver 
i.e. (a) an express consent in writing and (b)the consent must be 
obtained after the dispute has arisen. Therefore, it is abundantly 
clear that an agreement between the parties(provided it satisfies 
the specific waiver requirements under Section 12(5)) can 
effectively cure any concerns about impartiality or independence 
in such cases. 
42. 
Adequate safeguards are provided within the Arbitration 
Act to ensure a level playing field as discussed in the preceding 
paragraphs and therefore to answer the question in this 
reference, a search within the provisions of the Arbitration Act 

should first be made. In my view, the obligations of fair treatment 
should be grounded in the Arbitration Act rather than in the 
principles of Constitutional or administrative law. The choice of 
the parties in the agreement should not be disregarded without 
compelling reasons, through judicial intervention especially 
when the Arbitration Act provides clear remedies under Sections 
12, 13, 14, and 15 of the Arbitration Act. It is only when there 
is a complete lack of consensus between the parties that the 
Court’s interference under Section 11 could be justified. 
43. 
Flowing from the above discussion, the following are the 
conclusions:- 
a) Section 18 applies to all stages of arbitration including 
the stage of appointment of an arbitrator. The Arbitration 
Act does not provide for any special treatment to the 
government irrespective of whether the arbitration is by or 
against the government. b) Unilateral appointment of Arbitrators is permissible as per 
the legislative scheme of the Arbitration Act. There is a 
distinction 
between 
‘ineligibility’ 
and 
‘unilateral’ 
appointment of arbitrators. As long as an arbitrator 
nominated by a party is eligible under the Seventh Schedule 
of the Act, the appointment (unilateral or otherwise), should 

be permissible. It is only in cases of a complete lack of 
consensus that the court should exercise its power under 
Section 11(6) of the Arbitration Act to appoint an 
independent and impartial arbitrator as per Section 11(8) 
read with Section 12 and 18 of the Arbitration Act. At the 
appointment stage, the scope of judicial intervention is 
otherwise extremely narrow. c) The independence and impartiality of the arbitrator must be 
examined within the statutory framework of the Arbitration 
Act, particularly Section 18 read with 12(5). Public Law 
constitutional principles should not be imported to 
arbitration proceedings particularly at the threshold stage 
of Section 11. 

 ……..……………………..J 
 
 [HRISHIKESH ROY] 

NEW DELHI; 

NOVEMBER 08, 2024 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
Civil Appeal Nos. 9486-9487 of 2019 
 
Central Organisation for Railway Electrification...Appellant(s) 
 
Versus 
 
M/s ECI SPIC SMO MCML (JV) A Joint Venture Company...Respondent(s) 
 
With 

With 

With 

With 

With 
Diary No.7086 of 2024 
 
And With 
Diary No.13670 of 2024 

JUDGMENT 
 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
 
Contents 
A. Introduction... 3 
B. Access to Justice... 4 
C. Arbitration as Substitute Dispute Resolution... 5 
i. Two inviolable values of Arbitration, party autonomy and an independent 
and impartial Arbitral Tribunal.... 6 
D. Party autonomy... 7 
E. Obligations of parties to the Arbitration Agreement to constitute an independent 
and an impartial Arbitral Tribunal... 9 
i. Distinct duties of Arbitrators and Arbitrating Parties... 9 
ii. Freedom of Contract and its limitations under Contract Act.... 10 
iii. Public Policy Consideration to Constitute an Independent Tribunal..... 11 
iv. The limits of public policy considerations for commercial transactions and 
inapplicability of unconscionability.... 12 
v. Section 28 of the Contract Act and Access to Justice... 13 
F. Section 12, subsequent to 2015 Amendment... 15 
i. Two categories of challenge under Section 12.... 16 
ii. Public policy consideration in Section 12(5).... 18 
G. Power of the Court to Constitute an Independent Tribunal and the stage at which 
the power is exercised.... 18 
i. Section 11(8)... 19 
H. Precedents of this Court on Section 12(5) after its amendment... 24 
I. 
International Perspective... 30 
i. Legislative framework of certain foreign jurisdictions... 30 
ii. Judicial pronouncements of certain foreign jurisdictions.... 32 
J. On the opinion of the Hon’ble CJI... 36 
K. Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………..39 

A. 
Introduction 
1. 
The issue before us is whether the appointment process under an arbitration 
agreement, which allows a party who has an interest in the dispute to unilaterally 
appoint a sole arbitrator or curate a panel of arbitrators and mandate that the other 
party select their arbitrator from the panel, is valid in law. Prior to the 2015 Amendment 
to Section 12 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 19961, courts permitted such 
unilateral constitution of arbitral tribunals by one party. However, post amendment, 
judgments oscillated between negative and conditional affirmations. This Constitution 
Bench is called upon to clarify the correct position, essential for dispelling uncertainty. 
The argument against such an appointment process is based on Sections 12(5) and 
18 of the Act, as well as on public law considerations such as equal treatment of parties 
under Article 14, unfair and unreasonable procedure, and non-arbitrariness. 
2. 
I have considered it necessary to locate the obligations of the parties to 
constitute an independent and impartial arbitral tribunal within the Indian Contract Act, 
1872,2 and the Arbitration Act, and not to apply public law principles evolved in 
constitutional and administrative laws. This is to ensure party autonomy, coupled with 
minimal judicial intervention, a foundational principle of dispute resolution through 
arbitration. When parties choose arbitration over Court proceedings as an exception 
under Section 28 of the Contract Act, they are under a duty to constitute an 
independent and impartial tribunal as an effective substitute, failing which the 
arbitration agreement will be void as opposed to public policy under Section 23 of the 
Contract Act. This obligation is the Second Principle that governs arbitration. Whether 
the agreement is compliant with the duty to constitute an independent and impartial 
 
1 Hereinafter “the Act” or “Arbitration Act”. 
2 Hereinafter “the Contract Act”. tribunal and not opposed to the public policy effecting access to justice is always 
determined by the Court. This is the third principle. There is a clear statutory 
incorporation of these three principles in the Contract Act and the Arbitration Act. I 
believe that enduring answers to the questions before this Constitution Bench will lie 
in the balance between these principles. 
2.1 
Enquiry into disputes relating to legality and propriety of a contractual clause 
enabling unilateral appointment of arbitral tribunal arises when an application under 
Section 11(6) for appointment or under Section 14 of the Arbitration Act for substitution 
are brought before the Court. It is at this stage that the Court will examine the 
arbitration clause to ensure independence and impartiality. It will be impermissible for 
the court to intervene at a stage prior to that, to declare agreements to be void as an 
advanced ruling. This is to ensure party autonomy, particularly when the Arbitration 
Act itself enables parties to waive certain mandatory provisions such as Section 12(5) 
of the Arbitration Act. 
B. 
Access to Justice 
3. 
Access to justice constitutes the very foundation of democratic governance, 
serving as the linchpin of a fair and equitable society. Our Constitution, in its wisdom, 
establishes a comprehensive judicial architecture, encompassing the Supreme Court, 
the High Courts, and subordinate courts as public law and ordinary civil/criminal 
remedies to safeguard this inalienable right. Furthermore, specialised tribunals and 
commissions are constituted to adjudicate specific disputes, leveraging expertise and 
facilitating expeditious resolution, thereby guaranteeing swift and effective justice to 
all. It is imperative that these judicial remedies are effective. In fact, effectiveness of 
judicial remedies is a constitutional mission, and it is always a work in progress for the 

Supreme Court to ensure that the remedies are impartial, readily accessible, 
financially viable, swiftly administered, and comprehensively tailored. 
4. 
Beyond the realm of public law and ordinary civil/criminal remedies, as 
indicated herein above, parties to a dispute may elect to resolve their differences 
through mutually agreed procedures, crystallised in the form of contractual 
agreements. It is permissible in law to have such alternative dispute resolution 
mechanisms through contract. Section 28 of the Contract Act protects these alternative 
dispute resolution agreements through arbitration between contesting parties, 
fostering an environment conducive to expeditious and amicable dispute resolution. 
C. 
Arbitration as Substitute Dispute Resolution 
5. 
The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 provides a simple, efficient, cost-
effective, confidential, and a fair dispute resolution remedy by empowering the parties 
to choose their arbitrators and also the procedure for conduct of the arbitral 
proceedings. Recognising party autonomy, Section 53 of the Act restrains judicial 
authorities from intervening with the arbitral remedy except as provided in the Act. The 
mandate of Section 5 is reflected in a number of judicial decisions of this Court, 
enabling easy access to arbitration by merely examining the existence of an arbitration 
agreement between the parties, and at the same time refraining from interfering with 
the arbitral award on grounds other than manifest arbitrariness or against public 
policy.4 
 
3 Section 5 of the Act reads: 
“5. Extent of judicial intervention: Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, in matters governed by this Part, no judicial authority shall intervene 
except where so provided in this Part.” 
4 Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corporation, (2021); M/s Arif Azim Co. Ltd. v. M/s Aptech Ltd., 
(2024); SBI General Insurance Co Ltd v. Krish Spinning, on 
minimal judicial intervention. 

6. 
Two inviolable values of Arbitration, party autonomy and an independent and 
impartial Arbitral Tribunal: Two important values are inviolable for arbitration to be a 
viable, effective, and at the same time, credible alternative dispute resolution remedy; 
they co-exist in the duality of freedom and duty. They are the freedom to contract, 
constitute, and channel arbitration proceedings, i.e., party autonomy on the one hand, 
and the duty towards constituting an independent and impartial arbitral tribunal on the 
other. These values are independent, yet interdependent for a credible and effective 
dispute resolution.5 
7. 
With this introduction, I will now examine the following issues in detail; 
(i) Party autonomy, as recognised and incorporated in the scheme of the Act; 
(ii) Constituting an independent and impartial arbitral tribunal, which obligation of 
parties is distinct from the duty of the arbitrator to be unbiased and neutral; 
(iii) The obligation of the parties is founded on contract and public policy 
considerations, without which agreements are void and unenforceable in law; 
(iv) Apart from the obligations on the parties, the Contract Act and Arbitration Act 
empower the courts to ensure constitution of an independent and impartial arbitral 
tribunal; 
(v) The determination as to whether an arbitral tribunal is independent and objective 
is examined by the court only when it takes up an application under Section 11(6) or 
Section 14 of the Arbitration Act. 
 
5 These are also recognised as fundamental principles of arbitration law. See Centrotrade Minerals & 
Metals Inc v. Hindustan Copper Ltd., (2006); Union of India v. Uttar Pradesh Bridge 
Corporation Limited, (2015). 

D. 
Party autonomy 
8. 
Arbitration is an agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration all or certain 
disputes which have arisen or which may arise between them, as provided under 
Section 7(1) of the Act. Party autonomy is a product of freedom to contract and 
recognises the freedom of parties to determine the terms of contract. It is said to be 
the “brooding and guiding spirit in arbitration” and the “grund norm” of arbitration.6 
Party autonomy is ingrained as a fundamental principle in the Act. The freedom to 
enter into such an agreement belongs to the parties7 and this will also include the 
freedom to determine the law governing the arbitration agreement.8 
8.1 
Second, parties are free to determine composition of the arbitral tribunal, such 
as the number of arbitrators9, the nationality of the arbitrator10, the procedure for 
appointment11, the grounds of challenge, including waiver of challenge12, the 
procedure for challenging an appointed arbitrator13, terminate the mandate of an 
arbitrator14, and even the consequences of substitution of arbitrator15. 
8.2 
Third, the parties have the autonomy to determine the conduct of arbitral 
proceedings, the procedure to be followed by the arbitral tribunal in the conduct of 
proceedings16, the place of arbitration17, the date of commencement of arbitral 
proceedings18, the language to be used in the arbitral proceedings19, the time for 
 
6 Bharat Aluminium Co. v. Kaiser Aluminium Technical Services Inc., (2016). 
7 Cox and Kings v. SAP India Pvt Ltd, (2024), para 180. 
8 Bharat Aluminium Co. (supra). 
9 Section 10 of the Act, provided that it is not even number. 
10 Section 11(1). 
11 Section 11 (2), subject to Section 11(6). 
12 Section 12, including 12(5) proviso. 
13 Section 13(1), subject to Section 13(4) 
14 Section 15(1)(b). 
15 Section 15(3) and 15(4). 
16 Section 19(2). 
17 Section 20(1). 
18 Section 21. 
19 Section 22(1). submitting statements of claim and defence20, including amendments21, whether the 
arbitral tribunal will conduct oral hearings or proceed on the basis of documents and 
other material22, in cases of default by a party to communicate statement of claim or 
defence, or failure to appear at an oral hearing or produce documentary evidence23, 
and regarding the appointment of experts by the arbitral tribunal24. 
8.3 
Fourth, the parties to the arbitration agreement have the freedom to determine 
the procedure as well as the termination of arbitral proceedings. This will include the 
determination of the rules applicable for the resolution of the dispute25, whether the 
decision will be made by a majority of the members in an arbitral tribunal with more 
than one arbitrator26, extension of time limit for the completion of proceedings27, fast 
track procedures28, grant of pendente lite and pre-reference interest29, and whether 
the arbitral tribunal can make an additional arbitral award as to claims presented in the 
arbitral proceedings but omitted from the award30. 
8.4 
Fifth, the parties can challenge and/or apply for the enforcement of the award. 
Chapter VII and Chapter VIII set out the recourse available to parties after the arbitral 
award, for it to be set aside by the courts31, the finality and enforceability of the 
award32, appeals33, and miscellaneous provisions34. 
 
20 Section 23(1). 
21 Section 23(3). 
22 Section 24(1). 
23 Section 25. 
24 Section 26. 
25 Section 28. 
26 Section 29. 
27 Section 29A(2). 
28 Section 29B. 
29 Section 31(7)(a). 
30 Section 33(4). 
31 Section 34. 
32 Sections 35 and 36. 
33 Section 37. 
34 Sections 38 to 43. 

E. 
Obligations of parties to the Arbitration Agreement to constitute an 
independent and an impartial Arbitral Tribunal 
 
9. 
I will now examine the principles that impinge upon the freedom to contract and 
limit of party autonomy. Before that, a necessary distinction needs to be drawn for 
clarity and certainty. 
9.1 
Distinct duties of Arbitrators and Arbitrating Parties. There are two distinct 
obligations. The first is the obligation of the parties to the agreement, and the second 
is the neutrality and objectivity that an arbitrator must maintain. The obligations on the 
parties to the arbitration agreement to constitute an independent and impartial arbitral 
tribunal is distinct from the objectivity and impartiality that an arbitrator(s) must himself 
maintain. The foundation of the former is within the statutory framework, coupled with 
certain public policy considerations. The latter is simply the duty to act judicially, it is 
not superimposed by any statute or public policy, but arises because of the very nature 
of the calling, i.e., to judge what is right and what is wrong. Though the constitution of 
the arbitral tribunal is inextricably connected to the agreement between the parties, 
core duties of the arbitrator(s) in deciding the case is independent of the contract. The 
Arbitration Act provisions grounds to challenge appointment of an arbitrator at various 
stages, including after making of the award. The issue with which we are concerned 
is not about the arbitrator or the award of the arbitral tribunal, but about the legality of 
the contractual arbitration clause that enables one of the parties to unilaterally 
constitute the arbitral tribunal. Clarity about the issue arising for consideration is 
necessary to focus on the right questions that we must ask. 
10. 
Therefore, to understand the question relating to the legality of the contractual 
clause, we must get to the first principles that govern arbitration agreements, which in 
turn takes us to the first principles of law of contract. 

11. 
Freedom of Contract and its limitations under Contract Act. The foundation of 
the law of contract is in the freedom to contract and its enforceability in law. Sections 
2(a), (b), and (d), of the Contract Act define ‘proposal’, ‘promise’ and ‘consideration’, 
and reflect the autonomy of the parties declaring the terms and conditions and 
reciprocal promises. Section 2(e) provides that “Every promise and every set of 
promises, forming the consideration for each other, is an agreement”. Agreements are 
contracts if they are made by the free consent of parties35, and free consent36 exists 
when 
it 
is 
not 
caused 
by 
coercion37, 
undue 
influence38, 
fraud39 
and 
misrepresentation40. Furthermore, agreements attain the status of contracts only if 
they are made for lawful consideration and with a lawful object.41 The consideration or 
object of an agreement is lawful only when it is not opposed to public policy. It is here 
that the duty and obligation of the Court arises as it is the exclusive province of the 
Court to decide if an agreement is in consonance with public policy or not. This position 
is clear from the text of Sections 10 and 23 of the Contract Act, which are extracted 
hereinbelow for ready reference; 
“10. What agreements are contracts.—All agreements are contracts if 
they are made by the free consent of parties competent to contract, for a 
lawful consideration and with a lawful object, and are not hereby expressly 
declared to be void. 
 Nothing herein contained shall affect any law in force in India and 
not hereby expressly repealed by which any contract is required to be made 
in writing or in the presence of witnesses, or any law relating to the 
registration of documents.” 

35 Section 10 of the Contract Act 
36 Section 14 of the Contract Act. 
37 Section 15 of the Contract Act 
38 Section 16 of the Contract Act 
39 Section 17 of the Contract Act 
40 Section 18 of the Contract Act 
41 Section 23 of the Contract Act. 

“23. What considerations and objects are lawful, and what not.—The 
consideration or object of an agreement is lawful, unless— 
it is forbidden by law; or 
is of such a nature that if permitted, it would defeat the provisions of any 
law; or 
is fraudulent; or 
involves or implies injury to the person or property of another; or 
the Court regards it as immoral, or opposed to public policy. 
In each of these cases, the consideration or object of an agreement is said 
to be unlawful. Every agreement of which the object or consideration is 
unlawful is void.” 
 
12. 
Public Policy Consideration to Constitute an Independent Tribunal. Under the 
Contract Act, public policy considerations limit contractual freedom to the extent of 
declaring an agreement void when the court regards it as opposed to public policy.42 
The power of determining the meaning and scope of public policy is of the court.43 
13. 
The public policy principle has been interpreted to mean that parties to a 
contract cannot agree to terms or to an object which have the tendency to harm the 
public good and public interest.44 The freedom of contract is restricted by taking into 
account the protection and promotion of public welfare, and the larger interest of the 
community, which must be beyond the parties contracting freedom.45 Courts in India 
have relied on and applied the public policy principle in the following broad categories 
of cases: i) where the object is injurious to good government in domestic and foreign 
affairs; ii) whose object interferes with the proper administration of justice; iii) whose 
 
42 Section 23 of the Contract Act. 
43 Indian Financial Association of Seventh Day Adventists v. M.A. Unneerikutty, (2006), para 
17. 
44 Gherulal Parekh v. Mahadeodas Maiya, (1959) Supp, para 23; Central Inland Water 
Transport Corpn Ltd v. Brojo Nath Ganguly, (1986), para 92; Rattan Chand Hira Chand v. 
Askar Nawaz Jung, (1991), para 17; Indian Financial Association of Seventh Day Adventists 
(supra), para 19; Assistant General Manager v. Radhey Shyam Pandey, (2020) 6 SCCC 438, para 72. 
45 Pollock and Mulla, The Indian Contract and Specific Relief Acts, vol 1 (14th edn, Lexis Nexis 2013), 
524. object is injurious to marriage and which promotes sexual immorality; and iv) 
agreements in restraint of trade.46 
14. 
The limits of public policy considerations for commercial transactions and 
inapplicability of unconscionability. One of the most significant instances wherein our 
courts have travelled beyond the above categories of public policy restrictions on 
contractual freedom is in the case of Central Inland Water Transport v. Brojo Nath 
Ganguly47 where Court expounded on ‘unconscionability’ as a facet of public policy. 
This ground is particularly relevant for our analysis as Mr. Banerji has pointed out 
several US cases wherein arbitration agreements that allow one party to control the 
pool of potential arbitrators were held to be unconscionable. Therefore, it is necessary 
to set out the contours of unconscionability under Indian contract law. 
15. 
Through the doctrine of unconscionability, this Court in Brojo Nath Ganguly 
(supra) introduced inequality of bargaining power as a ground to refuse enforcement 
of unreasonable and unfair contracts that shock the conscience of the court. It has 
envisaged for this principle to apply in cases where the weaker party does not exercise 
meaningful choice and must agree to a standard form of contract.48 However, the 
Court has also circumscribed the applicability of unconscionability and held that it will 
not apply when parties have equal or almost equal bargaining power, such as in 
commercial transactions and contracts between businessmen.49 The inapplicability of 
‘unconscionability’ to commercial contracts has been reiterated by this Court in the 
 
46 ibid, 524-566; P. Rathinam v. Union of India, (1994), para 93. 
47 (1986) 
48 Brojo Nath Ganguly (supra), paras 89, 92-93. 
49 ibid, para 89. context of arbitration agreements.50 In view of the settled position, I cannot accept the 
submissions of Mr. Banerji on this issue. 
16. 
Section 28 of the Contract Act and Access to Justice. Access to justice is a 
constitutional principle. It provides remedies for redressal of grievances 
violation of rights and dereliction of duties. The remedies through ordinary civil courts 
and tribunals comprise credibility, efficiency, objectivity, expeditious disposal, 
comprehensiveness as well as financial viability. Prohibiting restraint from accessing 
these remedies is a public policy. 
17. 
Section 28 of the Contract Act secures access to justice by declaring that 
agreements in restraint of public law remedies are void. Section 28 is extracted 
hereinbelow for ready reference; 
“28. Agreements in restraint of legal proceedings, void.— Every 
agreement,— 
(a) by which any party thereto is restricted absolutely from enforcing his 
rights under or in respect of any contract, by the usual legal proceedings in 
the ordinary tribunals, or which limits the time within which he may thus 
enforce his rights; or 
(b) which extinguishes the rights of any party thereto, or discharges any 
party thereto, from any liability, under or in respect of any contract on the 
expiry of a specified period so as to restrict any party from enforcing his 
rights, is void to the extent. 
Exception 1.—Saving of contract to refer to arbitration dispute that 
may arise.—This section shall not render illegal a contract, by which two 
or more persons agree that any dispute which may arise between them in 
respect of any subject or class of subjects shall be referred to arbitration, 
and that only the amount awarded in such arbitration shall be recoverable 
in respect of the dispute so referred. 
 
50 S.K. Jain v. State of Haryana, (2009), para 8; ICOMM Tele Limited v. Punjab State Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board, (2019), paras 13-14. 

Exception 2.—Saving of contract to refer questions that have already 
arisen.—Nor shall this section render illegal any contract in writing, by 
which two or more persons agree to refer to arbitration any question 
between them which has already arisen, or affect any provision of any law 
in force for the time being as to references to arbitration.” 
 
Limitations on agreements which restrain access is necessary to secure the 
constitutional mandate of justice to all by providing access to public law and ordinary 
civil/criminal remedies from being void. Exceptions 1 and 2 to Section 28 are 
arbitration agreements and enable substituted dispute resolution, fostering an 
environment conducive to expeditious and amicable resolution. 
18. 
Access to justice, as provided through ordinary courts and tribunals, can be 
substituted through other systems and forums. As the substitution is only a 
replacement of the forum, the essentiality of remedy such as credibility, efficiency, etc. must continue to inhere in the substituted forum as well. In public law remedies, this 
issue was considered when administrative tribunals were constituted for the first time 
to substitute ordinary remedies. It was upheld subject to the condition that the tribunals 
are worthy successors, meaning that they must have the necessary credibility, 
efficiency and other features that are integral to judicial remedy. 
19. 
Similarly, arbitration being a substituted remedy contracted by the parties, it 
must also comprise the basic features of a judicious remedy, the most important being 
an independent and impartial decision-making forum. 
20. 
The question whether the substituted forum continues to inhere the essentiality 
of a remedy, in order to be compliant with the larger principle of access to justice, is 
for the court to examine. The Arbitration Act incorporates this principle of public policy 

in Sections 11, 12 as well as Section 34. It is in this context that I will now proceed to 
examine Section 12 of the Act. 
F. 
Section 12, subsequent to 2015 Amendment 
21. 
After the amendment, Section 12 of the Act reads: 
“12. Grounds for challenge.—(1) When a person is approached in 
connection with his possible appointment as an arbitrator, he shall disclose 
in writing any circumstances,— 
(a) such as the existence either direct or indirect, of any past or present 
relationship with or interest in any of the parties or in relation to the subject-
matter in dispute, whether financial, business, professional or other kind, 
which is likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or 
impartiality; and 
(b) which are likely to affect his ability to devote sufficient time to the 
arbitration and in particular his ability to complete the entire arbitration 
within a period of twelve months. 
Explanation1.—The grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule shall guide in 
determining whether circumstances exist which give rise to justifiable 
doubts as to the independence or impartiality of an arbitrator. 
Explanation 2.—The disclosure shall be made by such person in the form 
specified in the Sixth Schedule. 
(2) An arbitrator, from the time of his appointment and throughout the 
arbitral proceedings, shall, without delay, disclose to the parties in writing 
any circumstances referred to in sub-section (1) unless they have already 
been informed of them by him. 
(3) An arbitrator may be challenged only if— 
(a) circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to his 
independence or impartiality, or 
(b) he does not possess the qualifications agreed to by the parties. 
(4) A party may challenge an arbitrator appointed by him, or in whose 
appointment he has participated, only for reasons of which he becomes 
aware after the appointment has been made. 

(5) Notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary, any person whose 
relationship, with the parties or counsel or the subject-matter of the dispute, 
falls under any of the categories specified in the Seventh Schedule shall be 
ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator: 
Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes having arisen between 
them, waive the applicability of this sub-section by an express agreement 
in writing.” 
 
22. 
Two categories of challenge under Section 12. The effect of the 2015 
Amendment is that there are now two separate categories for the parties to challenge 
the appointment of an arbitrator. First, a challenge under Section 12(3) to an appointed 
arbitrator based on justifiable doubts regarding his independence and impartiality, by 
using the procedure under Section 13. While Section 12(3) itself remains unamended, 
the insertion of Explanation 1 in Section 12(1), read with the Fifth Schedule, now 
enlists the circumstances that give rise to justifiable doubts as to an arbitrator’s 
independence and impartiality. The Fifth Schedule contains 34 entries that have been 
adopted from the Red and Orange Lists of the IBA Guidelines. A written disclosure on 
these grounds must be made in the form provided in the Sixth Schedule.51 
22.1 The second category is under Section 12(5) which declares certain persons to 
be ‘ineligible’ to be appointed as arbitrators. These ineligibilities are enlisted in the 
Seventh Schedule. The provision itself stipulates that such ineligibility is 
notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary. In these situations, the ineligibility 
of the person to act as an arbitrator is a matter of law and goes to the root of their 
appointment52. As they are de jure unable to perform their function, their mandate 
automatically terminates under Section 14(1)(a), and the appointment need not be 
 
51 HRD Corporation (Marcus Oil and Chemical Division) v. GAIL (India) Ltd., (2018), paras 
11-12; Chennai Metro Rail Ltd v. Transtonnelstroy Afcons (JV), (2024), para 25. 
52 Bharat Broadband Network Limited v. United Telecoms Limited, (2019). challenged before the arbitral tribunal under Section 13. The parties can apply to the 
court under Section 14(2) for a decision on the termination of the arbitrator’s mandate 
and appointment of a substituted arbitrator.53 The only way for parties to by-pass such 
ineligibility, as provided in the proviso, is to enter into an express agreement in writing, 
subsequent to the disputes having arisen, to waive the applicability of Section 12(5).54 
23. 
The difference between these categories is important to bear in mind. In the 
former situation, there is no bar to the appointment itself, but the appointment may 
later be challenged before the arbitral tribunal. On the other hand, in the latter situation, 
the Act places an express bar on the appointment of certain ‘ineligible’ persons as 
arbitrators, notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary. Their appointment is 
invalid from the very beginning, and in the application before the court under Section 
14, the only question is whether the arbitrator falls under one of the categories of the 
Seventh Schedule and whether there is an agreement waiving the applicability of 
Section 12(5) in accordance with the proviso.55 
24. 
At this stage, it may be relevant to note that the entries of the Seventh Schedule 
are common with the first 19 entries of the Fifth Schedule. This Court in HRD v. GAIL 
(supra) has noted that the purpose of such overlapping entries is to ensure that the 
disclosure under the Sixth Schedule encompasses disclosure on entries contained in 
the Seventh Schedule. Otherwise, the parties will be put at a disadvantageous position 
as they will not have access to such information.56 Since this is the purpose of identical 
entries, it follows that if any of the entries in the Seventh Schedule applies, then the 
consequence under Section 12(5), rather than Section 12(1) read with Section 12(3), 
will ensue. 
 
53 ibid, paras 15-17; HRD Corporation (supra), paras 11-12; Chennai Metro Rail (supra), para 26. 
54 ibid. 
55 Chennai Metro Rail (supra), paras 29-33. 
56 HRD (supra), para 17. 

25. 
Public policy consideration in Section 12(5). The neutrality, independence, 
impartiality, integrity, and objectivity of an arbitral tribunal are matters of public policy, 
and the validity of arbitration agreements must be tested against this touchstone. The 
object and purpose of Section 12(5) is to secure the independence and impartiality of 
the arbitral tribunal by placing a restriction on the choice of the parties in appointing 
certain persons as arbitrators, who are declared as “ineligible” under the Seventh 
Schedule. Section 12 is therefore a statutory incorporation of the public policy principle 
of access to justice that I have delineated hereinabove, and the Fifth and Seventh 
Schedules enlist the situations when the appointment of certain persons could and 
would conflict with the independence of the tribunal. The courts can examine whether 
an appointment procedure accords or violates this provision. Therefore, the court will 
be guided by Section 12 of the Act, read with the Fifth and Seventh Schedules, to 
determine whether arbitration agreements providing for unilateral appointments and 
panel appointments are opposed to the public policy duty on the parties to appoint an 
independent tribunal. 
26. 
The next important question is the stage at which the court will exercise its 
power and jurisdiction to examine whether the arbitration agreement is in consonance 
with Section 12 and the broad public policy principle of constitution of an independent 
and impartial tribunal. I will now consider this question. 
G. 
Power of the Court to Constitute an Independent Tribunal and the stage 
at which the power is exercised 
 
27. 
Power of the Court to ensure that the agreement is not only independent and 
impartial but also seems independent and impartial. 
27.1 When a party to the arbitration agreement alleges that the core principle of the 
remedy is compromised in the procedure prescribed under the agreement by filing an 

application under Section 11(6), it is at this stage that the court will examine it. The 
provisions of Section 12, coupled with the Fifth and Seventh Schedules, will come to 
the aid of the court in coming to the conclusion on whether the arbitral tribunal 
maintains the sanctity of a credible remedy. 
28. 
Section 11(8): Section 11(8) of the Arbitration Act recognises the power of the 
court to appoint an arbitrator de hors the arbitration agreement to secure the 
independence and impartiality of the arbitral tribunal, and consequently to ensure that 
public policy is protected. Sections 11(6) and 11(8) reads: 
“11. Appointment of arbitrators – 
… 
(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon by the parties,— 
(a) a party fails to act as required under that procedure; or 
(b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail to reach an agreement 
expected of them under that procedure; or 
(c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform any function entrusted 
to him or it under that procedure, 
a party may request the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High 
Court or any person or institution designated by such Court to take the 
necessary measure, unless the agreement on the appointment procedure 
provides other means for securing the appointment. 
*** 
(8) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court or the person 
or institution designated by such Court, before appointing an arbitrator, shall 
seek a disclosure in writing from the prospective arbitrator in terms of sub-
section (1) of section 12, and have due regard to— 
(a) any qualifications required for the arbitrator by the agreement of the 
parties; and 
(b) the contents of the disclosure and other considerations as are likely to 
secure the appointment of an independent and impartial arbitrator.” 

29. 
Section 11(8) comes into play when the court is required to secure the 
appointment of the arbitrator on an application by the parties under sub-sections (4), 
(5), or (6). We are concerned with sub-section (6) here, as it applies when the parties 
have determined an appointment procedure but it fails due to the failure of one of the 
parties, the appointed arbitrators, or the entrusted arbitral institution. In such cases, 
the court will appoint the arbitrator upon an application from the parties, and while 
doing so, it shall have due regard to the qualifications required of the arbitrator by the 
agreement and other consideration as are likely to secure the appointment of an 
independent and impartial arbitrator, as provided under sub-section (8). 
30. 
While the general rule is that the court may adhere to the appointment 
procedure in the agreement in view of party autonomy, it is not bound by this 
procedure.57 Rather, Section 11(8) allows the Court to weigh other considerations 
regarding the qualifications of the arbitrator under the agreement, or to secure the 
independence and impartiality of the arbitrator, and in that light, appoint a person as 
an arbitrator by deviating from the procedure in the agreement.58 When “there is 
material to create a reasonable apprehension that the person mentioned in the 
arbitration agreement as the arbitrator is not likely to act independently or impartially… 
then the Chief Justice or his designate may, after recording reasons for not following 
the agreed procedure for referring the dispute to the named arbitrator, appoint an 
independent arbitrator in accordance with Section 11(8) of the Act.”59 
31. 
In such an exceptional situation, the court can deviate from the appointment 
procedure provided in the agreement on the basis of material that indicates that the 
 
57 Indian Oil Corporation v. Raja Transport Pvt Ltd, (2009), para 45; North Eastern Railway 
v. Tripple Engineering Works, (2014), paras 5-8. 
58 Northern Railway Administration, Ministry of Railway, New Delhi v. Patel Engineering Company, 
(2008), paras 12-14; North Eastern Railway (supra), paras 5-8. 
59 Indian Oil Corporation (supra), para 45. Also see Ace Pipeline Contracts (P) Ltd. v. Bharat Petroleum 
Corpn. Ltd., (2007), para 20; Uttar Pradesh State Bridge Corporation (supra), para 16. named arbitrator is not likely to act independently or impartially. It must also record the 
reasons for the same.60 The following principles laid down in Indian Oil Corporation 
(supra) summarise the position: 
“48. In the light of the above discussion, the scope of Section 11 of the Act 
containing the scheme of appointment of arbitrators may be summarised 
thus: 
… 
(vi) The Chief Justice or his designate while exercising power under sub-
section (6) of Section 11 shall endeavour to give effect to the appointment 
procedure prescribed in the arbitration clause. 
(vii) If circumstances exist, giving rise to justifiable doubts as to the 
independence and impartiality of the person nominated, or if other 
circumstances warrant appointment of an independent arbitrator by 
ignoring the procedure prescribed, the Chief Justice or his designate may, 
for reasons to be recorded ignore the designated arbitrator and appoint 
someone else.” 
 
32. 
Therefore, the power of the court to ensure the appointment of a neutral tribunal 
is not restricted to Section 12(5). Rather, Section 12(5) guides the court when it 
examines whether an arbitration agreement violates public policy of constituting an 
independent and impartial tribunal. In such cases, the court will not adhere to the 
procedure to the agreement, as the same becomes unenforceable, and will proceed 
to appoint an independent arbitrator. Further, Section 11(8) reifies and concretises the 
power of the court as it enables the court to undertake an examination on a case-to-
 
60 See Denel (Proprietary) Limited v. Bharat Electronics Limited, (2010); Bipromasz Bipron 
Trading SA v. Bharat Electronics Ltd., (2012); Denel (Proprietary) Limited v. Ministry of 
Defence, (2012) as examples of cases where the named arbitrator was not appointed on 
the basis of material that raised justifiable doubts regarding his independence and impartiality. Also see 
Rajasthan Small Industries Corporation Limited (supra), para 22 as an example for a case where the 
Court upheld the appointment of the named arbitrator as there was no material to show that a party has 
reason to believe that the arbitrator had not acted independently or impartially. case basis, based on the material and the evidence in each case, whether the 
independence or impartiality of the arbitrator is compromised. 
33. 
What must be noted is that the court exercises the discretion under Section 
11(8) while adjudicating on the facts in each case. However, the provision does not, in 
any manner, impose a blanket prohibition that is justifiable on a public policy 
consideration against unilateral appointments or appointments from a panel 
maintained by one party. All it does is that it leaves it open for the parties to the 
agreement to apply to the court if there are concerns regarding the neutrality or 
objectivity of arbitrators appointed through the agreed upon procedure. The court will 
then examine the facts, circumstances, material, and evidence in every application 
before it, to determine whether a case is made out to appoint an arbitrator de hors the 
agreement, but such ruling will be specific to that case rather than a declaration 
prohibiting such agreements altogether. 
34. 
Assertions that a person’s freedom to contract is grounded only in common law 
and statute, are ostensible at best. The freedom of speech and expression engrafted 
in Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution and significantly, the freedom to carry on 
occupation, trade and business Article 19(1)(g) read with the constitutional right to 
property under Article 300A, do provide a substantial foundation for a constitutional 
basis for the ‘freedom to contract’. The statutory framework governing contract laws, 
statutory restrictions on what contracts are lawful, what contracts are void and what 
considerations are lawful do have significant constitutional moorings. Sections 23 to 
30 of the Contract Act reflect constitutional colours, when they declare that agreements 
in restraint of trade, agreements in restraint of legal proceedings, agreements 
restraining marriage etc are void. Similarly, this Court has employed constitutional 

tools from Part III and Part IV of the Constitution to breathe fresh life into the term 
“public policy” in the context of Section 23 of the Contract Act.61 
35. 
This constitutional re-conceptualisation of contract law is not without relevance 
in the case. The freedom to contract out of traditional court based remedies and to opt 
for arbitral remedies is informed and regulated by constitutional considerations. To this 
end, what subject matters are arbitrable and how remedies are to be designed within 
the universe of arbitration, are informed not only by considerations of freedom to 
contract, but also a larger constitutional responsibility to provide access to justice. 
‘Party autonomy’ encapsulated within a larger freedom to contract must tempered with 
a person’s right to access justice and corresponding duty on the State to provide 
access to justice. 
36. 
Access to justice in this context is not a mere avenue for dispute redressal. It 
means access to timely, efficacious, and equitable system for dispute resolution. 
Arbitration though is often referred to as an alternative form of dispute resolution, it 
has, in practice evolved into a substituted form of dispute resolution. Therefore, arbitral 
remedies too must withstand constitutional scrutiny and provide access to arbitral 
tribunals that are not just independent and impartial, but also seem independent and 
impartial. In this scheme, it matters not whether the tribunal and its composition is 
decided by the State, PSUs, other State actors, or private entities. The underlying 
principle is that when party autonomy is exercised to appoint members to the arbitral 
tribunal, members who are so appointed are not just independent, but must also seem 
to be independent. 
 
61 Brojo Nath Ganguly (supra); Delhi Transport Corporation v. DTC Mazdoor Congress, (1991) Supp (1) 
SCC 600. 

37. 
This constitutional concern for access to justice which is not only in fact 
unbiased and fair, but also seems and appears unbiased and fair, is far more relevant 
to people who do not at present find place in the arbitration universe that is 
predominantly populated by big businesses, the mega-affluent contractors, and the 
millionaires. Access to justice, and by implication effective arbitral remedies are 
equally relevant for “the common man, for the poor and the humble, for those who 
have businesses at stake, for the "butcher, the baker and the candlestick maker'”.62 
H. 
Precedents of this Court on Section 12(5) after its amendment 
38. 
The substantial argument before us is that a unilateral or panel-based 
appointment process is invalid under Section 12(5) read with the Seventh Schedule. I 
will now deal with the case-law on Section 12(5), to examine how this Court has 
interpreted this provision and the public policy consideration to declare certain kinds 
of arbitration agreements as being violative of Section 12(5). For the sake of brevity 
and focus, the principles and main holding of each judgment may be stated as follows: 
I. 
First, it is important to note that Section 12(5) of the Act is a mandatory and 
non-derogable provision, which overrides the arbitration agreement between 
the parties that prescribes a person who is ineligible to act as an arbitrator. 
However, the proviso enables parties to waive its applicability through an 
express agreement in writing between them, subsequent to the dispute.63 
II. 
In Voestalpine64, a division bench of this Court upheld the validity of an 
arbitration agreement that mandates appointment of arbitrators from a panel 
maintained by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC). The Court held that a 
 
62 Bidi Supply Co v. Union of India,. 
63 Haryana Space Application Centre v. Pan India Consultants Private Limited, (2021), para 
18. 
64 Voestalpine Schienen GMBH v. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, (2017). panel comprising serving or retired engineers of government departments or 
PSUs does not fall foul of the Fifth or Seventh Schedule as they do not have 
any connection with DMRC and bias or real likelihood of bias cannot be 
attributed to such highly qualified and experienced persons.65 Rather, the 
purpose of empanelling them is due to their technical expertise.66 Nevertheless, 
the Court held that to inspire confidence in the panel, DMRC must not further 
limit Voestalpine’s choice from the panel to a list of 5 persons prepared by it. 
Voestalpine and the two appointed arbitrators must have full freedom to make 
their choice from the entire panel.67 Further, the Court also observed that the 
panel must be broad-based and comprise members of other professions and 
expertise such as engineers from the private sector, judges, lawyers, 
accountants, etc.68 
III. 
In TRF Limited,69 a three-judge bench of this Court considered the validity of 
an arbitration clause which provided that the Managing Director of the 
respondent would act as the arbitrator or nominate the sole arbitrator. The issue 
before the Court was whether the Managing Director, who is ineligible to act as 
an arbitrator under Section 12(5) read with the Seventh Schedule, can 
nominate the sole arbitrator.70 The Court answered this question in the negative 
by relying on various judgments on delegation of authority and the maxim “qui 
facit per alium facit per se” (what one does through another is done by 
oneself).71 Thus, the Court extended the ineligibility to act as an arbitrator under 
 
65 ibid, paras 24 and 25. 
66 ibid, para 26. 
67 ibid, paras 27 and 28. 
68 ibid, paras 29 and 30. 
69 TRF Limited v. Energo Engineering Projects Limited, (2017). 
70 ibid, paras 50, 53. 
71 ibid, paras 50-54. 

Section 12(5) to also include the ineligibility to appoint the sole arbitrator. 
However, while doing so, it did not test whether the nominee arbitrator is himself 
ineligible under Section 12(5), nor did it source its decision in any other 
provision of the statute that restricts the authority of a person who is ineligible 
to be an arbitrator to appoint the arbitrator. Further, no reasonable 
apprehension or justifiable doubt was raised regarding the nominated 
arbitrator’s independence and impartiality to warrant an appointment by the 
court de hors the arbitration agreement under Section 11(8) of the Act. 
IV. 
Subsequently, in Perkins,72 the Court interpreted and relied on the ruling in TRF 
(supra) while considering an arbitration agreement where the Chairman and 
Managing Director (CMD) of the respondent could appoint the sole arbitrator. It 
held that even if the arbitration agreement does not provide for the CMD to act 
as an arbitrator, as was the case in TRF (supra), he remains incompetent to 
nominate the arbitrator, which stems from his interest in the outcome of dispute, 
thereby creating a possibility of bias.73 The Court held that the ineligibility to 
appoint is a result of operation of law, as a person who is ineligible to act as an 
arbitrator must not have an exclusive role in charting the course of dispute 
resolution by appointing the arbitrator.74 However, in cases where both parties 
can nominate an arbitrator of their choice, the advantage to any one party would 
get counter-balanced.75 The problems in the reasoning in TRF (supra), i.e., the 
absence of a statutory source for ineligibility to appoint, and justifiable doubts 
regarding the nominated arbitrator’s independence and impartiality to warrant 
 
72 Perkins Eastman Architects DPC v. HSCC (India) Limited, (2020). 
73 ibid, para 20. 
74 ibid, para 21. 
75 ibid. a court appointment de hors the agreement, are not addressed even in Perkins 
(supra). 
V. 
A three-judge bench in CORE76 interpreted the arbitration clause 64(3)(b) of the 
GCC in railway contracts, which provides for appointment of a three-member 
arbitral tribunal from a panel of retired officers maintained by the Railways. The 
General Manager, Railways would send a list of at least four names, from which 
the other party must suggest at least two names as its nominee. The General 
Manager would then appoint one of these two persons as the contractor’s 
nominee, and appoint the balance arbitrators, including the presiding arbitrator, 
from within or outside the panel. The Court held that appointment of arbitrators 
must be as per the arbitration agreement,77 and that appointment from a panel 
of retired officers is not prohibited under Section 12(5) of the Act.78 It held that 
the rulings in TRF (supra) and Perkins (supra) will not apply to the present case 
as the advantage accruing to the Railways through appointing their arbitrator is 
counter-balanced by the contractor’s right to choose two names from the list, 
out of which the General Manager will appoint at least one of them as the 
contractor’s nominee.79 There are three noteworthy aspects of this reasoning: 
first, that the Court relies on Parmar Construction (supra) and Pradeep Vinod 
Construction (supra) while ruling on adherence to the appointment procedure 
in the agreement, but does not consider that these cases interpreted Clause 64 
of the GCC prior to the amendment in law and the arbitration clause pursuant 
 
76 Central Organisation for Railway Electrification v. ECI-SPIC-SMO-MCML (JV), (2020). 
Hereinafter referred to as “CORE”. 
77 ibid, para 22. The Court relied on Union of India v. Parmar Construction Company, (2019) and Union of India v. Pradeep Vinod Construction Co, (2020). 
78 ibid, para 26. The Court relied on Voestalpine (supra) and Govt. of Haryana PWD Haryana (B and R) 
Branch v. G.F. Toll Road (P) Ltd, (2019). 
79 ibid, paras 37-38. to the 2015 Amendment. Second, the Court does not deal with the prescriptions 
for a panel-based appointment that were set out in Voestalpine (supra) – that 
the other party must have freedom to make its choice from the complete panel 
rather than a limited list, and that the panel must be broad-based. The panel in 
CORE (supra) does not meet these criteria, but has been upheld by the Court. 
Further, CORE (supra) does not overrule or doubt TRF (supra) and Perkins 
(supra), but only differentiates its facts and in fact, relies on the counter-
balancing exception set out in these judgments. 
VI. 
In Glock Asia-Pacific Limited v. Union of India80, the Court appointed an 
independent arbitrator under Section 11 as the arbitration agreement provided 
for a person ineligible under Section 12(5) read with clause 1 of the Seventh 
Schedule to act as the arbitrator. Subsequently, in Lombardi Engineering 
Limited v. Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited81, the Court cited and followed 
Perkins (supra) to appoint an independent arbitrator, as the arbitration 
agreement therein was similar to that in Perkins (supra). 
39. 
This Court has also interpreted entries of the Fifth and Seventh Schedules of 
the Act, and has set out their contours in various cases. The following principles can 
be culled out from the judgments: 
I. 
In HRD v. GAIL (supra), this Court held that a broad commonsensical approach 
must be adopted while interpreting the entries of the Schedules, such that they 
are not unduly enlarged or restricted.82 It rejected the submission that an 
expansive view must be taken to remove even the remotest likelihood of bias 
 
80 (2023). 
81 (2024), see paras 85-91. 
82 HRD v. GAIL (supra), para 20. since the grounds for challenge of an award have been narrowed after the 2015 
Amendment.83 Rather, it held that since the entries in these Schedules are 
based on the Red and Orange Lists of the IBA Guidelines, they must be 
interpreted as per the principles contained in these Guidelines. The standard to 
be adopted is that a reasonable third person who has knowledge of the relevant 
facts and circumstances would conclude that there is a likelihood of the 
arbitrator being influenced by factors other than the merits of the dispute.84 
II. 
In Jaipur Zila Dugdh Utpadak Sahkari Sangh v. Ajay Sales & Suppliers85 and in 
Ellora Paper Mills v. State of M.P.86, this Court has held that the purpose of 
Section 12(5) and the Seventh Schedule is to ensure the neutrality, 
independence, and impartiality of the arbitral tribunal.87 Further, in Jaipur Zila 
(supra), the Court held that the Seventh Schedule must be read as a whole, 
considering its object and purpose.88 
III. 
This Court in Chennai Metro Rail Ltd. (supra) rejected a challenge to the 
arbitrator’s eligibility under Section 12(5) on a ground that is not enumerated in 
the Seventh Schedule. Once the Parliament has devised a statutory scheme 
prescribing the de jure ineligibility of certain persons to act as an arbitrator, the 
Court must not deviate and add to these grounds, as it would create uncertainty 
in the arbitration process.89 
40. 
After reviewing prior precedents and in view of what I have held about party 
autonomy, it can be said that the 2015 Amendment to Section 12, specifically the 
 
83 ibid. 
84 ibid. 
85 (2021). 
86 (2022). 
87 Jaipur Zila Dugdh (supra), para 14. 
88 ibid, paras 16-17. 
89 Chennai Metro Rail (supra), para 41. insertion of Section 12(5) and the Seventh Schedule, incorporates the overarching 
public policy consideration that binds the contracting parties to constitute an 
independent and an impartial arbitral tribunal as a credible and an effective substitute 
to ordinary courts and tribunals established to provide access to justice. In furtherance 
of this objective, the court will not be bound by the procedure for constitution of the 
arbitral tribunal in the arbitration agreement. 
I. 
International Perspective 
41. 
Having noted the perspective of this Court on the duty of the parties to appoint 
an independent tribunal after the 2015 Amendment, and before concluding, it is 
necessary to examine the international perspective on the issue. I must caveat that 
consideration of foreign laws and judgments of foreign jurisdiction do not have a direct 
bearing on the interpretation of our laws. At the most they grant us a perspective and 
nothing more. Further I will demonstrate that there is no single, universal standard on 
this issue; rather, each country has taken a different stance based on its own laws, 
policies, legal culture, and dispute resolution framework. Consequently, there is no 
uniform application or consistency in legal principles on this matter. Therefore, while 
foreign laws and precedents may provide insights, they should be referenced 
cautiously, acknowledging that differences in context may make direct reliance 
inappropriate. 
42. 
Legislative framework of certain foreign jurisdictions. Internationally, party 
autonomy is highly valued in appointing arbitrators and composing arbitral tribunals. 
For example, the New York Convention90 (Article V(1)(d)) permits refusal of award 
recognition if the tribunal's composition deviates from party agreement, underscoring 
 
90 Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, 1958. the primacy of party autonomy. The UNCITRAL Model Law also upholds party 
autonomy as a core principle in tribunal composition. Similarly, Section 591 of Federal 
Arbitration Act of US accords primacy to appointment procedure as agreed to between 
the parties. The arbitration agreement must be in accordance with Section 2 which 
requires the same to be, “valid, irrevocable, and enforceable, save upon such grounds 
as exists at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract.” This has been used by 
US courts to source ‘unconscionability’ as a ground to test the validity of an arbitration 
agreement.92 
43. 
Article 2 of Geneva Protocol on Arbitration Clauses93 provides that “the 
constitution of arbitral tribunal, shall be governed by the will of the parties and by the 
law of the country in whose territory the arbitration takes place.” Article 1028 of Code 
of Civil Procedure, Netherlands provides that in case the arbitration agreement gives 
one of the parties to the dispute a privileged position in appointing arbitrators, then, 
the other party may, despite the agreement, request the relevant court to appoint an 
arbitrator. Similarly, Section 1034 of German Code of Civil Procedure stipulates that if 
in the arbitration agreement, one of the parties has a preponderant right in so far as 
composition of the arbitral tribunal is concerned, thereby putting the other party at a 
disadvantage, then such latter party can request the court to appoint an arbitrator in 
 
91 Section 5, Federal Arbitration Act. It reads as: 
Section 5. Appointment of arbitrators or umpire 
If in the agreement provision be made for a method of naming or appointing an arbitrator 
or arbitrators or an umpire, such method shall be followed; but if no method be provided 
therein, or if a method be provided and any party thereto shall fail to avail himself of such 
method, or if for any other reason there shall be a lapse in the naming of an arbitrator or 
arbitrators or umpire, or in filling a vacancy, then upon the application of either party to the 
controversy the court shall designate and appoint an arbitrator or arbitrators or umpire, as 
the case may require, who shall act under the said agreement with the same force and 
effect as if he or they had been specifically named therein; and unless otherwise provided 
in the agreement the arbitration shall be by a single arbitrator. 
92 Perry v. Thomas, 482 US 483 (1987); Harold Allen’s Mobile Home Factory Outlet, Inc. v. Butler, 825 
So.2d 779,783-85 (Ala. 2002) 
93 Geneva Protocol on Arbitration Clauses, Sept. 24, 1923, 27 L.N.T.S. 158. derogation of the appointment procedure agreed upon. Article 15(2) of Spanish 
Arbitration Act, 2003, though enables the parties to freely agree on the procedure for 
the appointment of arbitrator, makes the same subject to an obligation to ensure that 
there is no violation of principle of equal treatment. 
44. 
The Estonian Code of Civil Procedure, vide Section 721 also in similar terms 
provides that if in the arbitration agreement, one party has been given economic or 
other advantage in the formation of an arbitral tribunal which is materially damaging to 
the other party, such party may make a request to the court for the appointment. 
45. 
Article 3, Annexure 1 of ‘European Convention Providing a Uniform Law on 
Arbitration’ states that an arbitration agreement is invalid if it gives one party a 
privileged position in matters of appointment. 
46. 
The analysis of foreign legislations shows that while party autonomy is 
recognised in appointment and composition of an arbitral tribunals, certain national 
laws explicitly prohibit unilateral appointments that disadvantage one party. Where 
legislatures saw it fit to ban such appointments, they have done so explicitly, 
embedding unilaterality as a vitiating factor in the statute, not leaving it to judicial 
interpretation. This legislative clarity ensures that unilaterality is a codified breach of 
an arbitral tribunal’s integrity, removing any ambiguity or scope for discretionary 
judgment. 
47. 
Judicial 
pronouncements 
of 
certain 
foreign 
jurisdictions. 
Judicial 
pronouncements across jurisdictions have adopted differing views. Gary Born94 has 
surveyed numerous foreign precedents in this regard and has referred to decisions of 
the Swiss Federal Tribunal95 and Paris Cour d’Appel96 (Paris Appellate Court), which 
 
94 Born (supra), 1878. 
95 Judgement of 26 November 2002, DFT 4P_129/2002. 
96 Philipp Bros. v. Icco, 1990 Rev. 880,883; Raffineries de Petrole d’Homs et de Banias v. Chambre de 
Commerce Internationale, 1985 Recv. Arb. 141,146 

hold that the composition of the arbitral tribunal is a matter of party autonomy and the 
appointment, removal, and replacement of arbitrators must be as per the agreement. 
The Court of Cassation (France), in one of its decisions97, has upheld an arbitration 
agreement where one party provides a list of potential arbitrators from which the other 
party must choose an arbitrator. 
48. 
However, at the same time, there are pronouncements which frown upon 
unilaterality in matters of appointment of arbitrator/arbitral tribunal. For instance, in one 
Swiss decision98, it has been held: 
“The Federal Tribunal…has developed principles, under which conditions 
an arbitral tribunal sufficiently safeguards impartial and independent 
adjudication. The most important of these principles….is that no party may 
have a preponderant influence on the appointment of the tribunal.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
49. 
American Courts have also dealt with this issue. Despite there being no express 
statutory proscription against unilaterality in matters of appointment, in one of its 
decisions, the Massachusetts District Court remarked that “both the parties to a 
dispute must have an equal right to participate in the appointment process.”99 Similarly, 
in another case,100 the Supreme Court of Alabama invalidated an arbitration 
agreement as being unconscionable for the reason that it excluded one party from the 
appointment process. Further, in Hooters of America, Inc. v. Phillips101, the arbitration 
clause was held to be against rules of neutrality and the award refused enforcement 
because one party was given exclusive control over the panel of potential arbitrators 
from which the other party could select its nominee arbitrator. It was observed that: 
 
97 Judgment of 31 January, 2002, 2003:2 Cahiers de l’Arbitrage 303. 
98 Judgement of 11 November 1981, DFT 107 Ia 155,158 (Swiss Fed. Trib.). 
99 Rosenberg v. Merril Lynch, Pierce, Fennner & Smith, Inc. 995 F.Supp. 190,208. 
100 Harold Allen’s Mobile Home Factory Outlet, Inc. v. Butler, 825 So.2d 779,783-85 (Ala. 2002) 
101 39 F. Supp. 2d 582 (D.S.C. 1998). 

“In this case, the challenge goes to the validity of the arbitration agreement 
itself. Hooters materially breached the arbitration agreement by 
promulgating rules so egregiously unfair as to constitute a complete default 
of its contractual obligation to draft arbitration rules and to do so in good 
faith. Hooters and Phillips agreed to settle any disputes between them not 
in a judicial forum, but in another neutral forum -- arbitration. Their 
agreement provided that Hooters was responsible for setting up such a 
forum by promulgating arbitration rules and procedures. To this end, 
Hooters instituted a set of rules in July 1996. The Hooters rules when taken 
as a whole, however, are so one-sided that their only possible purpose is 
to undermine the neutrality of the proceeding.” 
Further, on the question of unilateral composition of panel, the court remarked: 
“The Hooters rules also provide a mechanism for selecting a panel of three 
arbitrators that is crafted to ensure a biased decisionmaker. Rule 8. The 
employee and Hooters each select an arbitrator, and the two arbitrators in 
turn select a third. Good enough, except that the employee's arbitrator and 
the third arbitrator must be selected from a list of arbitrators created 
exclusively by Hooters. This gives Hooters control over the entire panel and 
places no limits whatsoever on whom Hooters can put on the list. Under the 
rules, Hooters is free to devise lists of partial arbitrators who have existing 
relationships, financial or familial, with Hooters and its management. In fact, 
the rules do not even prohibit Hooters from placing its managers 
themselves on the list. Further, nothing in the rules restricts Hooters from 
punishing arbitrators who rule against the company by removing them from 
the list. Given the unrestricted control that one party (Hooters) has over the 
panel, the selection of an impartial decisionmaker would be a surprising 
result.” 
50. 
Similarly, in Murray v. United Food and Commercial Workers Union102, the 
District Court of Maryland held the arbitration agreement to be unconscionable 
because the arbitrator was selected from a list of potential arbitrators curated by one 
 
102 289 F.3d 297 (4th Cir.2002). of the parties to the dispute. In doing so, the court observed that, “Although an 
arbitration agreement will not be invalidated for failure to “replicate the judicial forum”, 
we again refuse to enforce an agreement so utterly lacking in the rudiments of even-
handedness.” This line of reasoning continues in McMullen v. Meijer, Inc.103 where the 
agreement granted one party unilateral control over the pool of potential arbitrators. 
There, the court noted that, “when the process used to select the arbitrator is 
fundamentally unfair, as in this case, the arbitral forum is not an effective substitute for 
a judicial forum, and there is no need to present separate evidence of bias or 
corruption.” 
51. 
The importance of composition of a just and proper arbitral tribunal was also 
highlighted by the Supreme Court of West Virginia in Board of Education of Berkley 
County v. W. Harley Miller, Inc.104 There, the disputes were to be settled pursuant to a 
standard arbitration provision contained in the construction contract with the Board 
which provided that disputes shall be decided by arbitration in accordance with the 
Construction Industry Arbitration Rules of the American Arbitration Association. While 
the clause did not give one party unilateral control over the pool of arbitrators, the 
Court nonetheless discussed the issue of unilaterality in matters of appointment and 
reasoned that: 
“A functional analysis of the West Virginia cases which do not favor 
arbitration demonstrates that this Court would not countenance an 
arbitration provision by which the parties agree that all disputes will be 
arbitrated by a panel chosen exclusively by one of the parties. This is the 
classic rabbits and foxes situation, with the foxes stacking the arbitration 
panel in their favor. Such a contract provision is inherently inequitable and 
 
103 355 F.3d 485 (6th Cir. 2004). 
104 Board of Ed. v. W. Harley Miller, Inc., 160 W. Va. 473, 236 S.E.2d 439 (W. Va. 1977). unconscionable because in a way it nullifies all the other provisions of the 
contract.” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
 
52. 
In a case decided by the England and Wales Court of Appeal in Sumukan Ltd. v. Commonwealth Secretariat105, the award passed by the arbitrator was set aside on 
the ground that one of the parties to the dispute was not consulted in the appointment 
of arbitrator. It was observed: 
“Furthermore if the arbitrators were to be selected from a Panel, and if there 
was a procedure for the appointment of the Panel aimed at guarding against 
any apparent lack of independence, it seems to me right that a substantial 
failure to comply with that procedure should have an effect on the 
jurisdiction of the tribunal itself.” 
 
53. 
The comparative analysis of judicial pronouncements across jurisdictions 
reveals that, while party autonomy is often respected in the appointment of arbitrators, 
courts are also wary of provisions granting one-sided control over the arbitral panel. 
Rulings from the U.S., Switzerland, France, and the UK highlight differing views on 
this matter. This diversity in views across jurisdictions reinforces the need for caution 
in relying on foreign precedents or laws. 
J. 
On the opinion of the Hon’ble CJI 
54. 
I have had the benefit of the exhaustive and erudite judgment of the Hon’ble 
Chief Justice Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud. I have already given reasons for my decision. I 
find it necessary to indicate certain issues about the perspective and the final 
conclusion. 
 
105 [2007] EWCA 1148. 

54.1 At the outset, I reiterate the necessary distinction between the duty of the 
parties to arbitration agreement to constitute an independent arbitral tribunal and the 
duty of the arbitrator to act judicially. In this case, we are concerned with the former 
and not about the duty of the arbitrator. 
54.2 Holding that an arbitral tribunal has the “trappings of a court” as it determines 
the competing rights and liabilities of parties through an ‘adjudicatory process’, and 
therefore it must act judicially has the problems of introducing public law principles in 
contractual dispute resolution. This formulation has engendered the application of 
principles of procedural equality, equal treatment under Article 14, fairness, non-
arbitrariness, justice, reasonableness, impartiality and bias, all of which have been 
subsequently invoked in the judgment as core values. I tried to locate the obligations 
of contracting parties to the arbitration agreement within the province of contract law 
and public policy considerations therein. This approach, I believe, is better suited for 
the determination of disputes in arbitration law, as it balances and protects the twin 
values of party autonomy through judicial restraint, and the duty the parties to 
constitute an independent arbitral tribunal without compromising any one in favour of 
the other. 
54.3 There is a certain difficulty in invoking Section 18 of the Act and applying it as 
an equality principle mandating equal opportunity to both the contracting parties at the 
time of constituting the arbitral tribunal. Section 18 is the obligation of the arbitrator in 
conduct of arbitral proceedings. I have already highlighted the important distinction 
between the duty of the arbitrator to act judicially and the obligations of the parties to 
constitute an independent arbitral tribunal. That apart, the text and the context of 
Section 18 as is evident from the scheme of the Act eschews application of Section 18 
at the time of appointment. This is clear through two factors: first, through the 

placement of Section 18 in Chapter V, on ‘Conduct of arbitral proceedings’, which 
comes after Chapter III on ‘Composition of arbitral tribunal’; and second, through the 
wording of Section 18, which makes it clear that the obligation to treat the parties with 
equality is on the arbitral tribunal, rather than the parties to the arbitration agreement. 
The later portion of Section 18, which mandates that “each party shall be given a full 
opportunity to present his case”, further fortifies this view. 
54.4 The doctrine of bias and the contours of the test of real likelihood of bias have 
been discussed through various significant decisions of this Court rendered in the 
context of administrative and constitutional law. Considering that the issue before us 
is the legality of a procedure in the arbitration clause, I find it difficult to apply the 
doctrine of bias or real likelihood of bias at this stage. The real issue is about the 
imbalance caused due to unilateral power of one of the parties to the contract to 
constitute the arbitral tribunal. Composition of the arbitral tribunal is part of party 
autonomy but there is always the power, coupled with duty, of the court to ensure that 
procedure under the arbitration clause enables constitution of an independent arbitral 
tribunal. This scrutiny or enquiry by the court is at the stage of considering the 
application under Section 11. I am of the opinion that we cannot, as an advance ruling, 
give a declaration that all arbitration clauses enabling unilateral appointments are null 
and void at this stage. 
54.5 I am of the opinion that a priori declaration that arbitration agreements that 
prescribe unilateral appointment procedures are invalid can lead to many problems in 
the day-to-day working of arbitral remedies. Particularly for institutions involving 
multiple transactions such as insurance claims, credit card defaults, etc. involving 
large number of cases but each claim may be of small sum. Our declaration of law 
substantially covers domestic arbitration, it will not be confined to high and 

international commercial arbitration. There could also be situations where the 
unilateral constitution of the panel of arbitrators could have credible members with 
respect to which no one can have an objection. Rather than declaring that all such 
agreements are void, it would be better to strengthen the remedial mechanisms 
available under the Act. This way, the choice of the parties is not completely ignored, 
and impartiality and independence of the arbitral tribunal is also ensured through close 
scrutiny by courts on a case-to-case basis. In any event, as indicated earlier, the 
enquiry about the arbitration clause will be at the stage of Section 11. 
55. 
I consider it necessary to note that mere existence of some relationship with 
the appointing authority does not inherently undermine autonomy. For instance, senior 
officers always serve as appellate authorities, and their objectivity is not compromised 
due to their employment. The solution is in the remedies and certainty in law. System 
of governances must evolve and recognize the capability in handling distinct 
professional duties. It is said that the key difference between humans and other beings 
lies in their ability to think independently and even against our own interests. While it 
is important to acknowledge potential conflicts of interest, it does not mean that the 
system must bend backward to cater to unending suspicion and doubt. A balance must 
be struck between ensuring confidence in the system and fostering a healthy culture 
of independence and objective in functioning. If we focus solely on identifying and 
disqualifying individuals for perceived conflicts, the process becomes an endless cycle 
of mistrust. 
K. 
Conclusion 
56. 
With these findings and observations, I summarise my conclusions as follows: 

I. 
Dispute resolution through arbitration encompasses two independent yet 
interdependent principles: contractual freedom as party autonomy and 
statutory obligation as duty to constitute an independent arbitral tribunal. 
II. 
Party autonomy in making of an arbitration agreement is an essential feature 
of arbitration. It commences with choosing the members of the arbitral 
tribunal, extends to the procedure that would apply for its conduct, and 
concludes with the method by which an award could be challenged before 
a court. It is thus a brooding and guiding spirit of arbitration. Party autonomy 
is sufficiently incorporated in the Arbitration Act, along with a restraint on 
judicial intervention. 
III. 
The moment parties choose arbitration over ordinary civil proceedings for 
dispute resolution, their duty to establish an independent and impartial 
tribunal arises. The substitution of arbitration in place of civil courts as an 
exception under Section 28 of the Contract Act is only for a forum and not 
for contracting out of the most essential feature of a dispute resolution, i.e., 
independence and impartiality must exist in every forum. This essential 
feature is the inviolable public policy consideration under Section 23 of the 
Contract Act from which the parties cannot opt out. Arbitration agreements 
which are not compliant of this public policy consideration are void under 
Section 23 of the Contract Act. Thus, there is a statutory incorporation of 
duties of the parties to the arbitration agreement. 
IV. 
If an arbitration agreement is considered by the court as not enabling 
constitution of an independent and impartial tribunal, any submission that 
the said agreement is a binding contract, or it is in exercise of party 

autonomy is not tenable as such an agreement will be against public policy 
and as such not an enforceable contract. 
V. 
In view of the statutory incorporation of these duties, it is not necessary to 
apply public law principles evolved in constitutional and administrative laws. 
Sourcing these duty obligations from Contract Act and Arbitration Act is 
important to maintain the integrity of the party autonomy and restraint of 
judicial institutions. 
VI. 
The power to ensure that the arbitration agreement is compliant of the public 
policy requirement of establishing an independent and impartial tribunal is 
always of the Court. This principle is recognised and statutorily incorporated 
in the Contract Act and the Arbitration Act. It is the duty of the court to ensure 
that the arbitration agreement inspires confidence and it will enable 
establishment of an independent and impartial arbitral tribunal. 
VII. 
Neither public policy considerations under the Contract Act or the Arbitration 
Act restrain the parties to the arbitration from maintaining a panel of 
arbitrators in any manner. However, arbitration agreements enabling one of 
the parties to unilaterally constitute arbitral tribunal do not inspire confidence 
of independence and may violate the public policy requirement of 
constituting an independent and impartial tribunal. The court will, therefore, 
scrutinise the agreement and hold them to be invalid if it considers it 
appropriate. 
VIII. 
The occasion for the court to examine the constitution of the independent 
and impartial tribunal under the arbitration clause will arise when one of the 
parties makes an application under Sections 11, 14 or 34. It is not 
permissible for the court to give an advance declaration that all such 

agreements which enable one of the parties to unilaterally constitute the 
arbitral tribunal would be void per se. No two agreements are the same and 
it is necessary for the court to examine the text and context of the 
agreement. 
IX. 
All applications pending before the courts challenging the unilateral 
appointment clauses will be disposed of applying the test as to whether such 
a clause enables establishment of an independent and impartial tribunal. 

[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 
 
November 08, 2024 
New Delhi.