IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

IN RE: T.N. GODAVARMAN THIRUMULPAD       …PETITIONER

VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.
        …RESPONDENTS
JUDGMENT 
P.C.
1.
This judgment is in the context of institutionalisation and
reconstitution of the Central Empowered Committee.1  The CEC
was originally directed to be constituted by an order of this Court
dated 09.05.2002.2  Almost for a period of two decades, the CEC
was functioning as an ad hoc body. We noticed that the present
composition of the CEC also consisted of persons who are more
than 75 years of age and some of whom are also residing outside
India.  We also noticed that much water had flown when the CEC
1 Hereinafter ‘CEC’. 
2 In IA No. 295 in WP(C) No. 202/1995 reported as T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union
of India, (2013). Pursuant to the said direction, a notification dated 17.09.2002
was issued by the Central Government constituting the CEC as a statutory authority under
Section 3(3) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. was   initially   constituted,   inasmuch   as,   various   enactments
concerning environmental issues were enacted, so also various
regulatory bodies were constituted under the said enactments.
We further found it  necessary to have  a relook at the  CEC’s
functioning. We, therefore, passed orders dated 24.03.2023 and
18.05.2023 in this regard.  
2.
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
thereafter issued a Notification dated 05.09.2023 under Section
3(3) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, constituting the
CEC as a permanent body for  “the purposes of monitoring and
ensuring compliance of the orders of the Supreme Court covering
the subject matter of Environment, Forest and Wildlife, and related
issues arising out of the said orders and to suggest measures and
recommendations   generally   to   the   State,   as   well   as   Central
Government, for more effective implementation of the Act and other
orders of the Court”.3  By our order dated 18.08.2023, we have
approved   the   aforesaid   Notification.   While   approving   the
Notification,  we   also   declared   that  the   CEC   shall  continue  to
function subject to such orders and directions that this Court
may pass from time to time.
3 See the Preamble of the notification dated 05.09.2023.

3.
In   Part   I   of   this   judgment,   we   will   first   present   the
conception,   constitution,   functions,   and   finally   the
institutionalisation   of   the   CEC.     In   Part   II,   to   entrench
environmental rule of law in our environmental governance, we
have attempted to formulate some new principles for the effective
monitoring   of   various   bodies,   institutions,   and   regulators
established for protecting our forests, wildlife, environment, and
ecology.
PART ­ I
4.
Original Constitution and Functioning of CEC till 2023: This
Court’s   endeavours   to   protect   forests   in   India   and   to   ensure
regulation of non­forest activities in forests commenced in 1996.
Even prior to the constitution of the CEC, this Court directed the
constitution   of   various   bodies   to   oversee   and   monitor   the
compliance of its orders. In one of the most important orders
dated   12.12.1996,4  this   Court   defined   the   term   ‘forest’   as
covering all statutorily recognised forests, irrespective of how they
were designated (either as reserved, protected or otherwise). The
term ‘forest land’ in Section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act,
1980   was   held   to   include   any   area   recorded   as   a   forest   in
4 T.N. Godavarman Thirumulkpad v. Union of India, (1997). government   records,   irrespective   of   its   ownership.   Along   with
mandating   prior   approval   of   the   Central   Government   to
undertake   any   non­forest   activities   in   forests   and   issuing
directions on the felling of trees, this Court also directed the
constitution of  Expert Committees  by each state government to
identify ‘forests’ and sustainable existence of saw mills in forests.
This Court also directed each state government to constitute a
committee   with   the   Principal   Chief   Conservator  of   Forests   and
another Senior Official to oversee the compliance of its orders and
the filing of status reports by the states. 
5.
In   its   order   dated   04.03.1997,5  this   Court   constituted   a
High­Powered Committee6  to oversee  the implementation of  its
orders   in   the   North­Eastern   region   and   to   also   oversee
preparation of inventory of timber, apart from permitting its sale.
By order dated 17.04.2000,7  this Court empowered the HPC to
also   supervise   the   transportation   of   illegal   timber,   oversee
investigation   into   cases   of   illegal   felling   of   trees,   and   to   re­
examine licensing of units. 
6.
The   CEC   was   constituted   by   this   Court   by   order   dated
09.05.20028  to monitor the implementation of its orders and to
5 T.N. Godavarman Thirumulkpad v. Union of India, (1997).
6 Hereinafter ‘HPC’.
7 T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India, (2002).
8 T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India, (2013). present   cases   of   non­compliance,   including   with   respect   to
encroachment   removals,   implementation   of   working   plans,
compensatory afforestation, plantations and other conservation
issues. The Court directed that the CEC must be constituted
until   such   time   that   the   Central   Government   constitutes   a
statutory body under Section 3 of the Environment (Protection)
Act.   The   CEC,   so   constituted   comprised:   (i)   a   Chairman,
nominated   by   the   Ministry   of   Environment   and   Forests9  in
consultation with the amicus curiae, (ii) a nominee of the MoEF,
(iii) two NGOs who are to be nominated in consultation with the
amicus   curiae,   and   (iv)   a   Member   Secretary.   These   members
(other   than   the   nominee   of   the   MoEF)  could   not   be   removed
without the Court’s permission. 
7.
The above order required that the reports and affidavits filed
by states pursuant to this Court’s orders were to be placed before
the   CEC   for   its   examination   and   recommendations.   The
recommendations of the CEC would be placed before this Court
for   orders.   Further,   persons   who   are   aggrieved   by   any   steps
taken by the government in purported compliance of this Court’s
orders could seek relief from the CEC, which must decide the
applications in conformity with the Court’s orders. To perform
9 Hereinafter ‘MoEF’. these   functions,   the   CEC   was   given   the   power   to   call   for
documents from any person or government, summon any person
and receive evidence on oath, and seek assistance/presence of
any person or official, including the power to co­opt persons as
special invitees for dealing with specific issues. When an issue
pertains to a particular state, the Chief Secretary and Principal
Chief Conservator of Forests of that state were to be co­opted as
special invitees wherever feasible. The composition of the CEC
was finalised by this Court by order dated 09.09.2002.10 In this
order, the Court also took note of the draft proposed notification
under   Section   3(3)   of   the   Environment   (Protection)   Act   that
constituted the CEC as a statutory body for five years. The Court
directed that once the notification is issued, the functions and
responsibilities of the CEC are to be exercised as a statutory
committee.   The   Central   Government   issued   the   notification
constituting the CEC under Section 3(3) on 17.09.2002.11
10 T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India, (2009). Under this order,
the Court appointed the following members of the CEC:
a.
PV Jayakrishnan, Secretary, Government of India as Chairman;
b.
Shri NK Joshi, ADG of Forests, Member;
c.
Valmik Thapar, Ranthambore Foundation as Member;
d.
Advocate Mahendra Vyas as Member;
e.
MK Jiwrajka, IGF as Member Secretary.
11 No.13­21/98­SU­PT.II.

8.
The first modification of the order dated 09.05.2002 came
by   way   of   order   dated   14.12.2007.12  The   modified   terms   of
reference, which superseded all previous orders, were as follows:
“1.2. The committee shall exercise the following powers
and perform the following functions:
(i) to monitor the implementation of this Court's orders
and place reports of non­compliance before the Court and
the Central Government for appropriate action; 
(ii) to examine pending interlocutory applications in the
said writ petitions (as may be referred to it by the Court)
as well as the reports and affidavits filed by the States in
response to the orders passed by the Hon'ble Court and
place its recommendations before the Court for orders;
(iii)   to   deal   with   any   applications   made   to   it   by   any
aggrieved person and wherever necessary, to make a
report to this Court in that behalf; 
(iv)   for   the   purposes   of   effective   discharge   of   powers
conferred   upon   the   Committee   under   this   order,   the
Committee can:
(a) call for any documents from any persons or the
Government   of   the   Union   or   the   State   or   any   other
official;
(b) undertake site inspection of forest area involved;
(c)   seek   assistance   or   presence   of   any   person(s)   or
official(s) required by it in relation to its work;
(d) co­opt one or more persons as its members or as
special invitees for dealing with specific issues;
(e) co­opt, wherever feasible, the Chief Secretary or his
representative   and   Principal   Chief   Conservator   of
Forests of the State as special invitees while dealing
with issues pertaining to a particular State;
(f) to suggest measures generally to the State, as well
as   Central   Government,   for   the   more   effective
implementation   of   the   Act   and   other   orders   of   this
Court;
12 T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India, (2013). 

(v)   to   examine   and   advise/recommend   on   any   issue
referred to the Committee.”
9.
The composition of the CEC was modified by this Court by
its order dated 21.02.200813  and the term of office for the new
members   was   directed   to   be   for   three   years   or   until   further
orders, whichever is earlier. In another order dated 11.09.2009,
one of the members of the CEC was replaced14 and by order dated
03.02.2017, the Member Secretary was replaced.15
10.
Developments   in   2023:  It   is   in   the   context   of   IA   No.
174896/2019 seeking permission of this Court to construct a
Convention   Centre   at   Patnitop   that   the   present   issue   of
reconstitution   of   CEC   is   taken   up.   The   said   application   was
allowed   by   this   Court   on   24.02.2023   subject   to   obtaining
clearance from the concerned statutory authorities.16
11.
The   CEC   submitted   its   report   on   the   subject   matter   on
13.03.2023. When the report was placed before this Court on
24.03.2023, the Court made the following observations regarding
13 T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India, (2008).
14 T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India, (2009).
15 T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India, (2022).
16 IA No. 196062 and 174896 of 2019 in T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India,
W.P. (C) No. 202/1995, order dated 24.02.2023

the functioning of the CEC. The relevant portion of the order
dated 24.03.2023 is extracted below:17 
“10. In any case, we are of the view that once an order
is   passed   by   this   Court,   it   is   not   appropriate   for   a
Committee which was constituted under the very orders
of this Court to give a report which in effect, questions
the correctness or otherwise, of the orders passed by
this Court. 
11. A Committee which is constituted under the orders
of the Court cannot consider itself to be an appellate
authority in regard to the orders passed by this Court. 
12.   We   are   further   informed   by   the   learned   Solicitor
General that at times, the members of the CEC are not
ad idem on all the issues, which are ultimately reported
to this Court. 
13. We, therefore, direct that hereinafter, wherever there
is   a   separate   or   dissenting   opinion   of   any   of   the
members of the CEC, such opinion shall also be placed
before the Court alongwith the report. 
14. It is further informed that some of the members of
the Committee have crossed the age of 75 years and
some of the members are also living abroad. 
15.   No   doubt,   the   Committee   has   rendered   yeomen
services to the cause of environment. However, we are
of the view that for effective functioning of the CEC, it is
appropriate that some experts in the relevant fields who
are relatively younger to the present incumbents, can
contribute in a more energetic and efficient manner. It
will   therefore   be   appropriate   that   some   of   the   old
members, who have attained an advanced age or are
not   available   in   India   all   the   time,   are   replaced   by
younger members. 
16. We, therefore, request the learned Solicitor General
and both the learned Amicus Curiae to give a list of
persons,   who   have   expertise   in   environmental   and
17  IA   No.   196062   and   174896   of   2019   along   with   CEC   Report   No.   11/2023   in  T.N.
Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India, W.P. (C) No. 202/1995, order dated 24.03.2023. ecological fields. The same shall be done within three
weeks from today. 
17. List these applications on 19.04.2023 for direction.”
12.
When the matter was next listed on 18.05.2023,18  learned
Solicitor   General   submitted   that   the   Central   Government   had
accepted the suggestion of the Court to constitute the CEC as a
permanent statutory body. Union of India was to publish a draft
notification under Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act,
1986   to   constitute   the   CEC   within   15   days   and   place   the
notification   before   this   Court.   This   notification   would   contain
provisions on the qualification of members, their tenure, powers
and responsibilities, etc. The relevant portion of the order dated
18.05.2023 is extracted below:
“On   the   last   date   when   the   matter   was   heard,   a
suggestion was made by the Bench that instead of the
CEC (Central Empowered Committee) being an ad­hoc
body, it would be in the larger interest that the CEC as
an institution should be a permanent statutory body. 
Mr.   Tushar   Mehta,   learned   Solicitor   General,   has
accepted the said suggestion. He states that the Union
of India would publish a draft notification under the
provisions of Section 3 of the Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986 providing for the constitution of the CEC. 
He submitted that the draft notification would contain
provisions related to the qualification of the Members to
be   appointed,   their   tenure,   their   powers   and
responsibilities etc. 
18 T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India, I.A. Nos. 196062 and 174896 of 2019 in
W.P. No. 202/1995, order dated 18.05.2023.

Learned   Solicitor   General   submits   that   the   draft
notification will be published within a period of 15 days
from today and that the same shall be placed before the
Court on the next date.”
13.
On 18.08.2023,19 a draft notification issued by the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change20 for constitution of
the CEC was placed before the Court, with a copy to the learned
amicus curiae. We examined the draft notification in detail and
made certain suggestions about incorporating certain features for
the   effective   and   efficient   functioning   of   the   CEC.   Certain
suggestions were also made by the learned amicus curiae. The
learned Solicitor General did not have any objection to the same
and submitted that the suggestions would be incorporated in the
final   notification.   Pursuantly,   the   Central   Government   was
permitted   to   proceed   with   the   issuance   of   the   notification   to
constitute the CEC as a permanent body in the interest of all
stakeholders. This Court also permitted the MoEFCC to proceed
with the constitution of members of the CEC in accordance with
the notification. The relevant portion of the order passed by this
Court is extracted below:
19 T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India, I.A. Nos. 196062 and 174896 of 2019 in
W.P. No. 202/1995, order dated 18.08.2023.
20 Hereinafter ‘MoEFCC’.

“2.   In   pursuance   of   the   aforesaid   order,   Mr.   Tushar
Mehta, learned Solicitor General of India, has handed
over a draft notification to be issued by the Ministry of
Environment,   Forest   and   Climate   Change   (MoEFCC)
regarding constitution of Central Empowered Committee
(CEC). The said draft has already been shared with Mr.
K. Parameshwar, learned Amicus Curiae. 
3. Learned Amicus Curiae submits that he has only one
suggestion to the draft notification i.e. there should be a
provision for periodical audit of the functioning of the
CEC by the MoEFCC. 
4. Learned Solicitor General does not have any objection
to the said suggestion. He states that the suggestion
given   by   the   learned   Amicus   Curiae   would   be
incorporated   in   the   final   notification   that   would   be
issued by the MoEFCC. 
5. We, therefore, permit the Union of India to proceed
further with the issuance of notification for constitution
of the CEC as a permanent body. 
6. We find that rather than CEC functioning as an ad
hoc body, it functioning as a permanent body would be
in the interest of all the stake holders. 
7. We also permit the MoEFCC to proceed further with
the   constitution   of   the   CEC   in   accordance   with   the
notification that will be issued by the MoEFCC.”
14.
Pursuant to the above referred orders dated 18.05.2023 and
18.08.2023,   the   MoEFCC   issued   a   Notification   dated
05.09.202321 under Section 3(3) of the Environment (Protection)
Act   to   constitute   a   permanent   authority,   i.e.,   the   Central
Empowered   Committee   (CEC),   for   monitoring   and   ensuring
compliance of this Court’s orders covering the subject­matter of
environment, forest, and wildlife and related issues arising out of
these   orders;   and   to   suggest   measures   and   make
21 E. F. No. 13­12/2022­SU. recommendations to the states and Central Government for more
effective implementation of the Act and this Court’s orders. 
15.
Under   the   new   notification,   the   CEC   shall   comprise:   i)
Chairman, ii) Member Secretary, and iii) Three expert members
(one each from the fields of environment, forest, and wildlife). The
Chairman and three expert members are to be nominated by the
Central   Government   for   a   tenure   of   3   years,   which   can   be
extended to one more tenure subject to the prescribed age limit of
66   years.   The   Member   Secretary   is   appointed   by   the   Central
Government to be the Chief Coordinating Officer of the CEC and
to assist the CEC in the discharge of its functions.
16.
The notification also provides for the functions and powers
of the CEC in accordance with the orders of this Court along with
certain other functions. They are:
“2. The Committee shall exercise the following powers
and perform the following functions:­ 
A. Powers and functions conferred upon the Committee
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Writ Petition
( in the case of T. N.
Godavarman   Thirumalpad   Vs.   Union   of   India   and
others:­
a)   to   monitor   the   implementation   of   Supreme   Court's
orders   in   above   matters   and   place   reports   of
noncompliance   before   the   Central   Government   for
appropriate actions; 
b)   to   deal   with   any   applications   made   to   it   by   any
aggrieved person and wherever necessary, to make a
report to the Central Government in that matter; 

c)   for   the   purposes   of   effective   discharge   of   powers
conferred   upon   the   Committee   under   this   order;   the
Committee can:­
i. call for any documents from any persons or the
government of the Union or the State or any other
official. ii. undertake site inspection. iii. seek assistance or presence of any person(s) or
official(s) required by it in relation to its work. iv. co­opt one or more persons as special invitees for
dealing with specific issues. v. co­opt, wherever feasible, the Secretary of the State
Government   dealing   with   the   subjects   related   to
Forest or Wildlife or Environment or his representative
or the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests of the
State as special invitees while dealing with issues
pertaining to a particular State. vi. to suggest or recommend measures generally to
the State as well as Central Government, for the more
effective implementation of the Act and other orders of
the Supreme Court in above matters.
B. to examine and advise or recommend on any issue
referred to the Committee by the Central Government,
from time to time.”
17.
The   notification   provides   that   the   states   or   Central
Government shall give reasons in writing for not accepting any
suggestion or recommendation of the CEC and the decision of the
Central Government shall be final.22 Further, in case of deferment
of   the   decision   of   any   State   Government   with   the   CEC’s
recommendation,   the   matter   shall   be   referred   to   the   Central
Government and the decision of the Central Government shall be
final and binding.23  We may clarify at this very stage that the
22 ibid, s.3.
23 ibid, s.4. decisions of the Central Government, or, for that matter, State
Governments,   are   always  subject  to  the   orders  of   this  Court.
When this notification was placed before us, we clarified this
position,   and   we   hereby   reiterate   that   the   order   of   the   State
and/or   Central   Government   under   clauses   3   and   4   will   be
subject to any direction or order that this Court may pass from
time to time.
18.
The members of the CEC are appointed in their personal
capacity and are to function under the administrative control of
the   MoEFCC,   with   headquarters   in   Delhi.24  The   salaries   and
allowances payable, other perks and conditions of service of the
Chairperson and members are to be prescribed and they cannot
be varied to their disadvantage after the appointment.25 MoEFCC
is   required   to   provide   suitable   and   adequate   office
accommodation for the CEC and requisite manpower, budgetary
support, and infrastructure for the discharge of functions and
powers delegated to the CEC.26 MoEFCC is also required to meet
the expenditure incurred, including salaries and remuneration to
members and supporting staff.27 The CEC is required to submit
24 ibid, s.5.
25 ibid, s.6.
26 ibid. s.7.
27 ibid, s.8. quarterly reports to the Central Government and MoEFCC for
periodical review and audit of the CEC’s functioning.28 
19.
Finally, the Central Government appointed the members of
the   CEC   by   another   notification   dated   08.09.2023,   and   the
composition is as follows:29 i) Sri Siddhant Das, Chairman, ii) Sri
Chandra Prakash Goyal, Member, iii) Sri Sunil Limaye, Member,
iv) Dr. J.R. Bhatt, Member and v) Ms Banumathi G, Assistant
Inspector   General   of   Forests,   MoEFCC,   Member   Secretary.
Thereafter, the matter came up before us on 11.12.2023.  On the
said date, we heard the learned Solicitor General as well as the
learned   amicus   curiae   at   length.   We   had   also   called   for
suggestions for more effective functioning of the CEC.  
20.
We find that by virtue of the Notification dated 05.09.2023,
our concerns regarding the functioning of the CEC as an ad hoc
body   and   that   hereinafter   it   should   be   institutionalised   as   a
permanent body have been taken care of. The said Notification
provides for the constitution of the CEC, its powers, functions,
mandate,   members,   method   of   appointment,   terms   of   service,
and monitoring of its functioning. 
28 ibid, s.9.
29 F. No. 13­12/2022­SU.

21.
We further direct the CEC to adopt the following measures
to   promote   institutional   transparency,   efficiency,   and
accountability in its functioning: 
i.
The CEC shall formulate guidelines for the conduct of its
functions and internal meetings. The CEC shall formulate
the   operating   procedures   delineating   the   roles   of   its
members and the Secretary of the CEC. ii.
The   CEC   shall   formulate   guidelines   about   the   public
meetings that it holds, ensure the publication of meeting
agenda in advance on its website, maintain minutes of
meetings, and set out rules regarding notice to parties. iii.
The CEC shall formulate guidelines for site visits and, if
necessary,   hearing   the   public   and   affected   parties
therein. iv.
The CEC shall formulate guidelines fixing time limits for
site visits, preparation of reports, and also the manner of
preparation of reports. v.
We further direct that these guidelines/regulations must
be accessible for anyone to seek. They shall be posted on
the official website of the CEC.
PART­II
22.
As   new   bodies,   authorities,   and   regulators   for
environmental   governance   emerge   from   time   to   time,   their

institutionalisation
 
assumes
 
extraordinary
 
importance.
Institutionalisation   means   that   these   bodies   must   work   in
compliance with institutional norms of efficiency, integrity, and
certainty. In this context, the role of the constitutional courts is
even greater. 
23.
Environmental Rule of Law: Environmental rule of law refers
to   environmental   governance   that   is   undergirded   by   the
fundamental tenets of rule of law.30 The rule of law regime is one
that   has   effective,   accountable,   and   transparent   institutions;
responsive, inclusive, participatory, and representative decision­
making; and public access to information.31 It recognises the vital
role that institutions play in governance and focuses on defining
the   structural   norms   and   processes   that   guide   institutional
decision­making.32

United   Nations,   ‘Environmental   Rule   of   Law:   First   Global   Report’   (2019)
https://www.unep.org/resources/assessment/environmental­rule­law­first­global­report,
p.1, 8. The United Nations has defined environmental rule of law with reference to 7 core
components, which are:
i.
Fair, clear, and implementable environmental laws;
ii.
Access to information, public participation, and access to justice through
courts, tribunals, commissions, and other bodies;
iii.
Accountability and integrity of decision­makers and institutions;
iv.
Clear and coordinated mandates and roles, across and within institutions;
v.
Accessible,   fair,   impartial,   timely   and   responsive   dispute   resolution
mechanisms;
vi.
Recognition   of   the   mutually   reinforcing   relationship   between   rights   and
environmental rule of law; and
vii.
Specific criteria for the interpretation of environmental law. 
31 Hanuman Laxman Aroskar v. Union of India, (2019), para 156.
32  Himachal   Pradesh   Bus­Stand   Management   &   Development   Authority  v.  Central
Empowered Committee, (2021), para 48. 

24.
While   several   laws,   rules,   and   regulations   exist   for
protection of the environment, their objective is not achieved as
there is a considerable gap as these laws remain unenforced or
ineffectively   implemented.   Rule   of   law   in   environmental
governance seeks to redress this issue as the implementation gap
has a direct bearing on the protection of the environment, forests,
wildlife, sustainable development, and public health, eventually
affecting fundamental human rights to a clean environment that
are   intrinsically   tied   to   right   to   life.33  Accountability   of   the
authorities impressed with the duty to enforce and implement
environmental and other ecological laws is an important feature
of judicial governance. In the context of accountability, this Court
in Vijay Rajmohan v. CBI34 has held:
“34. Accountability in itself is an essential principle of
administrative   law.   Judicial   review   of   administrative
action   will   be   effective   and   meaningful   by   ensuring
accountability of the officer or authority in charge.
35. The principle of accountability is considered as a
cornerstone   of   the   human   rights   framework.   It   is   a
crucial   feature   that   must   govern   the   relationship
between “duty bearers” in authority and “right holders”
affected by their actions. Accountability of institutions is
also one of the development goals adopted by the United
Nations in 2015 and is also recognised as one of the six
principles of the Citizens Charter Movement.
36.   Accountability   has   three   essential   constituent
dimensions: (i) responsibility, (ii) answerability, and (iii)
enforceability. Responsibility requires the identification
33 Hanuman Laxman Aroskar (supra), paras 143­144.
34 (2023). of duties and performance obligations of individuals in
authority and with authorities. Answerability requires
reasoned decision­making so that those affected by their
decisions, including the public, are aware of the same.
Enforceability   requires   appropriate   corrective   and
remedial   action   against   lack   of   responsibility   and
accountability   to   be   taken.   Accountability   has   a
corrective   function,   making   it   possible   to   address
individual   or   collective   grievances.   It   enables   action
against officials or institutions for dereliction of duty. It
also has a preventive function that helps to identify the
procedure  or   policy  which  has  become  non­functional
and to improve upon it.”
25.
In India, environmental rule of law must draw attention to
the   existing   legal   regime,   rules,   processes,   and   norms   that
environmental regulatory institutions follow to achieve the goal of
effective   and   good   governance   and   implementation   of
environmental laws. More importantly, the focus must be on the
policy and regulatory and implementation agencies. In doing so,
environmental   rule   of   law   fosters   open,   accountable,   and
transparent decision­making and participatory governance. The
renewed role of constitutional courts will be to undertake judicial
review to ensure that institutions and regulatory bodies comply
with the principles of environmental rule of law. 
26.
Existing Institutional Governance of the Environment in India:
Environmental regulation in our country is performed by various
bodies   constituted   under   legislations   concerning   the

environment, forests, and wildlife. Governance is also through
the   exercise   of   executive   power   by   the   Central   and   State
Governments. These bodies perform their function of regulating
private and public activities that impact the environment, forests,
and wildlife in accordance with environmental legislations, rules,
regulations, and notifications passed under them. An overview of
some of the main bodies that regulate the environment in India
can be encapsulated as follows:
i.
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and State Pollution
Control   Boards  (SPCB):   These   Boards   were   initially
constituted under the Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Act, 1974.35  They also function under the Air
(Prevention   and   Control   of   Pollution)   Act,   1981.36  The
function  of   the   CPCB   under   these   Acts   is   to  promote
cleanliness of water streams and wells and to improve air
quality and combat air pollution. In furtherance of these
functions,   the   Board   advises   the   Central   Government,
coordinates   activities   of   states,   provides   technical
assistance to SPCBs, lays down standards, and performs
any   other   function   as   may   be   prescribed.   The   SPCBs
35 Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, ss. 3 and 4.
36 Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1981, ss. 3 and 4. perform   similar   functions   by   advising   the   State
Governments   on   matters   concerning   air   and   water
pollution.37 
ii.
Authorities   concerning   protection   of   wildlife   under   the
Wildlife  Protection  Act,  1972:  The  Central Government
appoints   a   Director   of   Wild   Life   Preservation   and   the
State Government appoints Chief Wild Life Wardens, Wild
Life Wardens, and Honorary Wild Life Wardens.38 
The   Central   Government   shall   constitute   the  National
Board   for   Wild   Life  to   promote   the   conservation   and
development of wildlife and forests.39 The National Board
can   frame   policies   and   advise   the   Central   and   State
Governments   on   promoting   wildlife   conservation   and
effectively   controlling   poaching   and   illegal   trade;
recommend setting up and managing national parks and
sanctuaries; conduct impact assessment of activities on
wildlife;   review   progress   of   wildlife   conservation;   and
prepare   and   publish   status   reports   on   wildlife   in   the
country.40 Similarly, State Board(s) for Wild Life must also
be constituted under the Act for selecting and managing
37 Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, ss. 16 and 17; Air (Prevention and
Control of Pollution) Act 1981, ss. 16 and 17.
38 Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, ss. 3 and 4.
39 Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, ss. 5A and 5C.
40 ibid. protected areas; formulating policies for protection and
conservation of wildlife; harmonising the needs of tribals
and forest dwellers with wildlife conservation; and any
other matter referred to it by the State Governments.41 
The Central Government must constitute the Central Zoo
Authority that regulates the functioning of zoos by laying
down
 
minimum
 
standards,
 
recognition
 
and
derecognition,   maintaining   records,   coordinating
personnel   training,   and   providing   assistance.42  The
Central Government must also constitute  the  National
Tiger   Conservation   Authority  under   the   Act,43  whose
powers and functions have been set out in Section 38O. iii.
The   Central   Government   constitutes   the
 Advisory
Committee  under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 to
advise the Central Government on the grant of approval
for State Government’s use of forest land for non­forest
purposes and on any other matter connected with forest
conservation which may be referred to it by the Central
Government.44
41 Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, ss. 6 and 8.
42 Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, ss. 38A and 38C.
43 Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, s. 38L.
44 Forest (Conservation) Act 1980, s. 3. iv.
The Central Government, in exercise of its power under
Section   3   of   the   Environment   (Protection)   Act,   1986
constitutes   the  State   Environment   Impact   Assessment
Authorities  (SEIAA)   at   the   state   level   to   grant   prior
environmental clearance to certain projects, as specified
in the Environment Impact Assessment Notification. v.
National   Biodiversity   Authority  and  State   Biodiversity
Boards are constituted under the Biological Diversity Act,
2002.45 The National Biodiversity Authority has the power
to grant permission for obtaining biological resources and
to   regulate   matters   pertaining   to   the   grant   of   such
permission,   including   intellectual   property   rights.   The
Authority   also   advises   the   Central   Government   on
conservation   and   sustainable   and   equitable   use   of
biodiversity, the State Governments on the management
of heritage sites, and such other functions as may be
prescribed   by   the   Central   Government.46  The   State
Biodiversity   Boards   are   tasked   with   advising   State
Governments   on   conservation   and   sustainable   and
equitable   use   of   biodiversity,   regulating   the   grant   of
45 Biological Diversity Act, 2002, ss. 8 and 22. 
46 Biological Diversity Act, 2002, s. 18. approvals for commercial utilisation, bio­survey and bio­
utilisation of biological resources in India, and such other
functions   as   may   be   prescribed   by   the   State
Government.47
vi.
National Green Tribunal  (NGT) has been constituted by
the Central Government by notification under the NGT
Act, 2010.48 It has jurisdiction over all civil cases where a
substantial   question   relating   to   the   environment   is
involved and such question arises out of implementation
of   various   legislations   pertaining   to  the   environment.49
The   NGT   also   has   appellate   jurisdiction   over   certain
matters arising out of the Water (Prevention and Control
of Pollution) Act, 1974; Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;
Air   (Prevention   and   Control   of   Pollution)   Act,   1981;
Environment   (Protection)   Act,   1986;   and   Biological
Diversity Act, 2002.50 In Municipal Corporation of Greater
Mumbai  v.  Ankita Sinha,51  this Court has held that the
NGT   is   a   sui   generis   body   with   all­encompassing
47 Biological Diversity Act, 2002, s. 23.
48 NGT Act, 2010, s. 3.
49 As per Schedule I of the NGT Act, the following legislations are covered: (i) The Water
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; (ii) The Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Cess Act, 1977; (iii) The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980; (iv) The Air (Prevention
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981; (v) The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986; (vi) The
Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991; (vii) The Biological Diversity Act, 2002. 
50 NGT Act 2010, s. 16.
51 2021 SCC OnLine SC 897, para 61. jurisdiction   to   protect   the   environment.   It   not   only
performs an adjudicatory role but also performs wider
functions   in   the   nature   of   prevention,   remedy,   and
amelioration.52 
vii.
In  S. Jagannath  v.  Union of India,53  which was a writ
petition regarding prawn farming in  ecologically  fragile
coastal   areas,   this   Court   directed   the   Central
Government   to   constitute   an   authority   under   the
Environment   (Protection)   Act,   1986   and   confer   it  with
powers   to   protect   ecologically   fragile   coastal   areas,
seashores, waterfronts, and other coastal areas. Pursuant
to this judgment, the Central Government by notification
under Section 3(3) constituted the National Coastal Zone
Management Authority,54 State Coastal Zone Management
Authorities,55 
and
 Union   Territory   Coastal   Zone
Management   Authorities56  in   coastal   states   and   union
territories.   The   NCZMA   coordinates   the   actions   of
SCZMAs   and   UTCZMAs,   examines   proposals   for
classifying   coastal   zonal   areas,   reviews   violations,   and
52 ibid, para 46.
53 (1997), para 52.
54 Hereinafter ‘NCZMA’.
55 Hereinafter ‘SCZMA’.
56 Hereinafter ‘UTCZMA’. provides technical assistance to the State Governments
and Central Government. viii.
In  M.C. Mehta  v.  Union of India,57  this Court took suo
motu   cognisance   of   falling   ground   water   levels   and
directed the Central Government to constitute a Central
Groundwater   Board  as   an   authority   to   regulate   and
control   groundwater   management   and   development
under Section 3(3) of the Environment (Protection) Act,
1986. The main object of constituting the Board was the
urgent   need   to   regulate   indiscriminate   boring   and
withdrawal of underground water.58
There are many more bodies, authorities, and officers under the
Union and states that are involved in environmental governance.
A comprehensive list of such bodies, including the above, is as
follows:
i.
Animal Welfare Board of India59 
ii.
Atomic Energy Regulatory Board60
iii.
Central Pollution Control Board61 
iv.
State Pollution Control Boards62 
57 (1997), para 9.
58 ibid, para 12.
59 Constituted under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
60 Constituted under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.
61  Constituted under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Air
(Prevention and Control of Pollution Act, 1981.
62 ibid. v.
Director   of   Wild   Life   Preservation,   Chief   Wild   Life
Wardens,   Wild   Life   Wardens,   and   Honorary   Wild   Life
Wardens 63
vi.
National Board for Wild Life64 
vii.
State Boards for Wild Life65
viii.
Central Zoo Authority66
ix.
National Tiger Conservation Authority67
x.
Coastal Zone Management Authority68
xi.
Central Groundwater Board69
xii.
Advisory Committee70
xiii.
National Biodiversity Authority71 
xiv.
State Biodiversity Boards72
xv.
National Disaster Management Authority73
xvi.
State Disaster Management Authorities74
xvii.
District Disaster Management Authorities75 
xviii.
National Green Tribunal76
xix.
State Level Advisory Bodies77 
xx.
National Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management
and Planning Authority78 
xxi.
State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and
Planning Authority79 
63 Appointed under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.
64 Constituted under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. 
65 ibid.
66 ibid.
67 ibid.
68 Constituted by the Central Government under Section 3(3) of the Environment Protection
Act pursuant to Supreme Court Directions in S. Jagannath v. Union of India, (1997).
69 Constituted by the Central Government under Section 3(3) of the Environment Protection
Act pursuant to Supreme Court Directions in M.C. Mehta v. Union of India, (1997).
70 Constituted under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.  
71 Constituted under the Biological Diversity Act, 2002. 
72 ibid.
73 Constituted under The Disaster Management Act, 2005. 
74 ibid.
75 ibid.
76 Constituted under the NGT Act, 2010. 
77 Constituted under the Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016. 
78 Constituted under the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016.
79 ibid. xxii.
Environment Impact Assessment Authorities80
xxiii.
Expert Appraisal Committee81 
xxiv.
Dahanu Taluka Environment Protection Authority82 
xxv.
Wildlife Crime Control Bureau 
xxvi.
Forest Survey of India
27.
The   above   referred   bodies,   authorities,   regulators,   and
officers are constituted with persons having expertise in the field.
They have the requisite knowledge to take appropriate decisions
about   contentious   issues   of   the   environment,   forests,   and
wildlife,   and   also   to   ensure   effective   implementation   of
environmental   laws.   These   bodies   constitute   the   backbone   of
environmental governance in our country. They need to function
with   efficiency,   integrity,   and   independence.   As   duty­bearers,
they are also subject to accountability. 
28.
We may ask a simple question – how effectively are these
environmental   bodies   functioning   today?   This   question   has   a
direct   bearing   on   the   protection   and   restoration   of   ecological
balance. 
29.
As   environmental   governance   through   these   bodies
emerges,   the   obligation   of   the   constitutional   courts   is   even
greater. Hitherto, the constitutional courts focused on decisions
and actions taken by the executive or private persons impacting
80  Constituted   under   the   Environment   Impact   Assessment   Notification   issued   by   the
Central Government under Section 3(3) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
81 ibid.
82  Constituted   by   the   Central   Government   under   Section   3(3)   of   the   Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986. the environment and ecology because the scrutiny by regulators
was   felt   to   be   insufficient.   Their   judgment,   review,   and
consideration did not inspire confidence and therefore, the Court
took up the issue and would decide the case. In this process, a
large number of decisions rendered by this Court on sensitive
environmental,   forest,   and   ecological   matters   constitute   the
critical   mass   of   our   environmental   jurisprudence.   This   Court
would   continue   to   exercise   judicial   review,   particularly   in
environmental matters, whenever necessary. 
30.
We however seek to emphasise and reiterate the importance
of   ensuring   the   effective   functioning   of   these   environmental
bodies as this is imperative for the protection, restitution, and
development of the ecology. The role of the constitutional courts
is   therefore   to   monitor   the   proper   institutionalisation   of
environmental regulatory bodies and authorities.
31.
In furtherance of the principles of environmental rule of law,
the   bodies,   authorities,   regulators,   and   executive   offices
entrusted   with   environmental   duties   must   function   with   the
following institutional features:
i.
The   composition,   qualifications,   tenure,   method   of
appointment   and   removal   of   the   members   of   these
authorities   must   be   clearly   laid   down.   Further,   the

appointments must be regularly made to ensure continuity
and these bodies must be staffed with persons who have the
requisite knowledge, technical expertise, and specialisation
to ensure their efficient functioning. ii.
The authorities and bodies must receive adequate funding
and their finances must be certain and clear. iii.
The mandate and role of each authority and body must be
clearly demarcated so as to avoid overlap and duplication of
work and the method for constructive coordination between
institutions must be prescribed. iv.
The authorities and bodies must notify and make available
the rules, regulations, and other guidelines and make them
accessible by providing them on the website, including in
regional languages, to the extent possible. If the authority or
body does not have the power to frame rules or regulations,
it may issue comprehensive guidelines in a standardised
form and notify them rather than office memoranda. v.
These bodies must clearly lay down the applicable rules and
regulations   in   detail   and   the   procedure   for   application,
consideration,   and   grant   of   permissions,   consent,   and
approvals. vi.
The authorities and bodies must notify norms for public
hearing,   the   process   of   decision­making,   prescription   of
right to appeal, and timelines. vii.
These bodies must prescribe the method of accountability
by   clearly   indicating   the   allocation   of   duties   and
responsibilities of their officers. viii.
There   must   be   regular   and   systematic   audit   of   the
functioning of these authorities.
32.
The role of the constitutional courts is to ensure that such
environmental   bodies   function   vibrantly,   and   are   assisted   by
robust infrastructure and human resources. The constitutional
courts will monitor the functioning of these institutions so that
the   environment   and   ecology   is   not   only   protected   but   also
enriched. 
33.
Ordered accordingly.
……………………………………….J.
[B.R. GAVAI]
……………………………………….J.
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]
……………………………………….J.
[PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA]
NEW DELHI. 
JANUARY 31, 2024.