CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
SHYAM KUMAR INANI 
 
VERSUS 
VINOD AGRAWAL & ORS. 

WITH 

JUDGMENT 
VIKRAM NATH, J. 
1. 
The six appellants are the plaintiffs in a suit for 
specific performance of a contract. The Trial Court 
decreed the suit. However, the High Court, on first 
appeal, allowed the appeal, set aside the order of the 
Trial Court and dismissed the suit. Aggrieved, the 
present appeals by the plaintiffs. 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

2. 
The dispute relates to 23.98 acres of Khasra Nos.546, 
547 and 548 situate in village Godar Mau, Tehsil 
Huzur, District Bhopal. It is an admitted position 
between the parties that a larger area measuring 
27.56 acres of the aforesaid three khasra numbers 
was purchased by one Sushila Bai, wife of late 
Chandra Mal Aggarwal, vide registered sale deed 
dated 29.04.1966 executed by erstwhile owner Vijay 
Chhatti for a sale consideration of Rs.7,000/-. Based 
on the said instrument, the name of Sushila Bai was 
mutated in land revenue records. 
 
3. 
The appellants filed separate suits for specific 
performance in May, 1995 against the legal heirs of 
Sushila Devi. 
 
4. 
It would be relevant to mention here that in the 
plaint, defendant nos.1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 were the other 
legal heirs of late Sushila Devi. We have mentioned 
the name of Kailash Aggarwal separately as he had a 
distinct role to play in the entire transaction. The 
sequence of events which would be discussed and 
pleaded upon at a later stage will reflect upon the role 
of Kailash Aggarwal. However, needless to say that 
Kailash Aggarwal was the eldest son of Sushila Devi. 
All the plaints are more or less identically worded, as 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. such, we are not giving any specific details of the 
separate suit schedule property for each of the plaint, 
but we have generally dealt with the plaint 
allegations. Briefly stated the plaint allegations are as 
follows: 
 
a) Sushila Devi was the owner of the suit schedule 
property. She entered into an Agreement to Sell 
on 30.08.1990 with each of the appellants 
separately after receiving the entire sale 
consideration. The appellants had taken over 
actual possession, having paid the entire sale 
consideration, the suit schedule property was 
agricultural 
land 
and 
cultivated 
by 
the 
appellants. b) Details of the land covered and the sale 
consideration with respect to six Agreement to 
Sell are as follows: 
 
S. 
NO. 
Khasra 
No. 
Area 
Consideration Name 
of 
Purchaser 
1. 

3.48 
acres 
Rs.58,000/- 
Bharat 
Kumar Lathi 
2. 

3.50 
acres 
Rs.70,000/- 
Shyam 
Kumar Inani 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

3. 

4.0 
acres 
Rs. 80,000/- 
Suryakanta 
Maheshwari 
w/o 
KD 
Maheshwari 
4. 

4.0 
acres 
Rs. 80,000/- 
Ram Kumar 
Inani 
5. 

4.50 
acres 
Rs. 90,000/- 
Sangeeta 
Maheshwari 
d/o 
K.D. 
Maheshwari 
6. 

4.50 
acres 
Rs. 90,000/- 
K.D. 
Maheshwari 

c) The defendants are the legal heirs of Sushila 
Devi and Agreement to Sell was binding 
upon them, but they declined to fulfil their 
legal obligation by executing the sale deed in 
favour of the appellants and had instead 
applied for mutation for the suit schedule 
property which had been allowed by the 
revenue authority. d) As the entire sale consideration had been 
paid as per the contents of the Agreement to 
Sell, the appellants were put into possession 
also. The original title deed of 1966 in favour 
of Sushila Devi was also handed over to the 
appellants. The witnesses to the Agreement 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. to Sell were Dipesh Chandra Patni PW-2 and 
one Mr. Sharma. As the entire sale 
consideration had been paid, the time was 
not the essence of contract and the same 
was also incorporated in the Agreement to 
Sell in clause 6. Smt. Sushila Devi executed 
a registered General Power of Attorney in 
favour of M.K. Maheshwari on 04.09.1990. 
She died on 25.12.1992 leaving behind the 
respondent nos. 1, 2, 3, 9 and 10 as her legal 
heirs and representatives. e) The legal heirs applied for mutation of their 
names over the suit schedule property to 
which 
objections 
were 
filed 
by 
the 
appellants. 
However, 
they 
were 
unsuccessful, and the Tehsildar directed for 
mutation of the names of the legal heirs by 
order dated 23.02.1999. f) The 
appellants, 
vide 
notice 
dated 
28.04.1994 called upon the legal heirs of 
Sushila Devi to execute the sale deed. 
However, the same was not honoured. g) The appellants instituted six separate Civil 
Suits, each seeking a decree for specific 
performance of an Agreement to Sell dated 
30.08.1990, against the legal heirs of 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

Sushila Devi, compelling them to execute the 
sale deed in accordance with the said 
agreement. In these suits, the following 
reliefs were similarly claimed: 

A decree directing the defendants to 
specifically perform their obligations 
under the Agreement to Sell dated 
30.08.1990 by registering a sale 
deed for the agricultural land under 
the respective khasra numbers in 
favour 
of 
the 
appellants. 
Alternatively, a direction was sought 
for the court itself to execute a legal 
sale deed for the disputed property 
in favour of the appellants. 

An award of costs of the suit in 
favour of the appellants and against 
the defendants, along with any other 
reliefs deemed appropriate by the 
court. 
(iii) A permanent injunction restraining 
defendants 
no. to 

from 
alienating, altering or placing any 
encumbrances on the said property, 
and from transferring the suit 
property to any third party or 
governmental authority. 

A declaration that the subsequent 
transfer of the suit property, effected 
on 18.01.2001, was void and not 
binding on the appellants. 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. h) Further, it was brought on record, by way of 
amendment to the plaint that the defendant 
numbers 1 to 5 on the basis of the mutation 
order passed on 23.02.1999 was likely to 
alienate the suit schedule property in favour 
of third party and, later on, by a further 
amendment, it was brought on record that 
defendant nos. 2 to 5 by four separate sale 
deeds actually alienated the suit schedule 
property 
in 
 
favour 
of 
newly 
added 
dependent nos. 7 to 10 on 18.01.2001. State 
of Madhya Pradesh was also made a party to 
the suit as defendant no. 6. Trial Court 
passed an interim injunction order on 
04.12.2000 putting a restraint on the 
alienation of the property in suit. i) Despite there being an injunction order 
restraining the defendants from alienating 
the suit schedule property, the appellants 
were always ready and willing to perform 
their part of the contract which only required 
registration of the sale deed as the entire sale 
consideration had already been paid. A 
prayer for specific performance of the 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. contract was made based on such plaint 
averments. 
 
5. 
A brief written statement was filed by the respondent 
State of Madhya Pradesh-defendant number 6 
(respondent no.8) to the effect that the suit schedule 
property fell in urban area (Nagariya Kshetra) under 
the Nagar Bhumi Seema Adhiniyam and as per the 
requirements of the said Act, it was only after the 
enforcement of the new Master Plan, that the actual 
area of land which the owner would be entitled to 
possess, would be determined. As such, the 
defendant would not have any right to sell the 
property, nor would the plaintiff have any right to buy 
these properties. The plaintiff is, thus, not entitled to 
any relief. 
 
6. 
Defendant nos. 2, 3 and 4, namely Vinod Aggarwal, 
Jagdish Aggarwal and Usha Aggarwal, three of the 
legal heirs of Sushila Devi filed a joint written 
statement. They denied the contents of the plaint 
except to the extent that Sushila Devi was the owner 
of the suit schedule property. It was further stated 
that she had never executed any Agreement to Sell. It 
was, thus, claimed that the suit deserves to be 
dismissed. 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

7. 
The subsequent purchasers, under the sale deed 
dated 18.01.2001, filed a separate written statement 
denying the plaint allegations. They also denied that 
any Agreement to Sell dated 30.08.1990 was 
executed by Sushila Devi. No specific answer has 
been given as to whether the sale deed dated 
18.01.2001 in their favour was executed in violation 
of the injunction order. They also took the plea that 
the 
Agreement 
to 
Sell 
required 
compulsory 
registration and also payment of sufficient stamp 
duty which was not done, as such, the same was not 
admissible in evidence. 
 
8. 
It was further stated in their written statement that 
the sale consideration mentioned in the Agreement to 
Sell was much below the prevailing market rate 
which indicated mala fide on the part of the 
appellants. A plea was also raised to the effect that 
the suit scheduled property was owned by a HUF and 
as such the Agreement to Sell having been executed 
only by Sushila Devi without the consent or 
confirmation of the other members of HUF, the 
Agreement to Sell was void. On such averments, the 
defendant nos. 7 to 10 stated that the suit was liable 
to be dismissed. 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

9. 
The Trial Court, on the pleadings of the parties, 
framed the following issues as stated in paragraph 8 
of the judgment along with its findings on each issue. 
The same are reproduced hereunder: 
“ 
Issues 
Finding 
1. 
Whether an Agreement 
was executed on 30.08.90 with 
the plaintiff by the mother of 
the defendants late Sushilabai 
for the sale of the disputed 
land situated in Godar Mau 
Khasra 
No.548 
area 
3.49 
acres? 

Sushilabai 
had 
executed 
an 
agreement 
dated 
30.08.90 for the sale of 
disputed land with the 
plaintiff. 
2. 
Whether the plaintiff 
making full payment of the 
Agreement to late Sushilabai 
obtained the possession of the 
disputed property on 30.08.90 
itself? 
All the amount of the 
bai was paid by the 
plaintiff to Sushila bai 
and the possession of 
the disputed property 
has been obtained. 

3(a) Whether the plaintiff has 
been always ready to comply 
with the Agreement? 
In compliance with the 
agreement the plaintif 
has been willing and 
ready to fulfil. 

3(b) Whether the defendants 
have refused to comply with 
the agreement? 
The 
Defendants 
have
refused to comply with
the Agreement. 

4. 
Whether the dispute 
being of agricultural land, the 
State of M.P. is necessary 
party? 
Proved 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

5.Whether 
the 
Defendant 
No.2 to 5 had sold the 
disputed land to Deft. No.7 to 
10 even there being order of 
prohibition during the course 
of trial? 

Yes 
6.Whether the plaintiff is 
entitled to get 4 sale deeds 
dated 
18.01.2001 
to 
be 
declared null and void? 
All 
four 
sale-deeds 
dt.18.01.2001 
concerning up to the 
extent of the disputed 
land the plaintiff is 
entitled to get declared 
null and void. 

7. Relief and expenses 
As per last para of the 
judgment 
& 
Decree 
issued.” 

10. The parties led both oral and documentary evidence 
in support of their respective cases. The Trial Court, 
vide judgment dated 14.05.2001, decreed all the 
suits as contained in paragraph 45 of the judgment. 
The operative part of the judgment of the Trial Court 
is reproduced hereunder: 
“….. 
1. The disputed land situated in 
Godar Mau in respect of Khasra 
No.548 area 3.48 acres which was 
sold by registered sale-deed dated 
18.01.2001 b Usha Aggarwal to 
Md. Shakir Khan, Vinod Aggarwal 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. to Irfan Khan, Sangita Aggarwal to 
Ashok 
Jaiswal 
and 
Jagdish 
Aggarwal in favour of Tomo has 
been executed, the lands of this 
Khasra No. to that extent of about 
4 sale deeds are declared null and 
void. 
2. That in favour of the plaintiff 
defendants No.1 to 5 may get 
executed the sale deed within a 
period of two months of the 
disputed land Khasra No.548 area 
3.48 acres. 
3. In respect of the above land, the 
expenses are to be incurred on 
getting the registered sale deed by 
the plaintiff. 
4. The cost of this suit of the plaintiff 
will be borne by the defendants 
and the defendants will bear their 
own expenses. 
….” 

11. RCS No.47A/01 and one more were decided on 
14.05.2001 and thereafter by a separate judgment 
dated 05.10.2001, four other suits were decreed, 
details whereof are given in the table below: 
 
S.No. Civil 
Suit 
No. 
Party Name 
Decided 
on. 
1. 
RCS No. 
22-A/97 
Bharat Kumar Lathi vs. 
Kaliash Agarwal & 9 
others. 
(Pankaj Maheshwari – 
Power 
of 
attorney 
Holder) 
 
14.05.2001 
2. 
RCS No. 
23-A/97 
Shyam Kumar Inani 
Vs. 
14.05.2001 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

Kailash Agarwal & 9 ors. 
 
Filed through self 
(KDM Power of attorney 
prosecuted later) 
3. 
RCS 
45-A/01 
 
Smt. 
Suryakanta 
vs. 
Kailash Agarwal and ors. 
(KDM Power of attorney) 
05.10.2001 
4. 
RCS 
46-A/01 
 
Raj Kumar Inani 
Vs. 
Kailash Agarwal & ors. 
(KDM Power of attorney) 
05.10.2001 
5. 
RCS 
47-A/01 
 
Sangeeta Maheshwari 
Vs. 
Kailash Agarwal & ors. 
(KDM Power of Attorney) 
05.10.2001 
6. 
RCS 
48-A/01 
K.D. 
Maheshwari 
vs. 
Kailash Agarwal and ors. 
(KDM Power of Attorney) 
Filed through self 
 
05.10.2001 
 
12. Aggrieved by the aforesaid two judgments, the 
defendants filed an appeal under section 96 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 before the High Court. 
The High Court, by the impugned judgment, has 
allowed all the six appeals and after setting aside the 
judgment of the Trial Court dismissed the suits. 
Aggrieved, the plaintiffs are in appeal before this 
Court. 
13. Before proceeding further, briefly, the evidence led by 
the 
appellant-plaintiffs 
and 
the 
defendant-
respondents 
may 
be 
noticed. 
The 
appellants 
examined either the plaintiff or his Power of Attorney 
holder as PW-1. Further, the attesting witness to the 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

Agreement to Sell dated 30.08.1990, Dipesh Patni 
was examined as PW-2 and Mahesh Kumar 
Maheshwari was examined as PW-3, who was said to 
have been Power of Attorney holder of Sushila Devi, 
vide registered deed of Attorney dated 04.09.1990. 
R.K. Pathik was examined as PW-4 as Handwriting 
Expert (HWE). 
 
14. On behalf of the defendants, Mohd. Shakir Khan was 
examined as DW-1. One of the legal heirs of Sushila 
Devi, namely Vinod Kumar Aggarwal, was examined 
as DW-2, and Naveen Chandra Deshpande was 
examined as DW-3 as Handwriting Expert (HWE). On 
behalf of the plaintiffs, the Power of Attorneys of the 
respective plaintiffs were filed and exhibited. The 
Agreement to Sell dated 30.08.1990 was also filed 
and duly proved as Exhibit-P/2. The original 
documents handed over by Sushila Devi to her Power 
of Attorney holder Mahesh Kumar Maheshwari were 
also filed which included loan book, Ex.-P/3, Original 
Sale deed dated 29.04.1966, Ex.-P/4, and the Power 
of Attorney in favour of Mahesh Kumar Maheshwari, 
Ex.-P/5 
15. Further, the defendants filed documents relating to 
the sale deed in favour of the defendants 7 to 10 along 
with supporting documents like loan book etc. which 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. were marked as Exhibits - D/1 to D/6. The list of 
documents with brief description filed by the 
plaintiffs as also the defendants in one of the suits is 
given hereunder: - 
“Documents filed by the Plaintiffs 
Exhibit P-1 
Sale agreement dated 30.8.1990 
Exhibit P-2 
Registered General Power of Attorney dated 
4.9.1990 executed by Smt. Sushila Devi in 
favour Shri M.K. Maheshwari 
 
Exhibit P-3 
Legal notice dated 28.04.1994 
Exhibit P-4 
Postal Receipt 
Exhibit P-5 
Sale-deed dated 29.4.1966 executed by 
Vijay Chhatti in favour of Smt. Sushila Devi 
in respect of Khasra Nos. 546, 547 and 548 
area 9.3, 15.5 and 3.3 acres, total are 27.56 
acres situated in Godarmau, Tahsil Huzur 
District Bhopal 
 
Exhibit P-6 
Rin Pustika issued in favour Smt. Sushila 
Devi 
 
Exhibit P-7 
Registered 
Power 
of 
Attorney 
dated 
20.04.1995 executed by Shri Ramkumar 
Inani (Plaintiff) in favour of Shri K.D. 
Maheshwari. 
 
Exhibit P-8 
Judgment and decree dated 14.05.2001 
passed 
by 
learned 
Second 
Additional 
District Judge, Bhopal in Civil Suit no.22-
A/1994 [Bharat Kumar Lathi vs. Kailash 
Agrawal] 
 
Exhibit P-9 
Judgment and decree dated 14.05.2001 
passed by Second Additional District Judge, 
Bhopal in [Shyam 
Kumar Inani vs. Kailash Agrawal] 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

Exhibit P-9A 
Evidence of Vinod Kumar Agrawal in Civil 
Suit No.23-A/1997 [Shyam Kumar Inani vs. 
Kailash Agrawal] 
 
Exhibit P-10 
Report of Handwriting Expert Shri R.K. 
Pathik 
 
Documents filed by the Defendants 
Exhibit D-1 
Bhu Adhikar Evam Rin Pustika issued in 
favour of Kailash, Vinod and Jagdish 
 
Exhibit D-2 
Rin Pustika issued in favour of Irfan Khan 
 
Exhibit D-3 
Rin Pustika issued in favour of Modh. Shakir 
 
Exhibit D-4 
Rin Pustika issued in favour of Mr. Tommy 
 
Exhibit D-5 
Rin Pustika issued in favour of Ashok 
Jaiswal 
 
Exhibit D-6(c) Order sheets of Ceiling Case passed by 
Additional Collector/Competent Authority 
 
Exhibit D-7 
Covering letter dated 28.08.2001 together 
with opinion of Shri N.C. Deshpande 
(Handwriting Expert) 
 
Exhibit 
D-8 
to D-20 
Copies of specimen signature of Smt. 
Sushila Bai 
 
16. We have mentioned this list only for the purpose of 
showing as to what were the documents generally 
filed by the parties. Most of the documents were 
common for all the six suits. The difference in 
different suits could be of numbering of the 
documents as exhibits but, more or less, they are one 
and the same. 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

17. We may now briefly refer to the discussion and 
analysis made by the Trial Court including the 
documents relied upon by it while decreeing the suit. 
The Trial Court thoroughly analysed the claims of 
both the parties, particularly focusing on the 
Agreement to Sell dated 30.08.1990 and the 
subsequent conduct of the parties. Following findings 
were recorded by the Trial Court: 
 
17.1. The Trial Court found that the appellants had paid 
the entire sale consideration at the time of the 
agreement, and the possession of the disputed 
land was handed over by Sushila Devi to the 
plaintiff-appellants. The appellants remained in 
possession of the land since 30.08.1990, using it 
for agricultural purposes. The Trial Court also 
noted that after Sushila Devi’s 
death on 
17.12.1992, 
the 
appellants 
had 
repeatedly 
requested the defendants, as legal heirs, to 
execute the sale deed in their favour, which the 
defendants failed to do. This refusal constituted 
the cause of action for filing the suit for specific 
performance. 
17.2. The Trial Court relied on the Power of Attorney 
holder, Pankaj Maheshwari, as a key witness. He 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. testified to his personal knowledge of the facts, the 
execution of the agreement, and the possession 
handed over to the plaintiff. Notably, Pankaj 
Maheshwari also presented crucial documents, 
including the original loan book, the registered 
sale deed of 1966, and the Power of Attorney, all 
of which were duly exhibited before the Trial 
Court. The agreement was witnessed by Dipesh 
Chandra Patni and one Mr. Sharma. Dipesh 
Chandra Patni was examined as plaintiff’s witness 
supporting the appellants’ case. 
17.3. The defendants, despite alleging fraud and forgery 
regarding the execution of the agreement and 
Power of Attorney, failed to appear or provide any 
rebuttal evidence. The Trial Court emphasized 
that the burden of proving fraud lay with the 
defendants, who did not present any credible 
evidence to support their claims. The Trial Court 
held that the defendants’ absence and failure to 
present 
any 
substantial 
challenge 
to 
the 
appellants’ evidence effectively confirmed the 
validity of the agreement. 
17.4. Further, the Trial Court addressed the sale of the 
disputed 
property 
by 
the 
defendants 
to 
subsequent purchasers, Defendant Nos. 7 to 10, 
during the pendency of the trial. It noted that a 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. prohibition order had been passed restraining 
such a transfer, yet the defendants proceeded 
with the sale in violation of the Court’s directive. 
As a result, the four sale deeds dated 18.01.2001 
were declared null and void. 
17.5. In its final findings, the Trial Court ruled that the 
appellants had been ready and willing to perform 
their obligations under the agreement. The suit 
was found to be within the period of limitation, as 
the cause of action arose when the legal heirs of 
Sushila Devi refused to execute the sale deed after 
her death. 
17.6. The Trial Court directed that Defendant Nos. 1 to 
5 must execute the sale deed in favour of the 
plaintiff within two months and further declared 
the sale deeds executed in favour of Defendant 
Nos. 7 to 10 as null and void. 
 
18. Now, we briefly refer to the reasoning and findings of 
the High Court in allowing the appeal. 
18.1. The High Court first scrutinized the Agreement to 
Sell dated 30.08.1990, emphasizing that it was 
not registered, and the sale consideration 
appeared to be significantly below the market rate 
prevailing at the time of the alleged transaction. 
The High Court found this to be an indicator of 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. potential mala fides on the part of the plaintiff-
appellants. 
18.2. Furthermore, the High Court noted that the 
agreement lacked specific details concerning the 
boundaries of the disputed land, leading to 
ambiguity about the property that was to be 
conveyed. 
18.3. On the issue of possession, the High Court 
observed that while the appellants claimed to have 
been put in possession of the land by Sushila 
Devi, there was no substantial evidence to 
corroborate this assertion. 
18.4. The High Court found that the appellants had 
failed to convincingly establish their possession of 
the 
land 
in 
question, 
which 
significantly 
weakened their case for specific performance. 
 
18.5. In addition, the High Court placed significant 
weight on the fact that the appellants did not enter 
the witness box to testify in support of their 
claims. Instead, the appellants relied on their 
Power of Attorney holder, Pankaj Maheshwari, to 
provide testimony. The High Court emphasized 
that while a Power of Attorney holder may testify 
regarding facts within their personal knowledge, 
critical facts regarding the execution of the 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

Agreement to Sell could only be testified to by the 
appellants 
themselves. 
The 
failure 
of 
the 
appellants to take the witness stand led the High 
Court to draw an adverse inference under the 
established legal principle that the best evidence 
should be produced, especially when a party to 
the agreement is alive and capable of testifying. 
 
18.6. The High Court further examined the issue of 
fraud and misrepresentation, which had been 
raised by the defendants. It found that the entire 
transaction was shrouded in suspicion, given the 
low consideration, the alleged absence of clear 
possession by the plaintiffs, and the fact that the 
legal heirs of Sushila Devi were unaware of the 
agreement. The High Court concluded that the 
burden of proving the validity of the agreement 
rested on the appellants, particularly in light of 
the defence of fraud, but the appellants had failed 
to discharge this burden satisfactorily. 
 
18.7. On the issue of limitation, the High Court 
disagreed with the Trial Court’s finding. The High 
Court held that the suit was barred by limitation 
under Article 54 of the Limitation Act, 1963. It 
found that the cause of action for filing the suit 
arose immediately after the death of Sushila Devi 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. in 1992, yet the suit was filed only in 1995. Given 
that no specific time was stipulated in the 
agreement for the execution of the sale deed, the 
High Court concluded that the suit was not filed 
within the prescribed period of three years from 
the date of Sushila Devi’s death or the time when 
the right to sue first accrued. Based on these 
findings, the High Court concluded that the 
plaintiffs had failed to prove their case for specific 
performance of the Agreement to Sell, and the sale 
deeds executed in favour of Defendant Nos. 7 to 
10 were not liable to be declared null and void. 
The High also recorded a finding that the vendor 
Sushila Devi was entitled to the benefits 
admissible to a Pardanashin lady and relied upon 
the judgments in the case of MST. Kharbuja Kuer 
vs. Jangbahadur Rai & Ors1. and Krishna 
Mohan Kul2. The High Court, thus, allowed the 
appeal, set aside the decree passed by the Trial 
Court, and dismissed the suits filed by the 
plaintiffs. 
 
19. We have heard Shri P.S. Patwalia and Shri Rahul 
Sripat, learned senior counsels appearing for the 
 
 SC 1203 (para 6) 
2 (2004) 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. appellants, Shri Sunil Kumar, Shri Sudhanshu 
Shashikumr Choudhari and Shri Ardhendumauli 
Kumar Prasad, learned senior advocates appearing 
for different respondents in different appeals and 
Shri Shekhar Kumar, advocate for the intervenor. 
 
20. Briefly summarised, the arguments advanced on 
behalf of the appellants by learned senior counsel are 
to the following effect: 
20.1. The Agreement to Sell dated 30.08.1990 executed 
by Sushila Devi was duly proved and it was valid 
and binding on the legal representatives of late 
Sushila Devi. Our attention has been drawn to the 
oral evidence as well as documentary evidence led 
by the plaintiffs in support of the said Agreement 
to Sell. The same would be dealt with at an 
appropriate stage. 
 
20.2. It was next submitted that the defence taken by 
the respondents regarding plea of fraud and 
misrepresentation with respect to Agreement to 
Sell dated 30.08.1990, would be required to be 
established by the defendants as the onus of proof 
in this regard laid on the defendants. The High 
Court, in the impugned judgment, erred to shift 
the burden on the plaintiff-appellants, even 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. though the High Court had specifically recorded 
that the defendants had failed to lead any 
evidence in respect of misrepresentation and 
fraud. 
 
20.3. An objection and argument was raised by the 
respondents with regard to the plaintiffs not 
entering the witness box to prove Agreement to 
Sell dated 30.08.1990, and that the evidence led 
by their Power of Attorney could not establish 
such facts. The submission is that one of the 
plaintiffs, namely K.D. Maheshwari, had entered 
the witness box in his suit and he had the Power 
of Attorney of the other five plaintiffs. This 
witness, thus, had full knowledge of the facts 
relating to Agreement to Sell as he was present at 
the time of the execution of the Agreement to Sell 
dated 30.08.1990 as one of the agreements was in 
his favour. It was submitted that only a technical 
objection was being raised by the respondent to 
frustrate the valid claim of the appellants. 
 
20.4. The High Court erred in observing that there was 
no readiness and willingness on the part of the 
plaintiff-appellants. 
In 
fact, 
the 
plaintiff-
appellants had discharged their full burden of 
payment of the entire sale consideration at the 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. time of execution of the Agreement to Sell and had 
also received possession of the suit schedule 
property. The only requirement left was of 
execution of the sale deed and its registration, for 
which, according to the appellants, they had been 
requesting the legal heirs of late Sushila Devi but 
as they declined and applied for mutation of their 
names, the appellants instituted the suit for 
decree of specific performance. It was not that any 
obligation on the part of the plaintiff-appellants 
towards Sushila Devi, or after her death her legal 
heirs, remained. The issue of readiness and 
willingness would arise where any obligation of 
the plaintiff-purchaser towards the seller was 
liable to be fulfilled and had not been fulfilled 
within the time that may have been stipulated in 
the Agreement to Sell. It is for this reason only that 
the time was not the essence as stated in 
paragraph 6 of the Agreement to Sell. 
 
20.5. With respect to the submissions of the intervenor 
of being bona fide purchasers for value, it was 
submitted that the said intervenors would only get 
the rights which their vendors had and if the 
rights of the vendors are extinguished, no better 
right can be claimed by the intervenors, who are 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. the second set of subsequent purchasers after the 
High Court decided the appeals by the impugned 
order. 
 
20.6. The High Court erred in holding that the suit was 
barred by limitation. Once there was no specific 
time frame mentioned in the Agreement to Sell for 
performance, in view of the second part of the 
Article 54 of the Limitation Act, the limitation to 
file the suit of three years would run from the time 
of refusal by the seller, which in this case arose in 
1994 when the mutation proceedings were 
initiated. The suit was well within time as it was 
filed in May 1995. 
 
20.7. The observations and the findings by the High 
Court regarding the vagueness of the Agreement 
to Sell and to declare the said document as void is 
also not sustainable in law and such plea could 
not have been raised by the seller having accepted 
the consideration. 
 
20.8. The conduct of the defendants has not been 
correctly appreciated by the High Court which 
would actually disentitle them from raising their 
defence 
and 
contesting 
the 
claim 
of 
the 
appellants. In this respect, reference has been 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. made to the oral evidence of the defendants which 
has been dealt with at an appropriate stage later 
in this judgment. Referring to the expert evidence 
relating to the genuineness of the signature of 
Sushila Devi on the Agreement to Sell dated 
30.08.1990, it was submitted that even the expert 
witness introduced by the defendants, Shri N.C. 
Deshpande, DW-3 had stated in his report to the 
effect that this report would not go to establish 
that the Agreement to Sell was not signed by 
Sushila Devi. Thus, the defendants had failed to 
establish their claim that no Agreement to Sell had 
been executed by Sushila Devi. 
 
21. On behalf of the respondents, the following 
submissions have been made which are summarised 
hereunder: - 
21.1. The plaintiff-appellants failed to prove the 
Agreement to Sell dated 30.08.1990 as also the 
General Power of Attorney dated 04.09.1990. Our 
attention was drawn to the evidence led by the 
plaintiffs as also the defendants in support of the 
submissions 
which 
would 
be 
dealt 
with 
appropriately at a later stage while analysing the 
arguments. Reliance was placed upon the 
judgment 
of 
this 
Court 
in 
the 
case 
of 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

Thiruvengadam Pillai vs. Navaneethammal and 
Anr.3 
 
21.2. Not only the plaintiffs failed to prove the execution 
of Agreement to Sell and General Power of 
Attorney, but they also failed to prove the contents 
of the Agreement to Sell and the General Power of 
Attorney. The submission that the contents of the 
General Power of Attorney and the Agreement to 
Sell were not read out and explained to the 
executor, namely Sushila Devi as she was an old 
illiterate lady, it was submitted that Sushila Devi 
would thus fall in the category of a Pardanashin 
lady and would be entitled to the protection 
available to the Pardanashin lady as explained 
and settled in the following judgments: 
- MST. Kharbuja Kuer vs. Jangbahadur Rai & 
Ors. (Supra) 
- Krishna Mohan Kul vs. Pratima Maity and 
ors.(para 17) 
 
21.3. The plaintiffs did not enter the witness box and 
therefore could not have proved the Agreement to 
Sell executed on 30.08.1990. Execution of a 
document could be proved only by a person 
 
3 (2008) (Para 19) 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. present at the time of the Agreement to Sell. 
Reliance is placed upon the following four 
judgments: 
- Vidyadhar 
Vishnupant 
Ratnaparkhi 
v. 
Manikrao Babarao Deshmukh and ors.4 
- Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani & Anr. V. Indusind 
Bank Ltd. And Anr.5 
- Man kaur vs. Hartar Singh Sangha6 
- Rajesh Kumar vs. Anand Kumar7 
 
21.4. The readiness and willingness were not proved by 
the plaintiff-appellants as they never made any 
efforts to get the sale deed executed and registered 
after getting the same typed out on the payable 
stamp duty. The suit was not filed within a 
reasonable time as it was not filed from three 
years of the execution of the Agreement to Sell or 
from the date of death of Smt. Sushila Devi who 
had died on 25.12.1992. The suit was filed about 
two and a half years from the date of death of 
Sushila Devi and about four and a half years from 
the date of execution of the alleged Agreement to 
Sell. As such, no discretionary relief should be 
 
4 (1993) (para 17) 
5 (2005) 
6 (2010) (para 17 & 21) 
7 (2024) SCC OnLine SC 981 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. granted in such a case where a suit is filed with 
such delay. 
 
21.5. The Agreement to Sell did not contain the specific 
boundaries of the land covered by the same and 
the same being vague, as such, no specific 
performance could have been granted. Possession 
has always remained with Sushila Devi and 
thereafter her legal heirs and now is with the 
transferees as has been held by the High Court. 
The sale deeds executed during the pendency of 
proceedings would not outrightly be declared as 
void but would only be subject to adjudication. 
Reliance is placed upon the following judgments: 
- Thomson Press (India) Ltd. V. Nank Builders 
& Investors (P) Ltd.8 
- Yogesh Goyanka v. Govind9 
 
21.6. On the above submissions, no discretionary reliefs 
should be granted to the plaintiff-appellants and 
the High Court has rightly declined the same. 
 
22. On behalf of the intervenor, in addition to what has 
been submitted on behalf of the respondents, further 
submissions are summarised hereunder:- 
 
8 (2013) (para 53) 
9 (2024) SCC OnLine SC 1692 (para 16 & 17) 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

22.1. Bona Fide Purchaser Without Notice: The 
intervenor argued that they purchased the suit 
property (22 acres) from Respondent Nos. 4 to 7 
on 26/03/2012 and 31/03/2012 through a 
registered sale deed for a total consideration of Rs. 
7.92 crores. At the time of the purchase, the 
intervenor had no knowledge of the pending 
litigation. They only became aware of the appeals 
after the purchase and filed the intervention 
applications accordingly. 
 
22.2. Lis Pendens Doctrine Not Applicable: The 
intervenor submitted that the doctrine of lis 
pendens under Section 52 of the Transfer of 
Property Act, 1882, does not apply in their case as 
the sale took place after the High Court's 
judgment on 15/03/2012 and before the Supreme 
Court's order on 30/04/2012 directing the parties 
to maintain the status quo. Therefore, they 
asserted that no litigation was pending during this 
period, and the transfer of the property was 
lawful. 
 
22.3. Registered Sale Deeds Valid: The intervenor 
contended that no relief can be granted to the 
appellants in the absence of a specific challenge to 
the registered sale deeds executed in their favor. 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

They argued that as bona fide purchasers for 
value, their rights should be protected. 
 
22.4. Agreement to Sell and Specific Performance: 
The intervenor further highlighted that the 
Agreement to Sell dated 30.08.1990 was vague 
and 
lacked 
specific 
details 
regarding 
the 
boundaries of the land. This made the agreement 
void under Section 29 of the Contract Act, 1872. 
 
22.5. Power of Attorney Holder's Limitations: The 
intervenor pointed out that the plaintiffs relied on 
Power of Attorney holder to prove the Agreement 
to Sell, which was contrary to settled law. The 
intervenor cited the case of Janki Vashdeo 
(supra), to argue that a Power of Attorney holder 
cannot depose for acts done by the principal 
unless they had direct knowledge of the 
transaction. 
 
22.6. Lack of Readiness and Willingness: The 
intervenor argued that the plaintiffs failed to 
demonstrate readiness and willingness to execute 
the sale deed, which is a crucial requirement 
under Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief Act, 
1963. They submitted that the plaintiffs never 
acted to get the sale deed executed and failed to 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. take any concrete steps before the death of 
Sushila Bai on 25/12/1992. 
ANALYSIS 
23. The 
present 
case 
is 
one 
of 
non-concurrent 
judgement, where the Trial Court, after appreciating 
and analysing the evidence on record, decreed the 
suit, however the High Court, on appeal, reversed the 
findings of the Trial Court and dismissed the suit for 
specific performance. We have carefully gone through 
the pleadings and the evidence on record. The 
findings recorded by the Trial Court and the High 
Court have already been briefly summarised. The key 
points germane to the litigation are briefly stated 
below: - 
(i). Whether the Agreement to Sell dated 13.08.1990 
was validly executed and proved? 
(ii). Whether the General Power of Attorney executed 
by Sushila Devi in favour of M.K. Maheshwari on 
04.09.1990 and duly registered created any 
doubt or suspicion on the conduct of the 
plaintiff-appellants? 
(iii). Whether the plaintiffs not entering into the 
witness box in five of the suits would call for an 
adverse inference, although their Power of 
Attorney had entered the witness box? 
(iv). Whether the suit was barred by limitation? 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

(v). Whether the forgery alleged by the defendants 
was actually proved by way of proper pleading 
and evidence to establish the same or was it just 
taken as a casual defence? 
(vi). Whether Kailash Aggarwal (defendant No.1), the 
eldest son of Sushila Devi, having not filed any 
written statement nor having entered the witness 
box on behalf of the defendants, would have an 
effect of adverse bearing against the defendants? 
(vii). Whether the finding of the High Court that 
Sushila Devi was a Pardanashin lady, and thus 
entitled to the benefit of the same, was actually 
pleaded and proved by the defendants? 
(viii). Whether the plaintiff-appellants producing the 
original sale deed of 1966 under which Sushila 
Devi had acquired the rights of ownership and 
the original Rin Pustika of Sushila Devi was a 
relevant fact and would it adversely impact the 
defendants? 
(ix). Whether the alienation by the defendant-legal 
heirs of Sushila Devi in gross violation of interim 
injunction granted by the High Court would have 
an impact on the validity of the sale deed 
executed in favour of the 3rd parties and also have 
an adverse impact on the conduct of the 
defendants? 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

(x). Whether there was any issue of readiness and 
willingness relevant in a case where, at the time 
of entering into the Agreement to Sell, the 
purchaser had paid the entire sale consideration 
to the seller? 
 
24. We now proceed to deal with the each of the above 
points framed by us to test whether the judgment of 
the Trial Court or the High Court deserved to be 
maintained. 
 
1. AGREEMENT TO SELL DATED 30.08.1990 
25. In all, there are seven Agreements to Sell executed by 
Sushila Devi in favour of different purchasers on 
30.08.1990, and accordingly, seven suits were filed. 
Before us, only six purchasers are in appeal. With 
respect to the 7th purchaser, apparently the matter is 
pending before the High Court or the Trial Court. One 
of the purchasers is K.D. Maheshwari, who is the 
plaintiff in suit RCS No. 48-A/01. He held the Power 
of Attorney for the four other purchasers who are 
before us. K.D. Maheshwari appeared as PW-1 in five 
suits, either as the plaintiff in his own suit or as the 
Power of Attorney holder for the other four plaintiffs. 
In one case, the plaintiff Bharat Kumar Lathi had 
executed Power of Attorney in favour of Pankaj 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

Maheshwari. In the said suit, he examined himself as 
PW-I. K.D. Maheshwari proved the execution of the 
Agreement to Sell, the payment of the full 
consideration to Sushila Devi, and also that Sushila 
Devi and the witnesses duly signed the Agreement to 
Sell. In addition, the plaintiffs examined one of the 
attesting witnesses to the Agreement to Sell, namely 
Dipesh Chandra Patni as PW-2. Further, M.K. 
Maheshwari, who had a registered Power of Attorney 
from Sushila Devi executed on 04.09.1990, was also 
examined as PW-3, and he supported the plaintiffs 
stating 
that 
Sushila 
Devi 
had 
executed 
the 
Agreement 
to 
Sell 
after 
receiving 
the 
full 
consideration. The plaintiffs also examined Mr. R.K. 
Pathik, a handwriting expert, to prove that the 
signatures on the Agreement to Sell were that of 
Sushila Devi. 
26. The plaintiff-appellants, thus, discharged their 
burden of proving the transaction between Sushila 
Devi and the plaintiffs on 13.08.1990, the passing of 
the consideration, and the execution of Agreement to 
Sell. 
27. Coming to the evidence of defendant-respondents, 
the legal heirs of Sushila Devi, one Mohd. Shakir 
Khan was examined as DW-1, one of the legal heirs 
of Sushila Devi namely Vinod Aggarwal was 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. examined as DW-2, and one N.C. Deshpande, a 
handwriting expert, was examined as DW-3. Mohd. 
Shakir Khan is the subsequent purchaser. He had no 
personal knowledge of the transaction that took place 
on 30.08.1990 at the time of execution of the 
Agreement to Sell. Vinod Kumar Aggarwal was one of 
the sons of Sushila Devi, and was admittedly not 
residing with her. Defendants had set up a case that 
the Agreement to Sell was a forged document, and 
had denied its execution and also passing of any 
consideration. In support of their allegation of 
forgery, the defendant had examined Mr. N.C. 
Deshpande, 
a 
handwriting 
expert, 
as 
PW-3. 
Interestingly, Mr. N.C. Deshpande could not come to 
a definite conclusion that the signatures on the 
Agreement to Sell, upon being compared with the 
admitted signatures, could not be said to be definitely 
not of Sushila Devi. He, in fact, made a candid 
admission that according to his opinion, it could not 
be said that the signatures on the Agreement to Sell 
were not of Sushila Devi. The star witness of the 
defendants could have been Kailash Aggarwal, the 
eldest son, in whose presence the Agreement to Sell 
had been executed and also the subsequent 
registered Power of Attorney in favour of M.K. 
Maheshwari. For reasons best known to the legal 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. heirs of Sushila Devi (the original defendants), 
Kailash Aggarwal chose not to appear in the witness 
box. This clearly reflects that original defendants 
were trying to avoid to face the real facts and, 
therefore, they avoided Kailash Aggarwal from 
entering the witness box. In the totality of 
consideration of evidence on record with regard to the 
execution of Agreement to Sell, we are of the view that 
the same had been validly proved by the plaintiff-
appellants and the defendants had failed to establish 
their claim that it was a forged document. 
 
2. PLAINTIFF NOT ENTERING THE WITNESS BOX 
28. Any adverse inference drawn by the High Court for 
the reason that the plaintiffs did not enter the witness 
box to prove the Agreement to Sell, in our opinion, 
was completely misplaced. Mr. K.D. Maheshwari is 
one of the purchasers and plaintiff in his suit for 
specific performance. He was throughout present in 
the transaction which took place on 30.08.1990. He 
held the Power of Attorney from the other plaintiffs 
and therefore, it was not necessary for each of the 
plaintiffs in separate suits to appear and prove the 
transaction of 30.08.1990. Mr. K. D. Maheshwari, 
who was examined as PW-1 in each of the suits 
whether in his capacity as plaintiff or as Power of 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

Attorney from other plaintiffs, was fully justified in 
establishing the facts that transpired on 30.08.1990. 
The Trial Court had examined this aspect and had 
found favour with the plaintiffs. The finding of the 
High Court on this aspect is not approved in view of 
the above. 
 
3. EFFECT OF THE REGISTERED POWER OF ATTORNEY 
DATED 04.09.1990 
29. Sushila Devi on 04.09.1990, in the presence of her 
son Kailash Aggarwal, executed a General Power of 
Attorney in favour of M.K. Maheshwari, who 
happened to be the real brother of K.D. Maheshwari, 
one of the purchasers. If Sushila Devi executed the 
Power of Attorney, no fault could be found with the 
same, as she wanted herself to be free from 
repeatedly going to the Registry Office for execution 
and registration of sale deeds. No suspicion could 
arise on account of execution of General Power of 
Attorney which was a registered document. Any 
challenge to the same by her legal heirs was without 
any basis and totally based on conjectures. The bona 
fides of the plaintiffs are also apparent from the fact 
that if they were actually doing any mischief, fraud, 
or misrepresentation, they would have immediately 
got the sale deeds executed and registered through 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. the Power of Attorney of M.K. Maheshwari soon after 
its execution on 04.09.1990. But, they did not do so 
and continued to request Sushila Devi and, later, her 
legal heirs to execute the sale deed, even after her 
death. However, when they failed to do so and upon 
the death of Sushila Devi, applied for mutation of 
their names in the revenue records and the plaintiff-
appellants had to file objections in the revenue 
proceedings, they were compelled to file the suit. 
 
4. LIMITATION 
30. The limitation for filing a suit for specific performance 
is three years from the date fixed for the performance 
or if no such date is fixed, when the plaintiff had 
notice that the performance is refused as stipulated 
in Article 54 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act, 
1963. In the present case, the Agreement to Sell did 
not mention any date for the performance, nor did 
Sushila Devi refused at any point of time and soon 
after the death of Sushila Devi in December 1992, the 
plaintiffs having come to know of the mutation 
proceedings by her legal heirs, they proceeded to file 
the suit, after giving notice in May 1995, which was 
well within a period of three years. The High Court 
fell in error in holding that the suit is barred by 
limitation as it was filed after more than three years 
from the date of execution of Agreement to Sell. The 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

High Court failed to take into consideration that it 
was the second part of Article 54 of the Schedule to 
the Limitation Act which would be applicable once 
there was no date fixed for performance in the 
Agreement to Sell. 
 
5. ORIGINAL 
TITLE 
DEEDS 
WITH 
THE 
PLAINTIFFS-
APPELLANTS 
31. Sushila Devi had purchased the property in question 
in the year 1966 by way of a sale deed dated 
23.04.1966. The said sale deed would normally be in 
possession of Sushila Devi or her legal heirs. 
Surprisingly, the said original sale deed of 1966 was 
filed and duly exhibited by the plaintiffs-appellants. 
Even the original Rin Pustika in the name of Sushila 
Devi was also filed by the plaintiffs-appellants and 
duly exhibited. Kailash Aggarwal (Sushila Devi’s 
eldest son) is said to have been present both at the 
time of Agreement to Sell dated 30.08.1990 and again 
at the time of execution and registration of General 
Power of Attorney on 04.09.1990. Original title deed 
and Rin Pustika must have been handed over in his 
presence. How and why the original sale deed of 1966 
and Rin Pustika of Sushila Devi were in possession of 
the plaintiffs-appellants had not been explained by 
the defendants, nor did they dispute that the 1966 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. sale deed and the Rin Pustika in the name of Sushila 
Devi were forged and fabricated documents. This 
clearly shows that the transaction which took place 
on 30.08.1990 was valid transaction, the full sale 
consideration was paid, and it is only thereafter that 
the seller would part with the original title deed and 
the Rin Pustika and hand them over to the 
purchasers. 
6. POSSESSION 
32. A purchaser who has paid the full consideration and 
received the original title deeds from the seller would 
have taken possession under normal circumstances. 
Any possession taken by any other party thereafter 
would be unauthorised and illegal. Therefore, the 
finding of the High Court regarding plaintiff not being 
in possession and therefore the suit being barred in 
law, is untenable. It is relevant to mention here that 
the plaintiffs-appellants had produced Rin Pustika of 
the revenue department to show that they had been 
paying the land revenue. 
 
7. VIOLATION OF INJUNCTION 
 
33. The plaintiffs-appellants had sought amendments in 
the plaint and had expressed their apprehension that 
the legal heirs of Sushila Devi, the original 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. defendants, were likely to alienate the land in favour 
of the third party. Upon their application, the Trial 
Court had passed an interim injunction order on 
04.12.2000, 
restraining 
the 
defendants 
from 
alienating the property in dispute. Despite the same 
and having full knowledge of the interim injunction 
order, the defendant nos. 2, 3, 4 and 5 executed four 
separate sale deeds on 18.01.2001 in favour of third 
parties, who were later on impleaded in the suit as 
defendant nos.7,8,9 and 10. This conduct by the 
original defendants (legal heirs of Sushila Devi) 
clearly indicates their desperation, as they wanted to 
further gain financial benefits by hook or by crook 
and, therefore, alienated the property in violation of 
the injunction order. Such sale deed would be a void 
document. The conduct of the original defendants 
disentitles them from any discretion being exercised 
in their favour, as they blatantly and knowingly 
violated the interim injunction order. The High Court 
failed to take note of this conduct of the original 
defendants. 
34. Learned counsel for the respondents have relied upon 
a number of authorities. However, we find that none 
of the authorities cited by the respondents really 
extend any help or benefit to them as the same are 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. all distinguishable on facts, as would be clear from 
the following references in brief: 
34.1. The respondents have relied upon the judgement 
of this Court in Thiruvengadam Pillai (Supra) to 
argue that the plaintiffs failed to prove the 
execution of the Agreement to Sell dated 
30.08.1990 and the General Power of Attorney 
dated 04.09.1990. In that case, the Court 
dismissed the suit for specific performance 
because the agreement was written on old stamp 
papers purchased years earlier, the attesting 
witnesses were close relatives of the plaintiff and 
one was not examined, possession was not 
delivered despite being stated in the agreement, 
and there was no expert verification of the thumb 
impression alleged to be that of the defendant. The 
plaintiff also failed to discharge the burden of 
proof, and the appellate court wrongly shifted this 
burden to the defendants. However, the present 
case is distinguishable on key facts. Here, the 
Agreement to Sell was executed on appropriate 
stamp paper without irregularities, and the 
plaintiffs diligently discharged their burden by 
providing 
credible 
evidence, 
including 
the 
testimony of PW-1 (either the plaintiffs or their 
Power of Attorney holder with personal knowledge) 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. and the attesting witness PW-2, who was not a 
close relative but an independent witness. 
Moreover, the plaintiffs produced the original title 
deed of 1966 and the Rin Pustika, handed over by 
Sushila Devi—a fact not contested by the 
defendants—which corroborates the genuineness 
of the transaction. An expert handwriting analysis 
affirmed the authenticity of Sushila Devi's 
signature, and the defendants' expert could not 
conclude otherwise. Unlike in Thiruvengadam 
Pillai (Supra), the plaintiffs in this case were given 
possession of the property, have been cultivating 
it, and have been paying land revenue. 
 
34.2. The respondents further contended that Sushila 
Devi, being an old and illiterate lady, fell into the 
category of a pardanashin woman entitled to 
special protection under the law, as established in 
the case of Mst. Kharbuja Kuer (Supra). In that 
case, the Court held that the burden of proving 
that a Pardanashin lady understood the contents 
of a document lies on the person seeking to 
enforce it. However, the facts of the present case 
are materially different. Firstly, there is neither 
any pleading nor any evidence to suggest that 
Sushila Devi was a Pardanashin lady who lived in 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. seclusion; mere old age and illiteracy do not 
suffice to classify her as such. She had 
independently conducted property transactions in 
the past, including the purchase of the suit 
property in 1966, demonstrating her active 
involvement in legal and financial matters. 
Secondly, 
the 
plaintiffs 
have 
adequately 
discharged any burden of proof by providing 
credible evidence that the contents of the 
Agreement to Sell and the General Power of 
Attorney were duly explained to her. The attesting 
witness, PW-2, testified that the documents were 
read over and explained to Sushila Devi before she 
affixed her signature. Additionally, her son, 
Kailash Aggarwal, was present during the 
execution of these documents, and there is no 
allegation that he raised any objections or that 
any undue influence was exerted. The defendants 
have failed to provide any evidence to the contrary 
or to establish that Sushila Devi did not 
understand the nature of the transactions. 
Therefore, the reliance on the principles laid down 
in Mst. Kharbuja Kuer (Supra) is misplaced, as 
the circumstances of that case are distinguishable 
from the present one, and the respondents' 
argument on this ground cannot be sustained. 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. 

34.3. The respondents have also relied upon the 
judgment in Krishna Mohan Kul (supra), 
involving 
an 
old, 
illiterate, 
and 
physically 
incapacitated person who allegedly executed a 
deed of settlement. This Court held that when an 
aged, illiterate, and infirm person is involved, the 
burden of proving the validity of the document lies 
on the beneficiary, who must demonstrate that 
the executant was in a fit state to understand the 
transaction and that no undue influence was 
exerted. However, in the present case, while 
Sushila Devi was elderly and illiterate, there is no 
evidence to suggest that she was physically or 
mentally incapacitated at the time of executing the 
Agreement to Sell and the General Power of 
Attorney. Unlike in Krishna Mohan Kul (supra), 
where the executant was over 100 years old, 
paralytic, and bedridden, Sushila Devi was 
capable of managing her affairs and had a history 
of 
independently 
conducting 
property 
transactions. 
 
34.4. The respondents have also relied upon the 
judgment in Vidyadhar Vishnupant (supra) to 
contend that the plaintiffs' absence from the 
witness box prevents them from proving the 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. execution of the Agreement to Sell dated 
30.08.1990, as such execution must be attested 
by someone present at the time. In Vidyadhar 
Vishnupant (supra), this Court observed that 
when a party refrains from testifying and avoids 
cross-examination, it may lead to an adverse 
inference against that party's case. However, the 
circumstances of the present case are significantly 
different. The plaintiffs' interests were represented 
by their Power of Attorney holders, namely Shri 
K.D. Maheshwari and Shri Pankaj Maheshwari. 
Shri K.D. Maheshwari is himself one of the 
purchasers and a plaintiff in his own suit. He 
appeared as PW-1 in all the suits, either as the 
plaintiff or as the Power of Attorney holder for the 
other plaintiffs. He had personal, firsthand 
knowledge of the execution of the Agreement to 
Sell, being directly involved in the transaction and 
present at the time of its execution. His detailed 
testimony 
provided 
substantial 
evidence 
supporting the plaintiffs' claims. Similarly, Shri 
Pankaj Maheshwari acted as the Power of Attorney 
holder for the plaintiff Bharat Kumar Lathi and 
also appeared as a witness. He had personal 
knowledge of the transaction and corroborated the 
execution of the Agreement to Sell and the 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. payment of the consideration. Both Shri K.D. 
Maheshwari and Shri Pankaj Maheshwari were 
intimately connected with the transaction and 
were competent to testify about the facts in issue. 
Moreover, one of the plaintiffs did enter the 
witness box in his own suit, further reinforcing the 
plaintiffs' case. Unlike in Vidyadhar Vishnupant 
(supra), where the defendant deliberately avoided 
the witness box, here the plaintiffs ensured that 
competent 
and 
directly 
involved 
witnesses 
testified on their behalf. 
34.5. The respondents have cited several other 
judgments to argue that the plaintiffs' failure to 
personally testify is detrimental to their case. In 
Janki Vashdeo (supra), this Court held that a 
power of attorney holder cannot depose on behalf 
of the principal regarding matters within the 
principal's personal knowledge. In Rajesh Kumar 
(supra), the Court reiterated that non-appearance 
of the plaintiff in the witness box can be fatal in 
specific 
performance 
suits. 
However, 
the 
circumstances in the present case are distinct as 
already discussed above. Therefore, the principles 
from the cited cases do not apply here, as the 
plaintiffs have adequately proved their case 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. through competent witnesses with personal 
knowledge. 
 
34.6. The respondents have then referred to the 
judgment in Thomson Press (India) Ltd. (supra) 
to argue that the Agreement to Sell lacks specific 
boundaries of the land, rendering it vague and 
unenforceable, and that possession has always 
remained with Sushila Devi and her heirs, now 
with the transferees, as held by the High Court. 
They further contend that the sale deeds executed 
during the pendency of the proceedings are not 
void but subject to adjudication. However, the 
circumstances and legal issues in Thomson Press 
(India) Ltd. (Supra) are not comparable to the 
present case. In Thomson Press (India) Ltd. 
(Supra), this Court dealt with the impleadment of 
a transferee pendente lite in a suit for specific 
performance and discussed the doctrine of lis 
pendens under Section 52 of the Transfer of 
Property Act. This Court held that a transferee 
pendente lite is bound by the outcome of the 
litigation and may be added as a party to the suit, 
especially if the transfer was made with knowledge 
of the pending proceedings and in violation of an 
injunction. In contrast, the present case revolves 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. around the enforceability of the Agreement to Sell 
dated 30.08.1990, which sufficiently identifies the 
property through detailed descriptions, including 
khasra numbers, area, and location. The absence 
of explicit boundary details does not render the 
agreement vague or unenforceable, as the 
property can be clearly identified from the 
information provided. Moreover, the plaintiffs 
have been in possession of the suit property since 
the execution of the Agreement to Sell, actively 
cultivating it and paying land revenue, which 
contradicts 
the 
respondents' 
claim 
that 
possession remained with Sushila Devi and her 
heirs. 
34.7. Regarding the sale deeds executed during the 
pendency of the suit, while such transfers are not 
void ab initio, they are subject to the doctrine of lis 
pendens and cannot prejudice the plaintiffs' rights 
under the prior Agreement to Sell. The transferees 
acquire the property subject to the outcome of the 
pending litigation and cannot defeat the plaintiffs' 
claim for specific performance. Therefore, the legal 
principles established in Thomson Press (India) 
Ltd. (Supra) do not apply to the present case, and 
the respondents' arguments based on that 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. judgment do not hold in light of the facts and 
circumstances here. 
34.8. Similarly, the respondents have also relied upon 
the judgment in Yogesh Goyanka v. Govind 

where 
this 
Court 
dealt 
with 
the 
impleadment of a transferee pendente lite who had 
notice of the pending litigation. In that case, the 
Court held that while transfers made during the 
pendency of a suit are not void ab initio under 
Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, the 
transferee's rights are subservient to those of the 
parties in the litigation. The Court allowed the 
impleadment of the transferee to protect his 
interests, especially when there was a possibility 
of collusion between the original parties. However, 
the facts and legal issues in Yogesh Goyanka are 
different from the present case. In Yogesh 
Goyanka, 
the 
Court 
addressed 
whether 
a 
transferee pendente lite could be impleaded in a 
suit to protect his interests. In contrast, the 
present case involves the enforceability of the 
Agreement to Sell dated 30.08.1990 and whether 
the subsequent sale deeds executed during the 
pendency of the suit affect the plaintiffs' rights. 
While the respondents argue that the sale deeds 
are not void but subject to adjudication, the 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. doctrine of lis pendens ensures that such 
transfers cannot prejudice the plaintiffs' prior 
contractual rights. 
 
35. Having thoroughly examined the judgments and 
authorities cited by the respondents, it is imperative 
to consider the primary precedents relied upon by the 
appellants. We will analyse their applicability to the 
present case. 
35.1. The appellants have relied upon the judgment in 
Pawan Kumar Gupta v. Rochiram Nagdeo10 to 
assert that when fraud and misrepresentation are 
alleged by the defendants, the burden of proof lies 
upon them to substantiate such claims. In the 
present case, the defendants contended that the 
Agreement to Sell dated 30.08.1990 was forged 
and fraudulent. However, they failed to provide 
credible evidence to support these allegations. In 
Pawan Kumar Gupta (supra), this Court held that 
when a party alleges fraud or that a transaction is 
benami, the onus is on that party to prove the 
allegation. The Court emphasized that the 
apparent tenor of a document is presumed to be 
true unless disproved by the party alleging 
otherwise. The burden does not shift to the party 
 
 SC 1823 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. relying on the document to prove its validity 
beyond its face value. Pawan Kumar Gupta 
(supra) reinforces the appellants' position and 
supports their claim for specific performance of 
the contract. 
35.2. The appellants have further relied upon the 
judgment in Man Kaur (supra) to substantiate the 
argument that a power of attorney holder can 
depose on behalf of the principal in respect of acts 
and transactions that the attorney has personal 
knowledge of. In this case, this Court clarified that 
while an attorney holder can definitely testify 
regarding the acts they have personally carried 
out on behalf of the principal, they cannot testify 
about matters requiring personal knowledge of the 
principal, such as the principal's state of mind or 
readiness and willingness to perform obligations 
under a contract. In the present case, the power 
of attorney K.D. Maheshwari was himself one of 
the vendees and all the transactions in the six 
suits having taken place simultaneously on the 
same day, same time and at the same place he was 
well aware personally of all the facts. 
 
36. The subsequent purchasers and the intervenors, who 
had further purchased the property from third 

CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2845/2015 ETC.ETC. parties, will only get rights of their vendors. And if the 
vendors did not have any rights, the vendees cannot 
be said to be in any better position. 
37. For all the reasons recorded above, the appeals are 
allowed. The impugned judgment and order of the 
High Court is set aside in all six appeals, and that of 
the Trial Court is restored. As the subsequent 
purchasers also joined in this litigation by filing 
impleadment/intervention application(s), we allow 
the same. We further direct that all the respondents, 
including the newly added respondents, shall execute 
the sale deed in favour of the appellants as per the 
directions of the Trial Court. Appellants to provide 
amended copy of the memo of parties within four 
weeks. 

…………………………………………J. 
(VIKRAM NATH) 
 
…………………………………………J. 
(PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA) 
NEW DELHI 
NOVEMBER 12, 2024