SLP (Crl.) No. 8028 of 2023 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Appeal No. of 2024 
( SLP (Crl.) No. 8028/2023) 

Didde Srinivas 
 ….Appellant 
 
Versus 
 
State SHO, Podduru Police Station and Anr. ….Respondents 

JUDGMENT 
 
C.T. Ravikumar, J. 

Leave granted. 
 
1. 
This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and order 
dated 16.3.2023 passed by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh at Amravati in 
CRRC No. 1937/2004. 
2. 
The appellant stood the trial in Sessions Case No. 109/2000 before the 
Court of Assistant Sessions Judge, Narasapur. The Trial Court convicted the 
appellant under Section 376 read with Section 511 besides under Section 451, 
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) and sentenced him for rigorous 
imprisonment (R.I.) for three years for the offence of ‘rape’ and R.I. for one 
year and a fine of Rs. 200/- for the offence under Section 451, IPC. The 
sentences were ordered to be run concurrently. 
3. 
In appeal, Court of VIth Additional and Sessions Judge (Fast Track 
Court), Narasapur, West Godavari District confirmed the conviction and 

SLP (Crl.) No. 8028 of 2023 
sentence on the appellant under Section 451 IPC and modified the conviction 
and sentence under Section 376 IPC to one under Section 354 IPC. 
Consequently, for the conviction therefor, he was sentenced to undergo R.I. for two years. The fine imposed for the conviction under Section 376 was 
maintained in regard to conviction under Section 354, IPC. It is challenging 
the same that the revision petition was filed which culminated in the 
impugned judgment. As per the impugned judgment, the conviction and the 
sentence for both the offences were confirmed by the High Court. 
4. 
Heard learned senior counsel for the appellant and learned counsel for 
the respondent State. The materials on record would reveal that the 
conviction of the appellant for the offence under Section 451, IPC is concurrent 
based on the uncontroverted oral testimonies of PWs 4 and 5. The appellant 
failed to establish perversity whatsoever in regard to the conclusion arrived at 
based on their testimonies that the appellant had committed house-trespass. 
But then, the conviction of the appellant is not for house-trespass simpliciter 
punishable under Section 448, IPC and it is under Section 451, IPC. Hence, the 
next question is whether he did so, in order to commit any offence punishable 
with imprisonment or the offence of theft. As the only other offence for which 
the appellant was ultimately convicted is under Section 354, IPC the answer to 
the above question would depend upon the confirmation or otherwise of the 
conviction of the appellant for the offence under Section 354, IPC. Here again, 
the finding is founded on the oral testimonies of PWs 4 and 5. The 
creditworthy testimonies of PWs 4 and 5 were, according to us, rightly 
believed by the courts below. The expression ‘in order to the committing of 
any offence punishable with imprisonment’ used in Section 451 would reveal 

SLP (Crl.) No. 8028 of 2023 
that an intention to commit such an offence following house-trespass would 
justify a conviction thereunder. 
5. 
In the case on hand, the Appellate Court modified the conviction under 
Section 376, IPC to one under Section 354, IPC and it got conformance from 
the High Court. On scanning the evidence of PWs 4 and 5, we do not find any 
reason much less perversity warranting interference with conclusion arrived 
at based on appreciation of their evidence in relation to the said offence. 
Resultantly, we maintain the conviction of the appellant under Section 354, 
IPC. In view of the position that even an intention to commit an offence 
punishable with imprisonment’ coupled with house-trespass would constitute 
the offence punishable under Section 451, IPC a conviction for the offence 
under Section 354, IPC and the consequential imposition of sentence to 
undergo imprisonment for a term would leave us with no option but to confirm 
the conviction for the offence under Section 451, IPC. Hence, it is also 
maintained. 
6. 
In such circumstances, the only surviving question to be considered is 
whether the sentence of R.I. for 2 years imposed for the conviction under 
Section 354, IPC by the Appellate Court that was confirmed by the High Court 
deserves a further reduction of sentence, as prayed for. After hearing the 
learned counsel on both sides and taking into account the evidence on record, 
and further taking note of the fact that originally there was no prescription of 
minimum sentence for corporeal punishment for the conviction under Section 
354, IPC on the date of commission of the said offence, we are inclined to 
consider the prayer to reduce the sentence from two years. 
7. 
The learned senior counsel for the appellant also submitted that the 

SLP (Crl.) No. 8028 of 2023 
sentence imposed for the conviction under Section 451 IPC may also be 
reduced. The learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that the 
appellant had undergone 64 days of incarceration and hence, the sentence for 
the conviction for the aforesaid offences may be reduced to the period of 
imprisonment already undergone. Though, we are inclined to consider the 
prayer for reduction of sentence, we are of the considered view that the 
prayer for reducing the corporeal sentence to the period of 64 days already 
undergone would not be the proportionate punishment for the conviction 
under Section 354 of the IPC. The very proven case of the prosecution is that 
the appellant had committed the aforesaid offences taking advantage of the 
situation that the victim alone was present her house, at 3.00 PM on 
29.01.1999. Later, the victim committed suicide. There was no charge against 
the appellant under Section 306 IPC and the same, though charged against the 
co-accused of the appellant he was acquitted. Taking note of the nature and 
gravity of the offences committed by the appellant, but then, the absence of 
antecedents, that more than 25 years had lapsed since the incident, that the 
appellant was then a boy aged 21 years, we are of the considered view that 
reducing the sentence for the conviction under Section 354, IPC from 2 years 
R.I. to 1 year R.I would be the comeuppance for the commission of the 
aforesaid offence. It is ordered accordingly. 
8. 
Now, we will deal with the prayer for reduction of sentence for the 
conviction under Section 451, IPC. Since following house-trespass the 
appellant had committed the offence under Section 354, IPC punishable with 
imprisonment, we maintain the sentence of R.I. of one year imposed on the 
appellant for the conviction under Section 451, IPC. 

SLP (Crl.) No. 8028 of 2023 
9. 
In the said circumstances, this appeal is partly allowed. We confirm the 
conviction of the appellant under Section 451 and the sentence imposed 
therefor and also the conviction under Section 354, IPC. However, for the 
reasons as aforesaid we reduce the sentence imposed for the conviction 
under Section 354, IPC from R.I. for two years to R.I. for one year. Both the 
sentences of imprisonment shall run concurrently. The sentence of fine 
imposed as relates conviction under Section 354, IPC is maintained. 
10. 
The appellant shall surrender before the Trial Court within four weeks 
from today to serve out the remaining sentence. In case, the appellant does 
not surrender before the Court within the aforesaid period, he shall be taken 
into custody for serving the remaining period of sentence, in accordance with 
law. 
11. 
Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of. Registry shall 
forward a copy of the judgment to the Trial Court for appropriate action. 

….……….………… 
New Delhi; 
November 13, 2024