IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

TINKU … APPELLANT 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF HARYANA & ORS....RESPONDENTS 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH, J. 
1. This Appeal has been preferred by the son of Shri Jai 
Prakash, a deceased constable in Haryana Police, 
seeking appointment on compassionate grounds, as 
his father and another constable died while on duty 
on 22.11.1997. The Appellant then was seven years 
of age, and the policy which was in force was dated 
08.05.1995 which provided for ex-gratia appointment 

confined to Class III and IV posts. The widow of 
Balwan Singh, the other police constable, who died 
along with the father of the Appellant, was granted 
compassionate appointment as a constable upon her 
application. 
2. The mother of the Appellant, being illiterate, could not 
seek an appointment for herself and therefore applied 
for compassionate appointment for her son, the 
Appellant herein. A letter from the Director General of 
Police, Haryana (hereinafter referred to as “DGP”) 
dated 15.04.1998 was received by the Superintendent 
of Police on 20.04.1998 directing the name of the 
Appellant, 
Tinku, 
son 
of 
deceased 
Constable 
Jaiprakash, to be entered in the Minor’s Register No. 
47. This indicated the intention of the authorities of 
reserving one post for grant of employment to the 
Appellant at a later stage being minor child of 
deceased employee as per the applicable policy. 

3. Since the Appellant was a minor, his claim was kept 
pending. A further communication from the office of 
the 
Superintendent 
of 
Police, 
Rohtak, 
dated 
30.12.2003, was received by the mother of the 
Appellant that on attainment of the age of majority, 
the Appellant should approach the Office of the 
Welfare Inspector to get the case prepared. It is on 
this basis that the Appellant approached the DGP by 
way of representation dated 30.10.2008 putting forth 
his claim for appointment under the ex-gratia scheme, 
specifying therein that he had attained the age of 
majority on 10.10.2008. His mother also submitted a 
representation to the DGP, making reference to the 
earlier communications as mentioned above for the 
grant of appointment on compassionate grounds as 
per the policy. 
4. The claim of the Appellant was considered, and 
communication was received from the DGP dated 
28.04.2009 addressed to the Superintendent of Police, 

Rohtak, with a copy thereof to the mother of the 
Appellant intimating rejection of the claim for 
appointment on compassionate grounds. The reason 
assigned was that from the date of death of the 
Appellant’s father till he having become major 11 years 
had passed rendering the claim time barred when 
taken from the date of death of the father of the 
Appellant. For this reliance was placed on the 
Government instructions dated 22.03.1999 where a 
minor dependent of a deceased government employee 
gets the benefit provided he/she attains age of 
majority within a period of three years from the date 
of death of the government employee. It was further 
intimated that, as per the “Haryana Compassionate 
Assistance 
to 
the 
Dependents 
of 
Deceased 
Government Employees” Rules, 2006 (hereinafter 
referred to as the “2006 Rules”), which were then in 
force, whereunder the claim was considered, did not 
contain provision for providing a job under the ex-
gratia scheme. 

5. Faced with this situation, the Appellant had preferred 
a writ petition before the High Court in the year 2009, 
with the plea of promissory estoppel in the light of 
communications received referred to above. The writ 
was dismissed on 12.01.2021 holding therein that the 
principle of estoppel would not be applicable to the 
case in hand as it was only a communication which 
was sent to the petitioner with regard to the name 
having been entered in the minor’s register, while the 
subsequent communication from the Superintendent 
of Police was for approaching the authority on the 
attainment of the age of majority by the ward. An 
aspect with regard to the delay from the date of death 
of the father of the Appellant till the date of he having 
attained majority which is around 11 years also 
weighed on the mind of the Court in the light of the 
law as has been laid down by this Court in Umesh 
Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana1. 
 
1 1994 (4) SCC 138 

6. An intra court appeal preferred by the Appellant 
resulted in the dismissal of the same on 22.03.2022, 
leading to the filing of the present Appeal. 
7. Learned Counsel for the Appellant, by making 
reference to additional documents submitted that 
there has been violation of the right of equality relating 
to consideration for appointment under the ex-gratia 
policy, as it is asserted that in similar factual matters 
the benefit of appointment on compassionate grounds 
had been granted. It has been asserted that since the 
Appellant is similarly placed, he should be granted the 
same benefit. A reference in this regard has been made 
to Annexures A-1 appended along with the Appeal. 
8. A perusal of the above would indicate that the said 
benefit of appointment on attaining the age of 
majority, irrespective of the period having lapsed from 
the date of death of the parent, had been granted prior 
to 22.03.1999 when an outer limit of three years for 
attainment of the age of majority from the date of 
death of the deceased government employee was 

introduced by the instructions. Further, in those 
matters, the age of attainment of majority was also 
prior to the coming into force of instructions dated 
22.03.1999. 
9. That apart, the claim as has been stated above, cannot 
be accepted being not supported with any statutory 
backing. This is required for making any claim 
including a claim for compassionate appointment, 
which is an exception to the general rule of 
appointment requiring a proper advertisement and 
selection process to be followed as per rules which is 
an accepted norm. If some wrong benefit has been 
conferred or some benefit which is contrary to the 
scheme has been granted, it would not bestow a right 
upon the others to claim it as a right of equality by 
reference to Article 14 of the Constitution of India. 
10. There are catena of judgments of this Court that 
clearly lay down the principles which govern such 
claims. Some of which are Shanti Sports Club v. 

Union of India2, Chandigarh Administration v. 
Jagjit Singh3, R Muthukumar v. TANGEDCO4, 
Basawaraj & Anr v. Special Land Acquisition 
Officer5. 
11. The very idea of equality enshrined in Article 14 is a 
concept clothed in positivity based on law. It can be 
invoked to enforce a claim having sanctity of law. No 
direction can, therefore, be issued mandating the 
State to perpetuate any illegality or irregularity 
committed in favour of a person, an individual, or even 
a group of individuals which is contrary to the policy 
or instructions applicable. Similarly, passing of an 
illegal order wrongfully conferring some right or claim 
on someone does not entitle a similar claim to be put 
forth before a court nor would court be bound to 
accept such plea. The court will not compel the 
authority to repeat that illegality over again. If such 
 
2 (2009) 
3 (1995) 
4 (2022) SCC Online SC 151 
5 (2013) 

claims are entertained and directions issued, that 
would not only be against the tenets of the justice but 
would negate its ethos resulting in the law being a 
causality culminating in anarchy and lawlessness. 
The Court cannot ignore the law, nor can it overlook 
the same to confer a right or a claim that does not have 
legal sanction. Equity cannot be extended, and that 
too negative to confer a benefit or advantage without 
legal basis or justification. 
12. As regards the compassionate appointment being 
sought to be claimed as a vested right for appointment, 
suffice it to say that the said right is not a condition of 
service of an employee who dies in harness, which 
must be given to the dependent without any kind of 
scrutiny or undertaking a process of selection. It is an 
appointment which is given on proper and strict 
scrutiny of the various parameters as laid down with 
an intention to help a family out of a sudden pecuniary 
financial destitution to help it get out of the emerging 

urgent situation where the sole bread earner has 
expired, leaving them helpless and maybe penniless. 
Compassionate appointment is, therefore, provided to 
bail out a family of the deceased employee facing 
extreme 
financial 
difficulty 
and 
but 
for 
the 
employment, the family will not be able to meet the 
crisis. This shall in any case be subject to the claimant 
fulfilling the requirements as laid down in the policy, 
instructions, or rules for such a compassionate 
appointment. 
13. It must be clearly stated here that in a case where 
there is no policy, instruction, or rule providing for an 
appointment on compassionate grounds, such an 
appointment cannot be granted. 
14. The very basis and the rationale, wherever such 
policies are framed for compassionate appointment is 
with an object to grant relief to a family in distress and 
facing destitution, and thus an exception is culled out 
to the general rule in favour of the family of the 

deceased employee. This is resorted to by taking into 
consideration the services rendered by such employee 
and the consequent legitimate legal expectations apart 
from the sudden change in status and affairs of the 
family because of the unexpected turn of events, i.e. the loss of the sole bread earner. 
15. The purpose, therefore, of such policies is to give 
immediate succour to the family. When seen in this 
conspectus, three years as has been laid down from 
the date of death of the employee for putting forth a 
claim by a dependant, which, includes attainment of 
majority as per the 1999 policy instructions issued by 
the Government of Haryana cannot be said to be in 
any case unjustified or illogical, especially when 
compassionate appointment is not a vested right. 
16. In the present case, as is apparent from the record, 
the Appellant attained majority 11 years after the 
unfortunate death of his father. The claim, thus, has 
rightly been rejected by the respondent State. The 

decisions of the High Court vide the impugned 
judgments rejecting the claim of the Appellant thus, 
cannot be faulted with. 
17. The claim of the Appellant for appointment on 
compassionate grounds having been found to be not 
sustainable, an aspect that has come to light which 
requires consideration as has been put forth by the 
learned Counsel for the Appellant, is with regard to the 
grant of ex-gratia financial assistance. This is asserted 
in the light of the fact that the claim of the Appellant 
was 
pending 
consideration 
for 
compassionate 
appointment for long with the respondents, and the 
same had finally been decided on 28.04.2009 by 
rejecting the same and that too primarily on the 
ground that the said claim is time barred. It is further 
stated that in the impugned Order dated 28.04.2009 
that there is no provision for providing job under the 
ex-gratia scheme in the 2006 Rules. 

18. Going by the stand of the respondents, it is apparent 
that the claim of the Appellant was considered under 
2006 Rules which were enforced with effect from 
01.08.2006. These Rules apart from other aspects 
provide for the manner of dealing with the pending 
cases. Rule 8, which relates to repeal and savings, 
mentions the earlier prevalent rules, namely the 
Haryana 
Compassionate 
Assistance 
to 
the 
Dependents of the Deceased Government Employee 
Rules, 2005. The first proviso thereto states that the 
families would have the option to opt for the lump sum 
ex-gratia grant provided in the Rules of 2003 or 2005, 
as the case may be, in lieu of the monthly financial 
assistance provided under the 2006 Rules. 
19. Therefore, as per these 2006 Rules, the claim of 
dependents of the deceased employee would enure for 
consideration to ex-gratia compensation. The said 
claim, therefore, as far as the widow of the deceased is 
concerned, would survive and operate, especially in 

light of the fact that her son, for whom she had sought 
an appointment on compassionate grounds has been 
found to be ineligible because of he being a minor. A 
further perusal of the 2003 and 2005 Rules would 
show that the pending cases were to be dealt with 
under those rules. 
20. The admitted factual position is that all through the 
claim of employment of the Appellant was pending 
with the respondents and consequently the right of 
consideration of claim for ex-gratia compensation 
would also subsist. Given an option, the mother of the 
Appellant could have sought the benefit of such 
compensation had she been informed in time about 
the non-acceptance of her request for employment of 
her minor son. She was kept waiting for a final 
decision on the claim till its rejection in 2009. 
21. The Government of Haryana had taken a conscious 
decision on 16.03.2011 granting a mercy chance as 
one-time measure to exercise option for ex-gratia 

compensation. A perusal of the said decision would 
show that it was a one-time relaxation for applying for 
ex-gratia compensation in old cases pertaining to the 
claims before 01.08.2006. This was done having 
regard to the fact that in old cases where the family of 
the deceased employee could not exercise the option 
within time, due to lack of requisite knowledge or other 
reasons because of which their dependents could not 
avail the benefit under the ex-gratia scheme being 
time-barred. Such dependents were, accordingly, 
given one more chance to give an option. 
22. Admittedly, this decision of the government was never 
brought to the notice of the mother of the Appellant. It 
could not be disputed that no intimation whatsoever 
had been sent to the widow of the deceased 
government employee regarding the exercise of such 

an option. Had she been informed, she could have 
applied for the grant of ex-gratia compensation. The 
inaction on the part of the State in intimating her of 
her entitlement to put forth the claim is the reason for 
she having not opted for it. 
23. It would thus be just and reasonable that one 
opportunity is granted to the widow of the deceased 
government employee, Jai Prakash and the mother of 
the Appellant, to make a representation for exercising 
her option for the grant of lump sum ex-gratia 
compensation. We permit her to do so. On 
submission of the representation, the same shall be 
considered by the competent authority and a decision 
taken thereon within a period of six weeks from the 
date of receipt thereof. The lumpsum compensation, 
if granted and released within the time stipulated 
above, shall not carry any interest. However, if a 
decision is not made and if found entitled, the amount 

not disbursed within the stipulated time, interest at 
the rate of 6 per cent per annum shall be payable from 
the date of representation till the date of actual 
payment. 
24. The present Appeal is disposed of in the above terms. 
25. There shall be no order as to costs. 
26. Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of. 
 
…………………………………….J. 
(ABHAY S. OKA) 

…………………………………….J. 
(AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH) 
 
……………………………………..J. 
(AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)