IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

SUSHIL KUMAR PANDEY & ORS.
 PETITIONER(S)

VERSUS

THE HIGH COURT
OF JHARKHAND & ANR.
 RESPONDENT(S)
WITH

JUDGMENT
In these two writ petitions, we are to address the legality of
the selection process of District Judge Cadre in the State of
Jharkhand initiated in the year 2022. An advertisement bearing No.
01/2022 was published on 24th March, 2022, inviting applications
from the eligible candidates for the said posts. The vacancies
specified in the advertisement itself were twenty-two. Appointment
procedure to the said posts is guided by the Jharkhand Superior
Judicial Service (Recruitment, Appointment and Conditions of
Service) Rules, 2001 (‘the 2001 Rules’). In the year 2017, the
Jharkhand Superior Judicial Service (Recruitment, Appointment
and Conditions of Service) Regulation, 2017 (“the 2017 Regulation”)
was framed in terms of Rule 11 and Rule 30 of the 2001 Rules for

this purpose.
2. On the basis of cut-off marks specified in the advertisement as
also in the 2001 Rules, select list of sixty-six persons was
published, applying the 1:3 ratio as there were twenty-two
published vacancies. 
3. The High Court on its administrative side, however,
recommended only thirteen candidates for appointment though the
vacancies declared were twenty-two. A resolution to that effect was
taken in a Full Court meeting held on 23.03.2023. We shall quote
relevant provisions from the 2001 Rules in subsequent paragraphs
of this judgment along with the relevant extracts from the
advertisement. In the advertisement, the relevant portions for
adjudication of the subject dispute were contained under the
heading ‘Eligibility and Conditions’. The following criteria for
selection was specified therein:-
“Preliminary Entrance Test
(1) The Preliminary Entrance Test shall consist. Of:-
i. General English
ii. General Knowledge(including Current Affairs). iii. C.P.C. iv. Cr.P.C. v. Evidence Act
vi. Law of Contract.
Vii. IPC 
(2) The Preliminary Entrance Test shall be of 100 in
aggregate
(3) Duration of Preliminary Entrance Test shall be of two

hours.
(4) There shall be negative marking of -1 mark (minus
one)for each wrong answer.
Main Examination 
(1) The Main Examination shall consist of:-
Paper -I 
Part- I Language (English) 50 Marks
(Essay, Precis, Preposition and Comprehension etc,) 
Part- II 
(i) Procedural Law (Cr.P.C. & C.P.C.) (ii) Law of Evidence
(iii) Law of Limitation
 50 Marks 
Paper- II 
Substantive Law 

Marks

Constitution of India 
(ii) Indian Penal Code
(iii) Law of Contract
(iv) Sale of Goods Act
(v) Transfer of Property Act
(vi) Negotiable Instrument Act
(vii) Law relating to Motor Vehicle Accident Claim
(viii) Jurisprudence.
(ix) Santhal Pargana Tenancy Act
(x) Chhotanagpur Tenancy Act
(xi) Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act (pocso)
(xii) Prevention Of Corruption Act (xiii) SC & ST Act
(xiv) Electricity Act
(xv) Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act (NDPS
Act)
(2) Examination shall be held in two sittings of three hours
duration for each paper.
Viva-Voce Test
(1) There shall be Viva-Voce Test of 40 marks.
(2) The marks obtained in Viva-Voce Test shall be added to
the marks obtained in Main Examination and the merit list
shall be prepared accordingly.
(3) No candidate irrespective of the marks obtained by him
in the Main Examination, shall be eligible for selection for
appointment, if he obtains less than 20 marks out of
aggregate of 40 in the Viva-Voce. Test.

Note:- Every differently abled candidate will be allowed
"compensatory time" of 20 minutes for each hour of written
examination.”
4. So far as the selection process involved in these proceedings is
concerned, no preliminary entrance test was held, but that question
is not in controversy before us. The main examination comprising of
Paper-I and Paper-II carried a total of 200 marks. As per the
advertisement, the marks allocated for viva-voce test was 40 as
would appear from the preceding paragraph. A candidate
irrespective of the marks obtained by him in the main examination
was required to get at least 20 marks out of the aggregate 40 in the
viva-voce test.
5. As per the 2001 Rules, the provisions relevant are Rules 14, 18,
21 and 22. These Rules read:-
“14. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing
Rule, it shall be open to the High Court to require the
candidate at any stage of the selection process or
thereafter, to furnish any such additional proof or to
produce any document with respect to any matter relating
to his suitability and/or eligibility as the High Court may
deem necessary.
18. Before the start of the examination, the High Court may
fix the minimum qualifying marks in the Preliminary
Written Entrance Test and thereafter minimum qualifying
marks in the main examination. Based on such minimum
qualifying marks, the High Court may decide to call for
viva-voce such number of candidates, in order of merit in
written examination, depending upon the number of
vacancies available as it may appropriately decide: 
Provided that in the case of candidates belonging to
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes and candidates
belonging to other reserved categories, such minimum

qualifying marks may not be higher than 45% of the total
aggregate marks:
Provided also that in determining the suitability of a
particular candidate based on both the minimum
qualifying marks as well as in order of merit, the total
marks obtained in the examination as a whole and the
marks obtained in any individual paper, both shall also be
taken into consideration, depending upon any guidelines
that the High Court may issue in this behalf in the
Regulations to be framed for this purpose.
21. A candidate, irrespective of the marks obtained by him
in the Preliminary Written Entrance Examination and/or
the Main Written Examination shall not be qualified to be
appointed unless he obtains a minimum of 30% marks in
the viva-voce test. The marks obtained at the viva voce test
shall then be added to the marks obtained by the
candidate at the main written examination. The names of
the candidates will then be tabulated and arranged in
order of merit. If two or more candidates obtain equal
marks in the aggregate, the order shall be determined in
accordance with the marks secured at the main written
examination. If the marks secured at the main written
examination of the candidates also are found equal then
the order shall be decided in accordance with the marks
obtained in the Preliminary Written Entrance Test. From the
list of candidates so arranged in order of merit the High
Court shall prepare a select list and have it duly notified in
a manner as prescribed in the regulations. Such select list
shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of
being notified.
22. From out of the aforesaid select list, depending upon
the number of vacancies available or those required to be
filled up, the High Court shall recommend to the
Government the names for appointment as Additional
District Judge.”
6. There appears to be one inconsistency in relation to minimum
marks prescribed between the content of Rule 21 of the said Rules
and paragraph 12 of the 2017 Regulation. The said paragraph of
the Regulation stipulates:-

“(12)
No candidate irrespective of the marks obtained
by him in the Main Examination, shall be eligible for
selection for appointment, if he obtains less than 20 marks
out of aggregate of 40 in the Viva-Voce Test.”
7. We have already quoted Rule 21 of the 2001 Rules where
minimum of 30% marks in the viva-voce has been prescribed as the
qualification criteria. But that question also does not arise in the
present two writ petitions as none of the parties before us has
raised this point. We also find it to be a safer course to go by the
provisions of paragraph 12 of the 2017 Regulation, as the
advertisement also prescribed minimum 20 marks out of aggregate
of 40 in the Viva Voce test. 
8. Admitted position is that the 9 candidates who have been left out
from being recommended for appointment, had found place in the
select list in terms of Rule 21 of the 2001 Rules.
9. In, altogether seven
petitioners have joined in questioning the exclusion of the 9
candidates by the Full Court Resolution. The said resolution
introduces securing 50 per cent marks in aggregate (combination of
marks obtained in main examination and viva-voce) as the
qualifying criteria for being recommended to the said posts. This
resolution against Agenda No. 1 of the Full Court Meeting held on
23rd March, 2023 records:-

SL.No.
AGENDA
RESOLUTIONS
1.
To
 
consider
 
the
matter
 
over
recruitment process of
District Judge [U/r
4(a) directly from Bar]
with regard to Final
Result
 
against
advertisement
no.01/2022/Apptt.
Considered.
The Full Court resolves to approve the final
result list of 63 Candidates who have 
appeared for viva voce (list enclosed with 
this resolution and marked at Flag “X”)
Further, Full Court observes that
candidates at Sl.No.7 & 8 have got the
same total marks, but on careful
consideration it transpires that candidate
at Sl.No.8 has got higher marks in written
examination. Hence in view of Rule 21 of
Jharkhand Superior Judicial (Recruitment,
Appointment and Conditions of Service)
Rules, 2001, candidate at Sl.No.8 is placed
at higher place/rank.
Further after due deliberation, keeping in
view the responsibility that will be vested
upon the candidates who qualify for
appointment of District Judges and to
maintain the high standard of Superior
Judicial Services, the Full Court resolves
that only those candidates who have
secured at least 50% marks in aggregate,
shall be qualified for appointment to post of
District Judge.
It is hereby resolved to recommend the
names of following 13 top (merit wise)
candidates to the State Government for
issuance of necessary notification/s for
their appointment to the post of District
Judge after completing/undertaking the
investigation/enquiry relating to the
candidates credentials as per Rule 23 &
24 of Jharkhand Superior Judicial
(Recruitment, Appointment and Conditions
of Service) Rules, 2001:
S.No.
Roll 
No.
Name

NAMITA CHANDRA

SHWETA DHINGRA

PARAS KUMAR SINHA

KUMAR SAKET

SHIVNATH TRIPATHI

BHUPESH KUMAR

AISHA KHAN

BHANU PRATAP SINGH

NEETI KUMAR

PRACHI MISHRA

PAWAN KUMAR

RAJESH KUMAR BAGGA

NARANJAN SINGH
Registrar General is directed to upload the 
names of above mentioned 13 successful 
candidates to the official website of this Court.
10.
This Resolution has been disclosed in the reply to the
Rejoinder affidavit filed on behalf of the High Court of Jharkhand,
affirmed by Registrar General of that Court.
11.
There are two impleadment applications registered as I.A.
No. 173928 of 2023 taken out by ‘Purnendu Sharan’ and I.A. No.

10383 of 2024 taken out by ‘Ashutosh Kumar Pandey’, both of them
being aggrieved by the procedure adopted by the Full Court.
12.
Another set of candidates have filed the second writ petition
registered as. In this writ
petition, altogether five candidates have sought substantially the
same relief asked for in the. 
13.
The petitioners have been represented before us by Mr.
Dushyant Dave, Mr. Vinay Navare and Mr. Jayant K. Sud, learned
senior counsel whereas the High Court of Jharkhand has been
represented by Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned senior counsel. Mr. Rajiv
Shanker Dvivedi, learned Standing Counsel for the State of
Jharkhand has appeared for the State. State has taken a non-
committal stand before us. Counter affidavit has been filed by the
State in which also no definitive stand has been taken on the
legality of the Resolution in the Full Court meeting of the High
Court. It has however been submitted by the State that certain
amendments need to be carried out in Rule 21 of the 2001 Rules.
That plea does not come within the scope of the present
proceedings. 
14.
The petitioners’ main case rests on two planks. First one is
that the decision of the Full Court on the administrative side goes

contrary to the Recruitment Rules, Regulations and the Terms
contained in the advertisement. The second plank of the
submissions advanced by the petitioners is that in any event, after
the performance of each of the candidate is known and the marks
obtained by them in the two forms of the examination are disclosed,
it was impermissible for the High Court Administration to introduce
fresh cut-off marks. On this point, the authority relied upon by Mr.
Dave is a judgment of a Constitution Bench comprising of five
Hon’ble Judges of this Court in the case of Sivanandan C.T. &
Ors. Vs. High Court of Kerala [(2023) INSC 709)] decided on 12th
July, 2023. This judgment narrates the factual background of that
case in paragraph ‘7’ thereof and the ratio of this decision would
emerge from paragraphs ‘52’ to ‘57’ of the said judgment. These
passages from the judgment are quoted below:-
“7. On 27 February 2017, after the viva-voce was conducted,
the Administrative Committee of the High Court passed a
resolution by which it decided to apply the same minimum cut-
off marks which were prescribed for th e written examination as
a qualifying criterion in the viva-voce. In coming to this
conclusion, the Administrative Committee was of the view that
since appointments were being made to the Higher Judicial
Service, it was necessary to select candidates with a requisite
personality and knowledge which could be ensured by
prescribing a cut-off for the viva-voce in terms similar to the cut-
off which was prescribed for the written examination. On 6
March 2017, the Full Court of the High Court of Kerala
approved the resolution of the Administrative Committee. The
final merit list of the successful candidates was also published
on the same day. x x x

52. The statutory rule coupled with the scheme of examination
and the 2015 examination notification would have generated an
expectation in the petitioners that the merit list of selected
candidates will be drawn on the basis of the aggregate of total
marks received in the written examination and the viva voce.
Moreover, the petitioners would have expected no minimum
cutoff for the viva voce in view of the express stipulation in the
scheme of examination. Both the above expectations of the
petitioners are legitimate as they are based on the sanction of
statutory rules, scheme of examination, and the 2015
examination notification issued by the High Court. Thus, the
High Court lawfully committed itself to preparing a merit list of
successful candidates on the basis of the total marks obtained
in the written examination and the viva voce. ii. Whether the High Court has acted unlawfully in relation to its
commitment?
53. The Administrative Committee of the High Court
apprehended that a candidate who performed well in the
written examination, even though they fared badly in the viva
voce, would get selected to the post of District and Sessions
Judge. The Administrative Committee observed that recruitment
of such candidates would be a disservice to the public at large
because they possessed only “bookish” knowledge and lacked
practical wisdom. To avoid such a situation, the Administrative
Committee of the High Court decided to apply a minimum cut-off
to the viva voce examination. The decision of the Administrative
Committee was approved by the Full Bench of the High Court.
54. The Constitution vests the High Courts with the authority to
select judicial officers in their jurisdictions. The High Court,
being a constitutional and public authority, has to bear in the
mind the principles of good administration while performing its
administrative duties. The principles of good administration
require that the public authorities should act in a fair,
consistent, and predictable manner.
55. The High Court submitted that frustration of the petitioner’s
substantive legitimate expectation was in larger public interest –
selecting suitable candidates with practical wisdom for the post
of District Judges. Indeed, it is in the public interest that we
have suitable candidates serving in the Indian judiciary.
However, the criteria for selecting suitable candidates are laid
down in the statutory rules. As noted above, the High Court did
amend the 1961 Rules in 2017 to introduce a minimum cut-off
mark for the viva voce. The amended Rule 2(c) is extracted
below:
“2. Method of appointment – (1) Appointment to the service shall
be made as follows:

[…]
(c) Twenty five percent of the posts in the service shall be filled
up by direct recruitment from the members of the Bar. The
recruitment shall be on the basis of a competitive examination
consisting of a written examination and a viva voce. […]
Maximum marks for viva voce shall be 50. The General and
Other Backward Classes candidates shall secure a minimum of
40% marks and Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidate
shall secure a minimum of 35% marks for passing the viva voce.
The merit list of the selected candidates shall be prepared on
the basis of the aggregate marks secured by the candidate in
the written examination and viva voce.”
(emphasis supplied)
56.Under the unamended 1961 Rules, the High Court was
expected to draw up the merit list of selected candidates based
on the aggregate marks secured by the candidates in the
written examination and the viva voce, without any requirement
of a minimum cut-off for the viva voce. Thus, the decision of the
Administrative Committee to depart from the expected course of
preparing the merit list of the selected candidates is contrary to
the unamended 1961 Rules. It is also important to highlight that
the requirement of a minimum cutoff for the viva voce was
introduced after the viva voce was conducted. It is manifest that
the petitioners had no notice that such a requirement would be
introduced for the viva voce examination. We are of the opinion
that the decision of High Court is unfair to the petitioners and
amounts to an arbitrary exercise of power.
57. The High Court’s decision also fails to satisfy the test of
consistency and predictability as it contravenes the established
practice. The High Court did not impose the requirement of a
minimum cut-off for the viva voce for the selections to the post of
District and Sessions Judges for 2013 and 2014. Although the
High Court’s justification, when analyzed on its own terms, is
compelling, it is not grounded in legality. The High Court’s
decision to apply a minimum cut-off for the viva voce frustrated
the substantive legitimate expectation of the petitioners. Since
the decision of the High Court is legally untenable and fails on
the touchstone of fairness, consistency, and predictability, we
hold that such a course of action is arbitrary and violative of
Article 14.”
15.
There is an earlier judgment of this Court comprising of

three Hon’ble Judges in the case of K.Manjusree -vs- State of
Andhra Pradesh and Anr. [(2008) ] in which the change
of recruitment criteria mid-way through the selection process has
been held to be impermissible. We quote below paragraphs ‘27’ and
‘36’ of that judgment from the said report:-
“27. But what could not have been done was the second
change, by introduction of the criterion of minimum marks
for the interview. The minimum marks for interview had
never been adopted by the Andhra Pradesh High Court
earlier for selection of District & Sessions Judges, (Grade
II). In regard to the present selection, the Administrative
Committee merely adopted the previous procedure in
vogue. The previous procedure as stated above was to
apply minimum marks only for written examination and
not for the oral examination. We have referred to the proper
interpretation of the earlier Resolutions dated 24.7.2001
and 21.2.2002 and held that what was adopted on
30.11.2004 was only minimum marks for written
examination and not for the interviews. Therefore,
introduction of the requirement of minimum marks for
interview, after the entire selection process (consisting of
written examination and interview) was completed, would
amount to changing the rules of the game after the game
was played which is clearly impermissible. We are fortified
in this view by several decisions of this Court. It is
sufficient to refer to three of them - P. K. Ramachandra Iyer
v. Union of India1, Umesh Chandra Shukla v. Union of
India2, and Durgacharan Misra v. State of Orissa3. x x x
36. The Full Court however, introduced a new requirement
as to minimum marks in the interview by an interpretative
process which is not warranted and which is at variance
with the interpretation adopted while implementing the
current selection process and the earlier selections. As the
Full Court approved the Resolution dated 30.11.2004 of
the Administrative Committee and also decided to retain
the entire process of selection consisting of written
examination and interviews it could not have introduced a
new requirement of minimum marks in interviews, which
1 (1984): 1984 SCC (L &S) 214
2 (1985): 1985 SCC (L&S) 919
3 (1987): 1988 SCC (L & S) 36: (1987) 5 ATC 148

had the effect of eliminating candidates, who would
otherwise be eligible and suitable for selection. Therefore,
we hold that the action of Full Court in revising the merit
list by adopting a minimum percentage of marks for
interviews was impermissible.” 
16. The same view has later been taken by a Coordinate Bench of
this Court in the case of Hemani Malhotra -vs- High Court of
Delhi [(2008) ]. In a later decision, Tej Prakash Pathak &
Ors. -vs- Rajasthan High Court and Others [(2013) ], a
three Judge Bench of this Court expressed a view which is different
from that taken in the case of K. Manjusree (supra) and referred
the matter to the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India for being
considered by a larger Bench. There is no decision yet from a larger
Bench and until the principle laid down in the case of K.
Manjusree (supra) is overruled by a larger Bench, we shall continue
to be guided by the same as “no change in the rule midway” dictum
has become an integral part of the service jurisprudence. 
17. The next point urged by Mr. Gupta is that the ratio of the three
judgments on which reliance has been placed by Mr. Dave would
not apply in the facts of the present case. His argument is that in
those three authorities, the marking in viva-voce was the subject of
dispute whereas in the present writ petitions, it is on aggregate
marking that the High Court administration has raised the bar. One

of the authorities on which Mr. Gupta has relied on is State of
Haryana -vs- Subash Chander Marwaha & Ors. [(1974) ]. In paragraphs 7 and 12 of the said report, it has been held
and observed by a Bench of two Hon’ble Judges of this Court:-
“7. In the present case it appears that about 40 candidates
had passed the examination with the minimum score of
45%. Their names were published in the Government
Gazette as required by Rule 10(1) already referred to. It is
not disputed that the mere entry in this list of the name of
candidate does not give him the right to be appointed The
advertisement that there are 15 vacancies to be filled does
not also give him a right to be appointed. It may happen
that the Government for financial or other administrative
reasons may not fill up any vacancies. In such a case the
candidates, even the first in the list, will not have a right to
be appointed. The list is merely to help the State
Government in making the appointments showing which
candidates have the minimum qualifications under the
Rules. The stage for selection for appointment comes
thereafter, and it is not disputed that under the
Constitution it is the State Government alone which can
make the appointments. The High Court does not come into
the picture for recommending any particular candidate.
After the State Government have taken a decision as to
which of the candidates in accordance with the list should
be appointed, the list of selected candidates for
appointment is forwarded to the High Court then will have
to enter such candidates on a Register maintained by it.
When vacancies are to be filled the High Court will send in
the names of the candidates in accordance with the select
list and in the order they have been placed in that list for
appointment in the vacancies. The High Court, therefore,
plays no part except to suggest to the Government who in
accordance with the select list is to be appointed and in a
particular vacancy. It appears that in the present case the
Public Service Commission had sent up the rolls of the first
15 candidates because the Commission had been informed
that there are 15 vacancies. The High Court also in its
routine course had sent up the first 15 names to the
Government for appointment. Thereupon the Chief
Secretary to Government, Haryana wrote to the Registrar of
the High Court on May 4, 1971 as follows:
“I am directed to refer to Haryana Government endst No.

1678-1 GS, II—71/3802, dated April 22, 1971, on the
subject noted above, and to say that after careful
consideration of the recommendations of the Punjab and
Haryana High Court for appointment of first fifteen
candidates to the Haryana Civil Service (Judicial Branch),
the State Government have taken the view that it would be
appropriate that only the first seven candidates should be
appointed to the Haryana Civil Service (Judicial Branch)
and a notification has been issued accordingly. The reason
is that in the opinion of the State Government, only those
candidates who obtained 55% or more marks in the
Haryana Civil Service (Judicial Branch) Examination,
should be appointed as that will serve to maintain a
minimum standard in the appointments to the Service. It
may be mentioned that the last candidate appointed
against un-reserved vacancies out of the merit list prepared
on the basis of the Haryana Civil Service (Judicial Branch)
Examination held in May 1969, secured 55.67% marks.
The State Government have also received information that
the Punjab and Haryana High Court themselves
recommended to the Punjab Government that in respect of
P.C.S. (Judicial Branch) Examination held in 1970,
candidates securing 55% marks or more should be
appointed against un-reserved vacancies. Thus, the
decision taken by Haryana Government is in line with the
recommendations which the High Court made to the
Punjab Government regarding recruitment to the P.C.S.
(Judicial Branch) on the basis of the Examination held in
1970, and a similar policy in both the cases would be
desirable for obvious reasons.”
12. It was, however, contended by Dr Singhvi on behalf of
the respondents that since Rule 8 of Part C makes
candidates who obtained 45% or more in the competitive
examination eligible for appointment, the State Government
had no right to introduce a new rule by which they can
restrict the appointments to only those who have scored
not less than 55%. It is contended that the State
Government have acted arbitrarily in fixing 55% as the
minimum for selection and this is contrary to the rule
referred to above. The argument has no force. Rule 8 is a
step in the preparation of a list of eligible candidates with
minimum qualifications who may be considered for
appointment. The list is prepared in order of merit. The one
higher in rank is deemed to be more meritorious than the
one who is lower in rank. It could never be said that one
who tops the list is equal in merit to the one who is at the
bottom of the list. Except that they are all mentioned in one
list, each one of them stands on a separate level of
competence as compared with another. That is why Rule

10(ii), Part C speaks of “selection for appointment”. Even
as there is no constraint on the State Government in
respect of the number of appointments to be made, there is
no constraint on the Government fixing a higher score of
marks for the purpose of selection. In a case where
appointments are made by selection from a number of
eligible candidates it is open to the Government with a
view to maintain high standards of competence to fix a
score which is much higher than the one required for more
eligibility. As shown in the letter of the Chief Secretary
already referred to, they fixed a minimum of 55% for
selection as they had done on a previous occasion. There is
nothing arbitrary in fixing the score of 55% for the purpose
of selection, because that was the view of the High Court
also previously intimated to the Punjab Government on
which the Haryana Government thought fit to act. That the
Punjab Government later on fixed a lower score is no
reason for the Haryana Government to change their mind.
This is essentially a matter of administrative policy and if
the Haryana State Government think that in the interest of
judicial competence persons securing less than 55% of
marks in the competitive examination should not be
selected for appointment, those who got less than 55%
have no right to claim that the selections be made of also
those candidates who obtained less than the minimum
fixed by the State Government. In our view the High Court
was in error in thinking that the State Government had
somehow contravened Rule 8 of Part C.”
18.
Mr. Gupta has also cited the case of Ram Sharan Maurya
and Ors. Vs. State of U.P. and Ors. [(2021) ]. It has
been held in this judgment:-
“72. In terms of Rule 2(1)(x) of the 1981 Rules, qualifying
marks of ATRE are such minimum marks as may be
determined “from time to time” by the Government. Clause
(c) of Rule 14 of the 1981 Rules lays down that a
candidate must have “passed Assistant Teacher
Recruitment
 
Examination
 
conducted
 
by
 
the
Government”. Thus, one of the basic requirements for being
considered to be appointed as an Assistant Teacher under
the 1981 Rules is passing of ATRE with such minimum
marks as may be determined by the Government. Unlike
para 7 of the Guidelines for ATRE 2018 which had spelt
out that a candidate must secure minimum of 45% or 40%
marks (for “General” and “Reserved” categories
respectively) for passing ATRE 2018, no such stipulation

was available in G.O. dated 1-12-2018 notifying ATRE
2019. Though, the minimum qualifying marks were set out
in the Guidelines for ATRE 2018, it is not the requirement
of the 1981 Rules that such stipulation must be part of the
instrument notifying ATRE. By very nature of entrustment,
the Government is empowered to lay down minimum
marks “from time to time”. If this power is taken to be
conditioned with the requirement that the stipulation must
be part of the instrument notifying the examination, then
there was no such stipulation for ATRE 2019. Such reading
of the rules will lead to somewhat illogical consequences.
On one hand, the relevant Rule requires passing of ATRE
while, on the other hand, there would be no minimum
qualifying marks prescribed. A reasonable construction on
the relevant rules would therefore imply that the
Government must be said to be having power to lay down
such minimum qualifying marks not exactly alongside
instrument notifying the examination but at such other
reasonable time as well. In that case, the further question
would be at what stage can such minimum qualifying
marks be determined and whether by necessity such
minimum qualifying marks must be declared well before
the examination.
73.K. Manjusree [K. Manjusree v. State of A.P., (2008): (2008) 1 SCC (L&S) 841] and Hemani
Malhotra [Hemani Malhotra v. High Court of Delhi, (2008): (2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 203] were the cases which
pertained to selections undertaken to fill up posts in
judicial service. In these cases, no minimum qualifying
marks in interview were required and the merit list was to
be determined going by the aggregate of marks secured by
a candidate in the written examination and the oral
examination. By virtue of stipulation of minimum
qualifying marks for interview, certain candidates, who
otherwise, going by their aggregate would have been in
zone of selection, found themselves to be disqualified. The
stipulation of minimum qualifying marks having come for
the first time and after the selection process was
underway or through, this Court found such exercise to be
impermissible.
74. These were cases where, to begin with, there was no
stipulation of any minimum qualifying marks for interview.
On the other hand, in the present case, the requirement in
terms of Rule 2(1)(x) read with Rule 14 is that the minimum
qualifying marks as stipulated by the Government must be
obtained by a candidate to be considered eligible for
selection as Assistant Teacher. It was thus always
contemplated that there would be some minimum
qualifying marks. What was done by the Government by

virtue of its orders dated 7-1-2019 was to fix the quantum
or number of such minimum qualifying marks. Therefore,
unlike the cases covered by the decision of this Court in K.
Manjusree [K. Manjusree v. State of A.P., (2008): (2008) 1 SCC (L&S) 841], where a candidate could
reasonably assume that there was no stipulation regarding
minimum qualifying marks for interview, and that the
aggregate of marks in written and oral examination must
constitute the basis on which merit would be determined,
no such situation was present in the instant case. The
candidate had to pass ATRE 2019 and he must be taken
to have known that there would be fixation of some
minimum qualifying marks for clearing ATRE 2019.
75. Therefore, there is fundamental distinction between the
principle laid down in K. Manjusree [K. Manjusree v. State
of A.P., (2008): (2008) 1 SCC (L&S) 841] and
followed in Hemani Malhotra [Hemani Malhotra v. High
Court of Delhi, (2008): (2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 203]
on one hand and the situation in the present case on the
other.
76. We are then left with the question whether prescription
of such minimum qualifying marks by order dated 7-1-
2019 must be set aside merely because such prescription
was done after the examination was conducted. At this
juncture, it may be relevant to note that the basic prayer
made in the leading writ petition before the Single Judge
was to set aside the order dated 7-1-2019. What could
then entail as a consequence is that there would be no
minimum qualifying marks for ATRE 2019, which would
run counter to the mandate of Rule 2(1)(x) read with clause
(c) of Rule 14. It is precisely for this reason that what was
submitted was that the same norm as was available for
ATRE 2018 must be adopted for ATRE 2019. In order to
lend force to this submission, it was argued that Shiksha
Mitras who appeared in ATRE 2018 and ATRE 2019
formed a homogeneous class and, therefore, the norm that
was available in ATRE 2018 must be applied. This
argument, on the basis of homogeneity, has already been
dealt with and rejected.
77. If the Government has the power to fix minimum
qualifying marks “from time to time”, there is nothing in the
Rules which can detract from the exercise of such power
even after the examination is over, provided the exercise of
such power is not actuated by any malice or ill will and is
in furtherance of the object of finding the best available
talent. In that respect, the instant matter is fully covered by
the decisions of this Court in MCD v. Surender
Singh [MCD v. Surender Singh, (2019): (2019) 2
SCC (L&S) 464] and Jharkhand Public Service

Commission v. Manoj Kumar Gupta [Jharkhand Public
Service Commission v. Manoj Kumar Gupta, (2019) ]. In the first case, the power entrusted under Clause
25 of the advertisement also provided similar discretion to
the Selection Board to fix minimum qualifying marks for
each category of vacancies. While construing the exercise
of such power, it was found by this Court that it was done
“to ensure the minimum standard of the teachers that
would be recruited”. Similarly, in Jharkhand Public Service
Commission [Jharkhand
 
Public
 
Service
Commission v. Manoj Kumar Gupta, (2019) ],
the exercise of power after the examination in Paper III
was over, was found to be correct and justified.
78. If the ultimate object is to select the best available
talent and there is a power to fix the minimum qualifying
marks, in keeping with the law laid down by this Court
in State of Haryana v. Subash Chander Marwaha [State of
Haryana v. Subash Chander Marwaha, (1974): 1973 SCC (L&S) 488], State of
U.P. v. Rafiquddin [State of U.P. v. Rafiquddin, 1987 Supp
SCC 401: 1988 SCC (L&S) 183], MCD v. Surender
Singh [MCD v. Surender Singh, (2019): (2019) 2
SCC (L&S) 464] and Jharkhand Public Service
Commission v. Manoj Kumar Gupta [Jharkhand Public
Service Commission v. Manoj Kumar Gupta, (2019) ], we do not find any illegality or impropriety in
fixation of cut-off at 65-60% vide order dated 7-1-2019.
The facts on record indicate that even with this cut-off the
number of qualified candidates is more than twice the
number of vacancies available. It must be accepted that
after considering the nature and difficulty level of
examination, the number of candidates who appeared, the
authorities concerned have the requisite power to select a
criteria which may enable getting the best available
teachers. Such endeavour will certainly be consistent with
the objectives under the RTE Act.
79. In the circumstances, we affirm the view taken by the
Division Bench of the High Court and conclude that in the
present case, the fixation of cut-off at 65-60%, even after
the examination was over, cannot be said to be
impermissible. In our considered view, the Government
was well within its rights to fix such cut-off.”
19.
In these two writ petitions, we are not, however, only
concerned with the “midway change of the Rule” Principle. But on
that count also, the ratio of the decisions cited by Mr. Gupta are

distinguishable. The three Judge Bench in Tej Prakash Pathak
(supra) had referred to the judgment in the case of Subhas
Chandra Marwaha (supra) to express doubt over correctness of the
judgment in the case of K. Manjusree (supra). As we have already
observed, the ratio of K. Manjusree (supra) still holds the field. In
the case of Ram Sharan Maurya (supra), the Rules guiding
recruitment empowered the Government to stipulate qualifying
marks of the particular selection process to be such minimum
marks as may be determined from time to time by the Government.
In this decision, the judgment itself takes note of the decisions of
this Court in K. Manjusree (supra) and Hemani Malhotra (supra)
and finds that the course for selection to the posts involved in that
case was different from that which was found to be impermissible in
K. Manjusree (supra) and Hemani Malhotra (supra). 
20.
We find from Rule 18 of the 2001 Rules, the task of setting
cut-off marks has been vested in the High Court but this has to be
done before the start of the examination. Thus, we are also dealing
with a situation in which the High Court administration is seeking
to deviate from the Rules guiding the selection process itself. We
have considered the High Court’s reasoning for such deviation, but
such departure from Statutory Rules is impermissible. We accept

the High Court administration’s argument that a candidate being on
the select list acquired no vested legal right for being appointed to
the post in question. But if precluding a candidate from
appointment is in violation of the recruitment rules without there
being a finding on such candidate’s unsuitability, such an action
would fail the Article 14 test and shall be held to be arbitrary. The
reason behind the Full Court Resolution is that better candidates
ought to be found. That is different from a candidate excluded from
the appointment process being found to be unsuitable. 
21.
Stipulations contained in Rule 21 of the 2001 Rules for
making the select list were breached by the High Court
administration in adopting the impugned resolution. The ratio of
the decision in the case of Ram Sharan Maurya (supra) would not
apply in the facts of this case and we have already discussed why
we hold so. 
22.
Mr. Gupta’s stand is that applying a higher aggregate mark
is not barred under the said Rules or Regulations. We are, however,
unable to accept this submission. The very expression “aggregate”
means combination of two or more processes and in the event the
procedure for arriving at the aggregate has been laid down in the
applicable Rules, a separate criteria cannot be carved out to enable

change in the manner of making the aggregate marks. 
23.
So far as the ratio of the decision in the case of K.
Manjusree (supra) is concerned, that authority deals with change
of the Rules mid-way. In the case before us, in our opinion, if the
High Court is permitted to alter the selection criteria after the
performance of individual candidates is assessed, that would
constitute alteration of the laid down Rules. We refer to paragraphs
Nos. 14 and 15 of the judgment of the Constitution Bench in the
case of Sivanandan C.T. (supra), which lays down the principle of
law on this point. We reproduce below the said passages from this
authority:-
“14. The decision of the High Court to prescribe a cut-off for
the viva-voce examination was taken by the Administrative
Committee on 27 February 2017 after the viva-voce was
conducted between 16 and 24 January 2017. The process
which has been adopted by the High Court suffers from
several infirmities. Firstly, the decision of the High Court
was contrary to Rule 2(c)(iii) which stipulated that the merit
list would be drawn up on the basis of the marks obtained
in the aggregate in the written examination and the viva-
voce; secondly, the scheme which was notified by the High
Court on 13 December 2012 clearly specified that there
would be no cut off marks in respect of the viva-voce;
thirdly, the notification of the High Court dated 30
September 2015 clarified that the process of short listing
which would be carried out would be only on the basis of
the length of practice of the members of the Bar, should the
number of candidates be unduly large; and fourthly, the
decision to prescribe cut off marks for the viva-voce was
taken much after the viva-voce tests were conducted in the
month of January 2017.
15. For the above reasons, we have come to the conclusion
that the broader constitutional issue which has been

referred in Tej Prakash Pathak (supra) would not merit
decision on the facts of the present case. Clearly, the
decision which was taken by the High Court was ultra
vires Rule 2(c)(iii) as it stands. As a matter of fact, during
the course of the hearing we have been apprised of the fact
that the Rules have been subsequently amended in 2017
so as to prescribe a cut off of 35% marks in the viva-voce
examination which however was not the prevailing legal
position when the present process of selection was
initiated on 30 September 2015. The Administrative
Committee of the High Court decided to impose a cut off for
the viva-voce examination actuated by the bona fide
reason of ensuring that candidates with requisite
personality assume judicial office. However laudable that
approach of the Administrative Committee may have been,
such a change would be required to be brought in by a
substantive amendment to the Rules which came in much
later as noticed above. This is not a case where the rules
or the scheme of the High Court were silent. Where the
statutory rules are silent, they can be supplemented in a
manner consistent with the object and spirit of the Rules
by an administrative order.”
24.
The ratio of this authority is squarely applicable in the facts
of this case. Submission on behalf of the High Court administration
that Rule 14 permits them to alter the selection criteria after the
selection process is concluded and marks are declared is not proper
exposition of the said provision. The said Rule, in our opinion,
empowers the High Court administration in specific cases to
reassess the suitability and eligibility of a candidate in a special
situation by calling for additional documents. The High Court
administration cannot take aid of this Rule to take a blanket
decision for making departure from the selection criteria specified
in the 2001 Rules. The content of Rule 14 has the tenor of a

verification process of an individual candidate in assessing the
suitability or eligibility.
25.
We, accordingly, allow both the writ petitions by directing
the High Court to make recommendation for those candidates who
have been successful as per the merit or select list, for filing up the
subsisting notified vacancies without applying the Full Court
Resolution that requires each candidate to get 50 per cent aggregate
marks. The part of the Full Court Resolution of the Jharkhand High
Court dated 23.03.2023 by which it was decided that only those
candidates who have secured at least 50% marks in aggregate shall
be qualified for appointment to the post of District Judge is
quashed. 
26.
We expect the exercise of recommendation in terms of this
judgment to be completed as expeditiously as possible.
27.
We do not find any reason to address the impleadment
applications as this judgment will cover the entire recommendation
process.
…………………………………...J.
 [ANIRUDDHA BOSE]
…………………………………...J.
 [SANJAY KUMAR]
NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 01, 2024

ITEM NO.12 COURT NO.5 SECTION X
 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A
 RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

SUSHIL KUMAR PANDEY & ORS. Petitioner(s)
 VERSUS
THE HIGH COURT OF JHARKHAND & ANR. Respondent(s)
(IA No. 173928/2023 - INTERVENTION/IMPLEADMENT
 IA No. 140754/2023 - STAY APPLICATION)
 
WITH
W.P.(C) No. 921/2023 (X)
(IA No. 177197/2023 - STAY APPLICATION)
 
Date: 01-02-2024 These matters were called on for hearing today.
CORAM: 
 Justice ANIRUDDHA BOSE
 Justice SANJAY KUMAR
For Petitioner(s) Mr. Vinay Navare, Sr. Adv.
 Mr. Mahesh Thakur, AOR
 Ms. Neha Singh, Adv.
 Mrs. Geetanjali Bedi, Adv.
 Mr. Ranvijay Singh Chandel, Adv.
 Mr. Shivamm Sharrma, Adv.
 Ms. Shivani, Adv. 
 
 Mr. Prithvi Pal, AOR
 Mr. Sanjay Kumar Yadav, Adv.
 Mr. Manoj Jain, Adv. 
 
 Mr. K Karpagavinagagam, Sr. Adv.
 Ms. Kiran Bhardwaj, Adv.
 Mr. C Aravind, Adv.
 Mr. K V Mathu Kumar, Adv.
 Ms. Geeta Verma, Adv.
 Mr. Syed Imtiyaz, Adv.
 Mr. Usman Khan, Adv.
 Ms. Madhurima Sarangi, Adv.
 Mr. Naeem Ilyas, Adv.
 Mr. Towseef Ahmad Dar, AOR 
 
 Mr. Dushyant Dave, Sr. Adv.
 Ms. Meenakshi Arora, Sr. Adv.

 Mr. Danish Zubair Khan, AOR
 Dr. Lokendra Malik, Adv.
 
 Mr. Surya Nath Pandey, AOR
 
 Mr. Jayant K. Sud, Sr. Adv.
 Mr. Durga Dutt, AOR
 Mr. Rohit Priyadarshi, Adv.
 Mr. Upendra Narayan Mishra, Adv.
 Mr. Satyendra Kumar Mishra, Adv.
 Ms. Rashi Verma, Adv.
 Mr. Somesh Kumar Dubey, Adv.
 Mr. Kartik Jasra, Adv.
 Mr. Prannit Stefano, Adv.
 Mr. Shivam Nagpal, Adv. 
 
For Respondent(s) Mr. Jaideep Gupta, Sr. Adv.
 Ms. Susmita Lal, AOR
 Ms. Racheeta Chawla, Adv.
 Ms. Racheeta Chawla, Adv.
 Mr. Kamakhya Srivastava, Adv.
 Mr. Kamakhya Srivastava, Adv. 
 
 Mr. Arunabh Chowdhury, Sr. Adv, A.A.G.
 Mr. Rajiv Shanker Dvivedi, Adv.
 Ms. Tulika Mukherjee, AOR
 Mr. Karma Dorjee, Adv.
 Mr. Dechen W. Lachungpa, Adv.
 Mr. Beenu Sharma, Adv.
 Mr. Venkat Narayan, Adv.
 
 Mr. Danish Zubair Khan, AOR 
 UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
 ORDER
The present writ petitions are allowed in
terms of the signed judgment.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand
disposed of.
(SNEHA DAS) (VIDYA NEGI)
SENIOR PERSONAL ASSISTANT ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
(Signed judgment is placed on the file)