1 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
( SLP(Crl.)No.4887 of 2024) 
 
M.R. AJAYAN 

 … APPELLANT(S) 
Versus 
STATE OF KERALA & ORS. 
 
 … RESPONDENT(S) 
AND 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
( SLP(Crl.)No.7896 of 2023) 
 
ANTONY RAJU 

 … APPELLANT(S) 
Versus 
STATE OF KERALA & ANR. 
 
 … RESPONDENT(S) 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
SANJAY KAROL J. 
 
Leave Granted. 

2 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
2. The present appeals arise from the common final judgment and order dated 10th 
March, 2023 passed by the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in 
M.C.No.5261 of 2022, whereby the order taking cognizance in Crime 
No.215/1994 and all further proceedings pursuant to the same (C.C. No. 811 of 
2014) on the files of Judicial First Class Magistrate-I, Nedumangad, were 
quashed and the Registry of the High Court was directed to take appropriate 
action against Antony Raju in accordance with the procedure set out under 
Section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19731. 

FACTUAL MATRIX 
 
3. The genesis of this case dates back to the year 1990. On 4th April, 1990, an FIR 
came to be registered bearing Crime No.60 of 1990, under Section 20(b)(ii) of 
the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, wherein an Australian 
national, Andrew Salvatore, was travelling from Thiruvananthapuram to 
Mumbai. While undergoing frisking at the airport, he was found to be in 
possession of 2 packets containing 55 grams and 6.6 grams of charas, which were 
kept concealed in the pocket of his underwear. On registration of the FIR, the 
person, along with the seized articles and personal belongings, were kept in the 
custody of the Valiyathura Police Station. 
 
1 hereinafter “Cr.P.C” 

3 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
4. These seized articles were produced before the Judicial First Class Magistrate–
II, Thiruvananthapuram. Accused No.1 was the Clerk, in the custody of whom, 
by virtue of a judicial order, the articles were entrusted. Thereafter, on 
17.07.1990, an application was made on behalf of Andrew Salvatore, seeking the 
release of his personal belongings, which came to be permitted. 

5. Accordingly, the articles were released to accused No.2/appellant in 
SLP(Crl.)No.7896 of 2023, who was the junior lawyer of the counsel appearing 
for Andrew Salvatore. Pertinently, one of the items of the case property, i.e., the 
underwear of Andrew Salvatore, was also released along with the personal 
articles directed to be released by the Court. However, later, the underwear was 
returned by Accused No.2 to Accused No.1, which was forwarded to the Sessions 
Court and during trial, it was marked as Exhibit Mo2, in case Crime No.60 of 
1990. 
 
6. The Sessions Court convicted Andrew Salvatore and sentenced him to undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and to pay a fine of Rs.1 Lakh under Section 
20(b)(11) of the NDPS Act, 1985. An appeal was preferred as Criminal Appeal 
No.20 of 1991 before the High Court of Kerala. During the course of hearing, a 
practical test was conducted, and it was found that the said underwear (Ex. Mo2) 
was not the size of the convicted person. Therefore, vide judgment and order 
dated 5th February, 1991, the High Court while acquitting Andrew Salvatore, 

4 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
observed that “there is a strong possibility of Mo2 being planted in an attempt to 
help the appellant to wriggle out of the situation. I hope that this matter will be 
duly enquired into and dealt with properly by the concerned authorities… A copy 
of this judgment be forwarded to the Chief Secretary for appropriate action.” 
 
7. Subsequent to the judgment dated 5th February, 1991, the Vigilance Officer of 
the High Court of Kerala conducted an investigation and a report in this regard 
was submitted highlighting the necessity of a detailed investigation into the 
incident. This resulted in an Office Memorandum dated 27th September, 1994 
being 
issued 
by 
the 
High 
Court 
requesting 
the 
District 
Court, 
Thiruvananthapuram, to direct the Sheristadar to lodge a First Information Report 
before the police. 

8. Thereafter on 5th October, 1994, an FIR bearing No.215/94 came to be registered 
stating that – “As per the Order No.8384/94 dated 27.09.1994 issued by the 
Kerela High Court, a letter has been sent to the Trivandrum District Judge. As 
per the direction of the District Court, Trivandrum, the following charges have 
been imposed in SC No.147/90 for replacing Mo2 (Jetty), hence the accused 
cheated the Court by destroying the evidence and committed the offence.” It was 
further stated that the FIR pertains to replacing the Mo2 by an unknown person. 

5 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
9. Subsequently, a chargesheet came to be filed on 24th March, 2006 against one 
Mr. Jose, the Thondi clerk of the Court and Advocate Antony Raju under 
Sections 120(B), 420, 201, 193, 217 and 34 of the Indian Penal Code2. Allegedly, 
these accused persons conspired together with the intention and preparation to 
cause the disappearance of evidence (Mo2). It stated that Accused No.1, Clerk 
handed over Mo2 to Accused No.2, Antony Raju, who made alterations thereto, 
ensuring that it would not fit Accused Andrew Salvatore. Cognizance of this 
final report came to be taken by Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, 
Nedumangad, as C.C. No.811/2014. 
 
10. In the year 2022, both these accused persons preferred separate petitions (being 
M.C.No.7805/2022 & M.C.No.5261/2022) before the High Court of 
Kerela under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. seeking quashing of the proceedings of 
Crime No.215 of 1994 and C.C.No.811/2014 on the ground that cognizance in 
the present case could not have been taken due to the bar created under Section 
195(1)(b) of the Cr.P.C. 
 
11. Resultantly, the impugned order came to be passed, allowing the petitions and 
thereby quashing the order taking cognizance in Crime No.215/1994 and all 
further proceedings pursuant to the same (C.C.No.811/2014) on the files of 
Judicial First Class Magistrate-I, Nedumangad. However, it directed the Registry 
 
2 hereinafter "IPC" 

6 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
of the Court to undertake appropriate measures in accordance with the procedure 
under Section 195(1)(b) of the Cr.P.C. 
 
12. Impugning the said order passed by the High Court, two petitions have been filed 
before this Court. SLP(Crl.)No.4887 of 2024 is filed by M.R. Ajayan, stating that 
he is a socially spirited person and editor of “Green Kerela News". He is said to 
be aggrieved by the quashing of the grievous allegations in the complaint by the 
High Court. SLP (Crl.)No.7896 of 2023 is filed by Mr. Antony Raju, who is 
Accused No.2, stating that the High Court could not have directed de novo steps 
to be taken against the accused on the allegations made out in the quashed 
proceedings. Accused No.1 has not assailed any order. 

REASONING OF THE COURT BELOW 

13. The High Court vide the impugned order, after considering the contentions of the 
parties, gave the following findings while allowing the petitions: 
 
i. 
The release of article Mo2 (Jetty) from the custody of the Court, 
followed by its return after being altered, would be considered an act of 
criminal conspiracy under Section 120B, IPC and will also constitute 
an offence under Section 193, IPC. As the said article was released from 
the custody of the Court, and at that time, the same was unquestionably 

7 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
under 'Custodiam Legis’, and therefore, the bar u/s 195(1)(b) would get 
attracted. ii. 
The cognizance taken on the final report was not legally sustainable, as 
it contravened the legal requirements under Section 195 (1)(b) of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure. The Court categorically distinguished the 
decision of this Court in CBI v. M. Sivamani3 (2-Judge Bench) on the 
point that the procedural distinctions between judicial and 
administrative orders are underscored by this case, where the CB-CID 
had initiated the investigation based on a judicial order issued by the 
Madras High Court, rather than an administrative order, as in the 
present case. 
 
ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION 
 
14. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also perused the 
written submissions filed. The issues which arise for consideration of this Court 
are: 
i. Whether M.R. Ajayan, appellant in SLP(Crl.)No.4887 of 2024 has the 
locus standi to prefer this SLP against the impugned order? 
 
3 (2017) 

8 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
ii. Whether the High Court has rightly held the proceedings in question 
to be hit by the bar under Section 195(1)(b) Cr.P.C.? iii. Independent of the above, whether the High Court could have ordered 
de novo steps to be taken against the appellant? 

DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

15. Coming to the first issue at hand, concerning the locus standi of Mr. M.R. Ajayan, 
the appellant in SLP(Crl.)No.4887 of 2024, he has submitted that he is a socially 
spirited person and editor of “Green Kerela News”. He had also filed an 
intervention application before the High Court of Kerala, resisting the quashing 
petition. 

16. Antony Raju, Respondent No.2 in SLP(Crl.)No.4887 of 2024/ appellant in the 
appeal arising out SLP(Crl.)No.7896 of 2023, has objected to the locus of Mr. 
M.R. Ajayan, submitting that third parties cannot be permitted to prefer appeal 
in criminal proceedings and has sought to place reliance on judgments of this 
Court in P.S.R. Sadhanantham v. Arunachalam & Anr. (5-Judge Bench)4, 
 
4 (1980) 

9 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
National Commission for Women v. State of Delhi & Anr. (2-Judge Bench)5 
and Amanuallah & Anr. v. State of Bihar & Ors. (2-Judge Bench)6. 
 
17. The locus of a private individual seeking the exercise of jurisdiction of this Court 
under Article 136 of the Constitution is no longer res integra. This Court in 
National Commission for Women (supra) has observed that an appeal by a 
private individual can be entertained, both sparingly and after due vigilance, 
following the exposition of law in Arunachalam (supra). Furthermore, in 
Amanuallah (supra), this Court dealt with this issue in detail and observed: 

“19. The term “locus standi” is a Latin term, the general meaning of 
which is “place of standing”. Concise Oxford English Dictionary, 
10th Edn., at p. 834, defines the term "locus standi" as the right or 
capacity to bring an action or to appear in a court. The traditional 
view of "locus standi" has been that the person who is aggrieved or 
affected has the standing before the Court that is to say he only has 
a right to move the Court for seeking justice. Later, this Court, with 
justice-oriented approach, relaxed the strict rule with regard to 
"locus standi", allowing any person from the society not related to 
the cause of action to approach the Court seeking justice for those 
who could not approach themselves. Now turning our attention 
towards the criminal trial, which is conducted, largely, by following 
the procedure laid down in CrPC. Since, offence is considered to be 
a wrong committed against the society, the prosecution against the 
accused person is launched by the State. It is the duty of the State to 
get the culprit booked for the offence committed by him. The focal 
point, here, is that if the State fails in this regard and the party having 
bona fide connection with the cause of action, who is aggrieved by 
the order of the Court cannot be left at the mercy of the State and 
without any option to approach the appellate Court for seeking 
justice. 
24. After considering the case law relied upon by the learned counsel 
for the appellants as well as the respondents, in the light of the 
material placed on record, we are of the view that the appellants have 
 
5 (2010) 
6 (2016) 

10 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
locus standi to maintain this appeal. From the material placed on 
record, it is clear that the appellants have precise connection with 
the matter at hand and thus, have locus to maintain this appeal. The 
learned counsel for the appellants has rightly placed reliance upon 
the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court, namely, P.S.R. 
Sadhanantham [P.S.R. Sadhanantham v. Arunachalam, (1980): 1980 SCC (Cri) 649] and other decisions of this Court 
in Ramakant Rai [Ramakant Rai v. Madan Rai, (2003): 2004 SCC (Cri) Supp 445], Esher Singh [Esher Singh v. State of 
A.P., (2004): 2004 SCC (Cri) Supp 113], Rama Kant 
Verma [Rama Kant Verma v. State of U.P., (2008): 
(2010) 4 SCC (Cri) 734]. Further, it is pertinent here to observe that 
it may not be possible to strictly enumerate as to who all will have 
locus to maintain an appeal before this Court invoking Article 136 
of the Constitution of India, it depends upon the factual matrix of 
each case, as each case has its unique set of facts. It is clear from the 
aforementioned case law that the Court should be liberal in allowing 
any third party, having bona fide connection with the matter, to 
maintain the appeal with a view to advance substantial justice. 
However, this power of allowing a third party to maintain an appeal 
should be exercised with due care and caution. Persons, unconnected 
with the matter under consideration or having personal grievance 
against the accused should be checked. A strict vigilance is required 
to be maintained in this regard.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

18. More recently, similar to the case at hand, in Naveen Singh v. State of U.P. (2-
Judge Bench)7, while considering the locus of the Petitioner therein, this Court 
observed that since the allegations concerned tampering with the order of the 
Court, hence locus is not that important but, in fact, insignificant with the State 
not carrying forward the matter any further. 
 
19. In view of the above expositions of law, we are of the considered view that the 
locus standi of the appellant in SLP(Crl.)No.4887 of 2024, does not come in the 
 
7 (2021) 

11 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
way of this Court hearing the same. The case at hand, which has been quashed 
by the High Court, involves serious allegations of interference with judicial 
processes which strike at the very foundation of both dispensation and the 
administration of justice. Therefore, the first issue is answered in the affirmative 
as it is incumbent upon this Court to check the correctness of the approach 
adopted by the High Court, and the locus of the appellant would not come in the 
way of the same. 

20. We now proceed to examine the second issue, which pertains to the bar of 
prosecution under Section 195(1)(b) of the Cr.P.C. It reads as: 
 
“195. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public 
servants, for offences against public justice and for offences relating 
to documents given in evidence. 
(1) No Court shall take cognizance— 
(a) (i) of any offence punishable under sections 172 to 188 (both 
inclusive) of the Penal Code, 1860, (45 of 1860), or 
(ii) of any abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence, or 
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit such offence, 
except on the complaint in writing of the public servant concerned or 
of some other public servant to whom he is administratively 
subordinate;… 
(b) (i) of any offence punishable under any of the following sections 
of the Indian Penal Code ( 45 of 1860), namely, section 193 to 196 
(both inclusive), 199, 200, 205 to 211 (both inclusive) and 228, when 
such offence is alleged to have been committed in, or in relation to, 
any proceeding in any Court, or 
(ii) of any offence described in section 463, or punishable under 
section 471, section 475 or section 476, of the said Code, when such 

12 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
offence is alleged to have been committed in respect of a document 
produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in any Court, or 
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, or 
the abetment of, any offence specified in sub-clause (I) or sub-clause 
(ii), 
except on the complaint in writing of that Court or by such 
officer of the Court as that Court may authorize in writing in 
this behalf, or of some other Court to which that Court is 
subordinate. 
 
(2) Where a complaint has been made by a public servant under 
clause (a) of Sub-Section (1) any authority to which he is 
administratively subordinate may order the withdrawal of the 
complaint and send a copy of such order to the Court; and upon its 
receipt by the Court, no further proceedings shall be taken on the 
complaint; 
 
Provided that no such withdrawal shall be ordered if the trial in the 
Court of first instance has been concluded. 
 
(3) In clause (b) of Sub-Section (1), the term “Court” means a Civil, 
Revenue or Criminal Court, and includes a tribunal constituted by or 
under a Central, provincial or State Act if declared by that Act to be 
a Court for the purposes of this section. 
 
(4) For the purposes of clause (b) of Sub-Section (1), a Court shall 
be deemed to be subordinate to the Court to which appeals ordinarily 
lie from appealable decrees or sentences of such former Court, or in 
the case of a civil Court from whose decrees no appeal ordinarily 
lies, to the principal Court having ordinary original civil jurisdiction 
within whose local jurisdiction such Civil Court is situate; 
 
Provided that— 
 a. where appeals lie to more than one Court, the Appellate Court of 
inferior jurisdiction shall be the Court to which such Court shall be 
deemed to be subordinate; 
 b. where appeals lie to a civil and also to a Revenue Court, such 
Court shall be deemed to be subordinate to the civil or Revenue 
Court according to the nature of the case or proceeding in connection 
with which the offence is alleged to have been committed.” 

13 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
21. The principles relating to prosecutions under Section 195 Cr.P.C., as expounded 
by this Court in Sachida Nand Singh v. State of Bihar (3-Judge Bench)8; M.S. 
Ahlawat v. State of Haryana & Anr. (3-Judge Bench)9; Iqbal Singh Marwah 
& Anr. v. Meenakshi Marwah & Anr. (5-Judge Bench)10; Perumal v. Janaki 
(2-Judge Bench)11; and Sivamani (supra) are: 
 
i. The procedure prescribed under Section 195 Cr.P.C. is mandatory 
in nature. ii. The Section curtails the general right of a person and the general 
right of a Magistrate to register a complaint when the offences 
enumerated thereunder are committed. iii. The Section deals with three distinct categories of offences: (1) 
contempt of lawful authority of public servants, (2) offence against 
public justice, and (3) offence relating to documents given in 
evidence. iv. Broadly, the scheme of the Section requires that the offence should 
be such which has a direct bearing on the discharge of lawful duties 
of a public servant or has a direct correlation with the proceedings 
in a Court of justice, affecting the administration of justice. 
 
8 (1998) 
9 (2000) 
10 (2005) 
11 (2014) 

14 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
v. The provision only creates a bar against taking cognizance of an 
offence in certain specified situations except upon complaint by the 
Court. vi. To attract the bar under Section 195(1)(b), the offence should have 
been committed when the document was in “custodia legis” or in 
the custody of the Court concerned. vii. The bar under Section 195(1)(b)(ii) cannot be thought to be applied 
when the forgery of a document has happened prior to its production 
in Court. The bar only applies in case the enumerated offence takes 
place after the production of the document or in evidence in any 
Court. viii. High Courts can exercise jurisdiction and power enumerated 
under Section 195 on an application being made to it or suo-motu, 
whenever the interest of justice so demands. ix. In such a case, where the High Court as a superior Court directs a 
complaint to be filed in respect of an offence covered under Section 
195(1)(b)(i), the bar for taking cognizance, will not apply. 
 
22. In the instant case, the High Court, on the basis of the above bar on taking 
cognizance, has quashed the order taking cognizance and proceedings emanating 

15 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
therefrom. We are of the considered view, that this approach was not correct for 
the reasons set out below. 

23. At this stage, we must reiterate and re-emphasize the genesis of the proceedings 
in this case. On a perusal of the FIR, it is clear that based on the letter issued by 
the Kerala High Court dated 27th September, 1994 and by the District Judge, 
Trivandrum, the offence was registered against the accused persons. The criminal 
proceedings clearly do not arise from a complaint by a private individual. 

24. Elaborating the law to the attending facts, we notice that this Court in Perumal 
(supra) had observed: 

“19. Therefore, all that sub-section (4) of Section 195 says is that 
irrespective of the fact whether a particular court is subordinate to 
another court in the hierarchy of judicial administration, for the 
purpose of exercise of powers under Section 195(1), every appellate 
Court competent to entertain the appeals either from decrees or 
sentence passed by the original Court is treated to be a court 
concurrently competent to exercise the jurisdiction under Section 
195(1). The High Courts being constitutional courts invested with 
the powers of superintendence over all courts within the territory 
over which the High Court exercises its jurisdiction, in our view, is 
certainly a court which can exercise the jurisdiction under Section 
195(1). In the absence of any specific constitutional limitation of 
prescription on the exercise of such powers, the High Courts may 
exercise such power either on an application made to it or suo motu 
whenever the interests of justice demand.” 

25. The above exposition came to be followed and expanded by this Court in 
Sivamani (supra), wherein it was observed: 

16 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
 
“12. …. While the bar against cognizance of a specified offence is 
mandatory, the same has to be understood in the context of the 
purpose for which such a bar is created. The bar is not intended to 
take away remedy against a crime but only to protect an innocent 
person against false or frivolous proceedings by a private person. 
The expression “the public servant or his administrative superior” 
cannot exclude the High Court. It is clearly implicit in the direction 
of the High Court quoted above that it was necessary in the interest 
of justice to take cognizance of the offence in question. Direction of 
the High Court is on a par with the direction of an administrative 
superior public servant to file a complaint in writing in terms of the 
statutory requirement. The protection intended by the section against 
a private person filing a frivolous complaint is taken care of when 
the High Court finds that the matter was required to be gone into in 
public interest. Such direction cannot be rendered futile by invoking 
Section 195 to such a situation. Once the High Court directs 
investigation into a specified offence mentioned in Section 195, bar 
under Section 195(1)(a) cannot be pressed into service. The view 
taken by the High Court will frustrate the object of law and cannot 
be sustained.” 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

26. The High Court differentiated the judgment of this Court in Sivamani (supra), to 
the facts of the case herein, stating that in this case, the final report came to be 
filed on the basis of an administrative order and not a judicial one. We are unable 
to agree with the reasoning of the High Court on this aspect. 
 
27. As discussed above, the initiation of the present proceedings in the present case, 
was from the judgment and order dated 5thFebruary, 1991 of the Kerala High 
Court in, in acquitting Andrew Salvatore 
directing the matter of planting of Mo2 be positively looked into. This was 
followed by an investigation by the vigilance officer of the Court. Therefore, in 

17 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
the impugned order, the High Court has erroneously observed that there is no 
judicial order concerning the present proceedings. 

28. The High Court also distinguished Sivamani (supra) on the ground that the public 
interest present therein is absent in the present case. This is the second aspect that 
must be clarified. The alleged act is a glaring occurrence where the process of 
criminal prosecution stands interfered with, impugning upon the sanctity of 
judicial proceedings, resulting in a travesty of justice. Such actions not only erode 
public trust in the judicial system but compromise the principles of the rule of 
law and fairness, which are essential for the justice delivery system. Such 
incidents strike at the foundation of the independence and integrity of the judicial 
process, hence, it cannot be said that there is a lack of public interest herein. In 
the peculiar circumstances obtained in this case where the accused allegedly 
received a material object in question, from the judicial custody, despite there 
being no specific order for release thereof, and subsequently tinkered/ assisted in 
tinkering with the same and thereafter substituted it for the original. 
 
29. Furthermore, on a perusal of the judgment of this Court in Sivamani (supra) and 
the statutory provision, there is no distinction between a judicial or administrative 
order by a “Court to which that Court is subordinate.” 

30. The second question is, accordingly, answered in the negative. 

18 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
 
31. Lastly, independent of the above, this Court must address the ground of challenge 
to the impugned order raised by the appellant - Antony Raju, in the appeal arising 
out of SLP(Crl.)No.7896 of 2023. He has submitted that the High Court could 
not have ordered a de novo trial against him, being impermissible in law, as has 
been so directed to be done in paragraph 28 of the impugned order. In our view, 
it cannot be said that the High Court, in the attending circumstances, erred in 
doing so. 
 
32. On this aspect, we must make reference to the judgment of this Court in Nasib 
Singh v. State of Punjab (3-Judge Bench)12, wherein it was stated: 
 
“33. The principles that emerge from the decisions of this Court on 
retrial can be formulated as under: 
 
33.1. The appellate Court may direct a retrial only in "exceptional" 
circumstances to avert a miscarriage of justice.… 
33.6. The following are some instances, not intended to be 
exhaustive, of when the Court could order a retrial on the ground of 
miscarriage of justice: 
(a) The trial court has proceeded with the trial in the absence of 
jurisdiction; 
(b) The trial has been vitiated by an illegality or irregularity based 
on a misconception of the nature of the proceedings; and 
(c) The prosecutor has been disabled or prevented from adducing 
evidence as regards the nature of the charge, resulting in the trial 
being rendered a farce, sham or charade.” 

12 (2022) 

19 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
33. More recently, in Sunita Devi v. State of Bihar & Anr. (2-Judge Bench)13, this 
Court summarized the power of an Appellate Court to order retrial: 

“8. Every trial is a march towards the truth. It is the primary duty of the 
Court to search for the truth using the procedural law as its tool. Such a 
procedural law may have a substantive part extending certain inalienable 
rights to both, the accused and the victim. By non-compliance of the 
procedural law, justice cannot be allowed to derail. Anyone, who 
complains of an unfair trial, is duty bound to satisfy the Court that he stands 
prejudiced by it. This does not mean that a Court can be lackadaisical in 
following the rules and procedures meant to ensure justice. 
 
9. A fair trial is the heart and soul of criminal jurisprudence. The principle 
of democracy lies in a fair trial. It is not only a statutory right, but also a 
human right, which would be violated when the safeguards provided under 
the Statute are not followed. The absence of a fair trial would seriously 
impair and violate the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14 and 
21 of the Constitution of India. What is important to be seen is the existence 
of a failure of justice, which is obviously one of fact. A mere violation per 
se would not vitiate the trial, especially when the degree of substantivity 
exhibited in a statute is minimal. 
 
27. An Appellate Court has got ample power to direct re-trial. However, 
such a power is to be exercised in exceptional cases. The irregularities 
found must be so material that a re-trial is the only option. In other words, 
the failure to follow the mandate of law must cause a serious prejudice 
vitiating the entire trial, which cannot be cured otherwise, except by way 
of a re-trial. Once such a re-trial is ordered, the effect is that all the 
proceedings recorded by the Court would get obliterated leading to a fresh 
trial, which is inclusive of the examination of witnesses." 
 
(Emphasis supplied) 

34. Applying the above principles to the case at hand, the alleged forgery of evidence 
in a criminal investigation has resulted in acquittal in the NDPS case and, 
thereafter, an FIR has been registered, in the circumstance referred to 
hereinbefore. But then, the interference by the High Court in quashing the 
criminal proceedings was unwarranted. 

20 | SLP(Crl.)No.4887/2024
35. Therefore, in view of the above the impugned order is set aside. The order taking 
cognizance in Crime No.215/1994 and all further proceedings pursuant to the 
same (C.C No 811 of 2014) are restored on the files of Judicial First Class 
Magistrate-I, Nedumangad. 

36. Before parting with the present appeals, there is another aspect that this Court 
must be cognizant of. The proceedings in the case at hand emanate from nearly 
two decades ago. Therefore, in the interest of justice, we deem it appropriate to 
direct the Trial Court to conclude the trial within a period of one year from today. 
The accused shall appear before the Trial Court on 20th December 2024 or on the 
next working day of the Court concerned. The Registry to take follow-up steps. 
 
37. The appeal SLP(Crl.)No.4887 of 2024 is allowed in the aforesaid 
terms. The appeal SLP (Crl.)No.7896 of 2023 is dismissed. All 
pending applications, if any, are disposed of. 

………………………J. 
(C.T. RAVIKUMAR) 

………………………J. 
(SANJAY KAROL) 
 
Date: 20th November, 2024 
Place: New Delhi