R E P O R T A B L E 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 10409-10410 OF 2014 
 
M/S BHARTI AIRTEL LTD. 

…APPELLANTS (S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE COMMISSIONER OF 
CENTRAL EXCISE, PUNE 

WITH 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 5032-5035 OF 2021 
CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 5039-5040 OF 2021 

CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 5036-5037 OF 2021 

And 

JUDGMENT 
 
NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH, J. 
 
1. 
The core issue involved in this set of appeals is whether the 
mobile service providers (MSPs) who pay excise duties on various 
items for setting up their business more particularly for erection of 
mobile towers and peripherals like pre-fabricated buildings (PFBs) etc. can take the benefit of CENVAT Credit under the CENVAT Credit 
Rules, 2004 (hereinafter referred to as the “CENVAT Rules”) for the 
purpose of payment of service tax on the output services rendered by 
them. With respect to the same, conflicting views have been given by 
two High Courts, namely the High Court of Bombay and High Court of 
Delhi. The Bombay High Court has ruled against the MSPs, favouring 
the Revenue, holding that MSPs are not entitled to CENVAT credit on 
mobile towers and prefabricated buildings. Whereas, the Delhi High 
Court has held to the contrary extending the benefit of CENVAT credit 
to the MSPs. The decisions of both the High Courts have been 
challenged before this Court by the respective aggrieved parties, by way 
of the present set of appeals. 
1.1 
In the lead judgment of the Bombay High Court which has been 
challenged before this Court in, 
namely Bharti Airtel Limited v. The Commissioner of Central Excise, 
Pune (Bharti Airtel, for short) rendered on 26.08.2014 in Central 
Excise Appeal Nos.73 of 2012 and No. 119 of 2012, the Bombay High 
Court held that mobile towers and other components do not fall within 
the definition of “capital goods” as defined under Rule 2(a)(A) of the 
CENVAT Rules, nor are these “inputs” within the meaning of Rule 2(k) 

and, hence, the MSP is not entitled to CENVAT credit on duty paid on 
these items. 
1.2 
The aforesaid decision of the Bombay High Court in Bharti 
Airtel (supra) has been reiterated in the following cases: 
(i) Central Excise Appeal No.126 of 2015 and Central Excise 
Appeal No.127 of 2015 vide order dated 10.09.2015 which has 
been assailed before this Court in CA No.7119 of 2015 
(Vodafone India Limited v. Commissioner of Central Excise) 
and CA No.7179 of 2015 (Vodafone India Limited v. 
Commissioner of Central Excise); 
(ii) Central Excise Appeal No.191 of 2015 and Central Excise 
Appeal No.190 of 2015 vide order dated 12.10.2015 against 
which CA No.1077 of 2016 (Tata Teleservices Ltd. vs. 
Commissioner of Central Service Tax) and CA No.1078 of 
2016 (Tata Teleservices Maharashtra Ltd. v. Commissioner of 
Central Service Tax) have been filed before this Court; 
(iii) Central Excise Appeal No.159 of 2015, out of which CA 
No.5112 of 2021 (Idea Cellular Ltd. vs. Commissioner of 
Service Tax) has arisen; 
(iv) Central Excise Appeal No.1 of 2016, Central Excise Appeal 
No.2 of 2016, Central Excise Appeal No.4 of 2016, Central 
Excise Appeal No.6 of 2016, Central Excise Appeal No.7 of 
2016 which have been challenged in CA No.1201 of 2018 
(Reliance Communications v. Commissioner of Service Tax), 
CA 
No.1205/2018 
(Reliance 
Communications 
v. 
Commissioner of Service Tax), CA No.1203 of 2018 (Reliance 
Communications v. Commissioner of Service Tax), CA 

No.1204 of 2018 (Reliance Communications v. Commissioner 
of Service Tax) and the CA No.1202 of 2018 (Reliance 
Communications v. Commissioner of Service Tax); 
(v) Central Excise Appeal No.7 of 2017 rendered on 02.04.2018 
which has been challenged in CA No.5832 of 2018 (M/s 
Reliance Communication Infrastructure v. Commissioner of 
Service Tax, Mumbai). 
1.3 
The Delhi High Court in the case of Vodafone Mobile Services 
Limited v. CST, Delhi 2019 [(27) G.S.T.L. 481 (Del.)] (Vodafone, for 
short) decided on 31.10.2018 C.E.A.C. Nos.12-13 of 
2016, 6 of 2017 and 4 of 2018, SERTA Nos.14-20 of 2016, on the 
contrary, held that towers and other associated structures like 
prefabricated buildings (PFBs) are covered by the definition of “capital 
goods” and are “inputs” as defined under CENVAT Rules and hence, 
MSPs are entitled to input credit on excise duty paid towards 
installation of mobile towers and PFBs. This judgement of the Delhi 
High Court has been challenged before this Court in CA Nos. 5032-
5035/2021(Commissioner of Service Tax vs. Indus Towers Ltd.), CA 
No. 5039-5040/2021 (Commissioner of Service Tax vs. M/s Bharti 
Infratel Ltd.), CA No. 5038/2021 (Commissioner of Excise vs. Tower 
Vision India Pvt. Ltd.) and CA No. 5036-5037/2021 (Commissioner of 
Service Tax vs. Vodafone Mobile Services Ltd.). 
1.4 
Following the aforesaid decision of the Delhi High Court in the 
Vodafone (supra), CESTAT, Principal Bench, Delhi in SA Appeal 
No.52342 of 2015 allowed the CENVAT Credit to the MSPs. This 
decision of the CESTAT, Delhi has been challenged in CA No.62/2022 

(Commissioner Central Excise and Service Tax LTU vs. Mahanagar 
Telephone Nigam Ltd.) 
2. 
Most of the Assessees before us are mobile service providers 
(MSPs). The MSPs typically provide sim cards to the subscribers either 
in physical or electronic form, on activation of which the subscribers 
are able to enjoy wireless telecommunication service. For rendering 
these services, the service providers usually own and operate the 
infrastructure such as cell towers, Base Transceiver System (BTS) 
along with accompanying network equipment and structures like pre-
fabricated building (PFBs), electricity generating sets (gensets), battery 
back-up and stabilisers for uninterrupted power supply to ensure 
seamless telecom service to the subscribers. 
2.1 
Some of the Assessees, on the other hand, are merely providing 
passive infrastructure support service to the mobile telecommunication 
companies at telecom sites which consists of towers and other 
accompanying ancillaries including PFBs as mentioned above. 
3. 
The process of mobile telecommunication begins when a 
subscriber uses a wireless mobile handset which is also known as 
Mobile Station (MS) to make a call after activation of the sim card. The 
mobile handset, which is a radio equipment, performs the signal 
processing function of digitizing, encoding, error protecting, encrypting 
and modulating to transmitted signals. When it receives signals from 
other mobile stations, it performs the inverse functions. The mobile 
handset sends a signal, an electromagnetic wave, which is a modulated 
version of the user’s voice or data. The signal emanating from the 
handset is received by the antenna mounted on the tower. Thereafter, 
the signal received by the antenna is sent through cables to the Base 

Station Sub-system (BSS). BSS is a set of base station equipment like 
Base Transceiver Station (BTS) and Base Station Controller (BSC). 
BSC essentially controls one or more BTS or BS. Base Transceiver 
Station (BTS) housed at the base of the tower is kept in secured and safe 
conditions in the prefabricated house or building (PFB). The BTS then 
converts the electromagnetic signal into a digital format that can be 
processed by the network. The processed signal is then transmitted to 
the mobile switching centre (MSC). The MSC then routes the calls or 
data to the destination through another tower or series of towers and by 
a reverse process of conversion from digital mode to electromagnetic 
wave, the signal is received at the destination. 
3.1 
The said activities require constant electricity supply to the 
equipment to function. To prevent any interruption in the supply of 
electricity, the MSPs invariably keep electricity generator sets (gensets) 
and UPS Batteries along with stabilisers etc. which are kept near the 
base of the tower, usually housed in the portable PFBs to protect from 
damage. 
3.2 
From the above, what is evident is that to dispense wireless 
telecom service, the sim cards, antenna, BTS along with other 
equipment play a critical role. The antenna and BTS are intrinsically 
linked. Antenna, tower, BTS, generation set, PFBs typically constitute 
essential 
components 
for 
providing 
seamless 
mobile 
telecommunication service to the consumers/subscribers. 
4. 
The mobile towers are bought and brought at the site either in 
completely knocked down condition (CKD) or semi-knocked down 
condition (SKD) by the service provider. The tower is installed at an 
appropriate site based on technological viability. It is on this mobile 

tower that the antenna which receives and transmits the electromagnetic 
signal is hoisted and fixed at an appropriate height as may be technically 
determined. The mobile tower, in turn, is fixed to the ground or on the 
top of a building to provide stability and make it wobble free as the 
antenna cannot function effectively if the same is not kept at a particular 
height and is not stable and prevented from shaking due to wind, rain 
or any other reason. 
5. 
The MSPs or the infrastructure providers purchase these items 
from the manufacturers for installation at the appropriate locations. It is 
the excise duties paid on purchase of the mobile towers or parts thereof 
either in CKD or SKD condition and for erection of PFBs which are 
sought to be claimed by MSPs as CENVAT credit. This credit is 
thereafter utilised for payment as service tax for the output service 
provided by the MSPs to the consumers. This credit availed is the 
subject matter of dispute in these proceedings wherein the two High 
Courts have given contrary views. 
6. 
In view of the conflicting decisions of the two High Courts, in 
order to ascertain which of the two views is the correct one, it would be 
appropriate to examine the findings and reasons assigned by each of 
these High Courts for coming to different conclusions. 
7. 
Before we proceed to examine the decisions of the two High 
Courts, it may be apposite to refer to the relevant provisions of the 
CENVAT Rules as the issues dealt with by the two High Courts and 
before us are to be examined in the light of the provisions of the 
CENVAT Rules. 
7.1 
Rule 3(1) of the CENVAT Credit Rules, 2004 enables a provider 
of taxable service to claim CENVAT credit paid on any “capital goods” 

or “input” received in the premises of the service provider. As to what 
are “capital goods” and “input” have been defined under Rule 2(a)(A) 
and the Rule 2(k) of the CENVAT Rules. Consequently, if the mobile 
towers and prefabricated buildings, which are the items in issue here, 
qualify as “capital goods” or “inputs” received in the premises of the 
mobile service provider, the mobile service provider will be entitled to 
claim CENVAT credit which can be further used for paying service tax 
for the output services rendered by the mobile service provider. 
7.2 
While Rule 3(1) is the enabling provision for taking CENVAT 
credit, Rule (4) provides that the CENVAT credit in respect of “inputs” 
may be taken immediately on receipt of inputs in the factory of the 
manufacturer or in the premises of the service provider. 
For better clarity, we reproduce the relevant provisions of the 
CENVAT Rules. 
Rule 2(a) (A) defines “capital goods” and Rule 2(k) defines 
“input” which reads as below: - 
Rule 2(a)(A) 
“2. In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, - 
(a) “capital goods” means:- 
 (A) the following goods, namely:- 
(i) all goods falling under Chapter 82, Chapter 84, Chapter 
85, Chapter 90, heading No. 68.02 and sub-heading No. 
6801.10 of the First Schedule to the Excise Tariff Act; 
 
(ii) pollution control equipment; 
 
(iii) components, spares and accessories of the goods 
specified at (i) and(ii); 
 
(iv) moulds and dies, jigs and fixtures; 
 
(v) refractories and refractory materials; 
(vi) tubes and pipes and fittings thereof; and 
(vii) storage tank, 

used – 
 
(1) in the factory of the manufacturer of the final products, 
but does not include any equipment or appliance used in 
an office; or 
 
(2) for providing output service.” 
 
Rule 2(k) 
 
“2(k) “input” means- 

all goods, except light diesel oil, high speed diesel oil and motor 
spirit, commonly known as petrol, used in or in relation to the 
manufacture of final products whether directly or indirectly and 
whether contained in the final product or not and includes 
lubricating oils, greases, cutting oils, coolants, accessories of the 
final products cleared along with the final product, goods used as 
paint, or as packing material, or as fuel, or for generation of 
electricity or steam used in or in relation to manufacture of final 
products or for any other purpose, within the factory of production; 

all goods, except light diesel oil, high speed diesel oil, motor spirit, 
commonly known as petrol and motor vehicles, used for providing 
any output service. 
 
Explanation 1. - The light diesel oil, high speed diesel oil or motor spirit, 
commonly known as petrol, shall not be treated as an input for any purpose 
whatsoever. 
 
Explanation 2. - Input include goods used in the manufacture of capital 
goods which are further used in the factory of the manufacturer; 
Rule 3 is the enabling provision to take CENVAT credit, 
relevant portion of which reads as follows: - 
 
Rule 3 
 
“3.(1) A manufacturer or producer of final products or a provider of 
taxable service shall be allowed to take credit (hereinafter referred to the 
CENVAT credit) of – 

the duty of excise specified in the First Schedule to the 
Tarrif Act, leviable under the Excise Act: 
 ………………………………………………. paid on – 

any input or capital goods received in the factory of 
manufacture of final product or premises of the provider of 
out service on or after the 10th day of September, 2004; and 

any output service received by the manufacturer of final 
product or by the provider of output services on or after the 
10th day of September, 2004. 

……………. 

……………. 
(4) …………….. 

CENVAT credit may be utilized for payment of - 

any duty of excise of any final product; or 

an amount equal to CENVAT credit taken on inputs 
if such inputs are removed as such or after being 
partially processed; or 

an amount equal to the CENVAT credit taken on 
capital goods if such capital goods are removed as 
such; or 

an amount under sub-rule (2) of rule 16 of Central 
excise Rules, 2002; or 

service tax on any output service: 
…………………………………………… 
……………………………………………” 
Rule 4 
“Condition for allowing CENVAT credit. 
4. (1) The CENVAT credit in respect of inputs may be taken immediately 
on receipt of the inputs in the factory of the manufacturer or in the premises 
of the provider of output service: 
Provided that…………….” 
 
8. 
Since the Bombay High Court’s decision was rendered on an 
earlier date i.e. on 26.08.2014, and the Delhi High Court rendered its 
decision subsequently on 31.10.2018, we will first deal with the 
decision of the Bombay High Court. 
8.1 
Shorn of unnecessary details, we will refer only to the relevant 
facts by referring to the lead case of each of the High Courts as the 

decisions arrived on examining these lead cases would cover other 
appeals before us. 
Decision of the Bombay High Court 
9. 
The proceeding in the lead case of Bharti Airtel (supra) was set 
into motion by a show cause notice dated 25.04.2006 issued by the 
Commissioner of Excise to M/s. Bharti Airtel Limited, an MSP 
(Assessee) alleging inter alia, that the Assessee had wrongly taken and 
utilised CENVAT Credit on certain goods which do not qualify as 
“capital goods” within the meaning of CENVAT Credit Rules, 2004 and 
thus, availing such credit was contrary to the definition under Rule 
2(a)(A) and Rule 4 of the CENVAT Rules. The goods mentioned in the 
said show cause notice include amongst others: (i) towers and parts of 
towers; (ii) prefabricated building (PFB) used as a shelter for protecting 
transmission devices which are the primary concern of these 
proceedings. 
9.1 
In the said show cause notice, it was alleged that a tower, after 
erection, becomes immovable property having been fixed to the earth 
and thus, cannot be considered to be a “good” and hence was not 
“capital good” within the meaning of the CENVAT Rules. It was alleged 
that the tower even in CKD or SKD condition would fall under Chapter 
7308 of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 which does not find mention 
either in clause (i) or clause (ii) of Rule 2(a)(A) or in Rule 2(k) of the 
CENVAT Rules. It was also alleged that tower or parts of the tower 
cannot be claimed for CENVAT Credit as these are not components, 
spares or accessories of “capital goods” as specified in sub-clauses (i) 
and (ii) of Rule 2(a)(A) within the meaning of Rule 2(a)(A)(iii). 
Consequently, the Revenue sought not only the recovery of wrongfully 

claimed CENVAT credit but also imposed penalty and interests on 
account of misstatement of ineligible claim. 
9.2 
As regards prefabricated buildings (PFBs), it was alleged that 
these are used as shelter for protecting transmission devices etc. and not 
for providing output service i.e. telecommunication service and hence, 
cannot be considered “capital goods” within the meaning of Rule 
2(a)(A). 
Further, it was also alleged that these cannot be said to be 
“inputs” for providing mobile service within the meaning of Rule 2(k). 
9.3 
The response of the Assessee in respect of the said show cause 
notice was that towers and parts of towers are “capital goods” and 
“inputs” for which CENVAT credit is admissible for the output service 
rendered by the Assessee. 
9.4 
In regard to the prefabricated buildings (PFBs), the Assessee 
explained that these are also eligible for CENVAT credit as “capital 
goods” and in any case as “inputs” for providing mobile telecom service 
to the subscribers. It was contended that the aforesaid articles are 
covered within the meaning of “capital goods” under Rule 2(a)(A) and 
“inputs” under Rule 2(k). 
9.5 
It was also contended on behalf of the Assessee that credit in 
respect of “inputs” can be availed immediately on receipt of the goods 
in the premises of the service provider under Rule 4(1) of the CENVAT 
Rules. Thus, the Assessee was entitled to CENVAT credit the moment 
these articles were received in the premises of the service provider and 
the Assessee need not wait until these goods are actually installed for 
providing services to the consumers. 

9.6 
It was contended by the Assessee that tower is a part of the 
“Base Transceiver Station” (BTS) and antenna, all of which form 
components of an integrated telecom system. It was further contended 
that the tower acts as an accessory of BTS and antenna and without the 
tower, antenna and BTS cannot function properly. Consequently, 
mobile service cannot be provided by the service provider without 
tower, antenna and BTS. It has been contended that BTS and antenna 
are covered by Chapter 85 under Rule 2(a)(A) and are “capital goods”. 
Since BTS/antenna are “capital goods” under the CENVAT Rules, the 
tower, being a part of BTS/antenna will be also deemed as “capital 
good” by virtue of sub-clause (iii) of Rule (a)(A). Since these goods, 
namely tower, BTS and antenna are used for providing output telecom 
service to the subscribers/consumers, the mobile service provider will 
be entitled to claim CENVAT credit not only on BTS and antenna but 
also on tower, being an accessory to “capital goods” in the form of BTS 
and antenna. 
9.7 
The Assessee further contended that for effective and 
uninterrupted transmission and receipt of electromagnetic radio signals 
by the antenna which is installed on the mobile tower, additional 
peripheral equipment such as battery back-up, rectifier, UPS, gensets 
etc., are also necessary which are purchased by the service provider 
and brought at the site and installed and housed in the prefabricated 
shelters or buildings without which the antenna installed on the mobile 
tower and BTS will become inoperative. Thus, apart from mobile tower, 
the prefabricated building/shelter, where these ancillary items which are 
indispensable components of the mobile telephone system are securely 
housed, becomes an integral part of the mobile telephone system. It was 
also contended that since it is through these items including the 

prefabricated building that the mobile telephone service is provided as 
an output to the subscribers, these articles, including the prefabricated 
shelters/buildings will be eligible for CENVAT input credit. 
9.8 
The Revenue rejected the aforesaid pleas of the Assessee by 
holding that various goods/items like tower, antenna, prefabricated 
building (PFB) etc. have independent and definite functions and cannot 
be treated as a single integrated unit and accordingly, these items/goods 
cannot be treated as capital goods and CENVAT credit cannot be 
allowed. The Revenue held that only equipment like BTS, transmitter, 
antenna which are used in providing telecom service and which are 
covered under various Chapters under Rule 2(a)(A) are eligible for 
CENVAT credit vide order dated 19.12.2006 of the Commissioner of 
Excise/Revenue. 
9.9 
Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the Commissioner, 
the Assessee approached the Customs Excise and Service Tax Appellate 
Tribunal (CESTAT) by filing Appeal No. ST/49/2007 challenging the 
order dated 19.12.2006. 
9.10 
It may be noted that after the Commissioner, Excise/Revenue 
rejected the plea of the Assessee by order dated 19.12.2006, another 
proceeding was initiated for recovery of penalty which culminated in 
the passing of order dated 23.03.2009 by the Commissioner which was 
challenged before the Tribunal in Appeal No. ST/145/2009. 
9.11 
The aforesaid two orders passed in the above appeals namely 
ST/49/2007 and the ST/145/2009 were challenged before the CESTAT 
which were disposed of by a common order dated 06.01.2012 
upholding the view of the Revenue, against which the Assessee 
preferred appeals before the Bombay High Court by filing Central 

Excise Appeal No. 73 of 2012 and Central Excise Appeal No. 119 of 
2012 which were finally disposed of by the Bombay High Court on 
26.08.2014 vide a common judgment upholding the findings recorded 
by the Tribunal in support of the Revenue to the effect that subject items 
are neither “capital goods” under Rule 2(a)(A) nor “inputs” under Rule 
2(k) of the CENVAT Rules and hence duties paid on these items were 
not admissible to the Assessee for CENVAT credit. Against the 
aforesaid decision of the Bombay High Court, the present Appeal No. 
73 of 2012 and Appeal No. 119 of 2012 have been preferred before this 
Court. 
9.12 
The Bombay High Court, while examining the aforesaid issues 
framed the following questions of law:- 
"1. Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, the 
Appellate Tribunal was correct and justified in holding that the 
Appellant was not entitled to credit of duty paid on tower parts, 
green shelter, printers and office chairs? 
2. Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, the 
Appellate Tribunal was correct and justified in holding that the 
Appellant was not entitled to credit of duty paid on tower parts, 
green shelter on the ground that tower/green shelter is 
"immovable property" and hence, do not qualify as "capital 
goods" or "inputs" as defined under the CENVAT Credit Rules, 
2004? 
3. Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, the 
Appellate Tribunal was correct and justified in holding that 
tower would not qualify as "part" or "component" or 
"accessory" of the capital goods i.e. antenna?" 

The Bombay High Court decided all the above questions of law 
against the Assessee and in favour of the Revenue. 
9.13 
In deciding the abovementioned issues, the Bombay High Court 
considered the following aspects: 

That the aforesaid goods are not “capital goods” within 
the meaning under Rule 2(a)(A) of the CENVAT Rules, since 
these are immovable property. 

That these goods are not the components/accessories of 
antenna within the meaning of Rule 2(a)(A)(iii). 

That these goods are not “inputs” within the meaning of 
Rule 2(k). 
 In considering the aforesaid aspects the Bombay High Court 
analysed the relevant provisions of CENVAT Rules, as to what amounts 
to “capital goods” and “input” and also the provisions of Rule 3 which 
provides for credit on excise duty paid in discharging liability towards 
service tax. 
9.14 
The Bombay High Court, after considering the definition 
clauses in the CENVAT Rules, took the view that the goods in question 
i.e. tower and parts thereof which are fastened and fixed to the earth 
after their erection become immovable properties and therefore, these 
cannot be goods and hence not “capital goods” within the meaning of 
the CENVAT Rules. The Bombay High Court also took the view that 
the tower and parts thereof in the CKD or SKD condition, would fall 
under Chapter Heading 7308 of the Central Excise Tariff Act, but the 
aforesaid heading is not specified either in clause (i) or clause (ii) of 
Rule 2(a)(A) of the CENVAT Rules to be treated as “capital goods”. 

The Bombay High Court further opined that since these are 
neither components, spares and accessories of goods falling under any 
of the Chapters or Headings of the Central Excise Tariff Schedule as 
specified in Rule 2(a)(A)(i), the goods in question would not be “capital 
goods” for the purpose of CENVAT credit. 
9.15 
The Bombay High Court also did not find favour with the 
contention of the Assessee that tower is an accessory of antenna since, 
without tower, antenna cannot be installed, and consequently, antenna 
cannot function and hence tower should be treated as part or component 
of antenna. 
9.16 
In coming to the above stated conclusions, the Bombay High 
Court considered various decisions, cited by both the contesting parties, 
some of which we will advert to briefly. 
9.16.1 Before the Bombay High Court, the Assessee in support of the 
contention that the tower and parts thereof and PFBs are not 
immoveable properties, relied upon the following, inter alia, decisions: 

CCE V. SLR Steels Ltd., 2011 SCC Online Kar 4345, (2012) 280 
ELT 176 (Kant). 
 
(ii) CCE v. ICL Sugars Ltd., 2011 SCC Online Kar 4254, (2011) 271 
ELT 360 (Kant). 
 
(iii) CCE v. Sai Sahmita Storage Ltd., (2011) SCC OnLine AP 956, 
(2011) 23 STR 341 (AP). 
 
(iv) Bannari Amman Sugars Ltd. v. CCE, 2009 SCC OnLine Kar 
814, (2010) 250 ELT 326 (Kant). 
 
(v) CCE v Hindustan Sanitaryware & Industries, (2002). 
 
(vi) CCE v. N.R.C. Ltd., 2008 SCC OnLine Bom 1894. 
 
(vii) Commr. of Customs v. Rupa and Co. Ltd., (2004). 
 
(viii) Deepak Fertilizers & Petrochemicals Corpn. Ltd. v. C.C.E., 
Belapur,. 
 
(ix) Commr. of C.Ex., Jaipur v. Rajasthan Spinning & Weaving Mills Ltd., 
(2010). 

9.16.2 The Bombay High Court, however, held that the aforesaid 
decisions are not applicable to the present case and proceeded to 
examine the plea of the Assessee that since the antenna is fitted onto the 
tower and shelter is used for providing telecommunication services, 
they would qualify as “inputs” under Rule 2(k) of the CENVAT Credit 
Rules. In support of this contention, the Assessee had placed reliance 
on the following decisions:- 

Industrial Machinery Manufacturers (P) Ltd. v. State of Gujarat, 
1963 SCC Online Guj 84:(1965) 16 STC 380 (Guj). 

Board of Revenue v. Phelps & Co. (P) Ltd., (1972). 

J.K. Cotton Spg. & Wvg. Mills Co. Ltd. v. STO, AIR 1965 SC 
1310. 

Indus Towers Ltd. v. CTO, 2012 SCC Online AP 628: (2012) 52 
VST 447 (AP). 

Collector of C.E. v. Jay Engineering Works Ltd., 1989 Supp (1) 
SCC 128. 

Banco Products (India) Ltd. v. Commissioner of C. Ex., 
Vadodara-I,. 

Singh Alloys and Steel Ltd. v. Assistant Collector of Central 
Excise, 1993 SCC OnLine Cal 441 
 
The Bombay High Court, however, did not find the aforesaid 
decisions applicable to the present case. 
9.16.3 The Bombay High Court then proceeded to examine the 
alternate plea of the Assessee that the tower is an accessory of antenna 
and without towers, antenna cannot be installed and hence it cannot 
function, and therefore, tower should be treated as a part or component 
or accessory of the antenna. The contention of the Assessee was that 
the antenna falls under Chapter 85 of the Schedule to the Central Excise 
Tariff Act and is thus “capital good” within the meaning of Rule 

2(a)(A)(i) and (ii), therefore, tower being an accessory of antenna, will 
be eligible for availing CENVAT credit under Rule 2(a)(A)(iii). 
Some more cases relied upon by the Assessee were as follows. 

M/s. Annapurna Carbon Industries Co. v. State of Andhra 
Pradesh, (1976). 
(ii) Commissioner of Sales Tax, Maharashtra State, Bombay v. L.D. 
Bhave & Sons, 1981 SCC OnLine Bom 438. 

Mehra Brothers v. Joint Commercial Officer, (1991). 
The Bombay High Court on examination held these decisions 
not to be applicable to the present case. 
9.17 
The Bombay High Court then considered the contentions 
advanced on behalf of the Revenue which were as follows:- 
i) 
Since towers and parts thereof are fixed to the earth, thus, 
after being installed become immovable property and hence, 
cannot be considered as “goods” and consequently cannot be 
“capital goods”. ii) 
The tower in CKD/SKD condition would be classifiable 
under Chapter Heading 7308 of the Central Excise Tariff Act. 
However, Chapter Heading 7308 is not specified either in 
Clause (i) or Clause (ii) of Rule 2(a)(A) of the CENVAT Rules. 
Consequently, since tower is not one of the items specified in 
the Rules as “capital goods”, duties paid for parts of the tower 
cannot be claimed as CENVAT Credit. iii) 
Even if it is assumed that CENVAT credit on the parts of 
the towers would be admissible under Clause (iii) of Rule 
2(a)(A), there is an explicit condition that the said goods should 
be components, spares and accessories of the goods specified in 

Clauses (i) and (ii) of Rule 2(a)(A). As tower is not a “capital 
good” under the aforesaid clauses, duty paid on its parts, 
therefore, is not admissible for availing CENVAT credit. iv) 
Only those articles which go into composition of another 
article can be considered as components or parts of the latter. 
Though GSM and the network antenna are specified under 
Tariff Chapter Heading 8517, tower on which the antenna is 
placed is not classified as such under the said Tariff chapter 
Heading 8517. Thus, tower cannot be considered to be a 
component to the antenna within the meaning of Rule 
2(a)(A)(iii) as it does not enter into the composition of the 
antenna. 

As regards, availing the CENVAT credit in respect of 
“input”, it was submitted by the Revenue that only a 
manufacturer can avail such credit and not a service provider. 
9.17.1 In support of the contentions, the Revenue cited a number of 
judgments before the Bombay High Court, some of which are referred 
as below: 

Vandana Global Ltd. v. Commissioner of Central Excise, Raipur, 
2010 (253) E.L.T. 440 (Tri.-LB). 

Quality Steel Tubes (P) Ltd. v. Collector of Central Excise, (1995). 
 
(iii) Triveni Engineering & Industries Ltd. & Anr v. Commissioner of 
Central Excise, (2000). 
 
(iv) Mittal Engineering Works (P) Ltd. v. Collector of Central Excise, 
Meerut (1997). 
[ 

Commissioner of Central Excise, Indore v. Cethar Vessels Ltd. & Ors., 
(2009). 

(vi) Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay v. Indian Oil Corporation, 
1991 Supp (2) SCC 18. 
 
(vii) Cellular Operators Association of India & Ors. V. Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi etc., 2011 SCC OnLine Del 2003. 
 
(viii) Collector of Central Excise v. Hutchison Max Telecom P. Ltd., 2007 
SCC OnLine Bom 702. 
 
(xi) Saraswati Sugar Mills v. Commissioner of central Excise, Delhi-III, 
(2014) ). 
 
9.18. 
The Bombay High Court after analysing the facts of the present 
case, in the light of the case laws cited by the contesting parties and 
relevant provisions of the CENVAT Rules, rejected the contention of 
the Assessees that they were entitled to credit of the duties paid on these 
items since BTS is a single integrated system consisting of tower, GSM 
or Microwave Antennas, PFB, isolation transformers, electrical 
equipments, generator sets, feeder cables etc., and these are to be treated 
as “composite system” classified under Chapter Heading 85.25 of the 
Tariff Act and hence be treated as “capital goods” and credit be allowed. 
The Bombay High Court held that each of the components had 
independent functions and, hence, these cannot be treated and classified 
together as a single composite unit. 
9.19 
The Bombay High Court held that all capital goods are not 
eligible for credit and only those “capital goods” which fall under Rule 
2(a)(A)(i) and (ii) relatable to the output services and mentioned in the 
CENVAT Rules will be available for credit. The goods in question 
namely, the tower and parts thereof and PFB cannot be considered to be 
“capital goods” for the purpose of CENVAT credit as they are neither 
mentioned nor are components, spares or accessories of goods falling 
under any of the Chapters or Headings of the Central Excise Tariff 
Schedule as specified in Rule 2(a)(A). In the CKD or SKD condition, 

the tower and parts thereof would fall under Chapter Heading 7308 of 
the Central Excise Tariff Act and the said Heading is not specified in 
sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) of Rule 2(a)(A) of CENVAT Rules so 
as to be capital goods. 
9.20 
The Bombay High Court held that admittedly, the goods in 
question do not fall within the definition of “capital goods”, since 
towers and parts thereof, once fastened and fixed to the earth, post their 
erection, become immovable and therefore cannot be classified as 
goods. Consequently, they cannot be considered capital goods as 
defined under Rule 2(a)(A). Hence, the Assessee cannot claim the 
credit of duty paid on these items. The Court further clarified that only 
items specified as capital goods under Rule 2(a)(A) would be eligible 
for CENVAT credit. 
9.21 The Bombay High Court further held that the goods in question 
would not be capital goods for the purpose of CENVAT Credit as they 
are neither components, spares or accessories of goods falling under 
any of the chapters or headings of the Central Excise Tariff Schedule as 
specified in sub-clause (i) of the definition of “capital goods”. Thus they 
are not covered by sub-clause (iii) of Rule 2(a)(A). 
9.22 
The Bombay High Court repelled the contention of the Assessee 
that tower is an accessory of antenna and without tower, antenna cannot 
be installed and as such the antenna cannot function and that the tower 
should be treated as a part of antenna. 
The Bombay High Court held that towers are structures fastened 
to the earth on which antennas are installed and, hence, cannot be 
considered to be an accessory or part of the antenna. 

9.23 
The Bombay High Court also held that these items cannot be 
considered to be “inputs” within the meaning of Rule 2(k) of the 
CENVAT Rules as the Assessee is a service provider and not a 
manufacturer of capital goods. 
Further since tower and PFBs are in the nature of immovable, 
non-marketable and non-excisable goods, these cannot be classified as 
“inputs” to fall within the definition Rule 2(k) of the CENVAT Rules. 
9.24 
 In view of the aforesaid conclusions arrived by the Bombay 
High Court, it was held that the subject items are neither “capital goods” 
under Rule 2(a)(A) nor “inputs” under Rule 2(k) of the CENVAT Rules 
and hence CENVAT credit of the duty paid thereon was not admissible 
to the Assessee. 
Decision of the Delhi High Court 
10. 
The proceedings before the Delhi High Court arose out of the 
decision rendered by the CESTAT, New Delhi against an Appeal 
preferred under Section 35E of the Central Excise Act, 1944 and 
Section 83 of the Finance Act, 1944. 
10.1. 
The Assessee, Vodafone, provided cellular telecommunication 
services and paid service tax as applicable. It availed CENVAT credit 
on excise duty paid on towers, parts thereof and prefabricated 
shelter/building purchased by it for providing the output services. The 
credit so availed was utilized to pay service tax on the output services 
i.e. cellular mobile services to the customers. 
10.2. 
 A show cause notice was issued by the Revenue to the Assessee 
alleging, inter alia, that Vodafone had wrongly claimed and utilized 
CENVAT Credit in contravention of provisions of Rule 2(a)(A) of the 

CENVAT Rules, and was liable for penalty recoverable from it under 
the provisions of Rule 14 of the CENVAT Rules read with Section 73 
of the Central Excise Act. According to the Revenue, the Assessee had 
claimed and used credit in respect of goods which do not qualify as 
“capital goods” within the meaning of CENVAT Rules. The plea of the 
Assessee was that these were capital goods within the meaning of Rule 
2(a)(A)(i) and (ii) of the CENVAT Rules. Moreover, these were “inputs” 
used for providing output service, hence the benefit of Rule 3 should be 
available to the Assessee. 
10.3 
It was also the plea of the Assessee that the credit in respect of 
“inputs” can be availed immediately on receipt of the goods in the 
premises of the service provider under Rule 4(1). 
10.4 
 Further, the plea of the Assessee was that BTS constitutes an 
integrated system for the purpose of providing the benefits of mobile 
service and is classified under Heading 85.25 of Central Excise Tariff 
Act, 1985 (CETA) which also comprises of the tower as one of its parts, 
without which the output service cannot be provided. Hence, it was 
contended that the tower and parts thereof are parts of eligible “capital 
good”, i.e. BTS which are used for providing output services. Hence, 
excise duty paid on tower and its parts were eligible for the credit. 
10.5 
On similar lines, it was contended that a PFB is purchased for 
housing electrical equipment i.e. transformers/batteries/stabilizers, 
rectifiers etc. which are necessary to enable the antenna to provide 
uninterrupted signals. The aforesaid configuration is supported by a 
Diesel Generating Set (Genset) to be used as a backup source of 
electricity supply in case of failure of the main power supply. It was 
contended that since BTS as a whole is to be treated as a single 

integrated system which is classified under Chapter Heading 85.25 of 
CETA, and thus, BTS being an eligible “capital good”, the parts thereof 
i.e., the towers and other accessories are also eligible for credit under 
Rule 2(a)(A)(iii). 
10.6 
The Commissioner, however, did not agree with the aforesaid 
contention that these items form a composite integrated system 
classifiable under Chapter 85.25 of CETA and held that these goods had 
independent functions and could not be classified as a single unit. It was 
the view of the Revenue that all capital goods are not eligible for credit 
but only those which are used for providing output service would be 
eligible for credit. Thus, only telecom equipment like BTS, transmitters 
which are used for providing telecom services alone would be eligible 
for input credit and the not the other goods as insisted by the Assessee. 
10.7 
The Assessee appealed to the CESTAT, by which time the 
Bombay High Court had already rendered its decision in Bharti Airtel 
(supra), in view of which two members of the Bench of the CESTAT 
rendered two different opinions, hence, it was referred to a larger bench 
of the CESTAT, which, however, accepted the contentions of Revenue 
by holding that goods in question were neither “capital goods” and nor 
“inputs”, leading to the filing of the appeal before the Delhi High Court 
wherein the Delhi High Court decided in favour of the Assessee. 
10.8 
In deciding the said appeal, the Delhi High Court framed the 
following questions of law:- 
i) 
Whether the CESTAT was right in concluding that the 
towers, shelter and accessories used by the Appellants for 
providing telecom are immovable property? ii) 
Whether the Appellants are entitled to claim CENVAT 
credit on the towers, shelter as 'accessories' either as capital 
goods or input goods in terms of Rule 2(a) or 2(k) of the 
CENVAT Rules? iii) 
Whether the CESTAT erred in applying nexus test with 
reference to MS Angles and Channels, whereas according to the 
Appellants what was brought to the site were towers, shelter and 
accessories for providing services? iv) 
Whether the Appellants were justified, in terms of Rule 4 
(1) of the CENVAT Rules, in claiming CENVAT credit of excise 
duty paid by the manufacturer of towers and shelters after 
receipt of such towers and shelters at their premises (i.e. tower 
sites)? v) 
Whether the emergence of immovable structure at an 
intermediate stage (assuming without admitting) is a criterion 
for denial of CENVAT credit? 
10.9 
The Delhi High Court examined the aforesaid issues framed, in 
the following manner: 
10.9.1 As regards the first issue as to whether towers, shelters and 
accessories used by the Assessee for providing business support 
services were immovable property or not, the Delhi High Court, after 
examining the relevant statutory provisions under Section 3(36) of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 and Section 3 of the Transfer of Property 
Act, 1882, elaborately discussed the concept of immovable property, 
referring to a number of decisions including in Commissioner of 
Central Excise, Ahmedabad v. Solid and Correct Engineering Works 
& Ors (2010); Sirpur Paper Mills Ltd. v. Collector of 

Central Excise, Hyderabad, (1998); Narne Tulaman 
Manufacturers Pvt. Ltd. Hyderabad v. Collector of Central Excise, 
Hyderabad, 1989 (1) SCC 172; Quality Steel Tubes (P) Ltd. v. 
Collector of Central Excise, U.P. (1995) 1995 and Mittal 
Engineering Works (P) Ltd. v. Collector of Central Excise, Meerut, 
(1997); Triveni Engineering & Indus Ltd. v Commissioner 
of Central Excise, (2000) and other decisions rendered by 
the Delhi High Court, and applied the permanency test to come to the 
definitive finding that the entire tower and shelter are fabricated in the 
factories of the respective manufacturers and thereafter, are supplied in 
CKD condition to the mobile service providers. It was held that these 
are merely fastened to the civil foundation to make these wobble free 
and stable. It was also held that tower and PFB can be unbolted and 
reassembled without any damage and relocated to a new site. These are 
thus not permanently annexed to the earth for the beneficial enjoyment 
of the land of the owner as observed in para 37 of the decision of the 
Delhi High Court which is reproduced below: 
“37. 
On an application of the above tests to the cases at hand, this 
Court sees no difficulty in holding that the manufacture of the plants in 
question do not constitute annexation and hence cannot be termed as 
immovable property for the following reasons: 
(i) The plants in question are not per se immovable property. 

Such plants cannot be said to be "attached to the earth" 
within the meaning of that expression as defined in Section 3 of the 
Transfer of Property Act. 

The fixing of the plants to a foundation is meant only to give 
stability to the plant and keep its operation vibration free. 

The setting up of the plant itself is not intended to be 
permanent at a given place. The plant can be moved and is indeed 
moved after the road construction or repair project for which it is set 
up is completed.” 

It was thus held that these are not immovable properties as held 
by the Tribunal. 
 
10.9.2 Having held that these are not immovable but moveable, the 
Delhi High Court went on to examine the second issue as to whether 
the Assessee is entitled to claim CENVAT Credit on the tower and PFB 
either as “capital goods” or as “inputs” in terms of Rule 2(a)(A)(i) or 
Rule 2(k) of the CENVAT Rules, and whether these would qualify as 
accessories within the meaning of Rule 2(a)(A)(iii). 
10.9.3 After analysing the provisions of Rule 2(a)(A) of the CENVAT 
Rules, the Delhi High Court held that for goods to be termed as “capital 
goods”, the following conditions must be fulfilled: 

they must fall, inter alia, under Chapter 85 of the first 
Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act (CET) or must be 
components, parts or spares of such goods falling under Chapter 
85 of the first Schedule to the CET; and 

must be used for providing output service. 
10.9.4 The Delhi High Court noted that all components, spares and 
accessories of such capital goods under Chapter 85, would also be 
treated as capital goods since CENVAT credit is available to accessories 
of capital goods. 
10.9.5 As to what amounts to an accessory, the Delhi High Court, after 
analysis of the relevant rules and case laws, took the view that an 
accessory is an article or device that adds to the convenience or 
effectiveness but is not essential to the main machinery. It was held that 
tower has to be considered as an essential component/part of the 
“capital good” being BTS and the antenna. The Antenna which receives 

and transmits signals and used for providing output mobile service 
cannot be installed high above the ground without the tower. 
10.9.6 It was also held that BTS is an integrated system which includes 
antenna, and each component in the BTS has to work in tandem to 
provide cellular connectivity to phone users to provide efficient 
services. 
10.9.7 Further, it was held that the tower is part of the active 
infrastructure as the antenna cannot be placed at the appropriate altitude 
to generate uninterrupted frequency without the support of the tower 
and the PFBs are accessories for the placement of various BTS 
equipment and other items for these to remain in a dust-free 
environment with ambient temperature. 
10.9.8 The Delhi High Court then concluded that tower and 
PFB/Shelter support the BTS for effective transmission of mobile 
signals and therefore, enhance the efficiency of BTS and antenna. The 
towers and shelters, therefore, act as components and parts and in 
alternative as accessories to the BTS and antenna and thus are covered 
by the definition of “capital goods”. 
10.9.9 The Delhi High Court accordingly found fault with the Tribunal 
in interpreting the definition of “capital goods” and observed that the 
Tribunal merely adopted the ratio laid down in the case of Bharti Airtel 
(supra) of the Bombay High Court without proper analysis. The Delhi 
High Court was of the opinion that the view of the Bombay High Court 
in the aforesaid case of Bharti Airtel (supra) and subsequent decisions 
was contrary to the settled judicial precedents including in Solid and 
Correct Engineering (supra). 

10.9.10 The Delhi High Court further examined as to whether towers 
and PFBs/shelters would qualify as “inputs” under Rule 2(k) of the 
CENVAT Rules. 
10.9.11 After examining the principles laid down in Godfrey Phillips 
India Ltd. vs. Union of India, 1985 SCC OnLine Bom 345; Indian 
Chamber of Commerce vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, WB, AIR 
1976 SC 348; Union Carbide India Ltd. vs. CCE, Calcutta-1,; Oblum Electrical Industries Pvt. Ltd. vs. 
Collector of Customs, 1997 (7) SCC 581; J.K. Cotton Spinning and 
Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. vs. Sales Tax Officer, Kanpur, (1965), the Court came to the conclusion that the term “all goods” 
mentioned under Rule 2(k) of the CENVAT Rules would cover all the 
goods used for providing output services except those which are 
specifically excluded in the Rules. It held that the definition is wide 
enough to bring all goods which are used for providing any output 
service. 
10.9.12 Applying the functional utility test, the Delhi High Court held 
that if an item is required for providing output service by the service 
provider on a commercial scale, the test would be satisfied. It was held 
that in the present case, the BTS is an integrated system and each of its 
components have to work in tandem with one another in order to 
provide the required connectivity to the cellular phone users and for 
efficient telecommunication services and because of these utility and 
functions, these items would be considered to be “inputs” within the 
ambit of Rule 2(k) of the CENVAT Rules. 
10.9.13 As regards the question as to whether the CESTAT erred in 
applying the nexus test with reference to MS angles and channels, the 

Delhi High Court found fault with the finding of the CESTAT that there 
was no nexus between the input and output service and held that 
CESTAT had erroneously ignored the decision of the Andhra Pradesh 
High Court in the case of M/s Indus Towers Ltd. vs. CTU, Hyderabad, 
 which held that towers and shelters are 
indeed used and are integrally connected to the rendition of 
telecommunication services. The channels, which according to the 
Assessee, were in fact towers, shelters and accessories, were bought and 
brought to the site in CKD/SKD condition and put to use for 
mounting/installing telecommunication antenna and other equipment 
for providing output telecom services. However, the Revenue 
contended that these goods were used for assembling towers and 
shelters and do not fall within the definition of Rule 2(a)(A) i.e. “capital 
goods” and that these are items falling under Chapter 73 and the same 
is not included in Rule 2(a)(A) of the CENVAT Rules. 
10.9.14 The Delhi High Court accepted the plea of the Assessee by 
invoking the nexus test as enunciated in Collector of Central Excise vs. 
Hyundai Unitech Electrical Transmission Ltd. (2015) and 
took the view that MS angles and channels have gone into making 
towers and shelters which in turn are used for providing infra-support 
services/telecom services and hence are amenable to CENVAT credit. 
10.9.15 Coming to the fourth question framed by the Delhi High 
Court as to whether the Assessee could claim CENVAT credit on receipt 
of such towers and shelters at their premises, which the CESTAT had 
denied on the ground that upon installation, towers and shelters become 
immovable property and hence are not eligible for CENVAT credit as 
“inputs”. The Delhi High Court, however, accepted the plea of the 

Assessee that Rule 4(1) of the CENVAT Rules allows credit on inputs 
on receipt in the premises of the output service provider. 
10.9.16 The Delhi High Court ruled in favour of the Assessee that it 
is entitled to the credit immediately on receiving the inputs irrespective 
of the subsequent treatment i.e. by way of fastening, bolting etc. whether or not it results into an immovable property, by holding that the 
subsequent treatment of capital goods or inputs after receipt by the 
provider of output service is not relevant for the purpose of availing 
credit in terms of Rule 3(1) of the CENVAT Rules. According to the 
Delhi High Court, the only condition which is required to be satisfied 
is that the said goods must be used for providing the output services, 
which was not in dispute. 
10.9.17 The Delhi High Court accepted the plea of the Assessee that 
there was no break in the chain linking availability and actual availing 
of CENVAT credit. The towers and shelters were purchased in CKD 
condition and not as mere angles, channels, beams or bars and there is 
neither loss of identity of goods, nor emergence of a new entity with 
fresh identity with a distinct character, name or use and thus, there is no 
transformation to or new value addition to the parts assembled as towers 
and shelters. The identity of the inputs received (as parts of tower) and 
the inputs installed (as tower on assembling the parts thereof) are one 
and the same and in the absence of any manufacturing operation, there 
is no breakage of the credit chain. 
10.9.18 The Delhi High Court on analysis of the case laws cited on 
behalf of the respective parties held that the definition of “input” does 
not contain any condition relating to emergence of immovable property 
rendering it ineligible for taking credit and eligibility of credit must be 

determined at the time of receipt of goods in terms of Rule 4(1) of the 
CENVAT Rules and as such credit cannot be denied. 
10.9.19 
The Delhi High Court held that denial of CENVAT credit to 
the Assessee on the premise that the towers, on erection, resulted in an 
immovable property is erroneous and contrary to the judgment of this 
Court in the case of Solid and Correct Engineering (supra). The towers 
which are received in CKD condition are re-assembled and erected at 
the site, subsequently giving rise to a structure that remains immovable 
so long it is used for the reason of safety, stability and commercial 
reasons of use. 
10.9.20 The Delhi High Court clarified that entitlement of CENVAT 
credit is determined at the time of receipt of the goods and the fact that 
such goods are later on fixed/fastened to the earth for use would not 
make them non-excisable commodities when received. 
10.9.21 As regards the fifth question as to whether emergence of 
immovable structure at an intermediate stage will be a ground for denial 
of CENVAT credit, the Delhi High Court held that in view of the 
decision in Solid and Correct Engineering (supra), even if, in the 
intermediate stage, an immovable structure emerges, it is of no 
consequence in as much as entitlement of CENVAT credit is to be 
determined at the time of the receipt of goods and not at a later stage. 
It was held that if the goods that are received qualify as “inputs” or 
“capital goods”, the fact that they are later fixed/fastened to the earth 
for use would not make them non-excisable commodity when received. 
10.9.22 The Delhi High Court also held that in the present case the 
tower and PFB shelters are not immovable property for in the event of 

requirement of relocation, these towers and PFB shelters can be 
removed and shifted to another location. 
10.9.23 In the light of the aforesaid findings, the Delhi High Court 
held that the Assessees are entitled to seek CENVAT credit on the 
towers and pre-fabricated buildings (PFBs) and such other accessories. 
10.10 What emerges from the above discussion is that the Bombay 
High Court and Delhi High Court differed fundamentally on the issue 
as to whether towers, parts thereof and pre-fabricated buildings, with 
which we are primarily concerned in the present proceedings, are 
“capital goods” within the meaning of CENVAT Credit Rules, 2004 so 
as to enable the Assessees to claim CENVAT credit on the duty paid on 
the purchase of these. 
10.10.1 The other area of disagreement is that even if these items 
themselves may not qualify as “capital goods”, but if they are found to 
be accessories or components of “capital goods”, they would be covered 
by the deeming provision of “capital goods” under Rule 2(a)(A)(iii). 
10.10.2 Further, another aspect where the two High Courts differed is 
whether these goods can be considered as “inputs” for the “output” of 
services rendered by the service providers for if these are treated as 
“inputs”, the mobile service providers can claim CENVAT credit for the 
output services i.e. telecom services provided by them. 
10.10.3 While the Bombay High Court held that towers and the parts 
thereof and prefabricated buildings are not “capital goods” since these 
are immovable property and also cannot be said to be “inputs”, thus, the 
Assessee is not entitled to claim CENVAT credit, whereas, the Delhi 
High Court took the contrary view that towers, parts thereof and pre-
fabricated buildings are not immovable property and these can be 

considered as “capital goods” as defined under the CENVAT Rules. 
Since these are “capital goods”, these are liable to excise duty, of which 
the service provider can take CENVAT credit. The Delhi High Court 
also held that these goods can be said to be “inputs” for providing output 
service and hence eligible for CENVAT credit. 
Analysis by this Court: 
11. 
From the above discussion, what is evident is that the entire 
controversy revolves around the core issue as to whether the mobile 
service providers (MSPs) are entitled to claim CENVAT credit on excise 
duties paid on mobile tower, its parts thereof and prefabricated 
buildings (PFBs) in terms of the Rule 3 of the CENVAT Rules and 
whether the credit so claimed can be used to pay service tax for the 
output services rendered by the MSPs. 
11.1 
As discussed above, Rule 3(1) of the CENVAT Rules enables a 
provider of taxable service to claim CENVAT credit on duties paid on 
any “capital goods” or “input” received in the premises of the service 
provider. Thus, if the mobile towers and prefabricated buildings, which 
are the items in issue here, qualify as “capital goods” or “inputs” 
received in the premises of the mobile service provider, the mobile 
service provider will be entitled to claim CENVAT credit which can be 
further used for paying service tax for the output services rendered by 
the mobile service provider. 
11.2 
In the light of the provisions of the CENVAT Rules, if it is held 
that towers and/or parts thereof and prefabricated buildings (PFBs) are 
“capital goods” or “inputs” used for providing output service within the 
meaning of the aforesaid CENVAT Rules, then CENVAT credit can be 
claimed on these items. 

11.2.1 For this we will first examine the attributes of “capital goods” 
for if these items are to be considered “capital goods”, these must first 
have the traits of “goods”. 
11.2.2 We, therefore, now focus our attention in understanding what is 
meant by “goods”, for if these items do not qualify as goods then these 
obviously cannot be “capital goods” and the benefit of CENVAT credit 
under the Rules will not be available, since such credit is available only 
in respect of “goods”. 
11.2.3 The word “goods” has not been defined in the CENVAT Rules. 
Hence, we will refer to other statutes to understand its meaning. The 
term “goods” has been defined in an expansive manner, in the widest 
amplitude, under Article 366 (12) of the Constitution of India so as to 
include all materials, commodities and articles. 
11.2.4 However, since this definition is too broad in nature, it may not 
help us in our enquiry to determine whether the items in consideration 
are “goods” or not, for the purpose of CENVAT Rules. 
11.2.5 “Goods” has not been defined in the Central Excise Act, 1944. 
We, therefore, look into other statutes. The term “goods” has been 
defined under various statutes some of which may be mentioned as 
below. 

Sale of Goods Act, 1930 
 Section 2(7): 
“goods” means every kind of movable property other than 
actionable claim and money; and includes stocks, shares, 
growing crops, grass, and things attached to forming part 
of the land which are agreed to be severed before sale or 
under contract of sale. 

The Central Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017 
 
Section 2(52): 
 
“goods” means every kind of movable property other than money 
and securities but includes actionable claim, growing crops, grass 
and things attached to or forming part of the land which are agreed 
to be severed before supply or under a contract of supply. 

The Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 

Section 2(d): 
"goods" includes all materials, articles, commodities and all other 
kinds of movable property, but does not include [newspapers] 
actionable claims, stocks, shares and securities. 

The Customs Act, 1962 
 
 Section 2(22): 
goods includes—(a) vessels, aircrafts and vehicles; (b) stores; (c) 
baggage; (d) currency and negotiable instruments; and (e) any 
other kind of movable property. 

Competition Act, 2002 
 
Section 2(i): 
 “goods” means goods as defined in the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 
(8 of 1930) and includes— (A) products manufactured, processed 
or mined; (B) debentures, stocks and shares after allotment; (C) in 
relation to goods supplied, distributed or controlled in India, goods 
imported into India. 

The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 
 
Section 2(13): 
 “goods” includes live-stock, and anything (other than equipment 
ordinarily used with the vehicle) carried by a vehicle except living 
persons, but does not include luggage or personal effects carried 

in a motor car or in a trailer attached to a motor car or the personal 
luggage of passengers travelling in the vehicle. 
(vii) The 
Micro, 
Small 
And 
Medium 
Enterprises 
Development Act, 2006 
 
Section 2(f): 
 “goods” means every kind of movable property other than 
actionable claims and money. 
 
(viii) The Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 
 
Section 2(14): 
"goods" includes all kinds of movable properties under the Sale of 
Goods Act, 1930, other than actionable claims, money, stocks and 
shares; 

Consumer Protection Act, 2019 
 
Section 2(21): 
 "goods" means every kind of movable property and includes 
"food" as defined in clause (j) of sub-section (1) of section 3 of 
the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006). 

11.2.6 From the above, it appears that the definition of “goods” 
under the Sales of Goods Act, 1930 seems to be the basis of the term 
“goods” in other Statutes. Hence, we would primarily rely on the 
definition given in the Sale of Goods Act. 
11.2.7 The items in consideration viz., towers and prefabricated 
buildings are neither actionable claim nor money, nor do they come 
within the inclusive clause of the definition, viz., stocks, shares, 
growing crops, grass, and things attached to forming part of the land 
which are agreed to be severed before sale or under contract of sale. 

11.2.8 If these items are movable properties, these will be “goods”, 
in which case our further enquiry will be to examine whether these 
belong to the category of “capital goods” as enumerated in Rule 2(a)(A) 
only under which the Assessees will be entitled to claim CENVAT credit 
under the Rules. 
11.2.9 On the other hand, if these are held to be immovable property, 
as the Revenue insists and also as has been held by the Bombay High 
Court, we may not be required to proceed further in the enquiry with 
reference to Rule 2(a)(A) for claim of CENVAT credit on “capital 
goods”. 
11.3 Thus, the focus of our inquiry now will be to ascertain whether 
these items namely, towers, its parts thereof and prefabricated buildings 
are movable or immovable properties. 
11.3.1 As to what is a movable property has been defined and can be 
understood from the expansive meaning assigned to it under Section 
3(36) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 which states that, 
“movable property shall mean property of every description except 
immovable property”. 
 
11.3.2 The aforesaid definition categorically indicates that movable 
and immovable properties are mutually exclusive. Thus, if it is found 
that these items are not immovable properties, these invariably can be 
treated as movable properties under Section 3(36) of the General Clause 
Act and thus will be “goods” within the meaning of Section 2(7) of the 
Sale of Goods Act, 1930 and hence may qualify as “capital goods” 
within the meaning of Rule 2(a)(A) subject to fulfilling other conditions 
mentioned therein. 

11.3.3 As to what is immovable property has been explained under 
Section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 which specifies that 
“immovable property does not include standing timber, growing crops 
or grass”. 
11.3.4 It has been also defined under Section 3(26) of the General 
Clauses Act, though not exhaustively, but in an inclusive manner by 
providing that “immovable property” shall include “land, benefits to 
arise out of land and things attached to the earth, or permanently 
fastened to anything attached to the earth”. 
11.3.5 Therefore, we have to consider whether these items are attached 
to the earth or are permanently fastened to anything attached to the 
earth, for if these are found to be so, these will be immovable properties 
and hence cannot be “goods” and consequently, cannot be “capital 
goods” within the scope of the CENVAT Rules. 
11.4 
As to what amounts to “attached to earth” as mentioned under 
Section 3(26) of the General Clauses Act, has been explained under 
Section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 to mean as rooted in the 
earth, as in the case of trees and shrubs; imbedded in the earth, as in the 
case of walls or buildings; or attached to what is so imbedded for the 
permanent beneficial enjoyment of that to which it is attached. 
11.5 
For easy reference, the aforesaid definition clauses of the 
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and the General Clauses Act, 1897 as 
may be relevant are reproduced below. 
Section 3(36) of the General Clauses Act. 
“movable property” shall mean property of every description, except 
immovable property; 

Section 3(26) of the General Clauses Act. 
“immovable property” shall include land, benefits to arise out of land, 
and things attached to the earth, or permanently fastened to anything 
attached to the earth. 
 
Section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act. 
“immovable property” does not include standing timber, growing crops 
or grass. 
 
Under Section 3 of the Transfer of Properties Act, 
“attached to the earth” means: 
(a) rooted in the earth, as in the case of trees and shrubs; 
(b) imbedded in the earth, as in the case of walls or buildings; or 
(c) attached to what is so imbedded for the permanent beneficial 
enjoyment of that to which it is attached. 
 
11.6 
From the above, it is now clear that if these items, namely 
towers and parts thereof and prefabricated buildings/shelters are 
considered to be “goods”, these cannot be immovable properties. 
Conversely, if these are not rooted in the earth, nor imbedded in the 
earth nor attached to what is so imbedded for the permanent beneficial 
enjoyment of that to which it is attached, these cannot be immovable 
properties and can qualify to be movable properties and hence, “goods”. 
11.6.1 
Since, 
towers 
and 
parts 
thereof 
and 
prefabricated 
buildings/shelters apparently appear to be fixed on the earth or building, 
these seem to be immovable properties at the first blush. However, the 
first appearance may not be decisive to indicate the real character of 
these items, whether these are immovable or movable properties, as 
demonstrated by the conflicting views of the two High Courts on this 
issue. Hence, we need to delve further to arrive at the correct position 
in law on this issue. 

11.7 
In order to determine whether any property is movable or 
immovable, this Court, in the light of the statutory provisions has 
applied certain principles. It has also been noted that such determination 
may be done not based on a single test but after applying several criteria 
on the facts of each case. 
 
We will now refer to some of the decisions relied upon by the 
contesting parts. 
11.7.1 This Court, in Solid and Correct Engineering (supra), applied 
the intendment and functionality test to determine whether any article 
is movable or immovable. The issue in the said case was whether the 
asphalt drum/hot mix plant, though apparently appearing to be 
immovable and fixed to the structure embedded to the earth, can be 
considered to be movable. After examining the expression “attached to 
the earth” as mentioned in Section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act, the 
observations of this Court were as follows: 
“25. It is evident from the above that the expression “attached to the 
earth” has three distinct dimensions viz. (a) rooted in the earth as in 
the case of trees and shrubs, (b) imbedded in the earth as in the case of 
walls or buildings, or (c) attached to what is imbedded for the 
permanent beneficial enjoyment of that to which it is attached. 
Attachment of the plant in question with the help of nuts and bolts to a 
foundation not more than 1½ ft deep intended to provide stability to the 
working of the plant and prevent vibration/wobble free operation does 
not qualify for being described as attached to the earth under any one 
of the three clauses extracted above. That is because attachment of the 
plant to the foundation is not comparable or synonymous to trees and 
shrubs rooted in earth. It is also not synonymous to imbedding in earth 
of the plant as in the case of walls and buildings, for the obvious reason 
that a building imbedded in the earth is permanent and cannot be 
detached without demolition. Imbedding of a wall in the earth is also in 
no way comparable to attachment of a plant to a foundation meant only 
to provide stability to the plant especially because the attachment is not 
permanent and what is attached can be easily detached from the 
foundation. So also the attachment of the plant to the foundation at 
which it rests does not fall in the third category, for an attachment to 
fall in that category it must be for permanent beneficial enjoyment of 

that to which the plant is attached. It is nobody's case that the 
attachment of the plant to the foundation is meant for permanent 
beneficial enjoyment of either the foundation or the land in which the 
same is imbedded.” 
 
11.7.2 This Court found that the machine was fixed and attached to the 
earth primarily for the purpose of providing wobble-free operation of 
the machine and held that there was no necessary intent to make the 
same permanent, thus, it does not amount to permanently fixing, 
embedding as attachment in the sense that would make the machine a 
part and parcel of the earth permanently, and held as follows: 
“43. It is noteworthy that in none of the cases relied upon by the 
Assessee referred to above was there any element of installation of the 
machine for a given period of time as is the position in the instant case. 
The machines in question were by their very nature intended to be fixed 
permanently to the structures which were embedded in the earth. The 
structures were also custom made for the fixing of such machines 
without which the same could not become functional. The machines 
thus becoming a part and parcel of the structures in which they were 
fitted were no longer movable goods. It was in those peculiar 
circumstances that the installation and erection of machines at site were 
held to be by this Court, to be immovable property that ceased to remain 
movable or marketable as they were at the time of their purchase. Once 
such a machine is fixed, embedded or assimilated in a permanent 
structure, the movable character of the machine becomes extinct. The 
same cannot thereafter be treated as movable so as to be dutiable under 
the Excise Act. But cases in which there is no assimilation of the 
machine with the structure permanently, would stand on a different 
footing. 
44. In the instant case all that has been said by the assessee is that the 
machine is fixed by nuts and bolts to a foundation not because the 
intention was to permanently attach it to the earth but because a 
foundation was necessary to provide a wobble free operation to the 
machine. An attachment of this kind without the necessary intent of 
making the same permanent cannot, in our opinion, constitute 
permanent fixing embedding or attachment in the sense that would 
make the machine a part and parcel of the earth permanently. In that 
view of the matter we see no difficulty in holding that the plants in 
question were not immovable property so as to be immune from the levy 
of excise duty.” 

11.7.3 While deciding the said issue, the Court referred to Triveni 
Engineering (supra), Sirpur Paper Mills Ltd. (supra), Quality Steel 
Tubes (P) Ltd. (supra), Mittal Engg. Works (P) Ptd. (supra), T.T.G 
Industries Ltd. Vs. CCE (2004) and examined various 
characteristics of the property including marketability and lack of 
permanency to determine whether the property in issue was movable or 
immovable. 
11.7.4 In Triveni Engineering (supra), this Court applied the 
marketability test, in which it took the view that if the goods in question 
are capable of being taken into the market and sold, the same cannot be 
treated to be as immovable but movable property. 
 
This Court observed that “marketability” itself indicates 
movability of the property in issue. 
11.7.5 This Court was of the view and thus held that if the goods that 
were fixed to the earth were capable of being dismantled without doing 
any damage or change in the nature of goods, it would indicate the 
“absence of permanency” and such a good cannot be deemed to be 
immovable property, as held in the following paragraph: 
“20. Further, in the instant case, it is a common ground that a turbo 
alternator comes into existence only when a steam turbine and 
alternator with all their accessories are fixed at the site and only then 
it is known by a name different from the names of its components in the 
market. The Tribunal recorded the finding that fixing of steam turbine 
and the alternator is necessitated by the need to make them functionally 
effective to reduce vibration and to minimise disturbance to the 
coupling arrangements and other connections with the related 
equipments. It also noted that removal of the machinery does not 
involve any dismantling of the turbine and alternator in the sense of 
pulling them down or taking them to pieces but only undoing the 
foundation bolts arrangement by which they are fixed to the platform 
and uncoupling of the two units and, therefore, the turbo alternator did 
not answer the test of permanency laid down by this Court in the case 
of Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay. In our view, the findings 

recorded do not justify the conclusion of the Tribunal inasmuch as on 
removal, a turbo alternator gets dismantled into its components - steam 
turbine and alternator. It appears that the Tribunal did not keep in mind 
the distinction between a turbo alternator and its components. Thus, in 
our view, the test of permanency fails.” 

As regards marketability it was held as follows: - 
“21. The marketability test requires that the goods as such should be in 
a position to be taken to the market and sold and from the above 
findings it follows that to take it to the market the turbo alternator has 
to be separated into its components — turbine and the other alternator 
— but then it would not remain turbo alternator, therefore, the test is 
incorrectly applied. Though, there is no finding that without fixing to 
the platform such turbo alternator would not be functional, it is obvious 
that when without fixing, it does not come into being, it can hardly be 
functional.” 

11.7.6 In the case of Sirpur Paper Mills Ltd. (supra), this Court again 
applied the test of marketability. The issue which arose for 
consideration in the said case was whether paper machines assembled 
at site were liable for duties under the Excise Act. It was the plea of the 
Assessee that since the machine was embedded in concrete base, it 
became an immovable property though embedding was for providing a 
wobble-free operation of the machine. This Court rejected the plea and 
held that merely because the machine was attached to the earth for 
efficient working and wobble- free operation, it did not per se render 
the said property immovable since the said machine can be sold in the 
market. It was then observed as follows: 
“5. Apart from this finding of fact made by the Tribunal, the point 
advanced on behalf of the appellant, that whatever is embedded in earth 
must be treated as immovable property is basically not sound. For 
example, a factory owner or a house-holder may purchase a water 
pump and fix it on a cement base for operational efficiency and also for 
security. That will not make the water pump an item of immovable 
property. Some of the component of water pump may even be assembled 
on site. That too will not make any difference to the principle. The test 
is whether the paper making machine can be sold in the market. The 
Tribunal has found as a fact that it can be sold. In view of that finding, 
we are unable to uphold the contention of the appellant that the machine 

must be treated as a part of the immovable property of the company. 
Just because a plant and machinery are fixed in the earth for better 
functioning, it does not automatically become an immovable property.” 
 
11.7.7 In Quality Steel Tubes (P) Ltd. (supra), this Court was 
examining whether “the tube mill and welding head” erected and 
installed by the Assessee for manufacture of tubes and pipes out of duty-
paid raw material were exigible to duty. By applying the marketability 
test, this Court rejected the plea of the Assessee by holding that these 
were erected and installed in the premises and embedded in the earth 
and these are no longer movable goods that could be brought to market 
for sale since these ceased to be goods within the meaning of Section 3 
of the General Clauses Act. It was thus held that, 
"5. ………………..The basic test, therefore, of levying duty under the Act 
is twofold. One, that any article, must be a goods and second, that it 
should be marketable or capable of being brought to market. Goods 
which are attached to the earth and thus become immoveable and do 
not satisfy the test of being goods within the meaning of the Act nor it 
can be said to be capable of being brought to the market for being 
bought and sold. Therefore, both the tests, as explained by this Court, 
were not satisfied in the case of appellant as the tube mill or welding 
head having been erected and installed in the premises and embedded 
to earth they ceased to be goods within meaning of Section 3 of the Act". 
 
11.7.8 The test of marketability was also applied in the case of Mittal 
Engg. Works (P) Ptd. (supra). 
11.7.9 Much reliance was placed by the Revenue on the T.T.G. 
Industries Ltd. (supra) in which this Court, by relying on the 
permanency test as also applied in the Municipal Corporation of 
Greater Bombay (supra) held that if the article cannot be shifted 
without first being dismantled and thereafter re-erected at another site, 
it cannot be considered to be a movable property but an immovable 
property. 

In the aforesaid case, the machinery was erected at the site on a 
specially made concrete floor at a very high level of 25 feet from the 
ground level and the sheer weight, even without being fastened by nuts 
and bolts, rendered it incapable of being shifted to another site without 
dismantling and re-erecting. Given these facts, this Court held that it can 
be said to be immovable property. 

In Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay (supra) this Court 
observed as follows: 
“32. The tanks, though, are resting on earth on their own weight without 
being fixed with nuts and bolts, they have permanently been erected 
without being shifted from placed to place. Permanency is the test. The 
chattel whether is movable to another place of use in the same position 
or liable to be dismantled and re-erected at the latter place? If the 
answer is yes to the former it must be a movable property and thereby 
it must be held that it is not attached to the earth. If the answer is yes to 
the latter it is attached to the earth.” 

11.7.10 In T.T.G. Industries Ltd. (supra), this Court also placed reliance 
on Quality Steel Tubes and Mittal Engineering works Ltd. (supra). 
 This Court in T.T.G. Industries Ltd. (supra) held as follows: 
“27. Keeping in view the principles laid down in the judgments noticed 
above, and having regard to the facts of this case, we have no doubt in 
our mind that the mudguns and the drilling machines erected at site by 
the appellant on a specially made concrete platform at a level of 25 feet 
above the ground on a base plate secured to the concrete platform, 
brought into existence not excisable goods but immovable property 
which could not be shifted without first dismantling it and then re-
erecting it at another site. We have earlier noticed the processes 
involved and the manner in which the equipments were assembled and 
erected. We have also noticed the volume of the machines concerned 
and their weight. Taking all these facts into consideration and having 
regard to the nature of structure erected for basing these machines, we 
are satisfied that the judicial member of the CEGAT was right in 
reaching the conclusion that what ultimately emerged as a result of 
processes undertaken and erections done cannot be described as 
"goods" within the meaning of the Excise Act and exigible to excise 
duty. We find considerable similarity of facts of the case in hand and 
the facts in Mittal Engineering and Quality Steel Tubes (supra) and the 
principles underlying those decisions must apply to the facts of the case 

in hand. It cannot be disputed that such drilling machines and mudguns 
are not equipments which are usually shifted from one place to another, 
nor it is practicable to shift them frequently. Counsel for the appellant 
submitted before us that once they are erected and assembled they 
continue to operate from where they are positioned till such time as they 
are worn out or discarded. According to him they really become a 
component of the plant and machinery because without their aid a blast 
furnace cannot operate. It is not necessary for us to express any opinion 
as to whether the mudgun and the drilling machines are really a 
component of the plant and machinery of the steel plant, but we are 
satisfied that having regard to the manner in which these machines are 
erected and installed upon concrete structures, they do not answer the 
description of "goods" within the meaning of the term in the Excise 
Act.” 
 
 It may be noted that while this Court invoked permanency test in 
T.T.G. Industries Ltd. (supra), what was also observed was that if the 
machinery cannot be shifted and re-erected without dismantling, it 
would show that it is an immovable property. 
11.7.11 In the present case, while mobile tower cannot be shifted to 
another location without dismantling it, it is to be noted that mobile tower 
itself was bought and brought in a completely knocked-down (CKD) or 
semi-knocked-down (SKD) condition and it was erected and installed at 
the site after assembling the parts. If the said mobile tower is to be shifted 
to another location, it obviously has to be dismantled and restored to its 
SKD or CKD condition and thereafter re-erected, which however, would 
not entail any damage to it. Thus, the present case of the mobile towers 
differs from the factual matrix of T.T.G. Industries Ltd. (supra). 
11.7.12 Before us, the Revenue has also placed reliance on the 
Commissioner of Central Excise Versus Virdi Brothers and Ors., 
(2007) and CCE Versus Globus Store Pvt. Ltd., (2011), in which this Court relied on a Circular issued by the Central 
Board of Excise and Custom, Department of Revenue, Ministry of 

Finance, Government of India under No. 58/1/2002-CX dated 
15.01.2002 in which it was mentioned under Clause (e) that, 
“(e) If items assembled or erected at site and attached by foundation to 
earth cannot be dismantled without substantial damage to its 
components and thus cannot be reassembled, then the items would not 
be considered as movable and will, therefore, not be excisable goods.” 
 
11.7.13 In the present case, as discussed above, the tower has been 
bought and brought to the site in a semi or completely knocked-down 
condition and assembled and if the same is required to be re-located to 
another location it can be dismantled in its original semi-knocked-down 
or completely knocked down condition without causing any damage to 
the tower itself and as such the Clause (e) of the Circular referred to the 
above cannot be applied. 
11.7.14 It may be also noted that the CESTAT, in its order observed that 
the Revenue does not contest or dispute the fact that wherever BTS/ BSC 
site has to be relocated, all the equipment like BTS/BSC, microwave, 
UPS, tower, antenna etc., are required to be dismantled as individual 
components and then they are required to be moved from the existing site 
and reassembled at a new site. The CESTAT, however, observed that this 
involves damage to certain parts like cable trays etc. which are 
embedded/fixed to the civil structure as also the BTS microwave 
equipment itself. Thus, all the components of the newly set up structure 
cannot be shifted as an illustration to the room housing the equipment. 
Apart from it, the CESTAT was of the opinion that the goods cannot be re-
erected as in the previous place as requirement of each place is different. 
The structures cannot be shifted without damage. Apart from that various 
items and components are embedded in the earth. Therefore, the structure 
would not be considered as movable. 

11.7.15 Therefore, the finding of the CESTAT is that even though the 
tower can be relocated to another site, it would entail damages to it. 
11.7.16 There can no dispute that if the newly set up BTS/BSC is 
relocated to another site it may entail certain damages. However, what is 
important to be noted is that the damage is qua the BTS/BSC or cables 
connecting the various components, but not the tower itself or PFB with 
which we are concerned. If the tower or the PFB can be dismantled and 
relocated in another site without causing any damage to either the tower 
or PFB, the mobility or the marketability of these items is retained. Thus, 
as far as the tower and PFBs are concerned, these exhibit the character of 
a movable property. 
11.8 
In view of the above decisions, we are of the opinion that merely 
because certain articles are attached to the earth, it does not ipso facto 
render these immovable properties. If such attachment to earth is not 
intended to be permanent but for providing support to the goods concerned 
and make their functioning more effective, and if such items can still be 
dismantled without any damage or without bringing any change in the 
nature of the goods and can be moved to market and sold, such goods 
cannot be considered immovable. 
11.8.1 We may summarise some of the principles applied by the Courts 
in the decisions referred to above to determine the nature of the property 
as follows: 
1. Nature of annexation: This test ascertains how firmly a 
property is attached to the earth. If the property is so attached 
that it cannot be removed or relocated without causing damage 
to it, it is an indication that it is immovable. 

2. Object of annexation: If the attachment is for the permanent 
beneficial enjoyment of the land, the property is to be classified 
as immovable. Conversely, if the attachment is merely to 
facilitate the use of the item itself, it is to be treated as movable, 
even if the attachment is to an immovable property. 
3. Intendment of the parties: The intention behind the 
attachment, whether express or implied, can be determinative of 
the nature of the property. If the parties intend that the property 
in issue is for permanent addition to the immovable property, it 
will be treated as immovable. If the attachment is not meant to 
be permanent, it indicates that it is movable. 
4. Functionality Test: If the article is fixed to the ground to 
enhance the operational efficacy of the article and for making it 
stable and wobble free, it is an indication that such fixation is 
for the benefit of the article, such the property is movable. 
5. Permanency Test: If the property can be dismantled and 
relocated without any damage, the attachment cannot be said to 
be permanent but temporary and it can be considered to be 
movable. 
6. Marketability Test: If the property, even if attached to the 
earth or to an immovable property, can be removed and sold in 
the market, it can be said to be movable. 
11.9 
The plea of the Revenue is that the items in issue are attached 
to the earth, fixed permanently and not marketable, hence immovable, 
as also accepted by the Bombay High Court. 

11.9.1 What is “attached to the earth” to make it an immovable 
property would have to possess any of the three attributes as specified 
under Section 3 of the Transfer of Property of Act, namely, 
 (a) rooted in the earth, as in the case of trees and shrubs; 
(b) imbedded in the earth, as in the case of walls or buildings; 
or 
(c) attached to what is so imbedded for the permanent beneficial 
enjoyment of that to which it is attached: 
 
11.9.2 The present items in issue are not the ones which are rooted in 
the earth as in the case of trees and shrubs [sub-clause (a)]. Therefore, 
the next consideration will be whether these are embedded in the earth, 
as in the case of walls or buildings [sub-clause (b)], or whether these 
are attached to what is so embedded for the permanent beneficial 
enjoyment of that to which these are attached to the earth [sub-clause 
(c)]. The attachment of tower to the earth/building, however, does not 
partake of the character of walls or buildings imbedded in the earth. 
11.9.3 It is on the tower that the antennas are mounted and affixed at 
proper height, to make these stable. Since the antennas are used for 
receiving and sending radio signals, these need to be attached at a 
certain height, and these are required to be stable and wobble-free. It is 
not in dispute that the mobile tower is attached and fastened to the earth 
or building to provide stability to the same and to make antennas 
unshakable due to wind, rain or any other external force(s). 
11.9.4 The mobile tower is bought and brought in the CKD or SKD 
form from the manufacturers and same is installed at the site by 

assembling the parts which also consists of MS angles and channels. 
The tower, after being assembled and fixed to the earth or a building 
can be dismantled without any change in the nature of the tower, and 
the tower can be removed and shifted to any other location as per the 
needs and requirements of the service provider and also can be re-sold 
in the market in the same form and hence both, the functionality and 
marketability tests as applied in the aforesaid cases of Solid and Correct 
Engineering (supra), Triveni Engineering (supra) and Sirpur Paper 
Mills Ltd. (supra) can be said to be fulfilled in the present case. 
11.9.5 The tower is brought to the site in CKD or SKD form and 
assembled at the site. If it is to be dismantled, it only involves unbolting 
of the nuts and bolts. Dismantling the tower may entail some damages, 
but such damages will be on the cables which may be required to be 
stripped of but no damage is caused to the tower. If one says that there 
may be some damage caused, it will be with reference to the BTS which 
consists of the antenna, connected by cables and other electrical 
equipment. But there is no damage to the tower per se. Similarly, in case 
of PFB, there is no damage to it, though damage may be caused to the 
wiring or cables connecting the various parts of the Base Transceiver 
System (BTS) or the Base Station Sub-System (BSS). 
11.9.6 The tower which is affixed to the earth and thus appears to be 
immovable, can be dismantled from the existing site and re-assembled 
without causing any change in its character. It can be moved to any 
other place and also sold in the market. These attributes negate the 
permanency test, which is a characteristic of immovable property. The 
tower when fixed to the earth or the building or the civil foundation by 
nuts and bolts does not get assimilated with the earth or building 
permanently. Such affixing is only for the purpose of maintaining 

stability of the tower and keep it wobble free so that the antenna which 
is hoisted on it can receive and transmit the electromagnetic signals 
effectively and without any disturbance. Affixing of the tower to the 
earth or building is not for the permanent beneficial enjoyment of the 
land or building, but to make it stable for effective functioning of the 
antenna for seamless rendering of mobile services by the service 
provider to the consumers/subscribers. Same is the case with pre-
fabricated buildings (PFB). 
11.9.7 If we thus apply the functionality test, it can be stated that the 
attachment of tower to the earth /building is not for the benefit of the 
land or the building but for better functioning of the antenna which is 
fixed on the tower. Thus, based on functionality test it can be said that 
tower is a movable property, as also held in Municipal Corporation of 
Greater Bombay (supra). 
11.9.8 These items are not embedded in the earth as in the case of 
walls or buildings so as to fall under clause (b) of the definition of 
“attached to the earth” as provided under Section 3 of the Transfer of 
Property of Act. 
Neither do these items fall under clause (c) of the definition of 
“attached to the earth” and nor are these intended to be for permanent 
beneficial enjoyment of the building or land to which these are attached. 
In this regard, it may be apposite herein to mention what was 
stated in Solid & Correct Engg. Works (supra) as follows:- 
“25. It is evident from the above that the expression “attached to the 
earth” has three distinct dimensions viz. (a) rooted in the earth as in 
the case of trees and shrubs, (b) imbedded in the earth as in the case of 
walls or buildings, or (c) attached to what is imbedded for the 
permanent beneficial enjoyment of that to which it is attached. 
Attachment of the plant in question with the help of nuts and bolts to a 

foundation not more than 1½ ft deep intended to provide stability to the 
working of the plant and prevent vibration/wobble free operation does 
not qualify for being described as attached to the earth under any one 
of the three clauses extracted above. That is because attachment of the 
plant to the foundation is not comparable or synonymous to trees and 
shrubs rooted in earth. It is also not synonymous to imbedding in earth 
of the plant as in the case of walls and buildings, for the obvious reason 
that a building imbedded in the earth is permanent and cannot be 
detached without demolition. Imbedding of a wall in the earth is also in 
no way comparable to attachment of a plant to a foundation meant only 
to provide stability to the plant especially because the attachment is not 
permanent and what is attached can be easily detached from the 
foundation. So also the attachment of the plant to the foundation at 
which it rests does not fall in the third category, for an attachment to 
fall in that category it must be for permanent beneficial enjoyment of 
that to which the plant is attached. It is nobody's case that the 
attachment of the plant to the foundation is meant for permanent 
beneficial enjoyment of either the foundation or the land in which the 
same is imbedded.” 
 
11.9.9 Applying the tests of permanency, intendment, functionality 
and marketability, it is quite clearly evident that these items are not 
immovable but movable within the meaning of Section 3 of the Transfer 
of Property Act, read with Section 3 (36) of the General Clause Act. 
If we consider the nature of annexation of the tower to the earth, 
it is seen that the annexation is not for permanent annexation to the land 
or the building as the tower can be removed or relocated without 
causing damage to it. 
It is also to be noted that the attachment of the tower to the 
building or the land is not for the permanent enjoyment of the building 
or the land. 
Further, the tower is fixed to the land or building for enhancing 
the operational efficacy and proper functioning of the antenna which is 
fixed on the tower by making it stable and wobble free. 

The fact that the tower, if required can be removed, dismantled 
in the CKD and SKD and sold in the market is not disputed. 
Application of the tests evolved and discussed above on these 
items clearly points to the movability as opposed to immovability of 
these items. We are, thus, of the view that mobile towers and PFBs are 
movable properties and hence, “goods”. 
11.9.10 What we have also noticed is that the Bombay High Court has 
held that since the towers and parts thereof are fastened and fixed to the 
earth and after their erection, they become immovable, and therefore, 
these cannot be classified as goods. While this conclusion is based on 
the classic definition of immovable property based on one criterion, as 
noticed earlier, that may not be the sole consideration to determine 
whether a property is immovable or movable. Even if the property is 
embedded to the earth and appears ex-facie immovable, if there are 
other indicators which show the characteristics of a movable property, 
as for instance, susceptibility to removal of the property from the fixture 
without causing any damage to its basic structure and change in 
character, ability of relocation to a new location and if the same can be 
sold thereby showing marketability, and lack of intention to make it a 
permanent fixture, in spite of the said property being embedded to the 
earth by way of fixing, the property may still be considered to be 
movable as has been held in many of the cases referred to above 
including in Solid and Correct Engineering (supra). 
11.9.11 It also appears that the decision of this Court in Solid and 
Correct Engineering (supra) was not brought to the notice of the 
Bombay High Court and thus escaped consideration. The Bombay High 
Court without considering above-mentioned aspects proceeded on the 

premise that these items namely tower, its parts thereof and PFBs are 
immovable properties. In paragraph no. 52 of the impugned judgment, 
while dealing with the case of CCE Vs. Sai Samhita Storages (P) Ltd., 
(supra) rendered by the Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High 
Court, the Bombay High Court observed that, 
“The towers are admittedly immovable structures and non-marketable 
and non-excisable. We, therefore, are of the clear opinion that this 
judgment of the Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court is 
inapplicable in the facts of the present case.” 
 
11.9.12 We are of the opinion that the aforesaid finding was erroneous 
for the reason that there was no admission on the part of the Assessee 
that towers are immovable structures and in fact, that was the disputed 
issue before the Court which was required to be determined. 
11.9.13 The Revenue, however, relied on Triveni Engineering & 
Industries Ltd. (supra) to contend that there is neither mobility nor 
marketability in the tower but it is permanently fastened to the earth or 
building. In this regard, para 13 and 14 of the judgment in Triveni 
Engineering & Industries Ltd. (supra) may be referred to 
“13. A perusal of the entry shows that a turbo alternator does not find 
a place therein eo nomine. The question then will be whether a “turbo 
alternator” falls within the meaning of “electric-generating set”. To 
bring a “turbo alternator” under that heading it must be shown to have 
the attributes of excisable “goods” as understood in the excise law. 
They are mobility and marketability. The article in question should be 
capable of being brought and sold in the market — a test which is too 
well established by a series of decisions of this Court to be elaborated 
here. 
14. There can be no doubt that if an article is an immovable property, 
it cannot be termed as “excisable goods” for purposes of the Act. From 
a combined reading of the definition of “immovable property” in 
Section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act, Section 3(25) of the General 
Clauses Act, it is evident that in an immovable property there is neither 
mobility nor marketability as understood in the excise law. Whether an 
article is permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth 
requires determination of both the intention as well as the factum of 

fastening to anything attached to the earth. And this has to be 
ascertained from the facts and circumstances of each case.” 

11.9.14 Hence, it is to be noted that the tower, though appears to be 
fastened to the earth, cannot be said to be permanently fastened to the 
earth or a building for the beneficial enjoyment of the land or the 
building. The tower possesses the characteristics of mobility as the 
same can be dismantled and relocated to another place or site. 
 
Therefore, in our opinion, the decision in Triveni Engineering 
& Industries Ltd. (supra) cannot be applied in the present case, 
considering the factum and intention behind fastening of the tower for 
purpose of keeping the antenna stable and wobble free and that it can 
be relocated. 
11.9.15 Reliance has been also placed by the Revenue on Quality Steel 
Tubes (P) Ltd. (supra) by drawing our attention to para 5 and 6 of the 
judgment which read as follows: 
“5. In several decisions rendered by this Court commencing 
from Union of India v. Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd. [AIR 
1963 SC 791: 1977 ELT 199] to Indian Cable Co. Ltd. v. CCE [(1994): (1994) 74 ELT 22] the twin test of exigibility of an article 
to duty under Excise Act are that it must be goods mentioned either in 
the Schedule or under Item 68 and must be marketable. In Delhi Cloth 
Mills [AIR 1963 SC 791: 1977 ELT 199] it having been held that the 
word ‘goods’ applies to those goods which can be brought to market for 
being bought and sold it is implied that it applies to such goods as are 
moveable. The requirement of the goods being brought to the market for 
being bought and sold has become known as the test of marketability 
which has been reiterated by this Court in CCE v. Ambalal Sarabhai 
Enterprises [(1989): 1989 SCC (Tax) 162: (1989) 43 ELT 
214]. The Court has held in Union Carbide India Ltd. v. Union of 
India [(1986): 1986 SCC (Tax) 443] that even if the goods 
was capable of being brought to the market, it would satisfy the test of 
marketability. The basic test, therefore, of levying duty under the Act is 
twofold. One, that any article must be goods and second, that it should 
be marketable or capable of being brought to market. Goods which are 
attached to the earth and thus become immovable and do not satisfy the 
test of being goods within the meaning of the Act nor it can be said to 
be capable of being brought to the market for being bought and sold. 

Therefore, both the tests, as explained by this Court, were not satisfied 
in the case of appellant as the tube mill or welding head having been 
erected and installed in the premises and embedded to earth ceased to 
be goods within meaning of Section 3 of the Act. 
6. Learned counsel for the Revenue urged that even if the goods were 
capable of being brought to the market it would attract levy. True, but 
erection and installation of a plant cannot be held to be excisable goods. 
If such wide meaning is assigned it would result in bringing in its ambit 
structures, erections and installations. That surely would not be in 
consonance with accepted meaning of excisable goods and its 
exigibility to duty. 
 
11.9.16 The Revenue has also relied on the decision in Mittal 
Engineering Works (P) Ltd. (supra) by referring to paras 9 and 10 of 
the said judgment which are reproduced as below: 
“9. Upon the material placed upon record and referred to above, we 
are in no doubt that the mono vertical crystalliser has to be assembled, 
erected and attached to the earth by a foundation at the site of the sugar 
factory. It is not capable of being sold as it is, without anything more. 
As was stated by this Court in the case of Quality Steel Tubes (P) 
Ltd. [(1995) ] the erection and installation of a plant is not 
excisable. To so hold would, impermissibly, bring into the net of excise 
duty all manner of plants and installations. 
10. The Tribunal took an unreasonable view of the evidence. It was the 
case of the appellants, not disputed by the Revenue, that mono vertical 
crystallisers were delivered to the customers in a knocked-down 
condition and had to be assembled and erected at the customers' 
factory. Such assembly and erection was done either by the appellants 
or by the customer. Where it was done by the appellants, fabrication 
materials of the customer were used and the customer sent to the 
appellants debit notes in regard to their value. Where the assembly and 
erection was done by the customer, there was no occasion for it to send 
to the appellants a debit note. The fact that there was no debit note in 
respect of one customer could not reasonably have led the Tribunal to 
conclude that in the case of that customer a complete mono vertical 
crystalliser had left the appellants' factory and that, therefore, mono 
vertical crystallisers were marketable. The Tribunal ought to have 
remembered that the record showed that mono vertical crystallisers 
had, apart from assembly, to be erected and attached by foundations to 
the earth and, therefore, were not, in any event, marketable as they 
were.” 

11.9.17 Relying on the aforesaid decisions, it has been contended by 
the Revenue that the tower once assembled and fixed to the 
earth/building, ceases to be marketable and hence cannot be said to be 
moveable. 
11.9.18 However, as discussed above, the tower and PFBs, after being 
dismantled without being damaged, can be relocated or sold, thereby 
possessing the character of marketability. As such these decisions 
would not be applicable in the present case. 
 
For the same reason, the decision in T.T.G Industries Ltd. 
(supra) also relied upon by the Revenue will not help the cause of the 
Revenue. 
11.9.19 The Revenue has also sought to rely upon a circular under 
F.No.137/315/2007-CX.4, dated 26.02.2008 issued by the Central 
Board of Excise and Customs, Department of Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance specifying that angles, channels, beam of steel and 
prefabricated shelter, PUF panels are used by the cellular phone service 
providers for erecting towers and making housing/storage units and are 
used in making of products and cannot be called excisable goods, being 
attached to the earth and are not chargeable to excise duty. The circular 
further mentions that these inputs for civil structures are not used for 
providing taxable service and accordingly the circular clarified that 
credit of excise duty paid on such items is not available to the telecom 
service providers. 
11.9.20 We are of the considered opinion that though the Revenue/ 
Department may issue any such circular based on their understanding 
of the matter and the Revenue authorities/officers are bound to follow 
it, yet, in view of the findings arrived at by us in these proceedings, the 

said circular would be of no avail and to the extent the same is contrary 
to our findings in these proceedings would not be enforceable and 
would be liable to be withdrawn. 
11.9.21 In Commissioner of Central Excise, Bolpur Vs. M/s Ratan 
Melting & Wire Industries, (2008), it was held that, 
“6. Circulars and instructions issued by the Board are no doubt binding 
in law on the authorities under the respective statutes, but when the 
Supreme Court or the High Court declares the law on the question 
arising for consideration, it would not be appropriate for the Court to 
direct that the circular should be given effect to and not the view 
expressed in a decision of this Court or the High Court. So far as the 
clarifications/circulars issued by the Central Government and of the 
State Government are concerned they represent merely their 
understanding of the statutory provisions. They are not binding upon 
the court. It is for the Court to declare what the particular provision of 
statute says and it is not for the Executive. Looked at from another 
angle, a circular which is contrary to the statutory provisions has really 
no existence in law. (emphasis added) 
 
The aforesaid proposition of law was reiterated in Commissioner 
of Central Excise, Mumbai, Vs. Hindoostan Spinning and Weaving 
Mills Ltd. & anr, (2009). 
11.9.22 In a recent judgment in Ranadey Micronutrients & Ors. v. 
Collector of Central Excise, (2022) 18 S.C.R. 28, it was held that while 
the departmental circulars in operation are binding upon the officers of 
the Revenue, to the extent it is contrary to the statute must be withdrawn 
by holding as follows: 
“15. There can be no doubt whatsoever, in the circumstances, that the 
earlier and later circulars were issued by the Board under the 
provisions of Section 37B, and the fact that they do not so recite does 
not mean that they do not bind Central Excise officers or become 
advisory in character. There can be no doubt whatsoever that after 21st 
November, 1994, Excise duty could be levied upon micronutrients only 
under the provisions of heading 31.05 as “other fertilisers”. If the later 

circular is contrary to the terms of the statute, it must be withdrawn. 
While the later circular remains in operation the Revenue is bound by 
it and cannot be allowed to plead that it is not valid.” (emphasis added) 
 
11.10 We now proceed to the next stage of consideration. Even if it 
is held that the mobile towers and PFBs are movable properties and 
“goods”, the question which still requires to be answered is whether 
these are “capital goods” within the meaning of Rule 2(a)(A) of the 
CENVAT Rules. As discussed above, every “good” is not “capital 
good” within the scope of the CENVAT Rules, but only such goods 
which come within meaning of sub-Clause (i) of Rule 2(a)(A) i.e. goods 
falling under Chapter 82, Chapter 84, Chapter 85, Chapter 90 Heading 
no. 68.2 and the sub-Heading no. 6801, 6801.1 and 6801.10 of the 
First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, which are used for 
providing output service will be considered as “capital goods” and 
eligible for CENVAT credit. Sub-clause (ii) of Rule 2(a)(A) provides 
that pollution control equipment used for providing output service can 
also be capital goods with which we are not concerned. 
11.10.1 However, it may be noted that neither tower nor prefabricated 
shelter/building 

finds 
mention 
under 
any 
of 
the 
Chapters/Heading specified under sub-clause (i), nor these are pollution 
control equipment to fall within sub-clause (ii). Hence, these items on 
their own cannot be said to be “capital goods” within the meaning of 
sub-clause (i) and (ii) of Rule 2(a)(A). 
11.11 However, it is to be noted that it has been provided under sub-
clause (iii) that components, spares and accessories of goods specified 
in sub-clause (i) and sub-clause (ii) will also be treated as “capital 
goods” if used for providing output service within the meaning of 
CENVAT Rules. Therefore, we have to examine whether towers and 

PFBs which on their own are not “capital goods” within the scope of 
either of the sub-clauses (i) and (ii) can be considered to be “capital 
goods” under sub-clause (iii) by virtue of being accessories of any of 
the “capital goods” mentioned under sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of Rule 
2(a)(A). 
11.11.1 It is also not the case of the Assessees before us that mobile 
towers and PFBs are goods falling under Chapter 82, Chapter 84, 
Chapter 85, Chapter 90, Heading No. 68.02 and sub-Heading No. 
6801.10 of the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act so as to 
be deemed as capital goods. It is the case of the Assessees that the 
mobile tower is an accessory of “antenna” which is part of “BTS” and 
since antenna and BTS fall under Chapter 85 which are “capital goods”, 
mobile tower being accessory of antenna and BTS is to be treated as 
“capital good” by virtue of sub-clause (iii) of Rule 2(a)(A). Similar is 
the case with PFBs. 
11.11.2 Since, we have already held that mobile towers and PFBs are 
not immovable properties and can be treated as “goods”, we have to 
examine whether these are to be treated as accessories of antenna and 
BTS (which are “capital goods”) as claimed by the Assessees and if so, 
being accessory of antenna/ BTS, all these are covered within the 
meaning of “capital goods” under Rule 2(a)(A) (iii) and since these 
accessories of capital goods are used for providing output service i.e. mobile service, whether the service providers would be entitled to take 
CENVAT credit by virtue of Rule 3(i) of the CENVAT Rules. 
11.11.3 In this regard, it is to be noted that the stand of the Revenue 
is that the towers and PFBs have independent functions and existence 
and have specific utilities and thus these cannot form part of a 

composite system or a single unit and hence they cannot be considered 
to be accessories of the antenna or BTS in contra-distinction to the plea 
of the Assessees that these are accessories of antenna and BTS which 
are “capital goods” falling under Chapter 85 of the First Schedule to the 
Central Excise Tariff Act. 
11.11.4 What is an accessory has been defined in Black’s Law 
Dictionary, (Fifth Edition) as, 
“anything which is joined to another thing as an ornament or to render 
it more perfect, or which accompanies it, or is connected with it as an 
incident, or as subordinate to it, or which belongs to or with it, adjunct 
or accompaniment. A thing to subordinate importance. Aiding or 
contributing in secondary way of assisting in or contributing to as a 
subordinate.” 
 Similarly, Oxford Dictionary defines “accessory” as: 
“an extra piece of equipment that is useful but not essential or that can 
be added to something else as a decoration.” 
 
11.11.5 What comes out from the above dictionary meaning of 
“accessory” is that any such item which adds to the beauty, convenience 
or effectiveness of some other items can be said to be accessory of that 
other thing and it may or may not be essential for functioning of main 
machinery. Seen from the above perspective what is evident is that the 
tower is a structure fixed to the earth or building on which microwave 
antenna is fastened to provide the necessary height and stability to the 
antenna by making it steady and wobble free. The function of antenna 
as part of the BTS is to receive and transmit radio signal and is used for 
providing mobile telecom service to the subscribers. The tower itself is 
not an electrical component of microwave antenna per-se, yet it is 
necessary and helps in keeping the antenna at proper height and in a 
stable position so that the antenna can transmit signals for ensuring 
uninterrupted and seamless services to the subscribers. It is with the aid 

of the tower that the potential of the antenna is fully realised, making it 
function optimally. Without tower, antenna cannot effectively function 
for the purpose it is used. Hence, there can be no doubt that tower is to 
be considered as an accessory of antenna. 
11.11.6 Similarly, the PFB houses other BTS equipment and 
alternative electricity source in the form of diesel generators and other 
equipment to provide alternative and uninterrupted power supply to the 
antenna so that in the event of failure of main power supply, the 
generator can instantly provide backup electricity supply to the antenna 
and BTS. The PFBs house electric cables, other equipment related to 
antenna, BTS and generator. Thus, PFBs enhance the efficacy and 
functioning of mobile antenna as well as BTS and accordingly, PFBs 
can also be considered as accessories to the antenna and BTS which are 
“capital goods” falling under Chapter 85 of the Schedule to the Central 
Excise Tariff. 
11.11.7 That tower is to be treated as an accessory of antenna or BTS 
and their relationship has been highlighted by this Court in Tata 
Teleservices Ltd. Vs. Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. & Ors. (2008) wherein the principles of cellular networks have been 
discussed showing the inter dependency of tower and antenna in the 
following words, 
“xi) Principles of Cellular Networks: 
Mobile communications reached the market in 1980. Even at 
that time the major challenge was to implement advanced mobility 
features such as handover, roaming and localization of subscribers 
which required additional control channels between terminal and 
serving base station. 
A cellular network consists of a number of radio cells where 
the term "cell" refers to geographic coverage area of a BTS. The size 
of the coverage area depends on the signal strength of the base 

station and the degree of attenuation. Each BTS is assigned a certain 
number of channels for transmitting and receiving data which is 
called as cell allocation ("CA"). To avoid interference between cells, 
it needs to be guaranteed that the neighbouring base stations are 
also assigned cell allocations of different channels. There are no 
sharp borders between neighbouring cells. Most of the time they 
overlap. In urban areas, a mobile device can hear a set of around 10 
base stations simultaneously, and then it selects from this set of base 
station within the strongest signal. The number of cells a network is 
made up of is basically a function of the size of area to be covered 
and the user penetration. When building up a new network, 
operators first concentrate on establishing a coverage in congested 
urban areas before establishing base stations in rural areas. If a 
network runs the risk of becoming overloaded in a certain region, 
the operators can increase the capacity by increasing the base 
stations density. 
A cellular network not only consists of base stations but also 
comprises a network infrastructure for interconnecting base 
stations, mobility support, service provisioning and connection to 
other networks like internet. Therefore, a cellular network consists 
of several access networks, which include the radio equipment 
which is necessary to interconnect a terminal to the network. The 
access networks are interconnected by the core network. For 
example, in GSM, the access network is referred to as Base Station 
Subsystem ("BSS") whereas the core network is denoted as Mobile 
Switching and Management Subsystem ("SMSS"). BSS is 
responsible for monitoring and controlling the air interface. BSS 
consists of two different components, namely Base Transceiver 
Station ("BTS") and Base Station Controller ("BSC"). BTS stands 
for "base station". It contains transmitter and receiver equipment as 
well as an antenna. The base station is equipped with very limited 
capabilities for signalling a protocol processing. The bulk of the 
work, for example, allocation and release of channels is done by the 
BSC. The BSC is mainly responsible for control and execution of 
handover, a function which is needed to keep a circuit-switched 
connection if the subscriber moves between base stations. Therefore, 
each BSC controls several base stations, which are connected to the 
BSC via fixed lines or radio link systems. On the other hand, mobile 
Switching and Management System is a fixed network of switching 
nods and databases for establishing connections from and to the 
mobile subscriber. HLR and VLR are two important databases which 
are the foundation of the Numbering Plan in MSC. The switching 
components are the Mobile Switching Centre ("MSC") and the 
Gateway MSC ("GMSC"). The MSC connects a number of BSCs. to 
the network for the purposes of localization and handover. Thus, it 
is the MSC which is responsible for serving a limited geographic 
region governed by all base stations connected to the MSC over their 
BSCs. In a mobile network, when a connection is to be established 
it is the MSC which determines another switch depending on the 

current location of the mobile subscriber. For this purpose, MSC is 
also connected to local network for each subscriber so as to 
implement the numbering plan. The area from which the call 
emanates, the identification of the nature of the call whether from 
mobile or fixed wireline is all done by the computer having the 
requisite software in MSC.” 
 
11.11.8 In this regard, we may also note the finding given by the 
CESTAT which has not been disturbed by the Bombay High Court 
regarding the contention of the Assessee that towers are essential parts 
of the antennas and as such without tower, the antennas cannot be 
placed at appropriate and requisite height to receive and send signals 
and since towers are essential for the functioning of antennas, towers 
should be treated as accessories of antennas. The CESTAT did not find 
the said contention of Assessee acceptable on the ground that tower 
cannot be considered to be a part of antenna, since a component or part 
of any goods means something which is required to make such goods a 
finished item. The CESTAT held that only those articles which would 
go into the composition of another article can be considered to be 
component or part of the latter and that tower does not enter into the 
composition of the antenna and hence it is not a component/part of the 
antenna, relying on the decision of this Court in Saraswati Sugar Mills 
v. Commissioner of Central Excise, Delhi-III, (2014) ). In 
the aforesaid case of Saraswati Sugar Mills (supra) it was held by this 
Court that anything required to make the goods a finished item can be 
described as component or part of the finished item. It was held that 
iron and steel structures would not go into the composition of vacuum 
pans, crystallizers etc. If an article is an element in the composition of 
another article made out of it, such an article may be described as a 
component of another article. Thus, structures in question in the said 
case did not satisfy the description of ‘component’. 

11.11.9 While there can be no dispute about the aforesaid proposition, 
we are of the view that it cannot be the only criterion to determine what 
amounts to component of another article. In order for any article to be 
considered a component of another article, it does not necessarily mean 
that it has to be consumed or used up for producing the said another 
article as in the case of a manufacturing process. In our considered 
opinion, a component of any good would also mean to include those 
which make the good fully functional and make such a good more 
effective as observed in M/s. Annapurna Carbon Industries 
Co.(supra), wherein this Court held that an accessory would mean an 
object or a device that is not essential in itself but that adds to the beauty 
or convenience or effectiveness of something else or is supplementary 
or secondary to something of greater or primary importance, which 
assists in operating or controlling the said good, and thus serves as its 
accessory. 
It was thus held in Annapurna Carbon Industries Co. (supra) 
that, 
“10. We find that the term “accessories” is used in the schedule to describe 
goods which may have been manufactured for use as an aid or addition. A 
sense in which the word accessory is used is given in Webster's Third New 
International Dictionary as follows: 
“An object or device that is not essential in itself but that 
adds to the beauty, convenience, or effectiveness of something 
else.” 
Other meanings given there are: “supplementary or secondary to 
something of greater or primary importance”, “additional”, “any of 
several mechanical devices that assist in operating or controlling the tone 
resources of an organ”. “Accessories” are not necessarily confined to 
particular machines for which they may serve as aids. The same item may 
be an accessory of more than one kind of instrument.” 

11.11.10 Thus, in our opinion, the restricted meaning of accessory 
given by the CESTAT and not differed from by the Bombay High Court 
is not wholly correct in as much as the meaning of accessory can have 
different ascribed meanings as observed in the aforesaid decision. 
11.11.11 There is no dispute to the fact that BTS is a composite system 
consisting of the transmitter, receiver, antenna and other equipment, 
and antenna can be said to be an integral part of BTS. As discussed 
above, and not disputed by the Revenue, tower is needed to keep the 
antenna at an appropriate height and keep it stable. Without the tower, 
it is not possible to hoist the antenna at the requisite height and without 
it being securely fastened to the tower, antenna cannot be kept firm and 
steady for proper receipt and transmission of radio signals. Thus, there 
cannot be any doubt that a mobile tower can be treated to be an 
accessory of antenna and BTS. Accordingly, since in terms of sub-
clause (iii) of Rule 2(a)(A), all components, spares and accessories of 
such capital goods falling under sub-clause (i) would also be treated as 
capital goods, a mobile tower can also be treated as “capital good”. 
11.11.12 We, therefore, agree with the conclusion arrived at by the 
Delhi High Court that towers and shelters (PFBs) support the 
BTS/antenna for effective transmission of mobile signals and thus 
enhance 
their 
efficiency 
and 
since 
these 
articles 
are 
components/accessories of BTS/antenna which are admittedly “capital 
goods” falling under Chapter 85 within sub-clause (i) of Rule 2(a)(A) 
of CENVAT Rules, these items consequently are covered by the 
definition of “capital goods” within the meaning of sub-clause (iii) read 
with sub-clause (i) of Rule 2(a)(A) of CENVAT Rules. Further, since 
these are used for providing output service, i.e., mobile 
telecommunication service, and since these are “capital goods” received 

in the premises of the provider of output service as contemplated under 
Rule 3(1)(i), the Assessees would be entitled to CENVAT credit on the 
excise duties paid on these goods. 
11.12 The alternative plea taken by the Assessee is that these items, 
viz., mobile tower and the prefabricated buildings (PFBs) are “inputs’ 
used for providing output service of telecommunication and hence, 
being “inputs” under Rule 2(k) which are used for providing output 
service i.e., mobile service, CENVAT credit will be available in terms 
of Rule 3(1) which provides that a provider of a taxable service shall be 
allowed to take credit on duties paid on any input received in the 
premises of that provider of output service on or after 10th September, 
2004 and this may be utilised for payment of service tax on any output 
service under Rule 3(1) read with Rule 3(4) of the CENVAT Rules. 
11.12.1 “Input” has been defined under Rule 2(k) to mean all goods 
used for providing any output service. We have already held that tower 
and the prefabricated buildings (PFBs) are not immovable property but 
are “goods”/ “capital goods” within the meaning of Rule 2(a)(A)(iii) 
and since these are used for providing output service, i.e. mobile 
service, these can be considered to be “inputs” within the meaning of 
Rule 2(k) and CENVAT credit can be availed in respect of these goods 
for payment of service tax. 
The aforesaid definition clause under Rule 2(k) neither puts any 
condition on it nor any qualifying words have been added to the word 
“input”, except to mean goods used for providing any output service. 
Hence, it would mean any “good” which is used as “input” for 
providing taxable output service. Thus, any item so long it qualifies 
as a “good” and is “used” for providing output service, would come 

within the purview of “input” under Rule 2(k) and excise duty paid on 
such items can be claimed as CENVAT credit which may in turn be 
used for payment of service tax for the output service provided by the 
MSPs. 
11.12.2 It may be also noted that there must be “use” of such goods 
to qualify as “inputs”. Without stretching too much the meaning of the 
words “use” and “input”, it can be said, without any doubt, that tower 
and PFBs are used for providing output service by way of inputs. The 
use of tower and PFB cannot be said to be so remotely connected with 
the output of service that these goods will go beyond the ordinary 
meaning of “use”. Their usage in providing the output service is not 
remote but proximate. In fact, without the use of tower and PFB, it is 
inconceivable that the service provider can provide mobile services 
effectively. Rather, towers and PFBs are indispensable being 
accessories of antenna for providing mobile services. In this regard one 
may refer to the decision in Member, Board of Revenue, West Bengal 
Vs. M/s. Phelps & Co. (P) Ltd., (1972) wherein it was held 
that, 
“6. We have now to find out what exactly is the meaning of the expression 
"for use by him in the manufacture of goods for sale". Identical words are 
used in Section 8(b) of the Central Sales Tax Act 1956. This court was called 
upon to find out the scope of that expression in M/s. J.K. Cotton Spinning & 
Weaving Mills Co Ltd. Vs. Sales Tax Officer, Kanpur and Anr. (AIR 1965 SC 
1310). Dealing with that expression this Court observed: 
The expression "in the manufacture of goods" would 
normally encompass the entire process carried on by 
the dealer of converting raw materials into finished 
goods. Where any particular process is so integrally 
connected with the ultimate production of goods that 
but for that process, manufacture or processing of 
goods would be commercially inexpedient, goods 
required in that process would, in our judgment, fall 
within the expression "in the manufacture of goods. 

In the present case the assessee company has sold the goods in question to 
certain manufactures who were manufacturing iron steel materials. It is also 
clear from question no. (i) that those gloves were to be used by workmen who 
were engaged in hot jobs or in handling corrosive substances in the course of 
manufacture. That being so it cannot be denied that those gloves had to be 
used in the course of manufacture.” 
 
11.12.3 It may be noted that in the definition of “input” under Rule 2(k) 
when it relates to providing output service it has been simply defined as 
all goods, except light diesel oil, high speed diesel oil, motor spirit, 
commonly known as petrol and the motor vehicles used for providing any 
output service. However, when the word “input” is defined relating to 
manufacture of product, it has been defined in a broad and expensive 
manner to mean all goods except light diesel oil, high speed diesel oil and 
motor vehicle spirit commonly as petrol, 

used in or in relation to the manufacture of final products, 
(ii) whether directly or indirectly, 
(iii) whether contained in the final product or not, 
(iv) and includes lubricating oils, greases, cutting oils, coolants, 
accessories of the final product cleared along with the final 
products, 
(v) goods used as paint, or as packing material, or as fuel, or for 
generation of electricity or steam, used in or in relation to 
manufacture of final products, 
(vi) or for any other purpose, within the factory of production. 
 
Thus, “input” in relation to manufacturing of final product would 
mean not only those which are directly used but also indirectly used not 
only for manufacture of final product whether contained in the final 

product or not but also used in relation to manufacture of final product or 
for any of other purpose. 
However, as mentioned above when “input” has been defined with 
reference to providing output service, the definition clauses does not 
explain it so elaborately but merely uses the simple expression i.e. “used 
for providing any output service”. 
In our view, even if the definition of “input” with reference to 
output service may not have been explained in an expansive manner as in 
the case of manufacture of final product under Rule 2(k)(i), the definition 
of “input” with reference to providing output service under Rule 2(k)(ii) 
need not be given a restrictive meaning as sought to be done by the 
CESTAT by holding that tower is not used directly for transmission of 
signal. In our view since the subject matter is same, i.e., what amounts to 
“input” though the end use is for two different products, one tangible, in 
the form of final manufactured product, and one intangible i.e., output 
service, applying similar tests to determine what amounts to “input” 
would not be impermissible. 
11.12.4 We have also noted that the Bombay High Court had taken the 
view that it cannot be said that it is impossible to provide the service 
without the aid of the towers, thus showing non dependency of antenna 
on tower. 
 
In our view, while theoretically antenna may receive and transmit 
signal without the tower, practically, the same is not feasible and tower is 
an essential accessory for keeping the antenna at an appropriate height and 
in a stable position so that there is no disturbance in receiving and 
transmission of signal and there can be wider coverage of signal. The link 
between antenna and tower is almost inseparable for the effective 

functioning of antenna for providing mobile telecommunication service 
and it cannot be said that the nexus between antenna and tower is remote. 
Rather, in our view, their relationship is quite proximate and inseparable 
for proper functioning of antenna. 
 
In this regard, we have noted the decision of the Gujarat High 
Court in Industrial Machinery Manufacturers Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of 
Gujarat, (1965) 16 STC 380 (Guj) wherein the Gujarat High Court held 
that humidifiers which are used by the textile mills for improving the 
quality of the yarn produced in general, and even though humidifiers 
were essentially electric motors and not directly connected with the 
manufacturing process of yarns, yet these were considered to be 
machineries for use in the manufacture of yarn. The said finding by the 
Gujarat High Court was based on the essentiality of the humidifiers. By 
applying the same principle in the present case, towers and PFBs though 
themselves are not electrical equipment, are essential for proper 
functioning of antenna. Thus tower being essential to rendering of 
output service of mobile telephony, these items certainly can be 
considered to be “inputs” akin to antenna. Without the towers and the 
PFBs, there cannot be proper service of mobile telecommunication. 
Hence, these certainly would come within the definition of “input” 
under Rule 2(k)(ii). 
11.12.5 What we have noted also is that the CESTAT rejected the plea 
of the Assessee that towers and parts thereof are inputs under Rule 2(k) 
by observing that the towers are admittedly immovable structures and 
hence ipso facto non-marketable and non-excisable and these do not 
lead to manufacture of goods and that towers and PFBs certainly are not 
used for providing mobile services. By relying on Explanation-2 to 
Rule 2(k) which provides that input includes goods used in the 

manufacture of capital goods which are further used in the factory of 
the manufacturer, the CESTAT held that these items are not inputs. 
However, in our view, invoking Explanation-2 is neither appropriate 
nor necessary as sub-clause (ii) of Rule 2(k) itself clearly provides that 
“input” means all goods, except light diesel oil, high speed diesel oil, 
motor spirit, commonly known as petrol and motor vehicles, used for 
providing any output service. Even though tower and the PFBs are not 
electrical items/equipment in the sense that these do not transmit 
signals, yet these are indispensable for the effective functioning of 
antenna by which the radio signals are received and transmitted and 
accordingly, used for providing the mobile telephonic services to the 
subscribers. Thus, towers and PFBs, though are not electrical 
equipment for transmission of signals, yet these are used for 
transmission of signal by the antennas. Therefore, there can be no 
denying of the fact that there is a close proximity and nexus between 
their functioning and the ultimate transmission of radio signals which 
is the output service rendered by the MSPs. Hence, the view of the 
CESTAT which has not been disturbed by the Bombay High Court does 
not commend our acceptance. 
11.12.6 Having held that the tower and pre-fabricated buildings (PFBs) 
are “goods” and not immovable property and since these goods are used 
for providing mobile telecommunication services, the inescapable 
conclusion is that they would also qualify as “inputs” under Rule 2(k) 
for the purpose of credit benefits under the CENVAT Rules. 
11.13 For the foregoing reasons, we agree with the conclusions arrived 
at by the Delhi High Court and uphold the judgment rendered by it in 
Vodafone (supra) and dismiss the connected appeals being CA No. 

5032-5035 of 2021, CA No. 5039-5040 of 2021, CA No. 5038 of 2021, 
CA No. 5036-5037 of 2021, CA No. 62 of 2022. 
11.14 For the same reasons, we are unable to agree with the view of 
the Bombay High Court and accordingly, set aside the judgment in 
Bharti Airtel (supra) rendered by it and allow the connected appeals, 
being CA No. 10409-10 of 2014, CA No. 7119 of 2015, CA No. 7179 
of 2015, CA No. 1077 of 2016, CA No. 1078 of 2016, CA No. 5112 of 
2021, CA No. 1201 of 2018, CA No. 1205 of 2018, CA No. 1203 of 
2018, CA No. 1204 of 2018, CA No. 1202 of 2018, CA No. 5056 of 
2021 and CA No. 5832 of 2018. 
 
Consequently, all the appeals and connected applications are 
disposed of in terms of the above findings and conclusions. 

 ……………………………J. 
 (B.V. NAGARATHNA) 

……………….…………………………J. 
 (NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH) 

New Delhi; 
November 20, 2024.