IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
[ of 
2024] 
 
SUNNY 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA 

JUDGMENT 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeal arises out of the final judgment and 
order dated 5th August, 2020, passed by a Division Bench of the 
High Court of Judicature at Bombay (hereinafter, “High Court”), 
in, whereby the High Court has 
negatived the challenge to the judgment and order dated 7th July, 
2015, passed by the Court of Additional Sessions Judge – 3, at 
Satara (hereinafter, “trial court”), in Sessions Case No. 121 of 
2014, thereby upholding the conviction for the offence 
punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 

(hereinafter, “IPC”) and the imposition of sentence to suffer 
imprisonment for life along with fine of Rs. 500/- on the 
appellant. 
3. 
By way of the present appeal, the appellant has called into 
question the dismissal of his Criminal Appeal by the High Court. 
4. 
The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeal are as 
given below. 
4.1 The prosecution story is that on 21st March 2014, Sunita 
Bhosale (PW-6) and her husband Gopal Bhosale went to the 
house of Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5). At that moment, 
Rajendra Bhosale had gone to answer nature’s call. Sunita 
Bhosale (PW-6) and her husband were having a 
conversation with Chayya – wife of Rajendra Bhosale (PW-
5). At about 10:30 PM, Sunny antosh (appellant) came 
in front of the house of Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5) and started 
abusing Chayya and Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5) on account 
of a loan they had taken. When Chayya tried to pacify the 
appellant, he attempted to assault her. Seeing this, Gopal 
Bhosale intervened and requested the appellant not to use 
abusive language and that his grievance could be resolved 
the next day. The appellant went some distance away from 

the house of Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5) but then suddenly 
started abusing Gopal Bhosale in filthy language and called 
him out of the house in a threatening tone. Gopal Bhosale 
went out of the house and followed the appellant towards 
the Northern side of tar road leading towards Khadkoba 
Temple in the village. It is then that the appellant beat and 
assaulted Gopal Bhosale particularly on his face and head 
by means of a bamboo stick causing bleeding injuries. 
Mangesh Bhosale (PW-3) and Aniket Bhosale (not 
examined), upon hearing the sound of quarrel so also 
Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5) who was informed by Sunita 
Bhosale (PW-6) and his wife Chayya, rushed towards the 
spot and saw the appellant assaulting Gopal Bhosale by 
means of a bamboo stick and the injured lying on the 
ground. Seeing the three of them, the appellant ran away 
from there. Other people including Sharad Bhosale (PW-4) 
gathered at the spot. The injured Gopal Bhosale was taken 
to the Rural Hospital, Khandala, where the doctor declared 
him brought dead. 
4.2 Sharad Bhosale (PW-4) lodged the First Information Report 
being FIR No. 54 of 2014 at Police Station Khandala, 

District Satara, on the intervening night of 21st March 2014 
and 22nd March 2014 at around 1:35 AM. The FIR was 
registered for offences punishable under Sections 302 and 
504 of IPC. 
4.3 Investigating Officer Ashok Shelke (PW-10) conducted the 
investigation. After preparing the inquest panchnama, the 
dead body was sent for postmortem. The appellant was 
arrested. The blood-stained clothes of the appellant were 
seized by preparing a panchnama. While in police custody, 
the disclosure statement of the appellant was recorded and 
at his instance muddemal i.e., bamboo stick was seized 
under panchnama. The Investigating Officer also recorded 
the statement of witnesses. He sent blood-stained clothes, 
bamboo stick, etc., for chemical analysis. 
4.4 The 
Investigating 
Officer, 
upon 
completion 
of 
the 
investigation, filed a chargesheet forwarding the appellant 
to face the trial. The case was committed to the Sessions 
Court as the offence punishable under Section 302 of the 
IPC is exclusively triable by the Sessions Court. 
4.5 The trial court, upon hearing, framed charge against the 
appellant. The appellant pleaded not guilty and claimed to 

be tried. 
4.6 In order to bring home the guilt of the appellant, the 
prosecution examined ten witnesses. Besides the oral 
evidence, prosecution has also placed reliance on a number 
of documents. The incriminating circumstances in evidence 
were put to the appellant. The appellant denied the 
circumstances. He led no defence evidence. The defence 
was of total denial. 
4.7 The Sessions Court, upon trial, convicted the appellant for 
the offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC and 
sentenced him to undergo imprisonment for life. 
4.8 Aggrieved thereby, the appellant preferred an appeal before 
the High Court. Vide impugned final judgment and order, 
the High Court dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant. 
Aggrieved still, the appellant has filed the present appeal. 
5. 
We have heard Shri D.N. Goburdhun, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing for the appellant and Shri Siddharth 
Dharmadhikari, learned Counsel appearing for the respondent-
State. 
6. 
Shri D.N. Goburdhun, learned Senior Counsel, submits 
that the trial court as well as the High Court has grossly erred in 

convicting the appellant. It is submitted that the testimonies of 
the witnesses i.e. Mangesh Bhosale (PW-3), Rajendra Bhosale 
(PW-5) and Sunita Bhosale (PW-6) would show that there are 
material contradictions and inconsistencies in their depositions. 
It is further submitted that there are various contradictions in 
the FIR on one hand and the testimonies of the alleged 
eyewitnesses. He, therefore, submits that the judgment and 
order of conviction is not at all sustainable in law. 
7. 
Shri Goburdhun in the alternative submits that the 
evidence of the prosecution witnesses itself would show that the 
incident was an outcome of a sudden and grave provocation in a 
quarrel that took place between the deceased and the appellant. 
It is, therefore, submitted that, in any event, the conviction under 
Section 302 IPC would not be sustainable and will have to be 
altered to a lesser offence. 
8. 
Shri Siddharth Dharmadhikari, learned Standing Counsel 
for the State of Maharashtra, on the contrary, submits that 
insofar as the material aspect is concerned, the testimonies of all 
the three eyewitnesses are consistent. He submits that apart 
from the testimonies of the eyewitnesses, the circumstantial 
evidence also points towards the guilt of the appellant. He, 

therefore, submits that no interference would be warranted with 
the concurrent judgments and orders passed by the trial court 
and the High Court. 
9. 
Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5), states in his deposition that, on 
the date of the incident the deceased and his wife Sunita Bhosale 
(PW-6) had come to his residence. He had gone to answer the 
call of the nature. When he returned, Sunita Bhosale (PW-6) and 
his wife were standing at the door. They informed that the 
appellant had come and was abusing the deceased and that the 
deceased had gone after him. He then, went after them. When 
he went towards Khadkoba temple, he noticed that the deceased 
was lying on road near the house situated behind metal-sheet 
mansion and the appellant was assaulting him by means of 
bamboo stick. He states that Mangesh Bhosale (PW-3) and one 
Aniket Bhosale also came there. Seeing them, the appellant fled 
away. The deceased had become unconscious. The deceased 
was taken to the Government hospital where he was declared 
dead. 
10. The evidence of Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5) is sought to be 
corroborated by Mangesh Bhosale (PW-3). He stated that hearing 
the quarrelling noise on the rear side of his house he came out 

of the house and thereafter saw the appellant assaulting the 
deceased. However, the presence of this witness is itself 
doubtful, inasmuch as, Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5) in his cross-
examination admits that the house of Mangesh Bhosale (PW-3) 
is at a distance of 2000-2500 feet from the place of incident. 
11. The prosecution case is, however, also supported by Sunita 
Bhosale (PW-6), the wife of the deceased. 
12. Taking into consideration the evidence of Rajendra Bhosale 
(PW-5) and Sunita Bhosale (PW-6), we do not find any error in 
the finding of the trial court and the High Court that it is the 
present appellant who assaulted the deceased due to which the 
death of the deceased has occurred. 
13. The next question that arises for consideration is as to 
whether the conviction under Section 302 IPC would be 
sustainable or whether the appellant deserves to be convicted for 
a lesser offence. 
14. In this respect, it will be relevant to refer to the testimony of 
Sunita Bhosale (PW-6), the wife of the deceased. She in her 
evidence states that, she and her husband deceased Gopal had 
gone to the house of Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5). When they went 
to the house of Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5), he had gone to answer 

nature’s call. She further states that the accused appellant came 
there and started abusing Chayya and Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5). 
Thereafter, her husband tried to persuade the accused appellant 
telling him why he was abusing them, and they would see about 
his grievance in the morning. She states that thereafter the 
accused appellant started abusing her husband deceased Gopal 
due to his intervention. The accused appellant went from there 
and the deceased also went behind him. She further stated that 
she and Chayya, the wife of Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5) stood 
outside the house. At that time, Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5) also 
arrived. She states that, when Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5) 
returned, she and Chayya told Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5) about 
the incident stating that deceased Gopal had gone behind the 
accused appellant. She states that, thereafter Rajendra Bhosale 
(PW-5) went towards Khadkoba temple. He was followed by 
Mangesh Bhosale (PW-3) and one Aniket Bhosale. 
15. From the testimony of Sunita Bhosale (PW-6) itself, it will 
be clear that after a scuffle took place at the house of Rajendra 
Bhosale (PW-5), the accused appellant went from there and the 
deceased followed him. Thereafter, as to how the assault took 
place is not clear either from the evidence of Rajendra Bhosale 

(PW-5) or from the evidence of Sunita Bhosale (PW-6). It is 
however clear that after the accused appellant left the place, the 
deceased followed him. After that, as to what had happened 
between the deceased and the appellant is not clear from the 
evidence of the eyewitnesses. 
16. From the evidence of Sunita Bhosale (PW-6) itself, it is clear 
that the deceased had nothing to do with the incident. The 
appellant had come to the house of Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5) 
where she and her husband had gone. Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5) 
had gone to answer nature’s call and three of them i.e. the 
deceased, Sunita Bhosale (PW-6) and Chayya, the wife of 
Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5), were present there. The appellant 
started abusing Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5) and his wife Chayya. 
The deceased intervened and asked the appellant as to why he 
was abusing Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5). Irked by the intervention 
of the deceased, the appellant started abusing the deceased and 
thereafter went away. It is thus clear that no motive has come 
on record as to why the appellant wanted to commit the murder 
of the deceased. 
17. The evidence of the eyewitnesses also does not show that 
the appellant had come with any weapon. On the contrary, the 

medical evidence would show that the injuries caused are with 
the bamboo stick, which is commonly available in a village. The 
possibility of the deceased following the appellant and an 
altercation taking place between them and in a sudden fight in 
the heat of passion the appellant assaulting the deceased cannot 
be ruled out. 
18. As already discussed hereinabove, the prosecution has 
utterly failed to prove any case of premeditation. On the 
contrary, the case as put forth by the prosecution is about the 
appellant coming to the house of Rajendra Bhosale (PW-5), 
abusing him and his wife Chayya, and the weapon used is a 
bamboo stick which is commonly available anywhere in the 
village. The nature of the injuries sustained by the deceased 
would also not show that the appellant had taken any undue 
advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner. 
19. In that view of the matter, we find that the appellant is 
entitled to benefit of doubt. The conviction of the appellant under 
Section 302 IPC, therefore, deserves to be altered to one under 
Part I of Section 304 IPC. 
20. We are, therefore, inclined to partly allow the present 
appeal. 

21. In the result, we pass the following order: 

The appeal is partly allowed. 

The conviction of the appellant under Section 302 IPC is 
altered to the one under Part I of Section 304 IPC. 
(iii) The 
appellant 
has 
already 
undergone 
actual 
imprisonment for a period of more than 9 years and with 
remission he has undergone the sentence of more than 
12 years prior to his release on bail by the order of this 
Court dated 4th October 2024. We, therefore, find that 
the said sentence would subserve the ends of justice. 
Therefore, the appellant is sentenced to the period 
already undergone. 

The bail bonds, if any, shall stand discharged....J 
(B.R. GAVAI)...J 
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)