SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
[ SLP (] 

INDORE VIKAS PRAADHIKARAN 
(IDA) & ANR. 

 Civil Appeal No. 7906 
of 2021

VERSUS 
SHRI HUMUD JAIN SAMAJ 
TRUST & ANR. 

JUDGMENT 
 
SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
This present petition is order dated 
08.02.2022 passed in, titled as, “Shri 
Humad Jain Samaj Trust Vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh & 
Ors.”, passed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Indore. 
The Division Bench of the High Court has set aside the order 
dated 17.12.2021, passed by the learned Single Judge in Writ 
Petition No. 26040/2021. 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

3. 
The facts of the case reveal that the appellant Indore Vikas 
Praadhikaran (IDA), hereinafter referred to as “IDA” issued an 
advertisement inviting bids for leasing out land admeasuring 
3382 sq. meters situated at Scheme No. 74-C, Sector C, Indore, 
on 17.07.2020 and the terms and conditions were specified in the 
Notice Inviting Tender (NIT). The reserve price was fixed at Rs. 
21,120/- per square meter. The IDA pursuant to the NIT dated 
17.07.2020 received three bids and the bid of respondent No. 1-
Shri Humud Jain Samaj Trust was the highest as a bid of Rs. 
25,671.90/- per square meter was offered in the matter. The bids 
were opened on 09.09.2020. The Tender Committee while it was 
finalizing the bids noticed that in respect of the land in question, 
a property tax demand to the tune of Rs. 1.25 crores was 
outstanding and the same was not taken into account while fixing 
the base price and, therefore, the Tender Committee arrived at a 
conclusion not to accept any of the bids and to issue a fresh tender 
with a reserve price of Rs. 26,000/- per square meter. The matter 
was placed before the Board of IDA and on 27.07.2021, the 
Board accepted the recommendation of the Tender Committee. 
The bid of respondent No. 1 was rejected and it was resolved to 
issue a fresh NIT in the matter. Respondent No. 1 was informed 
on 23.08.2021 about the rejection of bid of respondent No.1 and 
on 01.10.2021, the earnest money was also refunded. On 
18.10.2021, the IDA passed a resolution for issuance of a fresh 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

NIT with a reserve price of Rs. 26,000/- per square meter and 
thereafter, a fresh NIT was issued on 17.11.2021. Respondent 
No. 1 after issuance of the fresh NIT preferred a writ petition on 
24.11.2021 before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, inter alia, 
challenging resolution dated 27.07.2021 rejecting the bid as well 
as being aggrieved by the issuance of fresh NIT dated 
17.11.2021. 
4. 
It is pertinent to note that respondent No.1 did not 
participate in the subsequent NIT issued on 17.11.2021. 
Respondent No. 1 before the High Court stated that by no stretch 
of imagination, his bid could have been cancelled as he was the 
highest bidder. It was further stated by respondent No.1 before 
the learned Single Judge that he is ready to negotiate in the matter 
and the bid has been cancelled without assigning any reason. 
5. 
The IDA did file a detailed and exhaustive reply before the 
learned Single Judge and reliance was placed upon the terms and 
conditions of the NIT. Heavy reliance was placed upon 
Condition No. 6 which empowered the IDA to accept or reject 
any or all bids. Learned Single Judge after hearing the parties at 
length arrived at the conclusion that the petitioner Trust is not 
entitled to any relief as no contract was executed at any point of 
time nor any letter of allotment was issued in its favour. Learned 
Single Judge also held that the highest bidder does not acquire 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

any vested right to have the auction concluded in his favour and 
the IDA was justified in issuing fresh NIT in the matter. 
6. 
Respondent aggrieved by the orders passed by the learned 
Single Judge preferred a writ appeal and the Division Bench of 
the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Indore Bench allowed the 
writ appeal directing the IDA to allot the plot to respondent in 
case he is ready to pay the price of the land in question at Rs. 
26,000/- per square meter. Para 6, 7 and 8 of the order passed 
by the Division Bench of the High Court reads as under: 
“6. 
The dates and events of the case are not in 
dispute. In the first NIT, the base price of the land 
was Rs.21,000/- per sq. meter as fixed by the Indore 
Development Authority. Out of three bidders, the 
petitioner offered the highest bid. Rs.25671.90/-. 
The property tax on land to the Municipal 
Corporation is payable by IDA. The resolution has 
been passed with the hope that the IDA might fetch 
higher prices than the price received in the first 
round of NIT. Unfortunately in the second round 
not, a single bidder had participated and the tender 
proceedings have resulted in an unsuccessful 
attempt. In all bona fide, the petitioner has 
submitted that the petitioner is still ready to match 
the base price fixed by the Indore Development 
Authority in the second tender by paying the amount 
of Rs.26,000/- per sq. meter. 
7. 
Had the Indore Development Authority 
received an offer in the second NIT more than 
Rs.26,000/- per sq. meter certainly the petitioner 
would not have any case before this court. But in the 
second round of NIT, the Indore Development 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

Authority has failed to receive any bid hence the 
right of the petitioner is still survived to claim the 
allotment being a successful bidder. The petitioner 
had approached this court by way of the writ 
petition before issuance of the second NIT and 
immediately after dismissal of the writ petition the 
writ appeal has been filed therefore, the cause for 
the petitioner is still survived. The Indore 
Development Authority has wasted public money by 
cancelling the first NIT and going for the second 
NIT. Learned counsel or the Indore Development 
Authority submitted that has the petitioner 
/appellant participated in the subsequent tented 
process the allotment would have been done on 
quoting the price of Rs 26000/- it means the Indore 
Development Authority has no issue in giving the 
land to the petitioner /appellant but same will not 
be given through the court as it is beyond judicial 
review. 
For this 
approach 
of 
the 
Indore 
Development Authority, a cost is liable to be 
imposed. 
8. 
Accordingly, the writ appeal is allowed, and 
the order passed by the writ court is set aside. If the 
petitioner is ready to pay the price of the in question 
land s.26,000/- per sq. meter the land in 
question be allotted to the appellant.” 
 
7. 
Hon’ble Division Bench while allowing the writ appeal 
has held that the respondent was the highest bidder as in the first 
round of the tendering process, the base price of the land was 
fixed at Rs. 21,120/- per square meter and the respondent No. 1 
offered a bid of Rs. 25,671.90/- per square meter. In the second 
round while issuing fresh NIT, the IDA has fixed the base price 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

at Rs. 26,000/- per square meter and no offer was received by the 
IDA in the second round of more than Rs. 26,000/- per square 
meter and, therefore, the Division Bench held that in case the 
respondent is willing to pay the amount at the rate of Rs. 26,000/- 
per square meter, the land in question should be allotted to the 
respondent No.1. 
8. 
The IDA being aggrieved by the order passed by the 
Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Indore, 
dated 08.02.2022, has preferred the present appeal and it has been 
vehemently argued by Mr. Balbir Singh, learned Senior Counsel 
for the appellant that the order passed by the Division Bench of 
the High Court deserves to be set aside as the High Court has in 
fact decided a suit for specific performance of contract while 
deciding the Writ Appeal. He has vehemently argued before this 
Court that in the light of Condition No. 6 of the NIT, dated 
17.07.2020, the IDA was having a right to accept or reject any or 
all the bids. It was also brought to the notice of this Court that 
the bid of respondent No.1 was cancelled only after it came to the 
notice of the Tender Committee in its meeting dated 25.09.2020, 
that there is an outstanding property tax in respect of the land in 
question amounting to Rs. 1,25,82,262/- and considering the 
location of the plot and after payment of property tax to the 
Municipal Corporation and further keeping in view the fact that 
more revenue is likely to be generated in future by disposing of 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

the property through the tendering process, the bid of the 
respondent No. 1 was rejected. 
9. 
Learned Senior Counsel has placed heavy reliance upon 
the judgments delivered in the case of State of Jharkhand and 
others Vs. CWE-SOMA Consortium (2016) 4 Supreme Court 
Cases 172 and Haryana Urban Development Authority and 
others Vs. Orchid Infrastructure Developers Private Limited 
(2017) 4 Supreme Court Cases 243. 
10. 
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 1-
Trust has vehemently argued before this Court that respondent 
No. 1 was the highest bidder in respect of NIT dated 17.07.2020 
and merely because the respondent No. 1 has not participated the 
second NIT issued on 17.11.2021, the question of setting aside 
the order passed by the Division Bench does not arise. It has been 
vehemently argued by the learned counsel for respondent No. 1-
Trust that once the respondent No. 1 was declared as the highest 
bidder amongst the three bids received in respect of the land in 
question, his bid of Rs. 25,671.90/- per square meter should have 
been accepted and respondent No.1 should have been declared 
the successful bidder and, thence, no case for interference is 
made out in the present case. Reliance has been placed on Eva 
Agro Feeds Private Limited Vs. Punjab National Bank and Anr. 
2023 INSC 809 decided on 06.09.2023 in. 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

11. 
Heard learned Senior Counsel for the appellant as well as 
learned counsel for the respondents at length and perused the 
entire documents placed on record in the matter. 
12. 
In the present case, the undisputed facts reveal that first 
NIT was issued on 17.07.2020 and respondent No. 1 was 
certainly the highest bidder by offering a bid of Rs. 25,671.90/- 
per square meter. The Tender Evaluation Committee after 
examining the bid arrived at a conclusion to cancel the tender as 
it came to its notice that an outstanding property tax demand 
amounting to Rs. 1,25,82,262/- was not taken into account while 
fixing the base price. It was resolved to issue a fresh NIT and, 
therefore, a fresh NIT was issued on 17.11.2021 and for the 
reasons best known to the respondent No. 1, it did not participate 
in the second NIT and instead preferred a writ petition on 
24.11.2021 before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh. Learned 
Single Judge was justified in dismissing the writ petition on the 
ground that merely by offering highest bid, the respondent No.1 
did not acquire any vested right for the execution of the contract 
in its favour. The Division Bench of the High Court, however, 
allowed the writ appeal and has gone to the extent in directing the 
IDA to accept the offer of respondent No. 1 which was made 
before the Court for an amount of Rs. 26,000/- per square meter 
in respect of the land in question, and further directing IDA to 
allot the land in question to respondent No.1. This Court in the 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

case of State of Jharkhand and others Vs. CWE-SOMA 
Consortium (supra) while dealing with the similar issue of 
annulment of tender process, in paras 21, 22 and 23 has held as 
under: 
“21. Observing that while exercising power of 
judicial review, the Court does not sit as appellate 
court over the decision of the Government but 
merely reviews the manner in which the decision 
was made, in Tata Cellular v. Union of India [Tata 
Cellular v. Union of India, (1994) ], SCC 
in para 70 it was held as under: (SCC p. 675) 
“70. It cannot be denied that the 
principles of judicial review would 
apply to the exercise of contractual 
powers by government bodies in order 
to prevent arbitrariness or favouritism. 
However, it must be clearly stated that 
there are inherent limitations in 
exercise of that power of judicial 
review. Government is the guardian of 
the finances of the State. It is expected 
to protect the financial interest of the 
State. The right to refuse the lowest or 
any other tender is always available to 
the Government. But, the principles 
laid down in Article 14 of the 
Constitution have to be kept in view 
while accepting or refusing a tender. 
There 
can 
be 
no 
question 
of 
infringement of Article 14 if the 
Government tries to get the best person 
or the best quotation. The right to 
choose cannot be considered to be an 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

arbitrary power. Of course, if the said 
power is exercised for any collateral 
purpose the exercise of that power will 
be struck down.” 
22. 
The Government must have freedom of 
contract. 
In Master 
Marine 
Services 

Ltd. v. Metcalfe & Hodgkinson (P) Ltd. [Master 
Marine Services (P) Ltd. v. Metcalfe & Hodgkinson 
(P) Ltd., (2005) ], SCC in para 12 this 
Court held as under: (SCC p. 147) 
“12. After an exhaustive consideration 
of a large number of decisions and 
standard books on administrative law, 
the Court enunciated the principle that 
the modern trend points to judicial 
restraint in administrative action. The 
court does not sit as a court of appeal 
but merely reviews the manner in 
which the decision was made. The 
court does not have the expertise to 
correct the administrative decision. If 
a review of the administrative decision 
is permitted it will be substituting its 
own decision, without the necessary 
expertise, which itself may be fallible. 
The Government must have freedom of 
contract. In other words, fair play in 
the joints is a necessary concomitant 
for an administrative body functioning 
in an administrative sphere or quasi-
administrative sphere. However, the 
decision must not only be tested by the 
application of Wednesbury principles 
of reasonableness but also must be free 
from arbitrariness not affected by bias 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

or actuated by mala fides. It was also 
pointed out that quashing decisions 
may impose heavy administrative 
burden on the administration and lead 
to 
increased 
and 
unbudgeted 
expenditure. (See para 113 of the 
Report, SCC para 94.)” 
The Court does not have the expertise to correct the 
administrative 
decision 
as 
held 
in Laxmikant v. Satyawan [Laxmikant v. Satyawan, 
(1996) ], the Government must have 
freedom of contract. 
23. 
The right to refuse the lowest or any other 
tender is always available to the Government. In the 
case in hand, the respondent has neither pleaded 
nor established mala fide exercise of power by the 
appellant. While so, the decision of the Tender 
Committee ought not to have been interfered with 
by the High Court. In our considered view, the High 
Court erred in sitting in appeal over the decision of 
the appellant to cancel the tender and float a fresh 
tender. Equally, the High Court was not right in 
going into the financial implication of a fresh 
tender.” 
 
13. This Court in the aforesaid case has held that while 
exercising power of judicial review, the Court does not sit as an 
appellate Court over the decision of the government but merely 
reviews the manner in which the decision was made [Tata 
Cellular v. Union of India, (1994) ]. In the considered 
opinion of this Court, the Division Bench should not have 
interfered in the matter and could not have gone to the extent of 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

fixing the base price/modifying the offer made by respondent 
and, therefore, in light of the aforesaid judgment as the High 
Court has virtually passed an order sitting in appeal over the 
decision of the government in absence of any mala fide exercise 
of power by the IDA, the judgment passed by the Division Bench 
of the High Court deserves to be set aside and is, accordingly set 
aside. This Court in the case of Haryana Urban Development 
Authority Vs. Orchid Infrastructure Developers Pvt. Ltd. 
(supra) again dealing with the cancellation of a bid of the highest 
bidder, in paragraphs 12,13,14,15, 16 and 30 has held as under: 
“12. Firstly, we examine the question whether there 
being no concluded contract in the absence of 
acceptance of bid and issuance of allotment letter, 
the suit could be said to be maintainable for the 
declaratory relief and mandatory injunction sought 
by the plaintiff. The plaintiff has prayed for a 
declaration that rejection of the bid was illegal. 
Merely by that, the plaintiff could not have become 
entitled for consequential mandatory injunction for 
issuance of formal letter of allotment. The court 
while exercising judicial review could not have 
accepted the bid. The bid had never been accepted 
by the authorities concerned. It was not a case of 
cancellation of bid after being accepted. Thus, even 
assuming as per the plaintiff's case that the 
Administrator was not equipped with the power and 
the Chief Administrator had the power to accept or 
refuse the bid, there had been no decision by the 
Chief Administrator. Thus, merely by declaration 
that rejection of the bid by the Administrator was 
illegal, the plaintiff could not have become entitled 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

to consequential relief of issuance of allotment 
letter. Thus the suit, in the form it was filed, was not 
maintainable for relief sought in view of the fact that 
there was no concluded contract in the absence of 
allotment letter being issued to the plaintiff, which 
was a sine qua non for filing the civil suit. 
13. It is a settled law that the highest bidder has no 
vested right to have the auction concluded in his 
favour. The Government or its authority could 
validly retain power to accept or reject the highest 
bid in the interest of public revenue. We are of the 
considered opinion that there was no right acquired 
and no vested right accrued in favour of the plaintiff 
merely because his bid amount was highest and had 
deposited 10% of the bid amount. As per Regulation 
6(2) of the 1978 Regulations, allotment letter has to 
be issued on acceptance of the bid by the Chief 
Administrator and within 30 days thereof, the 
successful bidder has to deposit another 15% of the 
bid amount. In the instant case, allotment letter has 
never been issued to the petitioner as per 
Regulation 6(2) in view of non-acceptance of the 
bid. Thus, there was no concluded contract. 
Regulation 6 of the 1978 Regulations is extracted 
hereunder: 
“6. Sale of lease of land or building 
by auction.—(1) In the case of sale or 
lease by auction, the price/premium to 
be charged shall be such reserve 
price/premium as may be determined 
taking into consideration the various 
factors as indicated in sub-regulation 
(1) of Regulation 4 or any higher 
amount determined as a result of 
bidding in open auction. 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

(2) 10 per cent of the highest bid shall 
be paid on the spot by the highest 
bidder in cash or by means of a 
demand draft in the manner specified 
in sub-regulation (2) of Regulation 5. 
The successful bidder shall be issued 
allotment letter in Form CC or C-II by 
registered post and another 15 per cent 
of the bid accepted shall be payable by 
the successful bidder, in the manner 
indicated, within thirty days of the date 
of 
allotment 
letter 
conveying 
acceptance of the bid by the Chief 
Administrator; failing which the 10 
per cent amount already deposited 
shall stand forfeited to the authority 
and the successful bidder shall have no 
claim to the land or building 
auctioned. 
(3) The payment of balance of the 
price/premium, 
rate 
of 
interest 
chargeable and the recovery of interest 
shall be in the same manner as 
provided in sub-regulations (6) and (7) 
of Regulation 5. 
(4) The general terms and conditions 
of the auction shall be such as may be 
framed by the Chief Administrator 
from time to time and announced to the 
public before auction on the spot.” 
 
14. We are fortified in our view by a decision of this 
Court in U.P. Avas Evam Vikas Parishad v. Om 
Prakash 
Sharma [U.P. 
Avas 
Evam 
Vikas 
Parishad v. Om Prakash Sharma, (2013) 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022: (2013) 2 SCC (Civ) 737], wherein the questions 
arose for its consideration that: whether there is 
any vested right upon the plaintiff bidder until the 
bid is accepted by the competent authority in 
relation to the property in question? Merely because 
the plaintiff is the highest bidder by depositing 20% 
of the bid amount without there being approval of 
the same by the competent authority and it amounts 
to a concluded contract in relation to the plot in 
question; and whether the plaintiff could have 
maintained the suit in the absence of a concluded 
contract? Considering the aforesaid questions, this 
Court has discussed the matter thus: (SCC pp. 195-
97, paras 30-31) 
“30. In support of the said proposition, 
the learned Senior Counsel for the 
defendant, Mr Rakesh Dwivedi has 
also placed reliance upon another 
decision of this Court in State of 
U.P. v. Vijay Bahadur Singh [State of 
U.P. v. Vijay Bahadur Singh, (1982) ]. The learned Senior 
Counsel has rightly placed reliance 
upon the judgment of this Court 
in Rajasthan 
Housing 
Board 
case [Rajasthan 
Housing 
Board v. G.S. Investments, (2007) ] which reads as under: (SCC 
p. 483, para 9) 
‘9. This being the settled legal 
position, the respondent acquired no 
right to claim that the auction be 
concluded in its favour and the High 
Court clearly erred in entertaining the 
writ petition and in not only issuing a 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

direction for consideration of the 
representation but also issuing a 
further direction to the appellant to 
issue a demand note of the balance 
amount. The direction relating to 
issuance of the demand note for 
balance amount virtually amounted to 
confirmation of the auction in favour 
of the respondent which was not the 
function of the High Court.’ 
In State 
of 
Orissa v. Harinarayan 
Jaiswal [State 
of 
Orissa v. Harinarayan Jaiswal, (1972) 
] case, relevant paragraph of 
which reads as under: (SCC pp. 44-
45, para 13) 
‘13. … There is no concluded contract 
till the bid is accepted. Before there 
was a concluded contract, it was open 
to the bidders to withdraw their bids 
(see Union 
of 
India v. Bhim 
Sen 
Walaiti Ram [Union of India v. Bhim 
Sen Walaiti Ram, (1969) ] ). 
[Ed.: The matter between two asterisks 
has been emphasised in Avam Evam 
Vikas Parishad case, (2013).] By merely giving bids, the 
bidders had not acquired any vested 
rights [Ed.: The matter between two 
asterisks 
has 
been 
emphasised 
in Avam Evam Vikas Parishad case, 
(2013).] ’. 
31. In view of the law laid down by this 
Court in the aforesaid decisions, the 
learned Senior Counsel Mr Rakesh 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

Dwivedi has rightly placed reliance 
upon the same in support of the case of 
the first defendant, which would 
clearly go to show that the plaintiff 
had not acquired any right and no 
vested right has been accrued in his 
favour in respect of the plot in question 
merely because his bid amount is 
highest and he had deposited 20% of 
the highest bid amount along with the 
earnest money with the Board. In the 
absence of acceptance of bid offered by 
the plaintiff to the competent authority 
of the first defendant, there is no 
concluded contract in respect of the 
plot in question, which is evident from 
letters dated 26-5-1977 and 8-7-1977 
wherein the third defendant had 
rejected the bid amount deposited by 
the plaintiff and the same was refunded 
to him by way of demand draft, which 
is an undisputed fact and it is also not 
his case that the then Assistant 
Housing 
Commissioner 
who 
has 
conducted the public auction had 
accepted the bid of the plaintiff.” 
15. This Court in Om Prakash Sharma case [U.P. 
Avas Evam Vikas Parishad v. Om Prakash Sharma, 
(2013): (2013) 2 SCC (Civ) 737] has 
held that in the absence of a concluded contract 
which takes place by issuance of allotment letter, 
suit could not be said to be maintainable as there is 
no vested right in the plaintiff without approval of 
the bid by the competent authority. Thus, in the 
wake of the aforesaid decision, in the absence of a 
concluded contract, the suit could not have been 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

decreed for mandatory injunction. It amounted to 
enforcing of contract in the absence thereof. 
16. In the light of the aforesaid discussion, it is 
evident that in the absence of a concluded contract 
i.e. in the absence of allotment letter and 
acceptance of highest bid, the suit filed by the 
plaintiff was wholly misconceived. Even if non-
acceptance of the bid was by an incompetent 
authority, the court had no power to accept the bid 
and to direct the allotment letter to be issued. 
Merely on granting the declaration which was 
sought that rejection was illegal and arbitrary and 
by incompetent authority, 
further relief of 
mandatory injunction could not have been granted, 
on the basis of findings recorded, to issue the 
allotment letter, as it would then become necessary 
to forward the bid to competent authority—Chief 
Administrator—for its acceptance, if at all it was 
required. 
30. In Meerut Development Authority v. Assn. of 
Management 
Studies [Meerut 
Development 
Authority v. Assn. of Management Studies, (2009): (2009) 2 SCC (Civ) 803], this Court has 
laid down that a bidder has no right in the matter of 
bid except of fair treatment in the matter and cannot 
insist for further negotiation. The authority has a 
right to reject the highest bid. This Court has laid 
down thus: (SCC p. 182, paras 27 & 29) 
“27. The bidders participating in the 
tender process have no other right 
except the right to equality and fair 
treatment in the matter of evaluation of 
competitive bids offered by interested 
persons in response to notice inviting 
tenders in a transparent manner and 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

free from hidden agenda. One cannot 
challenge the terms and conditions of 
the tender except on the above stated 
ground, the reason being the terms of 
the invitation to tender are in the realm 
of the contract. No bidder is entitled as 
a matter of right to insist the authority 
inviting tenders to enter into further 
negotiations unless the terms and 
conditions of notice so provided for 
such negotiations. 
29. The Authority has the right not to 
accept the highest bid and even to 
prefer a tender other than the highest 
bidder, if there exist good and 
sufficient reasons, such as, the highest 
bid not representing the market price 
but there cannot be any doubt that the 
Authority's action in accepting or 
refusing the bid must be free from 
arbitrariness or favouritism.” 
 
14. 
Keeping in view of the aforesaid judgments, this Court is 
of the considered opinion that in the absence of allotment letter 
and acceptance of highest bid, no relief could have been granted 
in favour of respondent No.1 as there was no concluded contract 
in the matter and the decision taken by the Tender Evaluation 
Committee to generate more revenues could not have been 
interfered with in the manner and method as has been done by the 
Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Indore 
Bench. The bidder has no right in the matter of bid except of fair 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

treatment and cannot insist for further negotiation as has been 
done in the present case. The terms and conditions of NIT, 
particularly condition No. 6, empowers the IDA to accept or 
reject any or all bids. In the present case, the bid was rejected for 
valid and cogent reasons and, therefore, the order passed by the 
Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh is set aside. 
15. 
Learned Counsels for respondent No. 1 placed heavy 
reliance on Eva Agro (supra) stating that the Appellant does not 
have absolute or unfettered discretion to cancel the auction. 
While we agree with the principle that the auctioning authority 
must adhere to the rule of law, the facts of the present case are 
entirely distinguishable from Eva Agro (supra). In that case, after 
the Appellant therein was declared the highest bidder, the auction 
was cancelled without providing any reason. This decision was 
found to be manifestly arbitrary by this Court and therefore, the 
appeal was allowed. However, in the present case, the decision 
to cancel the auction was not unfounded, it was undertaken to 
remedy the erroneous minimum rate provided in the NIT dated 
07.07.2020, as noted in the report of the Div. Commissioner of 
the IDA. Therefore, the Appellants were well within their rights 
to cancel the auction. More importantly, in the present case, 
pursuant to the cancellation of the first NIT, a second NIT was 
issued wherein the respondent No. 1 did not participate. Despite 
this fact, the Division Bench of the High Court effectively 

SLP (C) No. 9940/2022 

usurped the powers of the auctioning authority and fixed the price 
at Rs. 26,000/- per square meter. Hence, being entirely 
distinguishable on facts, the reliance placed is of no assistance to 
respondent No. 1. 
16. 
Resultantly, the IDA is directed to issue a fresh NIT for 
disposal of the land in question enabling the IDA to generate 
more revenues in respect of the land in question. The appellant 
shall certainly be free to participate in the fresh NIT as and when 
issued by the IDA. It is made clear that the IDA shall not dispose 
of the land in question except by way of public auction/by issuing 
NIT in future. 
17. 
With the aforesaid, the appeal stands allowed. 

……………………………………J. 

 [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 

……………………………………J. 
 [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 
 
NEW DELHI 
November 25, 2024