IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S).4758 OF 2024
( S.L.P. (CRIMINAL) NO(S). 13366/2024)
SANGRAM SADASHIV SURYAVANSHI APPELLANT(S)
 VERSUS
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA RESPONDENT(S)
JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
Heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties.
Leave granted.
The allegation against the appellant is of commission of
offences punishable under Sections 489A, 489B and 489C read with
Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
Six counterfeit currency notes of Rs.500/- each are subject
matter of the offence. The appellant has been incarcerated for two
and a half years. The counter affidavit filed by the State shows
that there are no antecedents. The trial is not likely to conclude
in a reasonable time. Therefore, in the facts of the case, the
appellant deserves to be enlarged on bail following the well-
settled rule that bail is rule and jail is an exception.
Accordingly, we direct that the appellant shall be produced
before the Trial Court within one week from today. The Trial Court
shall enlarge the appellant on bail till the conclusion of the
trial on appropriate terms and conditions, including the condition
of regularly and punctually attending the Trial Court and
cooperating with the Trial Court for expeditious conclusion of the
CRL. APP. (CRL.) NO. 13366/2024

case.
Before we part with this order, every day we notice that in
several orders passed by different High Courts while rejecting the
bail applications, in a routine manner, the High Courts are fixing
a time-bound schedule for the conclusion of the trials. Such
directions adversely affect the functioning of the Trial Courts as
in many Trial Courts, there may be older cases of the same category
pending. Every court has criminal cases pending which require
expeditious disposal for several reasons, such as the requirement
of the penal statutes, long incarceration, age of the accused, etc.
Only because someone files a case in our Constitutional Courts, he
cannot get out of turn hearing. Perhaps after rejecting the prayer
for bail, the Courts want to give some satisfaction to the accused
by fixing a time-bound schedule for trial. Such orders are
difficult to implement. Such orders give a false hope to the
litigants. If in a given case, in law and on facts, an accused is
entitled to bail on the ground of long incarceration without the
trial making any progress, the Court must grant bail. Option of
expediating trial is not the solution. 
 In paragraph 47.3 of the decision of a Constitution Bench of in
the case of ‘High Court Bar Association, Allahabad vs. State of
Uttar Pradesh & Ors.’1, this Court has held that in the ordinary
course, the Constitutional Courts should refrain from fixing a
time-bound schedule for the disposal of cases pending before any
other Courts. Paragraph 47.3 reads thus:
1 (2024) 
CRL. APP. (CRL.) NO. 13366/2024

“47.3. Constitutional courts, in the ordinary
course, should refrain from fixing a time-bound
schedule for the disposal of cases pending before
any other courts. Constitutional courts may issue
directions for the time-bound disposal of cases
only in exceptional circumstances. The issue of
prioritising the disposal of cases should be best
left to the decision of the courts concerned where
the cases are pending;”
(underline supplied)
 A direction which can be issued in exceptional circumstances is
being routinely issued by High Courts without noticing the law laid
down by the Constitution Bench.
 The Appeal is, accordingly, allowed.
 Registry to forward soft copies of this order to Registrar
Generals of all the High Courts with a request to them to circulate
copies to all the Hon’ble Judges of the High Court. 

CRL. APP. (CRL.) NO. 13366/2024