IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

VIJAYA SINGH & ANR. 
 
 ….APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF UTTARAKHAND ….RESPONDENT(S) 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA, J. 
 
1. 
In April, 2002, Devaki got married to Vijaya Singh. More 
than an year after the wedding, on the fateful day of 14.09.2023, 
Devaki died an unnatural death at the house of her in-laws. Vijaya 
Singh, appellant no. 1 herein, was accused of murdering her 
along with his mother, namely Basanti Devi, appellant no. 2 
herein. The case was registered as FIR No. 04/2003 at PS R.P. 
Jakholi, Rudraprayag, District Garhwal, Uttarakhand. After the 
conclusion of investigation and trial, the Trial Court found the 
appellants guilty. In appeal, the High Court of Uttarakhand also 
found them guilty and upheld the decision of the Trial Court. The 

appellants, by way of instant appeal, have assailed the Judgment 
and Order dated 29.08.2012 passed by the High Court of 
Uttarakhand at Nainital in, 
whereby the said appeal preferred by the appellants was 
dismissed. 
2. 
The appellant No.1 happened to be the husband and the 
appellant No.2 happened to be the mother-in-law of the deceased 
Devaki. After the incident, the FIR was registered at the instance 
of the complainant Shankar Singh (brother of the deceased 
Devaki), against the present appellants and Shri. Matbar Singh 
(father-in-law of the deceased). It was alleged inter alia in the 
said complaint that on 14.09.2003 at about 9 P.M., he had 
received one phone call from the in-laws of his sister at Gram 
Sabha Dangi (Village Hariyali) informing him that his sister had 
poured kerosene oil over her person at about 6 P.M. and had set 
herself ablaze. According to the complainant, he along with his 
two brothers went to the place of occurrence, where they saw that 
their sister was lying in almost naked condition with green grass 
having been put over her body and they suspected that their sister 
was murdered and she had not committed suicide. 
3. 
The 
Investigating 
Officer, 
after 
completing 
the 
investigation, filed the chargesheet against the appellants for the 
offences under Sections 302 and 201 of Indian Penal Code, 

18601. The case was committed for trial to the Sessions Court and 
the District & Sessions Judge, Rudraprayag, vide the Judgment 
and Order dated 14.05.2004, convicted both the appellants for the 
commission of offence under Section 302 of IPC and sentenced 
them to life imprisonment and fine of Rs.5,000/- each, and in 
default thereof, to further undergo imprisonment for a period of 
6 months. The said Court also convicted them for the offence 
under Section 201 of IPC and sentenced them to undergo 
imprisonment for a period of 2 years with payment of fine of Rs. 
2000/- each, and in default thereof to further undergo 
imprisonment for a period of 3 months. Being aggrieved by the 
said Judgment and Order passed by the Trial Court, the appellants 
had preferred an appeal being 
before the High Court, which came to be dismissed by the High 
Court vide the impugned Judgment and Order dated 29.08.2012. 
4. 
The Trial Court acknowledged that the entire case of the 
prosecution was based on circumstantial evidence and further, 
that the entire chain of evidence consistently pointed in the 
direction of guilt of the appellants. It found that the testimonies 
of the witnesses were credible and the retraction of their 
statements by PW-3 and PW-4, sisters of appellant no. 1, was a 
result of tutoring. Thus, the statements of the said witnesses 
 
1 Hereinafter referred as “IPC” 

recorded under Section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
19732 were found to be truthful and natural. 
5. 
The decision of the Trial Court was assailed before the 
High Court and the High Court, in the impugned order/judgment, 
found that the Trial Court had correctly analyzed the evidence on 
record and no infirmity was found in the findings of the Trial 
Court. 
6. 
While assailing the judgement of the High Court, learned 
counsel for the appellants submitted that there was a delay in the 
registration of FIR as the same was registered after 24 hours from 
the incident and the said period led to the fabrication of the entire 
story by the complainant. It is further submitted that there was no 
allegation of harassment at the time of registration of FIR and the 
versions put forth by PW-1, PW-2, PW-5 and PW-6 are 
inherently contradictory and there is no corroboration between 
the same. It is further submitted that PW-1 was not the real 
nephew of the deceased but was a distant relative belonging to 
the same community and therefore, he could not have possessed 
any direct knowledge of cruelty or harassment. It is further 
submitted that the statements of PW-1 and PW-5 appeared to be 
contrary to each other as PW-5 has not deposed regarding any 
bodily injury to the deceased at any point of time and has deposed 
 
2 Hereinafter referred as “CrPC” 

that the relationship between the appellants and the deceased was 
cordial. 
7. 
It is further submitted that the statements of PW-3 and PW-
4 recorded under Section 164 CrPC are liable to be rejected as 
the said statements were recorded in the presence of the 
Investigating Officer under threat, and could not be considered 
as voluntary statements. It is further submitted that the said 
statements could not be termed as substantive evidence and could 
only be used to corroborate or contradict the testimony of a 
witness in the Court. It is further submitted that the primary 
witness of the prosecution is PW-7/doctor and his testimony is 
fundamentally flawed. It is submitted that the concerned doctor 
initially deposed that he could not definitively state whether the 
death of the deceased was homicidal or suicidal, however, the 
witness later opined that 100% percent burn injuries were 
uncommon in suicide cases. It is submitted that in case of suicide, 
the act of burning is a voluntary act and therefore, 100% burn 
injuries are completely possible. To buttress, it is contended that 
the evidence of an expert is not the evidence of fact and is only 
advisory in nature. It is added that medical jurisprudence is not 
an exact science and in the expert testimony cannot be considered 
as a conclusive proof of the fact. 

8. 
Learned counsel has also submitted that the trial court and 
the High Court have failed to analyze the circumstances of the 
case in an objective manner and the findings of the said courts 
are based more on conjectures and less on evidence. 
9., it has been contended on behalf of the 
respondent State that the circumstances of the present case have 
proved the guilt of the appellants beyond reasonable doubt. It has 
been submitted that the chain of circumstances is complete and 
falls within the parameters laid down by this Court with respect 
to circumstantial evidence. Learned counsel appearing on behalf 
of the respondent has placed reliance upon the decision of this 
Court in Prabhudayal and Ors. v. State of Maharashtra3 to 
contend that in bride burning cases, the absence of cries or shouts 
from the victim is suggestive of the fact that it was not a case of 
suicide. Learned counsel has also laid emphasis on the false plea 
of alibi taken by appellant no. 2, and has submitted that if a false 
plea is taken by the accused in the course of a trial, it could be 
considered as an additional circumstance against the accused. 
10. 
We have heard the respective parties and we may now 
proceed to answer the seminal issue whether the findings arrived 
at by the High Court are based on a correct appreciation of the 
evidence on record and are sustainable in the eyes of law. 
 
3 (1993) 

DISCUSSION 
11. 
At the outset, it may be noted that the entire case of 
prosecution hinges on the circumstantial evidence, in as much as 
there was no eye witness to the incident in question. It is a well 
settled principle of law that when a case is based on 
circumstantial evidence, the circumstances proved must point 
unequivocally to the guilt of the accused and must be 
incompatible with any theory of his being innocent. The 
principles governing the appreciation of circumstantial have 
been laid down by this Court in unequivocal terms in Sharad 
Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra4. The principles, 
termed as the Panchsheel or five principles of circumstantial 
evidence, are traceable in the following para: 
“153. A close analysis of this decision would show 
that the following conditions must be fulfilled 
before a case against an accused can be said to be 
fully established: 
(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of 
guilt is to be drawn should be fully established. 
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that 
the circumstances concerned “must or should” and 
not “may be” established. There is not only a 
grammatical but a legal distinction between “may 
be proved” and “must be or should be proved” as 
was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade 
 
4 (1984) 

v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) ] where 
the observations were made: 
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that the 
accused must be and not merely may be guilty 
before a court can convict and the mental distance 
between ‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long and divides 
vague conjectures from sure conclusions.” 
(2) the facts so established should be consistent 
only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, 
that is to say, they should not be explainable on any 
other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty, 
(3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive 
nature and tendency, 
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis 
except the one to be proved, and 
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete 
as not to leave any reasonable ground for the 
conclusion consistent with the innocence of the 
accused and must show that in all human 
probability the act must have been done by the 
accused.” 
12. 
So far as the facts of the present case are concerned, it is 
not disputed that deceased Devaki and the Appellant No.1 got 
married in April, 2002 and the Appellant No.2 happened to be 
the mother-in-law of the deceased. It is also not disputed that the 
tragic incident occurred on 14.09.2003 i.e. within 17 months of 
the marriage, when deceased Devaki succumbed to the burn 
injuries at her matrimonial home i.e. at the home of the 
appellants. 

13. 
The Prosecution had examined as many as 8 witnesses to 
prove the charges levelled against the appellants, out of whom 
PW-1 Vinod Singh happened to be the nephew of the deceased 
who had inter alia stated that he used to go to leave his aunt 
Devaki at her matrimonial home and used to feel that the 
behaviour of appellant no. 2 was not good with her. He also stated 
that in the month of August, 2002 when he had visited the 
matrimonial home of his aunt to bring her back home, her 
mother-in-law (appellant no.2) had indulged into a quarrel with 
him saying that if he wanted to take his aunt with him, then he 
should keep her permanently with him. He also deposed that the 
appellant no. 2 had threatened him by saying that he had not seen 
her anger till that point of time. On that day, PW-1 came back 
home with his aunt/deceased. He also stated that in the year 2003, 
when his aunt i.e. the deceased Devaki had visited her parental 
home, she was found to have an injury on her eye and on his 
asking about the injury, she had confidentially told him that the 
said injury was caused by her husband - Vijaya Singh (appellant 
no.1), however he had not disclosed the same to anyone so that 
the matter may not aggravate further. 
14. 
In cross-examination, PW-1 deposed that he used to go to 
his aunt’s matrimonial house frequently as her brothers were not 
residing in the maternal village. He also deposed that appellant 
no. 1 was working in Chandigarh and used to come home in 3-4 

months. He further deposed that the deceased used to insist for 
going to Chandigarh and the appellant had promised her that he 
would take her soon. He further deposed that appellant no. 2 used 
to quarrel with the deceased regarding household work and about 
her desire of going to Chandigarh. 
15. 
PW-2 (Shankar Singh), brother of the deceased Devaki 
had stated before the Court that on 14.09.2003, a call was 
received at about 12.00 - 1.00 o'clock in the midnight from the 
village of his sister that his sister had poured kerosene oil on her 
person and put herself ablaze. He, therefore, managed to go to the 
village of his sister along with 5-6 people and when he reached 
the matrimonial home of his sister, the appellants were sitting 
outside the verandah and he was told that his sister had 
committed suicide by pouring kerosene oil on herself. He further 
stated that when he went inside the room, he saw that the dead 
body of his sister was lying on the floor between two coats in 
naked condition and green grass was put over her dead body. A 
quilt was lying there in burnt condition along with water. He 
further stated that at the time of incident, his sister was pregnant 
and he had felt that his sister had not committed suicide but she 
was murdered by her in-laws. He deposed that his sister used to 
tell them about the harassment of her in-laws regarding non-
performance of household work. In the cross-examination, he 
admitted that his sister wanted to accompany her husband Vijaya 

and stay at Chandigarh instead of staying at village and that prior 
to the death of his sister, the relationship between his sister and 
the accused Vijaya Singh was quite cordial. 
16. 
PW-3 Saroj happened to be the sister of the appellant no.1 
and daughter of appellant no.2, whose statement was recorded 
under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. during the course of investigation. 
She admitted about the recording of her statement before the 
Magistrate under Section 164 of Cr.P.C and admitted her 
signatures on the statement. In cross- examination, she stated that 
she was not present at home at the time of incident and that the 
relationship between her sister-in-law Devaki and her mother and 
brother was cordial. She further admitted that when the Patwari 
brought her to the Magistrate for recording her statement, he had 
threatened her, and had also remained present before the 
Magistrate when her statement was being recorded. PW-3 denied 
any statement regarding quarrel between the deceased and 
appellant no. 2. PW-4 Preeti is also the sister of appellant no.1 
and daughter of appellant no.2, and she also deposed to the same 
effect as her sister Kumari Saroj/PW-3. 
17. 
PW-5 examined by the prosecution was Kamal Singh, who 
happened to be the cousin brother of the deceased Devaki. He 
stated that on receiving the telephone call on 14.09.2003 at 8:00 
PM about the incident, he had gone to the house of the deceased 

and saw that the dead body of his sister Devaki was lying on the 
floor in naked condition and some green grass was put over her 
body. One bedding was also lying in the room and water was put 
all over it. He also stated that on inspection of the room, he felt 
that Devaki had not committed suicide but her mother-in-law and 
husband had murdered her by setting her ablaze. He further 
deposed that quarrels used to take place between the deceased 
and the appellants over her desire of going to Chandigarh with 
her husband. 
18. 
During cross-examination, PW-5 deposed that the 
deceased had told him that her mother-in-law was not allowing 
her to visit Chandigarh. 
19. 
PW-6 Sunita Devi, was the sister-in-law of the deceased 
Devaki. She stated that as and when Devaki used to visit her 
parental home, she used to tell her about the harassment caused 
by her mother-in-law and husband. She used to tell her that she 
(Devaki) was kept terrorized and threatened, and was not given 
proper food at her matrimonial home and that her in-laws would 
go out locking her in the house. 
20. 
The expert witnesses regarding the cause of death, 
examined by the prosecution, was PW-7 Dr. Shailendra Kumar, 
who had carried out post-mortem of the deceased Devaki. He 
stated that the deceased had sustained 100% burn injuries and the 

whole body was burnt from top to bottom. The cause of death 
was ‘Death due to shock’ and semi digested food was found in 
her stomach. No smell of any kind was felt from her person. He 
further stated that a male womb measuring 10 cm having weight 
200 gm was found in the uterus of the deceased. In the cross-
examination, he had stated that it was not possible to give opinion 
whether the deceased had got herself burnt or somebody had 
burnt her after pouring kerosene. However, in his opinion, 
sustaining 100% burn injuries was not possible in case of self-
inflicting burns and that some percentage would have been left. 
In the cross-examination, he had explained that 100% burns 
would mean the body was lying burnt from top to bottom. He 
also admitted that if the size of the room was very small, then 
entering the room from outside would not be probable due to 
smoke. 
21. 
The Investigating Officer, Shyam Lal Patwari examined as 
PW-8 had deposed about the investigation carried out by him 
after receiving the complaint from PW-2 on 15.09.2003. He 
deposed that he had seized the articles from the place of 
occurrence, which included semi burnt bedding, two cans of 
kerosene measuring 5 litre each, having half litre of kerosene 
available in each can at that time, one burnt wood etc. and had 
prepared a seizure memo. He further stated that when the accused 
Vijaya Singh was arrested, he had found fresh abrasion injury 

marks on his face and Vijaya Singh had told him that he had 
sustained those injuries due to scorching. Similarly, accused 
Basanti Devi at the time of her arrest was found to have fresh 
abrasion mark on her forehead and she also stated that the said 
marks were due to scorching. He also stated that he had made 
arrangement for recording of statements of witnesses Kumari 
Saroj and Kumari Preeti under Section 164 Cr.P.C. before the 
Judicial Magistrate. In the cross-examination, he had admitted 
that he had not made any arrangement for the medical 
examination of the injuries sustained by the accused Vijaya Singh 
and Basanti Devi. 
22. 
The statements of the appellants were recorded under 
Section 313 of Cr.P.C. Both of them denied the allegations made 
against them by the witnesses examined by the prosecution. The 
appellant no.1-Vijaya Singh further stated that the deceased was 
adamant to accompany him at Chandigarh, however, he had said 
that it would take one to two months and therefore, she 
committed suicide. The appellant no.2-Basanti Devi stated in her 
further statement that at the time of incident, she had gone to a 
flour mill which was located at the distance of 5 kms from her 
village along with her sister Pitambari Devi, and when they came 
back, the incident had already taken place. 

23. 
The appellants had examined a defence witness Pitambari 
Devi. She had stated that on the date of incident in the morning, 
she along with Basanti Devi had gone to Dharat (Flour Mill) 
situated in Bajaira which was 5 kms away and had come back 
home together in the evening at about 5.00 PM by bus. She 
further stated that people told her that the incident of fire had 
taken place in the house of the accused, however, she had not 
seen the dead body of the deceased. 
24. 
On a careful appreciation of the evidence on record, it 
could be seen that the appellant no. 1 was working in Chandigarh 
and used to visit his village once in 3-4 months. During these 
intervals, the deceased used to live alone with her in-laws in the 
village. The witnesses have invariably deposed that the deceased 
was desirous of going to Chandigarh along with her husband and 
appellant no. 2 had an objection regarding the same. The basis of 
that objection becomes clear from the testimony of PWs as the 
appellant no. 2 wanted the deceased to help with the domestic 
chores at home. 
25. 
The story of the prosecution begins much before the 
commission of the alleged offence. PW-1 and PW-6 have 
deposed in no uncertain terms that the deceased used to share 
with them her agony at her matrimonial home. They have 
deposed regarding the desire of the deceased to go to Chandigarh 

as well as regarding the harassment caused by appellant no. 2 for 
that reason. PW-1 has also deposed regarding the presence of an 
injury on the body of the deceased when she once visited her 
parental house soon after her wedding. Their versions have 
largely remained unrebutted despite elaborate cross-examination. 
The appellants have raised questions regarding their versions 
stating that they are contradictory. We are unable to find any 
material contradiction in their versions and the Trial Court and 
the High Court have correctly appreciated their evidence in light 
of their background. For, the witnesses were essentially villagers 
and their testimonies cannot be subjected to mathematical 
precision. The evidence of every witness cannot be subject to the 
same level of scrutiny and the Court must be alive to the social 
position of the witness. Further, it is trite law that mere presence 
of minor variations is not fatal to the case of the prosecution. It is 
so because a natural testimony is bound to have variations. The 
question is whether the variations or contradictions could be 
termed as fatal to the case of the prosecution. The said question 
needs to be answered in light of the other evidence on record by 
examining whether the oral testimonies have found corroboration 
from other evidence or have remained isolated testimonies. 
26. 
In the present case, the testimonies of PW-1 and PW-6 are 
supported by the testimonies of PW-3 and PW-4, who are the 
sisters of appellant no. 1 and daughters of appellant no. 2. They 

are not interested witnesses and their testimonies must be given 
due credence. The statements of PW-3 and PW-4 were recorded 
before the Judicial Magistrate under Section 164 of CrPC in the 
aftermath of the incident. However, the issue with respect to their 
evidence is that they have sought to retract from their statements 
recorded under Section 164 CrPC and have denied a material part 
of their statements before the Sessions Court. The reason for 
retraction is that the statements were recorded under threat of the 
concerned Patwari who was present before the Judicial 
Magistrate along with the witnesses. The weight to be attached 
to such a statement during appreciation of evidence is the 
question that arises before us at this juncture. 
27. 
The jurisprudence concerning a statement under Section 
164 CrPC is fairly clear. Such a statement is not considered as a 
substantive piece of evidence, as substantive oral evidence is one 
which is deposed before the Court and is subjected to cross-
examination. However, Section 157 of Indian Evidence Act, 
18725 makes it clear that a statement under Section 164 CrPC 
could be used for both corroboration and contradiction. It could 
be used to corroborate the testimonies of other witnesses. In R. 
Shaji v. State of Kerala6, this Court discussed the two-fold 
objective of a statement under Section 164 CrPC as: 
 
5 Hereinafter referred as “Evidence Act” 
6 MANU/SC/0087/2013 

“15. So far as the statement of witnesses recorded 
under Section 164 is concerned, the object is two 
fold; in the first place, to deter the witness from 
changing his stand by denying the contents of his 
previously recorded statement, and secondly, to tide 
over immunity from prosecution by the witness under 
Section 164. A proposition to the effect that if a 
statement of a witness is recorded under Section 164, 
his evidence in Court should be discarded, is not at 
all warranted …” 
The Court also recognized that the need for recording the 
statement of a witness under Section 164 CrPC arises when the 
witness appears to be connected to the accused and is prone to 
changing his version at a later stage due to influence. The relevant 
para reads thus: 
“16. … During the investigation, the Police Officer 
may sometimes feel that it is expedient to record the 
statement of a witness under Section 164 Code of 
Criminal Procedure. This usually happens when the 
witnesses to a crime are clearly connected to the 
accused, or where the accused is very influential, 
owing to which the witnesses may be influenced …” 
28. 
Considering the conceptual requirement of recording a 
statement before a Judicial Magistrate during the course of 
investigation and the utility thereof, as prescribed in Section 157 
of Evidence Act, it could be observed that a statement under 
Section 164, although not a substantive piece of evidence, not 
only meets the test of relevancy but could also be used for the 
purposes of contradiction and corroboration. A statement 

recorded under Section 164 CrPC serves a special purpose in a 
criminal investigation as a greater amount of credibility is 
attached to it for being recorded by a Judicial Magistrate and not 
by the Investigating Officer. A statement under Section 164 
CrPC is not subjected to the constraints attached with a statement 
under Section 161 CrPC and the vigour of Section 162 CrPC does 
not apply to a statement under Section 164 CrPC. Therefore, it 
must be considered on a better footing. However, relevancy, 
admissibility and reliability are distinct concepts in the realm of 
the law of evidence. Thus, the weight to be attached to such a 
statement (reliability thereof) is to be determined by the Court on 
a case-to-case basis and the same would depend to some extent 
upon whether the witness has remained true to the statement or 
has resiled from it, but it would not be a conclusive factor. For, 
even if a witness has retracted from a statement, such retraction 
could be a result of manipulation and the Court has to examine 
the circumstances in which the statement was recorded, the 
reasons stated by the witness for retracting from the statement 
etc. Ultimately, what counts is whether the Court believes a 
statement to be true, and the ultimate test of reliability happens 
during the trial upon a calculated balancing of conflicting 
versions in light of the other evidence on record. 
29. 
In the present case, the statements of PW-3 and PW-4 were 
recorded by the Judicial Magistrate on 09.10.2003 i.e. almost 25 

days after the incident. Thus, their statements were recorded after 
the passage of a considerable time and could not be termed as 
hasty statements as there was sufficient cooling period for the 
witnesses to think over and contemplate the consequences of 
their statements. During this entire period, both PW-3 and PW-4 
remained with their family and it is not their case that they were 
kept under influence or were tutored during this period. 
Pertinently, PW-1 has also deposed that on certain occasions, 
PW-3 had accompanied the deceased Devaki to her maternal 
home, which indicates that PW-3 had a sense of attachment with 
the deceased and the same could have been the reason for giving 
a statement against her own brother and mother. In fact, the 
retraction of these statements by PW-3 and PW-4 before the 
Court appears to be a result of tutoring and manipulation as the 
said witnesses could have easily been won over by their family 
members during the intervening period. Furthermore, the 
witnesses have admitted that the statements were signed by them 
and there is no suggestion to the effect that the witnesses could 
not have understood the statements. The statements have been 
certified by the concerned Magistrate to the effect that they have 
been read by the witnesses and their consequences have been 
explained to the witnesses. 
30. 
PW-3 and PW-4 have deposed that they were under threat 
from the concerned Investigating Officer who was present along 

with them before the Magistrate. The concerned Investigating 
Officer has been examined as PW-8 in the present case and 
during his examination, there is not even a suggestion from the 
appellants to the effect that he was present along with PW-3 and 
PW-4 at the time of recording their statement under Section 164 
or to the effect that he had threatened them to give incriminating 
statements against the appellants. Furthermore, the concerned 
Magistrate could have been examined as a witness in the present 
matter to clear the controversy on this aspect and for unexplained 
reasons, he was never called for examination especially when a 
completely hostile version was being provided by the witnesses 
qua the proceedings which were conducted before him. The 
appellants failed to place any material on record to justify the 
allegation of threat and as discussed above, the statements of 
PW-3 and PW-4 recorded under Section 164 CrPC reflected the 
correct version of the events that transpired on the fateful day. 
31. 
Having said so, we deem it fit to observe that a statement 
under Section 164 CrPC cannot be discarded at the drop of a hat 
and on a mere statement of the witness that it was not recorded 
correctly. For, a judicial satisfaction of the Magistrate, to the 
effect that the statement being recorded is the correct version of 
the facts stated by the witness, forms part of every such statement 
and a higher burden must be placed upon the witness to retract 
from the same. To permit retraction by a witness from a signed 

statement recorded before the Magistrate on flimsy grounds or on 
mere assertions would effectively negate the difference between 
a statement recorded by the police officer and that recorded by 
the Judicial Magistrate. In the present matter, there is no 
reasonable ground to reject the statements recorded under 
Section 164 CrPC and reliance has correctly been placed upon 
the said statements by the courts below. 
32. 
Thus, it stands proved from the testimonies of PW-3 and 
PW-4 that on the fateful day, the deceased and appellant no. 1 
had proceeded to the bus stand to leave for Chandigarh but they 
returned back as they could not find any bus. Naturally, despite 
the disappointment of not finding a bus, the deceased must have 
been happy to have finally found a way to go to Chandigarh along 
with her husband. However, after she came back, a quarrel took 
place between the appellant no. 2 and the deceased. This was at 
around 4 PM, after the return of appellant no. 2 from Dharat. 
Thereafter, PW-3 and PW-4 left for picking grass and when they 
returned around 6 PM, the deceased was found dead due to 
burning. During this interval, only the appellants were at home 
along with the deceased. The presence of appellant no. 2 at the 
place of occurrence is duly established and the testimony of 
DW-1 stands falsified in light of the versions put forth by PW-3 
and PW-4. Even otherwise, as per DW-1, appellant no. 2 came 
back at 5 PM and incident is stated to be of 6 PM. The courts 

below have correctly analyzed this aspect and no case for alibi is 
made out. 
33. 
The appellants have urged that the death of the deceased 
was suicidal and not homicidal. The reason given for suicide is 
that the deceased was frustrated as she could not go to 
Chandigarh along with her husband. The reason does not inspire 
confidence at all. For, there is no proportionality of this reason 
with the drastic act of suicide and even otherwise, on the date of 
incident, the deceased and appellant no. 1 had left for Chandigarh 
and had to return due to non-availability of bus. Thus, the 
deceased had no reason to be frustrated about it as things were 
finally moving as per her desire. Furthermore, the deceased was 
pregnant at the time of incident and she could not have taken a 
drastic step of suicide with a womb in her stomach. On the 
contrary, it is not difficult to accept that appellant no. 2 must have 
been angry with the deceased for going to Chandigarh and the 
quarrel which took place between the deceased and appellant 
no. 2, as per PW-3 and PW-4, was consistent with the natural 
course of events on the fateful day. 
34. 
So far as the possibility of suicide is concerned, it is 
difficult to believe that the deceased managed to procure two 
cans of kerosene (5 litres each) on her own for committing 
suicide within a time bracket of two hours, that too in the 

presence of the appellants in the house. It is equally difficult to 
believe that the deceased poured almost 9 litres of kerosene on 
herself, put herself on fire and kept on burning till her body 
suffered 100% burns, without the appellants getting a whisper 
about the same despite being present in the same house. If it was 
indeed a case of self-immolation, the appellants must have done 
something to save her and her body would not have suffered 
100% burns. This fact assumes greater gravity when it is seen 
that the room was not bolted from inside and was open for access. 
Thus, the conduct of the appellants, previous to and at the time 
of the incident, pointed in an incriminating direction. 
Furthermore, as per the testimonies of PWs, no smell of kerosene 
could be detected at the place of occurrence or in the body of the 
deceased which is not consistent with the allegation of self-
immolation using an enormous quantity of kerosene. 
35. 
Yet another circumstance which merited an explanation, 
and could not be explained by the appellants, was the presence of 
fresh injury and abrasion marks on the faces of the appellants at 
the time of their arrest. Both the appellants tried to explain away 
the presence of injuries/marks by stating that they occurred due 
to scorching. Although, the investigating officer ought to have 
ensured the conduct of medical examination of the fresh 
injuries/marks, however, the reason stated by the appellants is 
completely incredible. The appellants were residing in the same 

area and if at all the marks were due to scorching, they could not 
have been fresh marks. The only inference which could be drawn 
from the presence of fresh injuries is that there was physical 
resistance from the deceased when she was being set ablaze. It 
could not have been explained away in this manner. 
36. 
Equally questionable was the subsequent conduct of the 
appellants. The conduct of the appellants in the aftermath of the 
incident was unnatural and does not exonerate them in any 
manner. The deceased, as per the versions of PW-3 and PW-4, 
was dead by the time they returned i.e. around 6 PM. As per 
DW-1, the deceased had put herself on fire when she returned 
with appellant no. 2 from Dharat at around 5 PM. Irrespective of 
whether the time of death is taken as 5 PM or 6 PM, the fact 
remains that intimation of death was not given to the family 
members of the deceased before 8 PM (as per PW-5 and 9 PM as 
per the FIR), and in the interim, no complaint whatsoever was 
given by the appellants to the local police. Moreover, no effort 
was made by the appellants to provide medical attention to the 
deceased or to take her to any nearby hospital. The appellants 
were found to be sitting outside the house when PW-2 and PW-5 
reached. That the appellants chose to remain silent in their house 
for over two hours, despite witnessing that the deceased had 
completely succumbed to burn injuries, goes on to show a 
completely unnatural conduct and points in the direction of their 

guilt. Moreover, instead of taking measures to take legal or 
medical assistance without loss of time, the appellants were 
actually tampering with the scene of crime, as discussed in the 
following para. 
37. 
The evidence has revealed that the scene of crime was 
actually found to be altered by the time the Investigating Officer 
and the PWs reached the spot. The presence of two kerosene jars 
of 5 litres each, presence of grass on the body of the deceased, 
sprinkling of water on the quilt, placement of body between two 
unburnt coats etc. are the circumstances which indicate the 
alteration of the crime scene by the appellants in order to shield 
themselves from suspicion. Since the deceased had suffered 
100% burns, the water could not have been poured to save the 
deceased from burns and must have been poured afterwards to 
demonstrate that they had made efforts to save her. If water was 
indeed poured at the time of burning, the deceased ought not have 
suffered 100% burns from top to bottom and the act of pouring 
the water later on the quilt clearly amounts to manipulation of 
evidence. The findings on this count also remain unchallenged 
and are not open to any doubt. 
38. 
Thus, we may observe that the circumstantial evidence 
available on record appears to be consistent and does not leave 
much scope for the innocence of the appellants. The 

circumstances overwhelmingly point in the direction of guilt of 
the appellants and the cumulative effect of the circumstances has 
been analyzed correctly by the courts below. An alternate 
possibility is not in sight. To add to it, the evidence of PW-7 also 
states that it was not possible for the body to sustain 100% burns 
in the case of suicide or self-immolation and this opinion finds 
support from other evidence on record. Therefore, this opinion 
has been appreciated by the High Court and Trial Court in correct 
context. 
39. 
Once the entire evidence led by the prosecution is 
examined collectively and comprehensively, the only possibility 
that emerges is of the guilt of the appellants. The appellants have 
attempted to raise questions regarding the evidence of PW-7 and 
PW-3/PW-4 for various other isolated reasons. However, as 
discussed above, in order to arrive at the true picture, the 
evidence adduced before the Court is to be examined as a whole 
and not in isolation. This principle assumes greater importance in 
cases which are based on circumstantial evidence as in the 
absence of direct evidence of the offence, the Court is required to 
analyze the proved circumstances in a collective sense so as to 
arrive at a reasonable finding. In such cases, the finding of the 
Court is essentially an irresistible inference which is drawn from 
the proved material on record. 

40. 
We have also examined other grounds such as the delay in 
registration of FIR, however, we are unable to find any merit in 
the same. PW-2 was informed about the incident at night on 
14.09.2003 and as soon as he received the information, he 
travelled to the appellants’ village. Thereafter, he went to lodge 
a complaint, but the Patwari was not available at night, which is 
quite understandable as it was late. The complaint was lodged the 
very next day. Even otherwise, it could take a reasonable time for 
a family member to process the news of a tragic death and as long 
as the delay is not unreasonable or suspicious, any delay in the 
lodging of complaint would not be of much consequence, 
especially when other evidence is of incriminating value. 
41. 
In light of the foregoing discussion, we are of the 
considered view that the Trial Court and High Court have 
correctly appreciated the evidence on record. We are unable to 
find any infirmity in the findings of the courts below and the 
impugned order is sustainable in the eyes of law. In the absence 
of a finding of illegality or perversity or impossibility of the 
impugned findings, consistent views taken by two courts cannot 
be disturbed on mere conjectures or surmises. Accordingly, the 
present appeal is dismissed. 
42. 
The appellants, if enlarged on bail, shall surrender before 
the concerned Jail Superintendent within two weeks from the 

date of this judgment for serving their sentence. Registry to 
communicate the order forthwith. 
43. 
The present appeal stands disposed of in terms of this 
judgment. Interim application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed 
of. No costs. 
 
……………………………………J. 

 [BELA M. TRIVEDI] 

……………………………………J. 
 [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 
 
NEW DELHI 
November 25, 2024