SLP(C) No. 16030 of 2018 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
[ Special Leave Petition (Civil) No(s). 16030 of 2018] 
 
VINOD KANJIBHAI BHAGORA...APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
STATE OF GUJARAT & ANR. 

ORDER 
 
1. 
Leave granted. The decision of the High Court of Gujarat 
(the “High Court”) in Special of 
2017 whereunder, the High Court declined to exercise its 
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, is 
assailed before us (the “Impugned Order”). 

2. 
The Appellant was engaged by the Central Government as 
a Postal Assistant in the Gandhinagar Postal Division on 
12.08.1983 and thereafter continued to serve in the aforesaid role 
up until 16.07.1993. 
3. 
In the interregnum, an invitation for application(s) for 
recruitment to the post of Senior Assistant in the Ministry of 
Health and Medical Services, Government of Gujarat (the “State 
Government”) came to be issued. Accordingly, the Appellant 

SLP(C) No. 16030 of 2018 

herein obtained a No-Objection Certificate (“NoC”) dated 
18.06.1993 from the Superintendent of Post Office, Gandhinagar 
Division and thereafter participated in the aforesaid selection 
process. 
4. 
On 16.07.1993, the Appellant having been selected as 
Senior Assistant in the State Government, tendered a technical 
resignation in qua his employment as a Postal Assistant in the 
Gandhinagar Postal Division. 
5. 
On 18.08.1993, the Appellant joined as a Senior Assistant 
in the State Government; and thereafter went on to serve the State 
Government for a period extending to 23 (twenty-three) years up 
until his superannuation (the “Subject Period”). Thereafter, the 
State 
Government 
only 
paid 
the 
Appellant 
terminal 
benefits/pensionary benefits to the extent of the Subject Period 
(the “Impugned Action”). 
6. 
Aggrieved by Impugned Action of the State Government, 
the Appellant made a representation before the Chief Postmaster 
General, Gujarat Circle seeking the inclusion of the period of his 
service with the Central Government i.e., as a Postal Assistant in 
the Gandhinagar Postal Division between ‘1983 and ‘1993 to be 
considered in the grant of terminal benefits / pensionary benefits 
as per Rule 25 of the Gujarat Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 
2022 (the “Pension Rules”). However, vide an order dated 
30.06.2014, the aforesaid representation came to be rejected on 

SLP(C) No. 16030 of 2018 

the sole ground that the Appellant had tendered an unconditional 
resignation. 
7. 
In the aforesaid circumstances, the Appellant was 
constrained to prefer a writ petition before the High Court. Vide 
the Impugned Order, the High Court dismissed the aforesaid writ 
petition and observed inter alia that the Appellants’ case would 
not attract the benefit envisaged under Rule 25 of the Pension 
Rules. The operative paragraph(s) of the decision of the High 
Court are reproduced hereunder: 
“6. The petitioner has claimed the pensionary 
benefits from the State Government for the 
period he worked as Central Government for 
the year 1983 to 1993. Reliance is placed upon 
Rule 25 of the above Rules. However, 
considering Rule 25 of the above Rules, we are 
of the opinion that the same shall not be 
applicable to the facts and circumstances of the 
case on the hand. Rule 25 of the said Rules is 
with respect to the qualifying service. The 
employee who has rendered his service with the 
Central Government is thereafter absorbed in 
the State Government. Thereafter, it was found 
that he has not completed the qualifying 
service 
while 
working 
with 
the 
State 
Government. In that case for the purpose of 
qualifying service, the service rendered by him 
as a Central Government employee is required 
to be counted and that too for the purpose of 
qualifying service. 
7. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of 
the case, Rule 25 of the above Rules would not 
be applicable. 

SLP(C) No. 16030 of 2018 

8. Under the circumstances, as observed 
hereinabove, the petitioner has been paid the 
pension/pensionary/terminal benefits of the 
State Government where he last worked, 
considering the service rendered by him with 
the State Government.” 

8. 
Mr. Rishabh Parikh, Ld. Counsel appearing on behalf of 
the Appellant has drawn the attention of the Court to Rule 25(ix) 
of the Pension Rules. In the aforesaid context, he has submitted 
that the Appellant has served as Postal Assistant in the 
Gandhinagar Postal Division between ‘1983 and ‘1993 i.e., 
service under the Central Government having a pension scheme, 
and thereafter served the State Government for the Subject 
Period. Accordingly, it was his principal contention that the 
Appellant was absorbed by the State Government and 
consequently, in terms of Rule 25(ix) of the Pension Rules, the 
Appellants’ terminal benefits / pensionary benefits could not be 
limited to merely the Subject Period but must also include 10 
(ten) years of service rendered by him to the Central Government. 
9. 
On the other hand, Ms. Swati Ghildiyal, AOR appearing 
on behalf of Respondent No. 1 i.e., the State of Gujarat has 
vehemently opposed the aforesaid submission(s). The main 
thrust of her argument(s) before this Court is that that the 
Appellant was not entitled to seek the benefit of Rule 25(ix) of 
the Pension Rules on account of the Appellants’ appointment in 

SLP(C) No. 16030 of 2018 

the State Government emanating from a fresh recruitment i.e., 
pursuant to an invitation for application(s) to the post of Senior 
Assistant in the Ministry of Health and Medical Services issued 
by the State Government. 
10. 
As a precursor, it would be relevant to consider the raison 
d'etre qua the grant of pension. Similarly, it would be equally 
important to clarify that pension is earned by a government 
servant in lieu of tireless service rendered by him / her (as the 
case may be) during the course of their employment; and often is 
an important consideration for person(s) seeking government 
employment. Accordingly, in our considered opinion, the raison 
d'etre qua the grant of pension by the State Government would 
inextricably be linked to a concentrated effort by the State 
Government to enable its former employee(s) to tide over the 
vagaries and vicissitudes associated with old age vide a pension 
scheme. 
11. 
In this context, we must now examine Rule 25(ix) of the 
Pension Rules. For ease of reference the same is reproduced as 
under: 
“Rule 25. Qualifying Service: Subject to the 
provisions of these rules, qualifying service of 
a Government employee, means and includes - 
 
 xxx 

xxx 

 xxx 

services 
rendered 
under 
Central 
Government/Central Government Autonomous 

SLP(C) No. 16030 of 2018 

bodies 
having 
pension 
scheme, 
by 
a 
Government employee who is absorbed in 
Government” 
 
12. 
The fulcrum of the dispute before this Court pertains to 
whether the Appellants’ subsequent employment with the State 
Government could be construed to mean that the Appellant had 
been ‘absorbed’ by the State Government, such that the 
Appellants’ prior service with the Central Government would be 
considered as a part of ‘qualifying service’ in terms of Rule 25(ix) 
of the Pension Rules. 
13. 
Admittedly, the Appellant served the Central Government 
as a Postal Assistant in the Gandhinagar Postal Division between 
‘1983 – ‘1993 i.e., for a period spanning close to a decade. 
Subsequently, pursuant to an invitation of application(s) for 
recruitment to the post of Senior Assistant in the Ministry of 
Health and Medical Services, Government of Gujarat, the 
Appellant herein after obtaining an NOC from the Central 
Government, applied for and subsequently came to be appointed 
to the aforesaid post. Thereafter, the Appellant volunteered a 
technical resignation in order to be able to serve the State 
Government. 
14. 
On a perusal of Rule 25(ix) of the Pension Rules we note 
that, qualifying service for the purpose of calculating terminal 
benefits / pensionary benefits under the Pension Rules would 

SLP(C) No. 16030 of 2018 

include prior services rendered by such an person under inter alia 
the Central Government provided that (i) the employment of such 
person under the Central Government encompassed an 
underlying pension scheme; and (ii) such person came to be 
absorbed by the State Government. 
15. 
In the present case, it is an admitted and undisputed fact 
that the prior employment of the Appellant under the Central 
Government contemplated an underlying pension and thus, the 
dispute before us is only limited to whether the Appellant came 
to be ‘absorbed’ by the State Government. 
16. 
Respondent No. 1’s stance is premised on the fact that that 
the Appellant joined the services of the State Government 
pursuant to a fresh recruitment i.e., pursuant to an invitation for 
applications issued by the State Government; and, merely 
because the Appellant was a Central Government employee in his 
previous avatar, he could not be considered to have been 
absorbed by the State Government. 
17. 
It is well settled that pension scheme(s) floated by the State 
Government form a part of delegated beneficial legislation; and 
ought to be interpreted widely subject to such interpretation not 
running contrary to the express provisions of the Pension Rules1. 
Furthermore, it would be relevant to underscore that the State 
 
1Senior Divisional Manager, LIC v. Shree Lal Meena, (2019) 

SLP(C) No. 16030 of 2018 

Government is a model employer; and ought to uphold principles 
of fairness and clarity. 
18. 
In the aforesaid context, we have carefully considered the 
Pension Rules, and we find that the interpretation sought to be 
advanced by Ms. Ghildiyal is narrow and restrictive so as to limit 
the benefit of Rule 25(ix) of the Pension Rules only to such 
person(s) who may have explicitly been absorbed by the State 
Government as against persons such as the Appellant herein who 
has most certainly, implicitly been absorbed by the State 
Government i.e., the Appellants’ participation in the selection 
process was prefaced by an NOC from the Central Government; 
and subsequently was followed by the tender of a technical 
resignation to the Central Government upon securing 
employment with the State Government. Pertinently, neither can 
the aforementioned interpretation sought to be advance on behalf 
of Respondent No. 1 be said to be echoed by any express 
provision of the Pension Rules nor has any convincing rationale 
to adopt such an interpretation, been placed before us. 
19. 
We thus find that the High Court erred in its interpretation 
of Rule 25(ix) of the Pension Rules; and consequently, unfairly 
deprived the Appellant from seeking inclusion of the period of 
service rendered to the Central Government as a part of 
‘qualifying service’ under the Pension Rules. 

SLP(C) No. 16030 of 2018 

20. 
Accordingly, we direct Respondent No. 1 to consider the 
service rendered by the Appellant to the Central Government in 
his capacity as Postal Assistant in the Gandhinagar Postal 
Division to be considered as qualifying service; and thereafter (i) 
re-calculate the terminal benefits / pensionary benefits accruing 
in favour of the Appellant; and (ii) transmit the arrears (if any) of 
such terminal benefits / pensionary benefits to the Appellant 
within 6 (six) weeks from today i.e., 02.02.2024. 
21. 
Upon making the aforementioned payment, Respondent 
No. 1 shall be free to seek pro-rata re-imbursement / contribution 
from Respondent No. 2 in respect of terminal benefits / 
pensionary benefits paid by Respondent No. 1 for the period 
pertaining to service rendered by the Appellant for the Central 
Government. 
22. 
The Impugned Order is set aside; and the appeal stands 
allowed in the aforesaid terms. Pending application(s), if any, 
stand disposed of. No order as to costs. 
 
……………………………………J. 
 (VIKRAM NATH) 

……………………………………J. 
 (SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA) 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY 02, 2024