IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. OF 2024 
( Special Leave Petition (Criminal) Nos.9138-9139 of 2017) 
 
GURMEET KAUR … APPELLANT 
 
 VERSUS 
 
DEVENDER GUPTA & ANOTHER … RESPONDENTS 

JUDGMENT 
NAGARATHNA, J. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
2. 
Being aggrieved by the order dated 18.09.2017 passed in 
CRM-M-4549-2015 by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at 
Chandigarh in exercise of powers under Section 482 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 dismissing the petition as not 
maintainable; and order dated 01.11.2017 passed in application 
bearing CRM No.33535 of 2017 declining to recall the order dated 
18.09.2017, the appellant is before this Court. 

3. 
The relevant facts of the case are that the appellant herein 
filed a petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (for short “CrPC”) seeking quashing of complaint 
No.1383 dated 13.03.2010/11.11.2011 titled “Devender Gupta vs. 
Director, Town and Country Planning and others” along with the 
proceedings thereof. The said complaint was filed by Devender 
Gupta under Sections 323, 452, 506, 427, 384, 440, 166, 148, 
149 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for 
short, “IPC”) along with all consequential proceedings and the 
impugned order dated 20.11.2014 passed by the learned Judicial 
Magistrate, First Class, Gurgaon summoning the appellant herein 
and two others for the aforesaid offences were assailed before the 
High Court. 
4. 
The original complaint filed by Devender Gupta-first 
respondent herein under various provisions of the IPC referred to 
above against the present appellant, who was at the relevant 
time, the District Town Planner (Enforcement) and twelve others 
was that on 24.09.2006, the appellant had forcibly entered 
Anupama College of Engineering and Anupama Institute of 
Management, both situated at Gurgaon District of which the first 

respondent was the Chairman, in her official jeep along with 
some other officials and created chaos and had taken away the 
college telephone No.2241615 forcibly. That the college had 
resisted initially but the appellant refused to oblige them; a 
complaint was lodged before the Bilaspur Police Post regarding 
the said incident but no action was taken. Thereafter, the 
complainant met the appellant herein on 10.11.2006 along with 
his advocate but the appellant had asked for the building 
map/plan and other documents and the first respondent-
complainant had produced the said documents. However, one of 
the accused, Manipal demanded Rs.20,00,000/- (Rupees Twenty 
lakhs Only) as an illegal gratification but the first respondent-
complainant refused to oblige the same. Consequently, on 
05.02.2007 at about 9.45 A.M., the appellant forcibly entered the 
college premises along with sufficient number of police personnel 
with heavy machinery and equipment for the purpose of 
demolition and after vacating the campus of the staff and 
students, the demolition took place. The said action of the 
appellant was with a mala fide intention owing to non-payment of 
the bribe made previously; that an FIR was registered on the 

instructions of accused No.5 and the same was found to be false. 
Further, had also been filed 
in which the High Court had appointed a Local Commissioner to 
inspect the college campus and he had submitted his report on 
18.10.2007 stating that there was an existing building which was 
constructed prior to the year 2004 which was much before the 
notification being issued under the provisions of The Punjab 
Scheduled Roads and Controlled Areas Restriction of Unregulated 
Development Act, 1963 (“the Act” for the sake of brevity). 
Therefore, the Notification issued under the said Act was not 
applicable to the subject building inasmuch as its construction 
was prior to 05.08.2005. 
5. 
The aforesaid complaint was filed under Section 200 of the 
CrPC as a private complaint and on preliminary evidence and 
recording the statement of the complainant and witnesses namely 
CW-1 and CW-2 and documentary evidence at Ex.PA to PZ, Ex. 
PAA to Ex.PDD., the Trial Court issued a summoning order on 
20.11.2014 against the present appellant and two others only 
under Sections 323, 452, 506, 427, 384, 440, 166 read with 
Section 120-B of the IPC. 

6. 
Being aggrieved by the summoning order and also the very 
filing of the complaint against the appellant herein, the aforesaid 
petition was filed before the High Court. On considering the 
pleadings on record as well as the contentions, the High Court 
dismissed the said writ petition. Although there were two main 
facets of the said writ petition: one with regard to the quashing of 
the complaint itself on merits on the premise that no offence 
whatsoever was made out; the second aspect of the said case 
assumes significance inasmuch as the contention of the appellant 
before the High Court was that there was no sanction order 
passed under Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (CrPC) and therefore, the very initiation of the criminal 
proceedings against the appellant herein were vitiated. 
 
7. 
The High Court dismissed the said writ petition by stating 
that at that stage it could not categorically be opined whether 
there was an illegal act as such which was committed by the 
public servant namely the appellant herein which required 
sanction, or the requirement of sanction was unnecessary having 
regard to the nature of the acts complained against; that it 
required a detailed inquiry inasmuch as the Trial Court had held 

that there was a prima facie evidence against the appellant 
herein. In the above premise, the Writ Petition was dismissed. 
 
8. 
Learned senior counsel Sri Mukul Rohatgi assisted by Sri 
Sameer Rohatgi, learned counsel submitted that taking into 
consideration the allegations against the appellant herein, it is a 
clear case where the appellant, during the course of the discharge 
of her official duties had carried out the demolition on the basis of 
the instructions of her superior officers and therefore, there was 
no malicious act, malice or any illegal act which could have been 
attributed to the appellant herein let alone any criminal act which 
could have been alleged against the appellant herein. 
 
9. 
It was submitted that the High Court ought to have gone 
into the aspect as to whether any offence at all was made out and 
quashed the criminal complaint. It was further submitted that 
given the nature of allegations against the appellant herein, it can 
be noted that the said allegations emanate from the nature of the 
duties that the appellant carried out on 05.02.2007 inasmuch as 
the demolition of the illegal construction was carried out on the 
said date which neither can be termed to be an instance of 
“excess” in the discharge of her duties nor can it be said that 

there was a criminal intent on the part of the appellant herein. 
The appellant had simply performed her duties as per the 
instructions of her superior officers. 
 
10. It was therefore submitted that the sanction for prosecution 
within the scope and ambit of Section 197 of the CrPC, which is a 
mandatory requirement, had to be taken from the State 
Government before the initiation of criminal proceedings even 
though the criminal proceedings in the instant case is under 
Section 200 of the CrPC by way of a private complaint. In this 
regard our attention was also drawn to Sections 20 and 21 of the 
Act to contend that no suit, prosecution and other legal 
proceedings would lie against any person in respect of anything 
which has been done in good faith or intended to be done in 
pursuance of the Act or the rules made thereunder. Further, no 
Civil Court would have any jurisdiction to entertain or decide any 
question relating to matters under the Act or the rules made 
thereunder. It was submitted that the object and purpose of 
obtaining sanction under Section 197 of the CrPC is in order to 
protect the bona fide acts of officers and officials done during the 
discharge of their official duties and that the salutary intent of 

the said provision must be realised and hence, before initiation of 
any criminal proceeding, the condition precedent of obtaining a 
sanction is a mandatory requirement and hence, in the instant 
case the absence of any sanction order being issued by the State 
Government has vitiated the very initiation of the criminal 
complaint against the appellant herein. In support of this 
submission, reliance was placed on the following decisions of this 
Court: 
(1) D.T. Virupakshappa vs. C. Subhash, (2015) (“D.T. Virupakshappa”); 
 
(2) Abdul Wahab Ansari vs. State of Bihar, (2000) (“Abdul Wahab Ansari”) 
 
(3) D. Devaraja vs. Owais Sabeer Hussain, (2020) (“D. Devaraja”) 
 
(4) Amod Kumar Kanth vs. Association of Victim of 
Uphaar 
Tragedy 
and 
Anr., 
Crl. 
Appeal 
No.1359/2017 disposed of on 20.04.2023. 

11. It was submitted that having regard to the position of law 
which squarely apply to the facts of the present case, the 
impugned order may be set aside and the initiation of the 
criminal proceedings against the appellant may be quashed and 
all consequential orders thereby may be quashed. 

12., learned counsel for the first respondent Sri 
Aseem Mehrotra, at the outset submitted that the impugned 
order would not call for any interference; that the appellant would 
now have to face the criminal trial; and that the appellant has 
had the benefit of the interim order of stay of proceedings at the 
hands of this Court. Therefore, the appeal may simply be 
dismissed in limine, so that the appellant would stand the test of 
criminality which has been alleged against her. It was contended 
that the first respondent was constrained to file the complaint 
owing to the fact that the Notification issued under the Act was 
not at all applicable and that the demolition carried out by the 
appellant herein was with vengeance and malice; that she had no 
authority to carry out the demolition of the building which was 
constructed prior to 05.08.2005 inasmuch as the notification did 
not apply to the period prior to 05.08.2005. 
 
13. Further, the first respondent herein had made an 
application for regularization of the alleged illegal construction, 
the same was pending consideration and instead of considering 
the application for regularization made by the first respondent 
herein, the Department kept the same pending and went ahead 

with the demolition. This has caused not only monetary loss but 
also has prejudiced the institutions of which the first respondent 
is the Chairman. 
 
14. In this regard, learned counsel for the first respondent drew 
our attention to the following judgments of this Court: 
(1) Bhagwan Prasad Srivastava vs. N.P. Mishra, 
(1970) (“Bhagwan Prasad Srivastava”) 
 
(2) Urmila Devi vs. Yudhvir Singh, (2013), (“Urmila Devi”) 

Punjab 
State 
Warehousing 
Corporation 
vs. 
Bhushan Chander, (2016) (“Bhushan 
Chander”) 
 
(4) Bakhshish Singh Brar vs. Gurmej Kaur, (1987) (“Bakhshish Singh Brar”) 

15. Learned counsel for the first respondent submitted that 
there is sufficient material against the appellant herein who 
cannot be given the benefit of the legal position that the absence 
of sanction prior to the initiation of criminal proceeding would 
vitiate the entire proceeding. He submitted that in the event this 
Court was to hold that the sanction under Section 197 of the 
CrPC was a necessary condition to be complied with by the first 
respondent herein in the context of filing a criminal complaint 

under Section 200 of the CrPC, then, in the absence of such 
sanction being taken till date, liberty may be reserved to the first 
respondent herein to make a representation for seeking such a 
sanction. 
 
16. Learned counsel for the second respondent-State, Sri 
Akshay Amritanshu with reference to his counter affidavit and 
other pleadings submitted that having regard to the fact that 
appellant herein was on the relevant day discharging her duties 
as a District Town Planner and it was in accordance with the 
scope and ambit of her authority that the demolition was carried 
out, the first respondent herein could not have initiated the 
criminal proceeding as against her in the absence of an order of 
sanction for doing so under the provisions of Section 197 of the 
CrPC. 
 
17. Learned counsel for the second respondent-State also 
submitted that there is no merit in the arguments of the first 
respondent’s counsel that the appellant herein ought to have 
been slow in carrying out the demolition inasmuch as the 
application for regularisation was pending before the Department 
and therefore the act of demolition of the illegal structure was an 

instance of excess as demonstrated by the various dicta of this 
Court. He submitted that in view of the conspectus of facts in the 
instant case, it was not at all a case of excess inasmuch as the 
Department 
which 
had 
to 
consider 
the 
application 
for 
regularisation was a different wing and the representation made 
for regularisation was not an impediment for carrying out the 
demolition. It was therefore submitted that appropriate orders 
may be made in this appeal. 
 
18. It was also submitted that this Court may be mindful of the 
fact that when an officer or an official of the State is carrying out 
the duty entrusted, the object and purpose of passing an order of 
sanction for prosecution under Section 197 of the CrPC must be 
borne in mind that a public servant ought not to be exposed to 
criminal prosecution or other kinds of litigation which would be 
wholly unjustified. 
 
19. In the circumstances, learned counsel for the second 
respondent submitted that the impugned order may be set aside 
and appropriate relief may be granted to the appellant herein. 

20. We have considered the arguments advanced at the bar in 
light of the facts which emanate in this case. At this stage itself, 
we may opine that we would confine the scope of this appeal to 
the question whether it was necessary for the first respondent 
herein to have made an application seeking sanction under 
Section 197 of the CrPC and thereafter proceeded to file the 
complaint under Section 200 of the CrPC. We also state that 
having regard to our reasoning and our decisions, it may not be 
necessary to go into the merits whether the appellant herein had 
indeed committed the offences alleged against her and therefore, 
the same ought to be quashed also. 
 
21. For ease of reference, Section 197 of the CrPC is extracted as 
under: 
“197. Prosecution of Judges and public servants. 

When any person who is or was a Judge or 
Magistrate or a public servant not removable from his 
office save by or with the sanction of the Government, is 
accused of any offence alleged to have been committed by 
him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of 
his official duty, no Court shall take cognizance of such 
offence except with the previous sanction- 

in the case of a person who is employed or, as the 
case may be, was at the time of commission of the alleged 
offence employed, in connection with the affairs of the 
Union, of the Central Government; 

in the case of a person who is employed or, as the 
case may be, was at the time of commission of the alleged 
offence employed, in connection with the affairs of a State 
of the State Government:[Provided that where the alleged 
offence was committed by a person referred to in clause 
(b) during the period while a Proclamation issued under 
clause (1) of Article 356 of the Constitution was in force 
in a State, clause (b) will apply as if for the expression 
"State Government" occurring therein, the expression 
"Central Government" were substituted.] [Added by Act 
43 of 1991, Section 2 (w.e.f. 2-5-1991).] 
 
22. As already noted, the object and purpose of the said 
provision is to protect officers and officials of the State from 
unjustified criminal prosecution while they discharge their duties 
within the scope and ambit of their powers entrusted to them. A 
reading of Section 197 of the CrPC would indicate that there is a 
bar for a Court to take cognizance of such offences which are 
mentioned in the said provision except with the previous sanction 
of the appropriate government when the allegations are made 
against, inter alia, a public servant. There is no doubt that in the 
instant case the appellant herein was a public servant but the 
question is, whether, while discharging her duty as a public 
servant on the relevant date, there was any excess in the 
discharge of the said duty which did not require the first 
respondent herein to take a prior sanction for prosecuting the 

appellant herein. In this regard, the salient words which are 
relevant under sub-section (1) of Section 197 are “is accused of 
any offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or 
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, no Court shall 
take cognizance of such offence except with the previous sanction”. 
Therefore, for the purpose of application of Section 197, a sine 
qua non is that the public servant is accused of any offence which 
had been committed by him in “discharge of his official duty”. The 
said expression would clearly indicate that Section 197 of the 
CrPC would not apply to a case if a public servant is accused of 
any offence which is de hors or not connected to the discharge of 
his or her official duty. However, there are a line of judgments 
which have considered this expression in two different ways 
which we shall now advert to. 
 
23. Learned senior counsel and learned counsel for the 
appellant have submitted the following judgments which indicate 
that Section 197(1) would apply prior to the initiation of a 
criminal proceeding under Section 197 of the CrPC. On the basis 
of the said judgments they have contended that it is during the 
discharge of her official duty that the demolition had taken place 

in the instant case and therefore, the necessity of an order of 
sanction being passed by the Government was a sine qua non 
prior to initiation of the criminal proceeding. The judgments relied 
upon by the learned senior counsel for the appellant herein could 
be adverted to at this stage. a) 
In D.T. Virupakshappa vs. C. Subhash, (2015) (“D.T. Virupakshappa”), the appellant therein was 
accused in a private complaint before the Civil Judge (Junior 
Division) and JMFC, on which the learned Magistrate took 
cognizance, registered and 
issued summons to the appellant therein. The offences 
alleged were under Sections 323, 324, 326, 341, 120, 114, 
506 read with Section 149 of the IPC. The appellant therein 
moved the High Court under Section 482 of the CrPC which 
was declined by the impugned order therein. The main 
contention of the appellant therein was that the learned 
Magistrate could not have taken cognizance of the alleged 
offences and issued process to the appellant without sanction 
from the State Government under Section 197 of CrPC, and 
on that sole ground, the High Court should have quashed the 

proceedings. It was alleged that the appellant therein 
exceeded in exercising his power during investigation of a 
criminal case and assaulted the respondent therein in order 
to extract some information with regard to the death of a 
person, and in that connection, the respondent therein was 
detained in the police station for some time. Therefore, the 
allegation of the appellant therein had an essential 
connection with the discharge of the official duty and 
therefore, the previous sanction was necessary. The issue of 
“police excess” during investigation and requirement of 
sanction for prosecution in that regard, was also a subject-
matter in State of Orissa vs. Ganesh Chandra Jew, (2004) 
 (“Ganesh Chandra Jew”) which was relied upon. 
There was also reliance on Om Prakash vs. State of 
Jharkhand, (2012) (“Om Prakash”). The Court 
held that the ratio of the aforesaid two judgments squarely 
apply to the case of the appellant therein and having regard 
to the factual matrix of that case, it was observed that the 
offensive conduct was reasonably connected with the 
performance of the official duty of the appellant therein. 

Therefore, the learned Magistrate could not have taken 
cognizance of the case without the previous sanction of the 
State Government and the High Court had missed this 
crucial point in the impugned order. This Court observed that 
in case such sanction is obtained and the same is produced 
before the learned Magistrate, the matter could be proceeded 
further before the learned Magistrate in accordance with law. b) 
In Abdul Wahab Ansari vs. State of Bihar, (2000) (“Abdul Wahab Ansari”), the facts were that the son of 
the deceased, who was respondent No.2 therein, had filed a 
complaint before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, alleging 
commission of offences by the appellant therein under 
Sections 302, 307, 380, 427, 504, 147, 148 and 149 of the 
IPC as well as Section 27 of the Arms Act. The Chief Judicial 
Magistrate was of the opinion that the provisions of Section 
197 of the CrPC would have no application to the facts of the 
case. Further, there was sufficient evidence available to 
establish a prima facie case and therefore had directed 
issuance of non-bailable warrants against the appellant 
therein and other accused persons. The appellant therein 

moved the High Court under Section 482 of the CrPC 
praying, inter alia, that no cognizance could be taken without 
a sanction of the appropriate Government, as required under 
Section 197 of the CrPC as the appellant was discharging his 
official duty pursuant to an order of the competent authority. 
The High Court opined that all the questions could be raised 
at the time of framing of charge and disposed the application 
filed by the appellant therein. Before this Court, two 
questions were raised and it was observed that previous 
sanction of the competent authority being a precondition for 
the Court taking cognizance of the offences if the offences 
alleged had been committed by the accused was in discharge 
of his official duty, the question touched upon the jurisdiction 
of the Magistrate in the matter of taking cognizance and 
therefore, there was no requirement that an accused should 
wait for taking such plea till the charges were framed. Placing 
reliance on certain decisions of this Court, it was observed in 
this case that the appellant therein had been directed by the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate to be present with police force and 
remove the encroachment in question and in the course of 

discharge of his duty to control the mob, he had directed for 
opening of fire, which was in exercise of the power conferred 
upon him and the duty imposed upon him under the orders 
of the Magistrate. Hence, Section 197(1) of the CrPC applied 
to the facts of the case. Since no sanction had been taken, 
the cognizance by the Magistrate was bad in law and 
therefore, the same was quashed qua the appellant therein 
and the appeal was allowed. c) 
In D. Devaraja vs. Owais Sabeer Hussain, (2020) (“D. Devaraja”), the facts were that the High Court had 
disposed of the application under Section 482 of the CrPC 
which was filed for quashing the order passed by the 
Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate III, Bengaluru City 
in taking cognizance of a private complaint, inter alia, against 
the appellant-accused therein, for offences punishable under 
Sections 120-B, 220, 323, 330, 348 and 506-B read with 
Section 34 of the IPC. The High Court did not quash the 
impugned order of the Additional Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate dated 27.12.2006, but remitted the complaint 
back to the learned Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate 

instead, with, inter alia, liberty to the appellant-accused 
therein to apply for discharge. The question considered by 
this Court was whether the learned Magistrate could, at all, 
have taken cognizance against the appellant therein, in the 
private complaint, in the absence of a sanction under Section 
197 of the CrPC read with Section 170 of the Karnataka 
Police Act, 1963, as amended by the Karnataka Police 
(Amendment) Act, 2013, and if not, whether the High Court 
should have quashed the impugned order of the Magistrate 
concerned, instead of remitting the complaint to the 
Magistrate concerned and requiring the appellant-accused 
therein to appear before him and file an application for 
discharge. Referring to several judgments of this Court, Indira 
Banerjee, J. speaking for the Bench observed in paragraph 66 
to paragraph 71 as under: 
“66. 
Sanction of the Government, to prosecute a 
police officer, for any act related to the discharge of 
an official duty, is imperative to protect the police 
officer from facing harassive, retaliatory, revengeful 
and frivolous proceedings. The requirement of 
sanction from the Government, to prosecute would 
give an upright police officer the confidence to 
discharge his official duties efficiently, without fear of 
vindictive retaliation by initiation of criminal action, 
from which he would be protected under Section 197 

of the Code of Criminal Procedure, read with Section 
170 of the Karnataka Police Act. At the same time, if 
the policeman has committed a wrong, which 
constitutes a criminal offence and renders him liable 
for prosecution, he can be prosecuted with sanction 
from the appropriate Government. 
67. 
Every offence committed by a police officer 
does not attract Section 197 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure read with Section 170 of the Karnataka 
Police Act. The protection given under Section 197 of 
the Criminal Procedure Code read with Section 170 
of the Karnataka Police Act has its limitations. The 
protection is available only when the alleged act done 
by the public servant is reasonably connected with 
the discharge of his official duty and official duty is 
not merely a cloak for the objectionable act. An 
offence committed entirely outside the scope of the 
duty of the police officer, would certainly not require 
sanction. To cite an example, a policeman assaulting 
a domestic help or indulging in domestic violence 
would certainly not be entitled to protection. 
However, if an act is connected to the discharge of 
official duty of investigation of a recorded criminal 
case, the act is certainly under colour of duty, no 
matter how illegal the act may be. 
68. 
If in doing an official duty a policeman has 
acted in excess of duty, but there is a reasonable 
connection between the act and the performance of 
the official duty, the fact that the act alleged is in 
excess of duty will not be ground enough to deprive 
the policeman of the protection of the government 
sanction for initiation of criminal action against him. 
69. 
The language and tenor of Section 197 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure and Section 170 of the 
Karnataka Police Act makes it absolutely clear that 
sanction is required not only for acts done in 
discharge of official duty, it is also required for an act 
purported to be done in discharge of official duty 

and/or act done under colour of or in excess of such 
duty or authority. 
70. 
To decide whether sanction is necessary, the 
test is whether the act is totally unconnected with 
official duty or whether there is a reasonable 
connection with the official duty. In the case of an act 
of a policeman or any other public servant 
unconnected with the official duty there can be no 
question of sanction. However, if the act alleged 
against a policeman is reasonably connected with 
discharge of his official duty, it does not matter if the 
policeman has exceeded the scope of his powers 
and/or acted beyond the four corners of law. 
71. If the act alleged in a complaint purported to be 
filed against the policeman is reasonably connected 
to discharge of some official duty, cognizance thereof 
cannot be taken unless requisite sanction of the 
appropriate Government is obtained under Section 
197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and/or 
Section 170 of the Karnataka Police Act.” 
 
It was concluded that the High Court had erred in law 
refusing to exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the 
CrPC to set aside the impugned order of the learned 
Magistrate taking cognizance of the complaint, after having 
held that it was a recognized principle of law that sanction 
was a legal requirement which empowers the court to take 
cognizance. This Court allowed the appeal and set aside the 
judgment and order under appeal and the complaint was 
quashed for want of sanction. d) 
In Amod Kumar Kanth vs. Association of Victim of 
Uphaar Tragedy, 
disposed of by three-Judge Bench of this Court on 
20.04.2023 of which one of us (Nagarathna, J.) was a 
member, it was observed that the question of cognizance 
being taken in the absence of sanction and thereby Section 
197 of the CrPC being flouted is not to be conflated and 
thereby confused with the question as to whether an offence 
has been committed. The salutary purpose behind Section 
197 of the CrPC is protection being accorded to public 
servants. In paragraphs 28, 29 and 31, it was observed as 
under: 
“(28) The State functions through its officers. 
Functions of the State may be sovereign or not 
sovereign. But each of the functions performed by 
every public servant is intended to achieve public 
good. It may come with discretion. The exercise of the 
power cannot be divorced from the context in which 
and the time at which the power is exercised or if it is 
a case of an omission, when the omission takes 
place. 
(29) The most important question which must be 
posed and answered by the Court when dealing with 
the argument that sanction is not forthcoming is 
whether the officer was acting in the exercise of his 
official duties. It goes further. Even an officer who 

acts in the purported exercise of his official power is 
given the protection under Section 197 of the Cr.P.C. 
This is for good reason that the officer when he 
exercises the power can go about exercising the same 
fearlessly no doubt with bona fides as public 
functionaries can act only bona fide. In fact, the 
requirement of the action being bona fide is not 
expressly stated in Section 197 of the Cr.P.C., though 
it is found in many other statutes protecting public 
servants from action, civil and criminal against them. x x x x 
(31) One ground which has found favour with the 
High Court against the appellant is that the 
appellant, according to the High Court, could raise 
the issue before the Magistrate. 
Here we may notice one aspect. When the 
question arises as to whether an act or omission 
which constitutes an offence in law has been done in 
the discharge of official functions by a public servant 
and the matter is under a mist and it is not clear 
whether the act is traceable to the discharge of his 
official functions, the Court may in a given case tarry 
and allow the proceedings to go on. Materials will be 
placed before the Court which will make the position 
clear and a delayed decision on the question may be 
justified. However, in a case where the act or the 
omission is indisputably traceable to the discharge of 
the official duty by the public servant, then for the 
Court to not accept the objection against cognizance 
being taken would clearly defeat the salutary purpose 
which underlies Section 197 of the Cr.P.C. It all 
depends on the facts and therefore, would have to be 
decided on a case-to-case basis.” 
 
It was concluded that learned Magistrate had erred in the 
facts of the said case in taking cognizance against the 

appellant therein contrary to the mandate of Section 197 of 
the CrPC and on that short ground alone, the appeal was 
allowed and the proceedings challenged in Section 482 were 
quashed. However, it was observed that the same would not 
stand in the way of the competent authority taking a decision 
in the matter and/or granting sanction for prosecuting the 
appellant therein in accordance with law. 
24. Learned counsel for the first respondent tried to distinguish 
the said judgments by another set of judgments of this Court 
wherein the question, whether the officer or official in discharge 
of the official duties had exceeded limits of the official authority or 
capacity and therefore, there was no necessity for seeking a 
sanction for prosecution for the excess committed by an officer or 
official during the course of discharge of duty. In this regard, the 
following judgments have been relied upon by the learned counsel 
for the first respondent. a) In Bhagwan Prasad Srivastava vs. N.P. Mishra, (1970) (“Bhagwan Prasad Srivastava”), the facts were 
that the appellant therein had used defamatory language 
towards the complainant and the two accused persons had 

insulted and humiliated him in the eyes of the public. The 
question before this Court was whether complainant’s case 
was covered by Section 197 of the CrPC and previous 
sanction of the superior authority was necessary before the 
trial court could take cognizance of the complaint. It was held 
that the alleged offence consisted of the use of defamatory 
and abusive words and of getting the complainant forcibly 
turned out of the operation theatre by the cook. This was not 
a part of the official duty of the appellant therein as a Civil 
Surgeon or that it was directly connected with the 
performance of his official duty that without so acting he 
could not have properly discharged it. Consequently, it was 
observed that it was not necessary to seek sanction under 
Section 197 of the CrPC. It was observed that the object and 
purpose underlying Section 197 of the CrPC is to afford 
protection to public servants against frivolous, vexatious or 
false prosecution for offences alleged to have been committed 
by them while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of 
their official duty. This Section is designed to facilitate an 
effective and unhampered performance of their official duty 

by public servants by providing for scrutiny into the 
allegations of commission of offences by them by their 
superior authorities and prior sanction for their prosecution 
as a condition precedent to the cognizance of the cases 
against them by the courts. The said provision therefore 
cannot be construed too narrowly or too widely. A too narrow 
and pedantic construction may render it otiose for it is no 
part of an official duty to commit an offence. This Court was 
of the view that it is not the “duty” which requires 
examination so much as the “act” because the official act can 
be performed both in the discharge of the official duty as well 
as in, dereliction of it. One must also guard against too wide 
a construction. Therefore, a line has to be drawn between the 
narrow inner circle of strict official duties and acts outside 
the scope of official duties. Thus, there must be a reasonable 
connection between the act and the discharge of the official 
duty; the act must bear such relation to the duty that the 
accused could lay a reasonable claim, but not a pretended or 
fanciful claim, that he did it in the course of the performance 
of his duty. 

Referring to Amrik Singh vs. State of Pepsu, (1955) at 1307 (“Amrik Singh”), the test to be adopted 
was, if the act complained of is directly concerned with his 
official duties so that, if questioned, it could be claimed to 
have been done by virtue of the office, then sanction would be 
necessary; and that would be so, irrespective of whether it 
was, in fact, a proper discharge of his duties, because that 
would really be a matter of defence on the merits, which 
would have to be investigated at the trial, and could not arise 
at the stage of the grant of sanction, which must precede the 
institution of the prosecution. It was further observed that 
the quality of the act that is important and if it falls within 
the scope and range of the official duties of the public servant 
concerned the protection contemplated by Section 197 of the 
CrPC will be attracted. On the facts of the aforesaid case, it 
was observed that sanction was unnecessary and therefore, 
the appeal was dismissed. 
We feel that the aforesaid case would not apply to the 
present case having regard to the facts that have been 
elucidated above. b) Sanction for prosecution of a police officer accused of causing 
grievous injuries and death in conducting raid and search 
and whether the police officer concerned while acting in 
purported discharge of official duty exceeded limits of his 
official capacity, were issues which were determined in 
Bakhshish Singh Brar vs. Gurmej Kaur, (1987) (“Bakhshish Singh Brar”). The matter arose before this 
Court because the petitioner therein being a government 
servant was being proceeded against in the absence of a 
sanction under Section 197 of the CrPC for the offences 
under Sections 148, 302, 325, 323, 149 and 120-B of the 
IPC. The contention of the petitioner therein was that 
cognizance of the offence under Section 197 of the CrPC 
could not have been taken nor the trial proceeded with 
without the sanction of the appropriate authorities. The 
question was, whether, while investigating and performing his 
duties as a police officer, was it necessary for the petitioner 
therein to conduct himself in such a manner which would 
result in such consequences such as injuries of one of the 
alleged accused and consequent death. Dwelling on the said 

issue, 
this 
Court 
observed 
that 
in 
the 
facts 
and 
circumstances of each case, protection of public officers and 
public servants functioning in discharge of official duties and 
protection of private citizens have to be balanced by finding 
out as to what extent and how far is a public servant working 
in discharge of his duties or purported discharge of his duties 
and whether the public servant has exceeded his limits. 
Taking note of Section 197 of the CrPC which is at the stage 
of taking cognizance, this Court observed that the criminal 
trial should not be stayed in all cases at the preliminary stage 
and it was observed on the facts of the case that the trial 
should proceed and the question of sanction under Section 
197 of the CrPC may be agitated after some evidences have 
been noted by the trial court. c) In Urmila Devi vs. Yudhvir Singh, (2013), 
(“Urmila Devi”) there are two concurring judgments by this 
Court. In the said case, the facts were that the appellant 
therein had filed a complaint against the respondent alleging 
that the respondent therein had threatened the appellant and 
another person that if they did not withdraw the complaint 

filed by them earlier as against a third person under Section 
500 of the IPC both of them will not remain in service. The 
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Panchkula had summoned 
the accused Nos.1 to 10 and 12 to face the trial for the 
offences under Sections 323, 354, 389, 452, 458, 500 and 
506 read with Sections 34 and 120-B of the IPC. It was 
contended that none of the acts complained of against the 
respondent therein would amount to exercise of any powers 
in his official capacity as the SDM and, therefore, he could 
not have taken umbrage under Section 197 of the CrPC. On 
considering the allegations against the respondent therein, 
this Court observed that the behaviour of the respondent 
therein as written in the complaint of the appellant, if found 
to be true, could only be held to be a high-handed one 
bordering on indecency of the highest order, wholly abusing 
his status as the SDM and can never be held to have acted 
within the statutory framework of law. That none of the 
actions alleged against the respondent therein by the 
appellant therein could be held to be one in which he acted in 
his capacity as the Executive Magistrate. This is because the 

respondent therein could not have barged into the house of a 
lady, that too at odd hours of 10.00 pm accompanied by a 
posse of police officers under the guise of ascertaining the 
truthfulness or otherwise of a complaint and for that purpose 
engage the services of two cameraman also with video 
cameras. It was observed that having regard to the aforesaid 
allegations against the respondent therein, the invocation of 
Section 197 of the CrPC was wholly uncalled for and 
consequently the impugned orders of the learned Additional 
Sessions Judge as well as the High Court was set aside and 
the appeal filed by the appellant complainant was allowed. 
T.S. Thakur, J. (as the learned Chief Justice then was) in 
his concurring judgment discussed the term “official” in its 
various connotations. For the purpose of understanding the 
expression “acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his 
official duties” in Section 197 of the CrPC which provides for 
obtaining a sanction of a public servant before he could be 
proceeded against for offences alleged to have been 
committed by him. It was observed that the test of direct and 
reasonable connection between the official duty of the 

accused and the acts allegedly committed by them is, 
therefore, the true test to be applied while deciding whether 
the protection of Section 197 of the CrPC is available to a 
public servant accused of the commission of an offence. It 
was further observed that public functionaries cannot under 
the cloak of purported discharge of official duties resort to 
harassment and humiliation of the citizens on the pretext of a 
complaint having been received by them, especially when the 
same does not disclose the commission of any offence triable 
by the Executive Magistrate or cognizable by the police. 
Therefore, the allegations made against the respondent 
therein in the said case were held to be outside the scope of 
discharge of official duties and hence, the plea that Section 
197 of the CrPC had to be applied, was rejected. 
It is necessary to appreciate the backdrop of the facts in 
the aforesaid case in which the complaints were made by the 
appellant therein against the respondent therein which we 
have epitomized above. It appears that the SDM in the 
aforesaid 
case 
was 
inquisitive 
about 
the 
adulterous 
relationship between the appellant therein and another 

person and a complaint having been received in that regard, 
had entered the house of the appellant (a woman) after 
sunset with a posse of police force, carrying video cameras for 
conducting an unwarranted search of the house, humiliating 
and invading the privacy of the appellant therein, insulting 
and humiliating another person by asking him to undress 
and dragging both of them to the police station for medical 
examination against their wishes, especially when male 
doctors were asked to examine the appellant therein (a 
woman) without any lawful justification for doing so. 
Therefore, the said judgment squarely turns on the glaring 
facts of the said case and cannot at all be applied to the facts 
which arise in the present case. d) In Punjab State Warehousing Corporation vs. Bhushan 
Chander, (2016) (“Bhushan Chander”), the 
allegations against the respondent accused who was working 
as a Godown Assistant in State Corporation was that he 
misappropriated 11 gunny bales valuing Rs.38,841 and 
tampered with the record of the department concerned. 
Prosecution under Sections 409, 467, 468 and 471 of the IPC 

was initiated without obtaining any sanction under Section 
197 of the CrPC. Inter alia, it was contended that the 
question of invoking Section 197 of the CrPC would not arise 
in the case of employees of Public Sector Undertakings (PSU). 
Allowing the appeal, it was held that there has to be 
reasonable connection between the omission or commission 
and the discharge of official duty or the act committed was 
under the office held by the official concerned. If the acts, 
omission or commission of which are totally alien to the 
discharge of the official duty, question of invoking Section 
197 of the CrPC would not arise. In the said case, this Court 
observed that on the factual matrix as it obtained sanction 
under Section 197 of the CrPC was unnecessary. Reliance 
was placed on the judgment of this Court in Matajog Dobey 
vs. H.C. Bihari, AIR 1956 SC 44 (“Matajog Dobey”) 
wherein it was opined that there must be a reasonable 
connection between the act and the discharge of official duty; 
the act must bear such relation to the duty that the accused 
could lay a reasonable but not a pretended or fanciful claim, 
that he did it in the course of the performance of his duty. In 

such an event, the need for obtaining a sanction under 
Section 197 of the CrPC would arise. Ultimately, in order to 
answer this query, the facts of each case would have to be 
considered and whether an offence has been committed in 
the course of official duty or not, or under colour of office 
cannot be answered hypothetically. In the said case, it was 
held the High Court was not right in setting aside the 
conviction and sentence on the ground that the trial is 
vitiated in the absence of sanction. Consequently, the appeal 
was allowed and the judgment and order passed by the High 
Court was set aside and the matter was remanded to decide 
the revision petition in accordance with law. 
 
25. We have considered the facts of the present case in light of 
the aforesaid rulings and the observations made by this Court. 
The relevant facts of the case are that on 05.08.2005, a 
notification was issued under the provisions of the Act. The said 
notification declared the area around the Government Primary 
School at village Bilaspur as a Controlled Area under the 
provisions of the said Act. The area of the respondent College 
(Anupama College) was also declared as a Controlled Area. 

Thereafter, on 06.03.2006, First Show-Cause Notice was issued 
by the predecessor of the appellant herein to the respondent 
regarding additional construction raised in Anupama College. The 
representatives of the first respondent sought time to file a reply. 
When the matter stood thus on 19.06.2006, the appellant was 
appointed as District Town Planner (Enforcement), Gurgaon. 
 
26. As there was no reply to the show-cause notice and the 
construction continued, the appellant herein issued restoration 
order under Section 12(2) of the Act on 09.10.2006. The 
appellant also lodged FIR No.364 dated 13.10.2006 with Police 
Station Bilaspur. Subsequently, on the request made by the 
appellant, the District Magistrate deputed two Duty Magistrates 
for overlooking the demolition. On 04.02.2007 and 05.02.2007, 
the 
demolition 
operation 
of 
the 
additional 
unauthorized 
construction was carried out. The respondent made a complaint 
against the appellant to the Senior Town Planner, Town and 
Country Planning Department stating that the appellant had 
demanded illegal gratification of Rs.20 lakhs and when that was 
not paid, the appellant had carried the demolition of the main 
building without serving any notice and thereby causing loss to 

the College. The appellant informed the Director, Town and 
Country Planning that all the construction raised after the date of 
notification had been demolished. 
 
27. Subsequently, a second show-cause notice under Section 
12(2) was issued owing to re-erection of the demolished portion. 
On 12.03.2007, the appellant relinquished her charge of DTP (E), 
Gurgaon owing to her transfer. Subsequently, on 05.04.2007, a 
preliminary report was submitted by the ADC Gurgaon to the 
effect that the demolition was unlawful. 
 
28. CWP No.6425 of 2017 was filed by the first respondent 
before the High Court seeking quashing of second show-cause 
notice dated 12.03.2007. The appellant herein was arraigned as 
respondent no.4 in the said writ petition. In response to the said 
writ petition, the ADC Gurgaon submitted modified and amended 
report specifically holding that the demolition was as per law. 
Another restoration order was passed on 21.08.2007 due to 
continued 
unauthorized 
construction 
by 
the 
respondent. 
However, 
later 
on, 
accepting 
the 
report 
of 
the 
Local 
Commissioner, the High Court vacated the stay granted to the 
first respondent, while observing that the ADC Report had been 

filed by the Government and the first respondent herein had 
threatened the Local Commissioner and deserves no relief. 
 
29. That, it is only after lapse of three years from the date of 
demolition, first respondent herein filed a Criminal Complaint 
No.1383 of 2010 under Sections 34, 148, 149, 166, 323, 384, 
427, 440, 452 and 506 IPC in the Court of Additional CJM, 
Gurgaon against 13 accused. The JMFC discharged all other 
accused except the appellant and accused nos.2 and 4 in 
Complaint No.1383 of 2010 and the summoning order was 
passed against the appellant and accused nos.2 and 4, namely, 
Senior Town Planner and Junior Engineer, Town & Country 
Planning (E). 
 
30. It is in the aforesaid circumstances that the appellant filed 
the petition under Section 482 CrPC before the High Court 
seeking for quashing of the summoning order dated 20.11.2014, 
in which initially a stay was granted and thereafter the said CRM-
M was dismissed as not maintainable. 
 
31. We have perused the impugned order of the High Court in 
light of the aforesaid facts and submissions and the judicial dicta 
on the position of law applicable in the instant case. 

32. We find that the facts of the present case would clearly 
indicate that the appellant herein who is accused of carrying out 
the demolition was doing so within the scope and ambit of her 
authority. We find that this is not a case where the appellant 
herein carried out the demolition dehors any legal backing or 
basis; neither was the said act of carrying out of the demolition 
outside the scope of her authority as the District Town Planner in 
the Enforcement Division. The appellant was carrying out the 
orders of the superior officers. There is a correlation between the 
act of demolition and the discharge of official duty. The demolition 
was carried out during the course of performance of appellant’s 
official duties. The fact that an application was filed seeking 
regularisation of the construction put up by the first respondent 
would indicate that even according to the first respondent, there 
was a digression and other irregularities in the construction put 
up which required regularisation. However, the contention of 
learned counsel for the first respondent is that when such an 
application was pending, the appellant had no authority to 
demolish the construction. We do not think that such an 
argument would impress us for the reason that the mere 

pendency of the application seeking regularisation before another 
department would have been an impediment for carrying out the 
demolition inasmuch as there was sufficient basis for doing so 
and was done under the orders of the superior authority and not 
independently as such. The fact that an application for 
regularization of the construction put up was filed implied that 
there was a deficiency/irregularity in the construction put up by 
the respondent No.1 herein. The impugned demolition cannot 
also be termed as an “excess”. 
 
33. In the circumstances, we observe that the first respondent 
herein ought to have sought sanction for prosecution under 
Section 197 of the CrPC in the instant case. The same, not having 
been done vitiated the initiation of the criminal proceeding 
against the appellant herein. Consequently, the summoning order 
and the consequent steps taken by the Trial Court pursuant to 
the said summoning order are liable to be quashed and are thus 
quashed. Insofar as the very initiation of the complaint is 
concerned, we observe that since there was no prior order of 
sanction passed under Section 197 of the CrPC, the initiation of 
the complaint itself, is non est. 

 However, we reserve liberty to the first respondent herein to 
take steps in accordance with law and seek an order of sanction. 
 The appeals are allowed and disposed of in the aforesaid 
terms............................ J. 
 
 [B.V. NAGARATHNA]........................... J. 
 [NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH]