IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 

 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 15782 of 2023) 
 
KALI CHARAN AND OTHERS 

VERSUS 

STATE OF U.P. AND OTHERS 

WITH 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 15535 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
( SLP(Civil) No(s). 19512-19513 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
( SLP(Civil) No(s). 19510-19511 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 24970 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 20314 of 2023) 
 
 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). of 2024) 

 (D. No. 34908/2023) 
 
 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). of 2024) 

(D.No. 35223/2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 24969 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 24971 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 23732 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 23727 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 25000 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 16057 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 17876 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 17015 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 21488 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 17888-17889 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
( SLP(Civil) No(s). 18703-18704 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
( SLP(Civil) No(s). 19514-19515 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
( SLP(Civil) No(s). 18705-18718 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
( SLP(Civil) No(s). 19222-19226 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 18885 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 19904 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 21354 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 20605 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 20486 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 20634 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 21500 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
 
 ( SLP(Civil) No(s). 21330 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 20541 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 21446 of 2023) 
 
 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 22041 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 21495 of 2023) 

 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 

( SLP(Civil) No(s). 7247 of 2024) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 

Table of Contents 
 
INTRODUCTION... 4 
BATCH NO. 1- LANDOWNERS’ APPEALS... 5 
BATCH NO. 2- YEIDA APPEALS... 6 
BRIEF FACTS... 6 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF LANDOWNERS (APPELLANTS IN BATCH NO. 1):... 15 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF YEIDA (RESPONDENT NO.3 IN BATCH NO. 1): -... 26 
DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS: -... 38 
CONCLUSION... 44 
 
1. 
Delay in filing application(s) for setting aside of abatement is 
condoned. 
2. 
Abatement is set aside. 
3. 
Delay in filing the application(s) for substitution is condoned. 
4. 
Application(s) for substitution is allowed. 
5. 
Application(s) for transposition is allowed. 
6. 
Application(s) for intervention/impleadment is allowed. 
7. 
Leave granted. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
8. 
The present batch of civil appeals @ special leave petitions arise 
out of the land acquisition proceedings initiated by respondent No.1-

State of Uttar Pradesh1 for planned development in the District 
Gautam Budh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, through respondent No.3-
Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development Authority2 by invoking 
‘urgency provisions’ incorporated in Sections 17(1) and 17(4) of the 
Land Acquisition Act, 18943. 
9. 
Arguments on all the appeals @ special leave petitions have 
been heard analogously and are being disposed of vide this common 
judgment. 
10. 
In total, 35 civil appeals @ special leave petitions are preferred 
both by landowners and YEIDA which can be categorized into two 
batches as mentioned below: 
BATCH NO. 1- LANDOWNERS’ APPEALS 11. 
A total of 29 civil appeals @ special leave petitions have been 
filed by the landowners challenging the decision of the Division Bench 
of the Allahabad High Court in “Kamal Sharma v. State of U.P. thru 
Special Secretary Industrial Development and Ors4”. The appeal 
 
1 hereinafter being referred to as ‘State’ 
2 hereinafter being referred to as ‘YEIDA’ 
3 hereinafter being referred to as “the Act” 
4; hereinafter referred to as ‘Kamal Sharma’ 

@ special leave petition titled “Kalicharan v. State of U.P. and 
others5” is being treated as the lead matter in this batch. 
BATCH NO. 2- YEIDA APPEALS 12. 
The YEIDA has filed 6 appeals @ special leave petitions 
challenging various decisions of the Division Bench of the Allahabad 
High Court invalidating the self-same land acquisition proceedings for 
integrated development of notified areas including the decision in 
“Shyoraj Singh and Others v. State of U.P.6”. The appeal @ special 
leave petition titled “YEIDA v. Shyoraj Singh and Ors.7” is being 
treated as the lead matter in this batch. 
BRIEF FACTS 
 
13. 
The chronology of events leading to the filing of these civil 
appeals are as follows. 
14. 
For the sake of convenience, we shall refer to the factual context 
as noticed in titled as “Kamal Sharma v. 
State of U.P. thru Special Secretary Industrial Development and 
Ors.8(lead matter in Batch No.1) filed before the Allahabad High Court. 
 
5 SLP(C) No. 15782 of 2023 
6; hereinafter referred to as ‘Shyoraj Singh’ 
7 SLP(C) Nos. 19512-19513 of 2023 
8 Supra, Note 4 

15. 
Upon receipt of a proposal from the Director, Land Acquisition 
Directorate, Rajswa, Uttar Pradesh, with prior approval of the State 
Government, a notification dated 26th February, 2009 was issued 
under Section 4(1)9 read with Sections 17(1)10 and 17(4)11 of the Act 
for the acquisition of the tracts of lands in question for planned 
development in the District Gautam Budh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh. The 
relevant portion of the aforesaid notification is extracted below: - 
“Under sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 
1894 (Act No. 1 of 1894), the Governor hereby notifies for the 
information of the general public that the land mentioned in the 
Schedule below shall be earmarked for public purposes, 
namely, the Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development 
Authority in District Gautam Budh Nagar for Planned 
Development. 
Because the Governor is of the opinion that the provisions 
or sub-section (1) of section 17 of the said Act apply to the 
said land, because the said land is urgently needed for 
planned development in district Gautam Buddha Nagar 
through Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development 
Authority and in view of this urgency, it is also necessary 
that the possible delay in conducting the Investigation 
 
9 4. Publication of preliminary notification and power of officers thereupon. – 
(1) Whenever it appears to the [appropriate Government] the land in any locality [is needed 
or] is likely to be needed for any public purpose [or for a company], a notification to that effect 
shall be published in the Official Gazette [and in two daily newspapers circulating in that 
locality of which at least one shall be in the regional language], and the Collector shall cause 
public notice of the substance of such notification to be given at convenient places in the said 
locality [(the last of the dates of such publication and the giving of such public notice, being 
hereinafter referred to as the date of the publication of the notification)]. 
10 17. Special powers in case of urgency. – 
 (1) In cases of urgency, whenever the [appropriate Government], so directs, the Collector, 
though no such award has been made, may, on the expiration of fifteen days from the 
publication of the notice mentioned in section 9, sub-section (1). [take possession of any land 
needed for a public purpose]. Such land shall thereupon vest absolutely in the [Government], 
free from all encumbrances. 
11 17. Special powers in case of urgency. – 
(4) In the case of any land to which, in the opinion of the [appropriate Government], the 
provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) are applicable, the [appropriate Government] 
may direct that the provisions of section 5A shall not apply, and, if it does so direct, a 
declaration may be made under section 6 in respect of the land at any time [after the date of 
the publication of the notification] under section 4, sub-section (1). under Section 5-A of the said Act should be avoided. 
Therefore, the Governor also directs under sub-section (4) 
of Section 17 of the said Act that the provisions of Section 
5-A of the said Act shall not apply.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
16. 
Since the land was sought to be acquired by invoking urgency 
provisions under Sections 17(1) and 17(4) of the Act, the landowners 
made representations to the Chief Executive Officer(‘CEO’) of YEIDA 
requesting that their land may not be acquired because the status of 
the land was ‘Abadi Bhoomi’ which was being used by the landowners 
as 
dwelling 
units 
and 
for 
rearing 
their 
cattle. 
The 
functionaries/authorities concerned did not accede to the request of 
the landowners and the State Government issued the notification 
dated 19th February, 2010 under Section 6 of the Act. 
17. 
The landowners challenged the acquisition of their lands by 
filing numerous writ petitions before the Allahabad High Court, 
primarily seeking the relief of quashing the acquisition proceedings 
undertaken by invoking Sections 4 and 6 read with Sections 17(1) and 
17(4) of the Act on several grounds which may be broadly categorized 
as below: - 

That the State Government arbitrarily invoked Section 
17(1) and Section 17(4) of the Act and deprived the 

landowners of their valuable right to raise objections 
under Section 5-A of the Act. 

That a bare reading of the notification issued under 
Section 4 would reflect that there was no material with 
the State Government for invoking the urgency clause 
in the matter of acquisition of land for planned 
development. 
(iii) That there was no genuine public purpose behind the 
acquisition and thus, the impugned action was illegal, 
arbitrary and unjustified. 
18. 
These writ petitions were decided by the Allahabad High Court 
taking divergent views which are assailed in these appeals by special 
leave. 
19. 
The Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court vide judgment 
dated 24th April, 2017 allowed the titled 
Shyoraj Singh and quashed the land acquisition notifications in 
question holding that the grounds being taken in the impugned 
notifications for invocation of the urgency clause were arbitrary and 
bad in law. The learned Division Bench in Shyoraj Singh summoned 
the original records from the State Government and perused the same 
to arrive at the following conclusions: - 

The Division Bench referred to two letters issued by the 
authorities of the District Gautam Budh Nagar, the details of 
which are as follows: 
(a) A letter justifying the invocation of the urgency clause 
signed by the Additional Chief Executive Officer of 
Yamuna Expressway, Tehsildar, Naib Tehsildar, and 
Lekhpal. The relevant extract from the said letter is as 
below: - 
“Yamuna expressway urgently needs the proposed land 
for planned industrial development. In the event of delay 
in the acquisition, there is a strong possibility of 
increasing encroachment on the proposed land, due to 
which public interest project of planned industrial 
development will adversely be affected.” 
“Hearing and disposal of written/oral objections will 
definitely take years and there will be unexpected delays 
which will stall the planned development.” 
 
(b) A letter issued in 2010 by the District Magistrate, 
recording a satisfaction that the prevailing facts and 
circumstances justified the invocation of the powers 
under Section 17 of the Act for dispensing with the 
hearing of objections under Section 5-A of the Act. The 
relevant extract from the said letter is as below: 
“Due to the need to complete the project without delay 
in the acquisition of the said land, it is necessary to take 
possession of the proposed land with immediate effect. 
In the case of using Section 17 of LAA, the provisions of 

Section 5-A of the Act become extinct and I fully agree 
with the justification of ending the opportunity of 
hearing to the land owners.” 
 
With reference to the aforesaid letters, the Division Bench 
observed that the two grounds mentioned for invoking urgency 
clause were: (1) That there are chances of unauthorized 
construction/encroachment on the said land. (2) Large number of 
landowners would be affected by the acquisition and hearing such 
large number of landowners would delay the project. 
The Division Bench in Shyoraj Singh held that the above-
noted factors did not furnish legally acceptable justification for the 
exercise of power under Section 17(1) of the Act by the State 
Government because the acquisition was primarily meant to cater 
to private interests in the name of industrial development of the 
District and no material was produced on record to show that the 
State Government and/or agencies/instrumentalities of the State 
were intending to establish industrial units on the acquired tracts 
of land. Further, the justification for invoking urgency provisions, 
that the land will be encroached on, had no substance as the land 
was already in possession of the recorded tenure holders. 

The Division Bench also observed that the notification under 
Section 4 of the Act was published on 26th February, 2009 but 

thereafter, the State Government took nearly one year to publish 
the notification under Section 612 of the Act. The time of one year 
consumed by the State Government in publishing the notification 
under Section 6 of the Act was by itself sufficient to infer that there 
was absolutely no urgency that could have justified the invocation 
of the urgency clause, thereby depriving the landowners of an 
opportunity of hearing under Section 5-A of the Act. 
20. 
However, another Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court 
while dealing with a batch of 73 writ petitions challenging the very 
same land acquisition proceedings took a different view from Shyoraj 
Singh and dismissed the writ petitions filed by the landowners, the 
lead matter being titled “Kamal Sharma v. 
State of U.P.”. The Division Bench while upholding the acquisition 
proceedings held that it could not be accepted that the entire exercise 
for invocation of urgency clause was mechanical or there was no 
material with the State for recording the subjective satisfaction to this 
effect. The reasons assigned by the Division Bench in Kamal Sharma 
were as follows: - 

A perusal of the Master plan and the facts established 
that the land required for development of Yamuna 
 
12 Published on 19th Feb, 2010. 

Expressway [‘Planned development through Yamuna 
Expressway'] was for an integrated project. The land 
was initially acquired for the Yamuna Expressway 
and, thereafter, for developing land parcels alongside 
the Expressway as townships. 

The original record of the State contains a categorical 
statement 
that 
the 
State 
Government, 
after 
scrutinizing the record had accepted the proposal 
applying mind to the fact that, in case the objections 
under Section 5-A of the Act were invited, it would 
adversely affect and cause delay in execution of the 
project of public importance. The said decision was 
made looking at the enormity of the project which 
required the acquisition of the lands spread over a 
large area of 18,000 hundred acres (approx.) 
comprising 16 villages. The development of the village 
‘Abadi Bhoomi’s by YEIDA was also linked to the 
development of the land alongside the Expressway. It 
was not the case of non-application of mind and no 
fault in the decision-making process could be 
demonstrated. 

(iii) There was no post-notification delay, inasmuch as, in 
two or three acquisition notifications, which were the 
subject matter of challenge in the present writ 
petitions, wherein one year time has been consumed 
in the issuance of the Section 6 notification, the delay 
has been duly explained by the State. 
21. 
In Kamal Sharma, the Division Bench distinguished Shyoraj 
Singh noting that the said judgment failed to consider the fact that 
the acquisition was proposed for an integrated project and that the 
Division Bench did not deal with the argument that looking at the large 
number of tenure holders, the hearings would have resulted into the 
project of tremendous importance being delayed. Further, it was noted 
that the reasons given for justifying the invocation of the urgency 
clause had not been examined in the context in which they were made, 
and also the decision of this Court in the case of Nand Kishore Gupta 
and Others v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Others.13 was not 
considered. 
22. 
The Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court while delivering 
the judgment in Kamal Sharma, validated the acquisition proceeding 
 
13 (2010); hereinafter referred to as ‘Nand Kishore’ 

in question and granted an enhanced compensation of 64.7% to the 
landowners. 
23. 
During the course of arguments, this Court was apprised of the 
fact that out of total 410 writ petitioners(landowners) before the High 
Court, only 96 have challenged the judgment in Kamal Sharma by 
filing civil appeals @ special leave petitions in Batch No. 1. 
24. 
It is in this backdrop of the conflicting decisions rendered by 
the Division Benches of the Allahabad High Court, that the two 
batches of civil appeals @ special leave petitions i.e. Batch No.1 and 
Batch No.2, have been preferred by the landowners and YEIDA before 
this Court. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF LANDOWNERS (APPELLANTS IN 
BATCH NO. 1): - 
 
25. 
Learned counsel representing the landowners implored the 
Court to grant relief in favour of the appellants as prayed for in Batch 
No.1 wherein lead matter is "Kalicharan and others v. The State of 
Uttar Pradesh and others14" and negate the challenge to the 
judgment in Shyoraj Singh. They advanced the following pertinent 
 
14 supra 

submissions 
for 
assailing 
the 
questioned 
land 
acquisition 
proceedings:- 

That the Division Bench of Allahabad High Court, while 
rendering the judgment dated 26th May, 2023 in Kamal 
Sharma, in effect sat in appeal over the judgment dated 24th 
April, 2017 in Shyoraj Singh rendered by a coordinate bench 
of the same High Court which dealt with an identical 
controversy both in facts and law. It was fervently contended 
that the Division Bench of Allahabad High Court, while 
dealing with the subsequent batch of writ petitions in Kamal 
Sharma should have followed the judgment passed in 
Shyoraj Singh as a matter of judicial discipline. 

That if at all the Division Bench in Kamal Sharma was of a 
view that Shyoraj Singh did not lay down the correct 
position of law, then the question of law should have been 
referred to a larger Bench rather than taking a divergent view 
in a Bench with a composition of same number of Judges. 
(iii) That the land acquisition notifications under Sections 4 and 
6 of the Act were dated 26th February, 2009 and 19th February 
2010, respectively. The above-mentioned dates demonstrate 
that about one years’ time was taken by the State 

Government for issuance of the final declaration notification 
under Section 6 after the proposal under Section 4 of the Act 
was issued and thus, there was pre and post notification 
delay which could not have been ignored and had to be taken 
into account. In this background there could not have been 
any justification for the dispensation of few weeks’ time to the 
landowners to file objections under Section 5-A of the Act, on 
the ground of urgency. On this aspect, reliance was placed 
upon Radhy Shyam(dead) through LRs. and Others v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh and Others15, wherein this Court 
observed as follows: - 
“82. In this case, the Development Authority sent the 
proposal sometime in 2006. The authorities up to the level of 
the Commissioner completed the exercise of survey and 
preparation of documents by the end of December 2006 but 
it took one year and almost three months for the State 
Government to issue notification under Section 4 read with 
Sections 17(1) and 17(4). If this much time was consumed 
between the receipt of proposal for the acquisition of land and 
issue of notification, it is not possible to accept the argument 
that four to five weeks within which the objections could be 
filed under sub-section (1) of Section 5-A and the time spent 
by the Collector in making enquiry under sub-section (2) of 
Section 5-A would have defeated the object of the 
acquisition.” 

15 (2011); hereinafter referred to as ‘Radhy Shyam’ 

Reliance in this regard was also placed on Dev Sharan and 
Others v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Others16, wherein 
this Court observed as below: - 
“37 [Ed.: Para 37 corrected vide Official Corrigendum No. 
F.3/Ed.B.J./16/2011 dated 16-3-2011.]. Thus the time 
which elapsed between publication of Section 4(1) and 
Section 17 notifications, and Section 6 declaration in the 
local newspapers is 11 months and 23 days i.e. almost one 
year. This slow pace at which the government machinery had 
functioned in processing the acquisition, clearly evinces that 
there was no urgency for acquiring the land so as to warrant 
invoking Section 17(4) of the Act. 
38. In Para 15 of the writ petition, it has been clearly stated 
that there was a time gap of more than 11 months between 
Section 4 and Section 6 notifications, which demonstrates 
that there was no urgency in the State action which could 
deny the petitioners their right under Section 5-A. In the 
counter which was filed in this case by the State before the 
High Court, it was not disputed that the time gap between 
Section 4 notification read with Section 17, and Section 6 
notification was about 11 months.” 
 
Learned counsel for the appellants also placed reliance on 
Devender Kumar Tyagi and Others v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh and Others17, wherein, this Court, while dealing 
with a post-notification delay of almost two years, held as 
follows: 
“28. In the facts and circumstances of the present case, 
it is clear that this Court, vide its order dated 17-8-2004 
[(2011) ], has issued a direction to the 
respondents to relocate the bone mills and allied industries 
causing environment pollution and health hazards as per the 
recommendations of CPCB and, inter alia, the respondents 
 
16 (2011) 
17 (2011) 

were also directed to identify the area for relocation. 
Pursuant to this, the respondents have filed an affidavit in 
the month of December 2004 specifying the construction of 
the 
Leather 
City 
Project 
at 
Hapur 
in 
Ghaziabad. 
Subsequently, it was only after the lapse of two years, the 
State Government had issued a Notification under Section 4 
on 3-7-2006 and the same was published on 4-7-2006. 
Thereafter, the State Government took more than 17 months 
in order to make a declaration of the notification under 
Section 6 from the date of publication of the notification 
under Section 4 of the LA Act. In view of the above 
circumstances, it is crystal clear that the government 
functionary has proceeded at very slow pace at two levels, 
that is, prior to the issuance of the notification under Section 
4 and post the issuance of the notification under Section 4, 
for acquisition of the land for construction of the Leather City 
Project, which undoubtedly is a public purpose. Therefore, 
the above series of the events amply exhibit the lethargical 
and lackadaisical attitude of the State Government. In the 
light of the above circumstances, the respondents are not 
justified in invoking the urgency provisions under Section 17 
of the LA Act, thereby, depriving the appellants of their 
valuable right to raise objections and opportunity of hearing 
before the authorities in order to persuade them that their 
property may not be acquired. 
 
 Further reliance was placed on the case of Darshan Lal 
Nagpal(Dead) by LRs. v. Government of NCT of Delhi and 
Others18, wherein, this Court observed as below: 
“36. It needs no emphasis that majority of the projects 
undertaken by the State and its agencies/instrumentalities, 
the implementation of which requires public money, are 
meant to benefit the people at large or substantially a large 
segment of the society. If what the High Court has observed 
is treated as a correct statement of law, then in all such cases 
the acquiring authority will be justified in invoking Section 
17 of the Act and dispense with the inquiry contemplated 
under Section 5-A, which would necessarily result in 
depriving the owner of his property without any opportunity 
to raise legitimate objection. However, as has been repeatedly 
held by this Court, the invoking of the urgency provisions can 
be justified only if there exists real emergency which cannot 
 
18 (2012) 

brook delay of even few weeks or months. In other words, the 
urgency provisions can be invoked only if even small delay of 
few weeks or months may frustrate the public purpose for 
which the land is sought to be acquired. Nobody can contest 
that the purpose for which the appellants' land and land 
belonging to others was sought to be acquired was a public 
purpose but it is one thing to say that the State and its 
instrumentality wants to execute a project of public 
importance without loss of time and it is an altogether 
different thing to say that for execution of such project, 
private individuals should be deprived of their property 
without even being heard.” 

That one of the grounds taken by the State for invoking the 
urgency clause was that there were chances of unauthorized 
construction/encroachments 
on 
the 
land 
subject 
to 
acquisition. This stand was questioned by placing reliance on 
Radhy Shyam, wherein this Court observed that it is highly 
unlikely that the recorded tenure holders would encroach or 
allow encroachments on their own land when they are 
admittedly in the possession of the same. The relevant extract 
as relied upon is quoted hereinbelow: - 
“83. The apprehension of the respondents that delay in the 
acquisition of land will lead to enormous encroachment is 
totally unfounded. It is beyond the comprehension of any 
person of ordinary prudence to think that the landowners 
would encroach their own land with a view to frustrate the 
concept of planned industrial development of the district.” 

That there was no material before the State Government to 
show the existence of any unforeseeable emergency 

warranting invocation of the urgency clause under Sections 
17(1) and 17(4) of the Act, thereby denying the landowners of 
their right to file objections against acquisition of their lands. 

That the lands under acquisition were to be utilized for 
commercial and residential purposes and such development 
work, would take ample time in planning and execution, thus 
there could have been no justification for the invocation of 
urgency clause. Reliance in this regard was placed on the 
following observations in Radhy Shyam:- 
“80...Even if planned industrial development of the district 
is treated as public purpose within the meaning of Section 4, 
there was no urgency which could justify the exercise of 
power by the State Government under Section 17(1) and 
17(4). The objective of industrial development of an area 
cannot be achieved by pressing some buttons on the 
computer screen. It needs a lot of deliberations and planning 
keeping in view various scientific and technical parameters 
and environmental concerns. The private entrepreneurs, who 
are desirous of making investments in the State, take their 
own time in setting up the industrial units. Usually, the State 
Government and its agencies/instrumentalities would give 
them two to three years to put up their factories, 
establishments, etc. Therefore, time required to ensure 
compliance with the provisions contained in Section 5A 
cannot, by any stretch of imagination, be portrayed as delay 
that will frustrate the purpose of acquisition.” 

Reliance was also placed upon the decision of Anand Singh 
and Another v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Others19, 
wherein this Court observed as follows: - 
“46. As to in what circumstances the power of emergency 
can be invoked are specified in Section 17(2) but 
circumstances necessitating invocation of urgency under 
Section 17(1) are not stated in the provision itself. Generally 
speaking, the development of an area (for residential 
purposes) or a planned development of city, takes many years 
if not decades and, therefore, there is no reason why 
summary enquiry as contemplated under Section 5-A may 
not be held and objections of landowners/persons interested 
may not be considered. In many cases, on general 
assumption likely delay in completion of enquiry under 
Section 5-A is set up as a reason for invocation of 
extraordinary power in dispensing with the enquiry little 
realising that an important and valuable right of the person 
interested in the land is being taken away and with some 
effort enquiry could always be completed expeditiously.” 
 
(vii) That the judgment of this Court in Radhy Shyam holds the 
field on the issue of invocation of urgency clause in 
acquisition 
proceedings 
for 
planned 
development 
for 
commercial, residential, industrial purposes and the decision 
in Kamal Sharma has been rendered while glossing over the 
law settled in Radhy Shyam. 
(viii) That the right to be heard as provided under Section 5-A of 
the Act is in the nature of a fundamental right and the same 
cannot be dispensed with, so as to justify the lackadaisical 
 
19 (2010) 

approach of the State Government. It was also contended 
that Section 5-A is not to be superseded ipso facto even if the 
provisions of Sections 17(1) and 17(2) of the Act are being 
invoked. Reliance in support of this contention was placed 
upon the decision of this Court in the case of Dev Sharan v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh and Others20, wherein it was held 
that even in cases of ‘urgency’ or ‘unforeseen emergency’, 
enquiry contemplated by Section 5-A cannot ipso facto be 
dispensed with and even if the case is covered under sub-
sections (1) or (2) of Section 17, sub-Section (4) of Section 17 
would not necessarily apply. The relevant extracts relied 
upon are as below:- 
“32. In a recent judgment of this Court in Essco Fabs, 
(2009), this Court, after considering previous 
judgments as also the provisions of Section 17 of the Act 
held: (SCC P. 839, para 41) 
 
“41. Whereas sub-section (1) of Section 17 deals with 
cases of ‘urgency’, sub-section (2) of the said section 
covers cases of ‘sudden change in the channel of any 
navigable river or other unforeseen emergency’. But 
even in such cases i.e. cases of ‘urgency’ or 
‘unforeseen emergency’, enquiry contemplated by 
Section 5-A cannot ipso facto be dispensed with 
which is clear from sub-section (4) of Section 17 of the 
Act.” 
 
This Court, therefore, held that once a case is covered 
under sub-section (1) or (2) of Section 17, sub-section (4) of 
 
20 (2011) 

Section 17 would not necessarily apply: (SCC P. 395, para 
54) 
 
“54. In our opinion, therefore, the contention of the 
learned counsel for the respondent authorities is not 
well founded and cannot be upheld that once a case 
is covered by sub-sections (1) or (2) of Section 17 of 
the Act, sub-section (4) of Section 17 would 
necessarily apply and there is no question of holding 
inquiry or hearing objections under Section 5-A of the 
Act. Acceptance of such contention or upholding of 
this argument will make sub-section (4) of Section 17 
totally otiose, redundant and nugatory.” 
 
(ix) That the Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court 
committed grave error in law while placing reliance upon the 
judgment of Nand Kishore, for denying relief to the 
landowners. That on a conjoint reading of paras 3 and 96 of 
Nand Kishore, it would become evident that the land in 
question therein admeasured 1604 Hectares, which was to be 
acquired for the construction of the Yamuna Expressway 
itself and it is in that background that the invocation of the 
urgency clause was upheld, whereas the question as to the 
invocation of urgency clause to acquire land for commercial, 
residential or industrial purpose was not posed for 
adjudication in Nand Kishore, although it held the 
acquisition to be for public purpose. Paras 3 and 96 of Nand 
Kishore read as follows: - 

“3. The High Court, in the judgment dated 30-11-2009 
passed in Nand Kishore Gupta v. State of U.P. [ CMWP No. 
31314 of 2009 decided on 30-11-2009 (All)], basically 
pointed out that out of 12,282 landowners, 11,397 had 
already received their compensation under the agreement 
and the challenge related only to 21.03 ha out of 1604 ha of 
land. The High Court also took the view that the scales of 
justice must tilt towards the right to development of the 
millions who will be benefited from the road and the 
development of the area, as against the human rights of 35 
petitioners therein, whose main complaint was that they 
were not heard before the declaration under Section 6 of the 
Act. The High Court also declined to give any direction to the 
State Government to consider to exempt 21.03 ha of land 
relating to the 35 petitioners therein on account of the fact 
that the construction of the road had to be made in an 
alignment and that alignment could not be changed. 
Identical view was taken in another writ petition filed by one 
Balbir Singh. The High Court also expressed its concern that 
any direction to exempt the land covered by the construction 
might seriously jeopardise the Project. The High Court also 
reiterated that the acquisition of the land for interchange of 
the road was the essential part of the Project, as also the 
construction of bridges, culverts and interchanges, which 
were essential for the fast-moving six-lane Expressway. 
96. We are not impressed by the argument that the 
encroachment issue was not a relevant factor. This argument 
was based on the reported decision in Om Prakash v. State 
of U.P. [(1998) ] It must be said that the actual 
scenario in that case was different. In that case, the Court 
was considering the acquisition of area of about 500 acres 
comprising of 437 plots, whereas, in the present case, the 
area to be acquired for the Expressway alone was more than 
1600 ha. This is apart from the 25 million sq m of land which 
was liable to be acquired for the purposes of development of 
five land parcels. There was interlinking between the 
acquisition of land for the highway and the acquisition of 
land for establishing the five townships.” 

That the judgment in Radhy Shyam carves out a clear 
distinction by observing that the judgment in Nand Kishore 
related to the lands proposed to be acquired for construction 
of the expressway itself and not to the lands acquired for 

commercial, residential, and industrial purposes, for which 
the invocation of urgency clause was held to be untenable 
and bad in law. 
(xi) That neither the appellants have received any amount 
towards compensation for acquisition of the lands nor have 
they parted with the possession of the subject lands, and 
thus, quashing of the land acquisition notification would not 
have any adverse impact as no development has taken place 
on the lands in question. 
(xii) That the mere ploy of the grant of adequate compensation to 
the landowners with an escalation of 64.7% could not justify 
the grave illegalities committed by the authorities under the 
garb of urgent acquisition because the same cannot obviate 
or supersede the substantive fundamental right of the 
landowners to file objections against the acquisition of the 
privately owned lands. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF YEIDA (RESPONDENT NO.3 IN 
BATCH NO. 1):- 
 
26. 
Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General of India, Shri 
Ranjit Kumar, Shri Gopal Jain, learned senior counsel appearing on 
behalf of YEIDA implored the Court to uphold the judgment passed in 

Kamal Sharma and to reverse the judgment passed in Shyoraj 
Singh as being unsustainable in the eyes of law. They advanced the 
following pertinent submissions seeking the above relief:- 

YEIDA is a statutory authority formed under Section 3 of the 
U.P. Industrial Area Development Act, 1976, which has been 
established to ensure planned development of the ‘industrial 
development area’. In furtherance of this objective, YEIDA 
prepared the Master Plan of 2021 and the Master Plan of 
2031 with the intent to develop the eastern side of river 
Yamuna by construction of a six-lane Expressway joining 
Noida to Agra and also for integrated development of five 
distinct regions along the said Expressway for residential, 
industrial, institutional and recreational purposes. The 
construction of the Jewar Airport is also a part and parcel of 
the very same integrated project. 

That a bare perusal of the Master Plan(Phase-1-2031) clearly 
establishes that the land acquired for development across 
Yamuna Expressway, is an integrated project. The land was 
initially acquired for the Yamuna Expressway and thereafter, 
for 
developing 
land 
parcels 
alongside 
the 
Yamuna 
Expressway as residential townships, industrial areas, 

amusement zones, etc. The development is strictly being 
carried out in accordance with the Master Plan prepared by 
YEIDA. 
(iii) The Yamuna Expressway is a vital project of seminal 
importance providing access to millions of commuters by 
connecting the National Capital to Agra and nearby areas. 
The Yamuna Expressway is poised to become even more 
important with the upcoming Jewar Airport. A project of this 
magnitude would require the involvement of the adjoining 
areas which would lead to an overall development of the 
State. 
(iv) That the legality of the acquisition of the lands in question by 
YEIDA 
for 
integrated 
and 
complementary 
planned 
development is no longer res integra as the same has been 
consistently upheld by this Court vide various judicial 
pronouncements over time, the landmark case being Nand 
Kishore. 

That the judgment in Nand Kishore squarely covers the 
controversy at hand, wherein it was observed that the 
planned development of 25 million square meter of land (2500 
Hectares) being acquired for creation of the five zones for 

industry, residence, amusement zones, etc. would be 
complementary to the creation of the Expressway and is a 
part of an integrated project and it was urged that similarly 
in the present case, land has been acquired for the planned 
development of the region. 
(vi) That it is settled law that the decision on invocation of 
urgency clause is an administrative decision requiring 
subjective satisfaction of the State Government and scope of 
judicial review in the matters of invocation of the urgency 
clause under Sections 17(1) and 17(4) of the Act is limited to 
the decision-making procedure and not to the decision itself. 
The Court is required to examine the record just to arrive at 
a satisfaction regarding existence of material to form an 
opinion about invoking the urgency clause. 
(vii) That the controversy involved in the present case is ad idem 
to the facts of the case in Nand Kishore and the factors that 
weighed with this Court in upholding the invocation of the 
urgency clause in Nand Kishore, also exist in the present 
case, and therefore, the invocation of the urgency clause in 
the present case was fully justified. The Court’s attention was 
drawn to the following factors: - 

(a) Enormity of the project: The acquisition therein in 
‘Nand Kishore’ case, involved 1604 Hectares of 
land affecting 12,283 farmers. Similarly, in the 
present case, the acquisition involves approximately 
2,979 
Hectares 
of 
land 
affecting 
12,868 
farmers/landowners. Thus, the present acquisition 
is of greater magnitude than the one considered in 
Nand Kishore. 
(b) Likelihood of encroachments: The area for the 
expressway alone exceeded 1600 Hectares, not 
including the 25 million square meter parcel of land 
required for developing the five additional zones. In 
the present case, out of the 2,979 Hectares of land 
acquired, only 456.74 Hectares of land is under 
litigation. Therefore, there is an imminent likelihood 
of encroachment on 2,522.26 Hectares of land 
where 
landowners 
have 
already 
received 
compensation and YEIDA has taken the possession. 
(c) Number of Landowners to be heard: The total 
number of landowners to be heard could delay the 
project further. In the present case, 12,868 

landowners would need to be heard, significantly 
delaying the project. Only 140 landowners are 
before this Court (inclusive of both batches of civil 
appeals @ special leave petitions), claiming they 
were not heard before the issuance of notification 
under Section 6 of the Act, whereas, the others have 
accepted the escalated compensation of 64.7% 
directed to be paid by the High Court in Kamal 
Sharma. Thus, hearing all the landowners was 
bound to unnecessarily delay the developmental 
works of great importance without causing any real 
prejudice to the large number of landowners and 
would also lead to escalation of cost of development. 
(viii) That there was sufficient material before the State 
Government to justify the invocation of urgency clause, and 
there was no malice on part of the State Government in 
invoking the same. Stress was laid upon the observations 
made in Nand Kishore, wherein it was held that the 
executive's subjective satisfaction in dispensing with the 
enquiry under Section 5-A can be subjected to judicial review 
only on the grounds of insufficient material to justify 

dispensing with the enquiry or malice in the impugned action, 
neither of these elements exist in the present case. 
(ix) That the Division Bench of Allahabad High Court in the case 
of Shyoraj Singh clearly erred while relying upon the case of 
Radhy Shyam to hold that the acquisition notifications are 
bad in law and that the urgency clause was wrongly invoked. 
That Radhy Shyam is not applicable to the lands acquired 
for integrated planned development project at hand and is 
clearly distinguishable on facts as the said judgment was 
passed in the context of an acquisition for private purposes, 
serving private interests and the chunk of land was acquired 
in a standalone exercise for development of residential, 
commercial and industrial projects, unlike the present case 
where the acquisition is being done in the national interest 
for a project meant to create public infrastructure of huge 
magnitude. In this regard, it was submitted that Nand 
Kishore was distinguished in Radhy Shyam in the following 
terms: - 
“76. In Nand Kishore Gupta v. State of U.P. [(2010) ] the acquisition was upheld because the land was 
urgently needed for construction of Yamuna Expressway and 
by the time the matter was decided by this Court, huge 
amount had been spent on the project. As against this, the 
exercise of power under Sections 17(1) and/or 17(4) for the 

acquisition of land for residential, industrial and commercial 
purposes, construction of sewage treatment plant and 
district jails was held to be legally impermissible in Raja 
Anand Brahma Shah v. State of U.P. [AIR 1967 SC 1081: 
(1967) ], Narayan Govind Gavate v. State of 
Maharashtra [(1977): 1977 SCC (Cri) 49], Om 
Prakash v. State of U.P. [(1998) ], Union of India v. 
Krishan Lal Arneja [(2004) ], Essco Fabs (P) Ltd. v. State of Haryana [(2009): (2009) 1 SCC (Civ) 
537], Babu Ram v. State of Haryana [(2009): 
(2009) 4 SCC (Civ) 69] and Anand Singh v. State of U.P. 
[(2010): (2010) 4 SCC (Civ) 423].” 

That this Court in Natthi v. State of U.P. & Ors.21 and 
Narendra Road Lines Pvt. Ltd. v. State of UP and 
Others22, has dismissed the SLPs preferred against the 
judgments passed by the Allahabad High Court in the self-
same acquisition while relying on the law laid down in Nand 
Kishore, wherein it was held that the acquisition in question 
in District Gautam Budh Nagar through YEIDA is for planned 
development and the subject lands are contiguous to the land 
parcels, which were acquired for the purpose of residential, 
industrial, amusement, etc. along with Yamuna Expressway. 
(xi) The attention of the Court was also drawn to the fact that the 
SLP in Natthi v. State of U.P. & Ors.23 was dismissed on 9th 
 
21 SLP(C) No. 014705-014710 of 2011 
22 SLP(C) No. 17808 of 2010 
23 (Supra, Note 22) 

May, 2011, just a month after the decision of Radhy Shyam 
which was delivered on 15th April, 2011. 
(xii) That another Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court in 
the case of Yogesh Kumar v. State of U.P.24 considered the 
applicability of Radhy Shyam on invocation of urgency 
clause for planned development through YEIDA, and vide 
judgment dated 1st March, 2013, it was held that in view of 
judgment in Natthi v. State of U.P. Thru. Secr. Industrial 
Devp. & Ors.25, the decision in Radhy Shyam will have no 
application on the present acquisition. The decision of 
Allahabad High Court in Yogesh Kumar was also affirmed by 
this Court while dismissing the SLP26 by a Bench presided 
over by Hon’ble Mr. Justice G.S. Singhvi (who authored 
Radhy Shyam) vide order dated 23rd September, 2013. 
(xiii) That it was correctly held by the Division Bench of Allahabad 
High Court in Kamal Sharma that the right of the tenure 
holders to object against the acquisition provided under 
Section 5-A of the Act cannot be said to be a fundamental 
 
24 CMWP No.10782/2013, hereinafter referred to as ‘Yogesh Kumar’ 
25, hereinafter referred to as ‘Natthi’ 
26 Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. CC 16505/2013 

right or a right akin to fundamental right protected by the 
Constitution of India. 
(xiv) That the Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court in 
Kamal Sharma has meticulously reviewed the material on 
record, and held that the same justified the invocation of the 
urgency clause, recording its conclusions as follows: 
(a) The lands of nine villages were acquired through 
different notifications issued over a span of two years 
between 26th February, 2009 to 22nd March, 2011. 
(b) Majority of the declaration notifications were issued 
in a gap of 3 to 4 months. 
(c) It was specifically mentioned in the Certificate of the 
Collector that the acquisition of different parcels of 
land was being proposed as contiguous part of the 
project. If an opportunity of hearing under Section 5-A 
of the Act was granted, the same would have resulted 
in legal proceedings and eventual non-availability of 
contiguous land which would have hampered the 
execution of the integrated project in a time bound 
manner. The original record of the State provides 
categorical statements to this effect. 

(d) The aforesaid decision was taken on account of the 
enormousness of the project in question and the area 
of the land sought to be acquired. 
 He thus urged that the Division Bench of the Allahabad High 
Court, therefore, rightly held that the invocation of the 
urgency clause was not a mechanical exercise and was 
undertaken pursuant to the subjective satisfaction of the 
State Government being arrived at after due application of 
mind to material available on record. 
(xv) That the judgment in Shyoraj Singh does not lay down good 
law and is liable to be set aside, since it failed to take note of 
the earlier Division Bench decisions of the Allahabad High 
Court in the cases of Natthi27, Narendra Road Lines Pvt. 
Ltd. v. State of U.P. & Others28 and Yogesh Kumar29, 
wherein the validity of self-same land acquisition for 
integrated planned development by YEIDA was upheld. 
Ignoring an earlier judicial precedent rendered by a Bench 
presided by co-equal number of judges and taking a totally 

28, hereinafter referred to as ‘Narendra Road 
Lines’ 
29 supra 

contrary view itself amounts to a fundamental error rendering 
the subsequent view per incuriam as held in case of Karnail 
Singh v. State of Haryana30. 
(xvi) That there is no pre or post notification delay in the present 
acquisition inasmuch as there are only three notifications, 
where a period of nearly one year has been consumed in 
issuing the Section 6 notification. For other seven 
notifications, Section 6 notification was issued within two to 
four months. 
Learned Solicitor General concluded his submissions urging 
that it is now futile to oppose the acquisition, particularly when the 
same is unequivocally accepted by all except a few, inasmuch as the 
majority of the landowners have accepted the enhanced 
compensation without raising any further challenge to the 
acquisition. Learned Solicitor General urged that the entire process 
was wholly transparent and that there was pressing necessity for 
acquisition of lands, considering the public purpose involved. He 
thus implored the Court to accept the appeals filed by the YEIDA 
and dismiss the appeals filed by the landowners. 
 
30 (2009) 

27. 
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions 
advanced at bar and have gone through the impugned judgments and 
the material placed on record. 
DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS: - 
 
28. 
The issues which arises for our consideration in the present 
batches of appeal are as follows: - 

Whether the present acquisition is a part of the 
integrated development plan of ‘Yamuna Expressway” 
undertaken by respondent No.3-YEIDA? 

Whether the application of Sections 17(1) and 17(4) of 
the Act was legal and justified in the instant case, 
thereby 
justifying 
the 
decision 
of 
the 
State 
Government to dispense with the enquiry under 
Section 5-A of the Act? 

Whether the view taken by the Division Bench of the 
Allahabad High Court in Kamal Sharma validating 
the questioned acquisition while relying upon Nand 
Kishore lays down the correct proposition of law or 
whether the Division Bench in the case of Shyoraj 
Singh was justified in applying the principles laid 

down in Radhy Shyam and quashing the acquisition 
proceedings in question? 
29. 
Before adverting to the above issues, we may take note of the 
fact that the State Government had formulated a “Policy for Planned 
Development along the Taj Expressway31” and the notification to this 
effect was issued by the Infrastructure & Industrial Development 
Commissioner, Government of Uttar Pradesh on 29th December, 2007. 
The Policy dealt with the formation of Special Development Zone32 and 
the development thereof. As per clause 3.2 of the said Policy, the land 
use of SDZ is divided in the following terms: - 
“3.2. Land use of SDZ (special development zone) 
 
The permissible break-up of the total land area under SDZ for 
different activities shall be as under: 

 %age of total area of SDZ 
A. Core Activity Sports 
Not less than 35% 
(including road & open spaces) 
 
B. Other activities 
 
(i) Commercial 
Not more than 20% 
(ii) Institutional & amenities Not less than 5% 
(iii) Roads, open and 
 
Not less than 25% 
 Circulation areas 
(iv) Residential including 
Not less than 15% 
 Group Housing and 
 Plotted Development 
 Area ” 
 
31 In short, ‘Policy’ 
32 In short ‘SDZ’. 

30. 
A bare perusal of the aforesaid clause makes it clear that while 
the development of roads and open spaces which was to constitute 
35% of the land area was considered to be the core activity, the allied 
activities such as commercial, institutional & amenities, roads, open 
and circulation areas, residential including group housing and plotted 
development areas were to constitute the remaining 65% of the land 
under the SDZ. Hence, undeniably, the authorities were required to 
develop the entire SDZ in an integrated manner. This aspect was 
precisely taken note of by this Court in the case of Nand Kishore. The 
relevant extracts from the judgment of Nand Kishore are reproduced 
hereinbelow for the sake of ready reference: - 
“57. The Expressway is a work of immense public importance. 
The State gains advantages from the construction of an 
expressway and so does the general public. Creation of a 
corridor for fast-moving traffic resulting into curtailing the 
travelling time, as also the transport of the goods, would be 
some factors which speak in favour of the Project being for the 
public purpose. Much was stated about the 25 million sq m of 
land being acquired for the five parcels of land. In fact, in our 
opinion, as has rightly been commented upon by the High 
Court, the creation of the five zones for industry, residence, 
amusement, etc. would be complementary to the creation of the 
Expressway. 
58. It cannot be forgotten that the creation of land parcels 
would give impetus to the industrial development of the State 
creating more jobs and helping the economy and thereby 
helping the general public. There can be no doubt that the 
implementation of the Project would result in coming into 
existence of five developed parcels/centres in the State for the 
use of the citizens. There shall, thus, be the planned 
development of this otherwise industrially backward area. The 
creation of these five parcels will certainly help the maximum 
utilisation of the Expressway and the existence of an 

Expressway for the fast-moving traffic would help the industrial 
culture created in the five parcels. Thus, both will be 
complimentary to each other and can be viewed as parts of an 
integral scheme. Therefore, it cannot be said that it is not a 
public purpose.” 
 
31. 
Learned counsel for the landowners sought to draw a 
distinction, urging that Nand Kishore only dealt with the issue as to 
whether the acquisition was for public purpose and not with the issue 
as to whether the invocation of the urgency clause for commercial, 
residential, industrial purpose was justified. However, we are of the 
view that this contention is bereft of merit as no such distinction is 
permissible. 
32. 
The core question which requires this Court’s consideration is 
whether the Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court in the case of 
Shyoraj Singh was justified in relying upon Radhy Shyam, so as to 
quash the acquisition notification pertaining to the development of the 
land adjoining the Yamuna Expressway. The relevant extracts from 
Radhy Shyam which are reproduced supra would make it clear that 
in the said case, this Court was considering a controversy relating to 
the land acquisition for the purpose of planned industrial development 
in District Gautam Budh Nagar through Greater Noida Industrial 
Development Authority. Hence, the project did not contemplate a 
planned and integrated development of an Expressway and the 

adjoining areas. It was a standalone project pertaining to the 
development in industrial Gautam Budh Nagar. However, it cannot 
be gainsaid that Yamuna Expressway is a vital heartline providing 
access to millions of commuters from National Capital Delhi to Agra. 
The Expressway also connects the prestigious upcoming Jewar Airport 
to adjoining areas. To assume that the Yamuna Expressway is a 
simple highway without any scope for simultaneous development of 
the adjoining lands for commercial, residential and other such 
activities would be unconceivable. A project of such magnitude and 
enormity would definitely require the involvement of the adjoining 
areas which would lead to an overall development of the State of Uttar 
Pradesh at large. 
33. 
As observed above, the purpose behind the acquisition was 
unquestionably the integrated development of lands abutting the 
Yamuna Expressway. The acquisition of the lands for the Expressway 
could not be isolated or separated from the acquisition of the abutting 
lands. This was precisely held in the case of Nand Kishore. 
34. 
It may be noted that the entire edifice of Shyoraj Singh is based 
on Radhy Shyam, wherein a two-Judge Bench of this Court decided 
the controversy arising from land acquisition pertaining to the planned 
industrial development in the District Gautam Budh Nagar. Another 

Division Bench of this Court considered the acquisition pertaining to 
the Yamuna Expressway in the case of Natthi. Placing reliance on 
Nand Kishore, the Division Bench of the same composition as in 
Radhy Shyam vide order dated 9th May, 2011 rejected the special 
leave petition(s) laying challenge to the invocation of the urgency 
clause in the self-same acquisition proceedings. 
35. 
Much stress was laid by the learned counsel for the landowners 
on the issue that the Division Bench while deciding the impugned 
judgment in the case of Kamal Sharma could not have taken a 
different view from Shyoraj Singh and if at all, there was any doubt 
on the correctness of the view taken in Shyoraj Singh, then, the 
question of law was mandatorily required to be referred to a larger 
Bench. We feel that the said argument is fallacious on the fact of it. 
Much prior to Shyoraj Singh’s decision, three different Division 
Benches of the Allahabad High Court by detailed judgments in the 
cases of Natthi, Narendra Road Lines and Yogesh Kumar had 
already affirmed the validity of invocation of the urgency clause in the 
land acquisition notifications for the integrated development plan of 
‘Yamuna Expressway’ by respondent No.3-YEIDA. It is trite to mention 
that in Shyoraj Singh, the Division Bench failed to consider the 
earlier Division Bench judgments in the cases of Natthi, Narendra 

Road Lines and Yogesh Kumar. In this background, the view taken 
by the Division Bench in the case of Shyoraj Singh is per incuriam, 
rather than that in Kamal Sharma. 
36. 
At the cost of repetition, it may be mentioned that the Division 
Bench judgments rendered by the Allahabad High Court in the cases 
of Natthi, Narendra Road Lines and Yogesh Kumar have been 
affirmed by this Court with the dismissal of SLPs assailing the 
impugned judgments in those cases. 
CONCLUSION 
 
37. 
In the wake of the above discussion, we have no hesitation in 
holding that the Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court correctly 
interpreted the legal position while deciding the batch of writ petitions 
in the case of Kamal Sharma and the judgment in the case of 
Shyoraj Singh does not lay down the correct proposition of law. 
38. 
The issues framed above are answered in the following terms: 
(i) Whether the present acquisition is part of the integrated 
development plan of the ‘Yamuna Expressway’ undertaken by 
respondent No. 3-YEIDA? 
• Yes, the present acquisition forms part of the integrated 
development plan for the Yamuna Expressway initiated by 

YEIDA. As observed in the case of Nand Kishore, the 
development of land parcels for industrial, residential, and 
recreational purposes is complementary to the construction 
of the Yamuna Expressway. The objective of the acquisition 
is to integrate land development with the Yamuna 
Expressway’s construction, thereby promoting overall 
growth serving the public interest. Consequently, the 
Expressway and the development of adjoining lands are 
considered to be inseparable components of the overall 
project. 
(ii) Whether the application of Sections 17(1) and 17(4) of the Act 
was legal and warranted in the instant case, thereby justifying the 
Government’s decision to dispense with the inquiry under Section 
5-A of the Act? 
• Yes, the invocation of Sections 17(1) and 17(4) of the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894, was legal and justified in this case. 
The urgency clause was applied in accordance with the 
planned development of the Yamuna Expressway, as held in 
Nand Kishore. 
(iii) Whether the view taken by the Division Bench of the Allahabad 
High Court in Kamal Sharma while relying on Nand Kishore lays 

down the correct proposition of law, or whether the Division Bench 
in Shyoraj Singh was justified in applying the principles laid 
down in Radhy Shyam and quashing the acquisition proceedings 
in question? 
• The view expounded by the Division Bench in Kamal 
Sharma, which relied upon Nand Kishore, sets forth the 
correct proposition of law, and the judgment of the High 
Court in Shyoraj Singh, which relied on Radhy Shyam, did 
not present a correct legal interpretation. The judgment in 
Shyoraj Singh is set aside as it does not lay down good law 
and was passed while overlooking at the earlier precedents, 
rendering it per incuriam. 
39. 
The High Court while deciding Kamal Sharma extensively 
considered the factual matrix and also examined the original records 
of the State Government to arrive at the satisfaction that the 
invocation of the urgency clause was absolutely justified with regard 
to the acquisition in question. The High Court also exhaustively 
considered the entire sequence of judicial pronouncements in respect 
of the acquisition in question before arriving at the aforesaid 
conclusion and acted in an equitable manner while affirming the 
acquisition proceedings and directing the grant of additional 

compensation. We appreciate the endeavour made by the High Court 
to resolve the controversy objectively and equitably and grant our full 
imprimatur to the judgment in Kamal Sharma. 
40. 
Now, we are called upon to consider as to whether the escalated 
compensation formula as arrived at by the Division Bench of the High 
Court in the case of Kamal Sharma would subserve the ends of 
justice or the landowners whose lands have been acquired would be 
entitled to better compensation. 
41. 
It is pertinent to note that the overwhelming majority of 
landowners have refrained from seeking judicial intervention in this 
matter, as manifested by the fact that only 140 out of 12,868 
landowners(covered in both batches of civil appeals @ special leave 
petitions) have opted to challenge the acquisition by approaching this 
Court. This indicates that the majority of the landowners have 
accepted the escalated compensation granted by the High Court in 
Kamal Sharma. 
42. 
This Court, in the cases of Savitri Devi v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh and Others33, Sahara India Commercial Corporation 
Limited and Others v. State of Uttar Pradesh34, and Noida 
 
33 (2015) 
34 (2017) 

Industrial Development Authority v. Ravindra Kumar and 
Others35, despite holding the invocation of the urgency clause under 
Sections 17(1) and 17(4) of the Act to be illegal, nonetheless upheld 
the 
acquisition 
proceedings 
and 
directed 
enhancement 
of 
compensation so as to compensate the land owners. However, in the 
present case, we have concluded that the action of the State in 
invocation of the urgency clause is in consonance with the law. 
43. 
The Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court, while 
delivering its decision in Kamal Sharma has already granted 
additional compensation of 64.7% to the landowners, to be offered as 
‘No Litigation Bonus’ in consonance with the Government order dated 
4th November, 2015, thus there is no scope to direct further 
enhancement in compensation. 
44. 
In light of the Government order dated 4th November, 2015 and 
the precedents set in Savitri Devi v. State of Uttar Pradesh36 and 
Yamuna 
Expressway 
Industrial 
Authority 
v. 
Shakuntla 
Education and Welfare Society37, it is directed that 64.7% 
enhancement in compensation shall apply in rem, ensuring uniform 
benefits to all affected landowners under the present land acquisition. 
 
35 (2022) 
36 supra 
37(2022) SCC OnLine SC 655 

45. 
The question of non-issuance of the final award and its effect 
on the acquisition is left open ensuring that any affected party would 
retain the right to challenge or seek appropriate remedy on this 
specific issue independently, in accordance with law. 
46. 
As a result of the above discussion, the appeals filed by the 
landowners i.e. Batch No. 1, are dismissed, and the appeals filed by 
YEIDA i.e. Batch No. 2, are hereby allowed. 
47. 
No order as to costs. 
48. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

(B.R. GAVAI) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
November 26, 2024.