SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Appeal No. of 2024 
((Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022) 

Payal Sharma …Appellant(s) 
 
Versus 
 
State of Punjab & Anr. 
 …Respondent(s) 

With 
 
Criminal Appeal No. of 2024 
((Crl.) No. 13579 of 2023) 
 
Subhash Chander Kapila …Appellant(s) 
 
Versus 
 
State of Punjab & Ors. 
 …Respondent(s) 

JUDGMENT 

C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J. 

Leave granted. 
1. 
The captioned appeals are directed against the 
order dated 11.03.2022 in C.R.M.-M. No.42226 of 2021 
passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
Chandigarh. The said petition was jointly filed by the 
appellant in the former appeal and her husband, the 
second respondent in the latter appeal, under Section 
482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, 
‘Cr.P.C.’) as petitioner Nos.2 and 1 respectively, seeking 
quashment of FIR No.0080/2020 dated 03.12.2020 
registered for offences punishable under Sections 406, 
498-A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘IPC’) at 
Police Station, District Police Commissionerate, Women, 
Jalandhar and all subsequent proceedings arising 
therefrom. In fact, after the registration of FIR 
No.0080/2020 at the instance of Subhash Chander Kapila, 
the second respondent in the former appeal, offences 
under Sections 420 and 120-B, IPC were also added. The 
appellant in the former appeal is accused No.5 and her 
husband, the second respondent in the latter appeal, was 
accused No.6 in the said FIR. The appellant in the latter 
appeal viz., the second respondent in the former appeal 
is the complainant. For convenient sake, the parties are 
therefore, referred to hereafter in this judgment in 
accordance with their status and rank in the subject FIR 
and subsequently filed final report, unless otherwise 
specifically mentioned. In other words, the appellant in 
the former appeal is described as ‘accused No.5’, her 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
husband who is the second respondent in the latter 
appeal is referred to as ‘accused No.6’ and the appellant 
in the latter appeal, who is respondent No.2 in the former 
appeal is referred to as ‘the complainant’, in this 
judgment. 
2. 
As per the impugned judgment dated 11.03.2022, 
the High Court allowed CRM-M No.42226 of 2021 qua 
accused No.6, the husband of accused No.5 and quashed 
FIR No.0080 dated 03.12.2020 and all proceedings 
subsequent thereto qua him and at the same time, 
dismissed the said petition qua accused No.5, the second 
petitioner therein. The former appeal is filed by accused 
No.5 against CRM-M No.42226 of 2021 to the extent it 
rejected her prayer for quashment of subject FIR and all 
further proceedings and the latter appeal is filed by the 
complainant against the quashment of the subject FIR 
and all further proceedings therefrom qua accused No.6. 
3. 
Heard learned counsel appearing for accused 
Nos.5 and 6 and the learned counsel appearing for the 
respondent State and also for the complainant. 
4. 
Before adverting to the rival contentions, it is 
appropriate to look into the relationship between the 
parties involved in the matter. The couple involved (now 
divorced) is the first accused-Amit Sharma and Vandana 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
Sharma, who is the daughter of the complainant. 
Accused No.6 is the cousin brother of the first accused 
and as already noted, accused No.5 is his wife. 
5. 
The undisputed and indisputable facts, in succinct, 
that led to the filing of CRM-M No.42226 of 2021 before 
the High Court are as under: - 
The marriage between the first accused-Amit 
Sharma and Vandana Sharma was solemnized on 
23.02.2019. On 07.03.2019, the first accused-Amit 
Sharma left for Canada and Vandana Sharma stayed 
back in her matrimonial home at Jalandhar in Punjab with 
her in-laws. On 02.12.2019, Vandana Sharma also left for 
Canada. On 22.09.2020, Amit Sharma approached the 
Family Court, Canada seeking divorce from his wife 
Vandana Sharma. The lodgement of the subject FIR 
No.0080/2020 dated 03.12.2020 by the complainant who 
is the father of Vandana Sharma, alleging commission of 
the aforementioned offences under the IPC against all 
the accused including accused Nos.5 and 6, was later to 
initiation of the said proceedings. It was in the said 
circumstances that accused Nos.5 and 6 filed CRM-M 
No.42226 of 2021 before the High Court raising various 
grounds, which culminated in the impugned order. 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
6. 
The contention of accused No.5 is that she is only 
the wife of the cousin brother of the first accused, who 
was the husband of the daughter of the complainant. 
Accused No.5 has been residing with her husband at 
Mohali in Punjab whereas the daughter of the 
complainant Smt. Vandana was residing in her 
matrimonial home at Jalandhar in Punjab and in other 
words that they were residing in different cities. The 
subject FIR carries only allegations of general, ominous 
and omnibus character against herself, and her husband 
and they were arraigned as accused only with mala fide 
intention to pressurise to yield to the illegal demands. It 
is submitted that though the High Court has rightly 
quashed the FIR and all consequential and subsequential 
proceedings against accused No.6, the fact that accused 
No.5 is related to the first accused, the husband of the 
complainant’s daughter only through accused No.6 and 
except the exaggerated versions, as in the case of her 
husband, no specific and separate allegation with 
supporting materials are available against her and as 
such the High Court ought not to have dismissed the 
petition especially after allowing the very same petition 
as relates her husband. Contentions, unsuccessful 
raised before the High Court were also, thus raised. 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
7. 
The learned counsel for the complainant has 
reiterated the contentions raised before the High Court, 
to support the impugned order. The impugned order 
would reveal that while resisting the prayer of accused 
No.5 for quashing the FIR and all subsequent 
proceedings therefrom, it was contended before the 
High Court that specific allegations were raised against 
her and challan was submitted and the matter was listed 
for framing charges and hence, all the pleas could be 
raised by her before the trial Court. Evidently, the said 
contention is untaken, but the High Court held, as relates 
her, in paragraph 7 of the impugned judgment, thus: - 
 
“7. Having heard Ld. Counsel for the parties and 
after carefully perusing the record, this Court 
finds that there are specific allegations qua 
petitioner No.2 and thus, at this stage it will not be 
a case to quash the FIR qua her. Resultantly, the 
present petition qua petitioner No.2 stands 
dismissed.” 
 
8. 
In view of the aforementioned rival contentions, we 
bestowed an analytical consideration and found that 
besides the afore-extracted paragraph 7 there is 
absolutely no consideration of the contentions of the 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
appellant in the impugned judgment. We have already 
noticed that the accused No.5 is only the wife of the 
cousin brother of the husband of the complainant’s 
daughter, and she was living in another city along with 
her husband. In view of the aforesaid undisputed 
position, it is relevant to refer to certain decisions of this 
Court. 
9. 
In the decision in Preeti Gupta & Anr. v. State of 
Jharkhand & Anr.1, this Court observed that it is a matter 
of common knowledge that in matrimonial disputes 
exaggerated versions of the incident are reflected in a 
large number of complaints and the tendency of over 
implication is also reflected in a large number of cases. 
The criminal trials lead to immense sufferings for all 
concerned. Even ultimate acquittal in the trial may also 
not be able to wipe out the deep scars of sufferings of 
ignominy, it was further held therein. We have no 
hesitation to hold that the said observation of this Court 
is in fact, sounding of a caution, against non-discharge of 
the duty to see whether implication of a person who is 
not a close relative of the family of the husband is over 
implication or whether allegation against any such 
 
1 (2010) 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
person is an exaggerated version, in matrimonial 
disputes of this nature. In this context, it is to be noted 
that the term ‘relative’ has not been defined in the statute 
and, therefore, it must be assigned a meaning as is 
commonly understood. Hence, normally, it can be taken 
to include, father, mother, husband or wife, son, 
daughter, brother, sister, nephew, niece, grandson or 
granddaughter of any individual or the spouse of any 
person. To put it shortly, it includes a person related by 
blood, marriage or adoption. In paragraph 35 of Preeti 
Gupta’s case (supra) it was furthermore held thus: - 
“…The courts have to be extremely careful and 
cautious in dealing with these complaints and 
must take pragmatic realties into consideration 
while dealing with matrimonial cases. The 
allegations of harassment by husband’s close 
relatives who had been living in different cities 
and never visited or rarely visited the place where 
the complainant resided would have an entirely 
different complexion. The allegations of the 
complainant are required to be scrutinized with 
great care and circumspection.” 
 
10. 
 In such circumstances, normally against a person 
who is not falling under any of the aforesaid categories 
when allegations are raised, in the light of the 
observations made in Preeti Gupta’s case (supra), the 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
Court concerned owes an irrecusable duty to see 
whether such implication is over implication and/or 
whether the allegations against such a person is an 
exaggerated version. We have already taken note of the 
fact that except the observation made in paragraph 7 
there is no consideration at all of the contentions of 
accused No.5 in the impugned order. 
 
11. 
In the decision in Geeta Mehrotra and Anr. v. State 
of U.P. and Anr.2, this Court held that mere casual 
reference of the names of the family members in a 
matrimonial dispute without allegation of active 
involvement in the matter would not justify taking 
cognizance against them overlooking the tendency of 
over implication viz., to draw the entire members of the 
household in the domestic quarrel resulting in 
matrimonial dispute, especially when it happens soon 
after the wedding. In the decision in Kahkashan Kausar 
onam and Others v. State of Bihar & Ors.3, this Court 
quashed proceedings in so far as family members of the 
husband on the ground that the allegations against them 
are general and ominous in nature. In matters like the 
 
2 (2012) 
3 (2022) 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
one at hand when relatives not residing in the same 
house where the alleged victim resides, the courts shall 
not stop consideration by merely looking into the 
question where the accused is a person falling within the 
ambit of the expression ‘relative’ for the purpose of 
Section 498-A, IPC, but should also consider whether it is 
a case of over implication or exaggerated version solely 
to implicate such person(s) to pressurise the main 
accused. It is also relevant to refer to the decision of this 
Court in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal4, wherein after 
considering the statutory provisions and the earlier 
decisions, this Court referred to various categories of 
cases where the inherent powers under Section 482, Cr. 
P.C. could be exercised by High Court to prevent abuse 
of process of Court or otherwise to secure ends of justice. 
One among such categories is where the allegations 
made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and 
inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent 
man could ever reach a just conclusion that there is 
sufficient ground for proceeding against an accused. 
12. 
We will proceed to consider the case in respect of 
accused No.5 a little later and now, will consider the 
 
4 1992 Supp. (1) SCC 335 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
challenge of complainant against quashment of the 
subject FIR and all consequential proceedings based 
thereon, qua accused No.6 bearing in mind the above 
conclusions and decisions. It is to be noted that the 
impugned order itself would reveal that the learned 
counsel who appeared for the complainant admitted 
before the High Court regarding the absence of 
allegations against accused No.6 as relates offences 
under Sections 406 and 498-A, IPC. This is discernible 
from paragraph 6 of the impugned order and it reads 
thus: - 
“6. Qua Petitioner No.1, Ld. Counsel admits that 
so far as Sections 406 and 498-A are concerned, 
there are no specific allegations. He asserts that 
offences punishable under Sections 420 and 120-
B of the IPC have been added later on and the 
allegations levelled against petitioner No.1 shall 
well fall within the ambit of Sections 420 IPC and 
417 of the IPC.” 
 
13. 
Thus, it can be seen that what was left to be 
considered by the High Court in C.R.M.-M No.42226 of 
2021, as relates accused No.6 was whether the 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
allegations satisfied the ingredients to attract Sections 
420 and 417, IPC. 
14. 
Cheating simpliciter is punishable under Section 
417, IPC. To bring home an offence under Section 415 
punishable under Section 417, IPC, there must be (1) 
deception of any person; (2) that person must have been 
fraudulently or dishonestly induced – (i) to deliver any 
property to any person, or (ii) to consent with any person 
relating to any property; or (2)(a) that person must have 
been induced intentionally to do or omit to do anything 
which he would not do or omit, if he were not so 
deceived, and which act or omission causes or likely to 
cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, 
reputation or property. 
15. 
The difference between Section 417 and Section 
420, IPC, is that where in pursuance of the deception, no 
property passes, the offence is one of cheating 
punishable under Section 417, IPC, but where, in 
pursuance of the deception, property is delivered, the 
offence is punishable under Section 420, IPC. It is to be 
noted that the High Court in respect of accused No.6 held 
that the allegations in the FIR would not satisfy the 
ingredients to attract the offence punishable under 
Section 417, IPC. There cannot be any doubt with 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
respect to the position that when the ingredients to 
attract the offence punishable under Section 417, IPC are 
not satisfied there cannot be any question of such 
allegations/accusations attracting Section 420, IPC, for 
the simple reason that to bring a case within the ambit of 
Section 420, IPC, not only cheating is simpliciter but also 
by dishonest inducement of that person sought to be 
deceived to deliver any property must have delivered 
that property or made alteration or destruction of any 
valuable security. In view of the aforesaid position 
obtained with respect to applicability Sections 417 and 
420, IPC, and in view of the lack of allegations/ 
accusations to satisfy the ingredients to constitute such 
offences in the subject FIR and also in the subsequently 
filed final report the question is whether the contention 
that the High Court had done an error or illegality in 
quashing the FIR and also all further proceedings in 
pursuance thereof, can be sustained. The said question 
can be answered only in the negative. We will dilate on 
the same along with consideration of the case of accused 
No.5. A scanning of the impugned order would also 
reveal the factum of subsequent filing of final report was 
also within the knowledge of the trial Court. 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
16. 
In view of the relationship between accused No.5 
and the complainant and also the fact that accused No.5 
got related to the husband of complainant’s daughter 
only through her marriage with accused No.6, we are at 
a loss to understand as to how the offences under 
Sections 406 and 498-A, IPC, could be raised against 
accused No.5 in the light of the allegations in the subject 
FIR especially when the complainant himself admitted 
lack of specific allegations to connect accused No.6 with 
the said offences and if similar are the allegations raised 
against appellant Nos.5 and 6 qua the aforesaid offences. 
17. 
A bare perusal of the FIR would reveal that such 
allegations against the accused No.5 and 6 are general 
and omnibus in nature and that apart they are nothing but 
exaggerated versions invariably suggesting over 
implication of accused No.5 and 6. 
18. 
It is true that the contention of the complainant is 
that even before the High Court took up the matter for 
consideration the challan was filed and the said fact 
skipped the attention of the High Court and, in fact, in 
such circumstances, the High Court ought not have 
quashed the FIR and all further proceedings qua 
respondent No.6. A mere glance of the impugned order 
would reveal that the High Court had actually taken note 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
of the fact of filing of challan before the trial Court. In this 
context, it is relevant to note the decision in Umesh 
Kumar v. State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.5, this Court 
held that a petition could be filed under Section 482, 
Cr.P.C., for quashing the chargesheet even before 
framing of the charges and that it would not be in the 
interest of justice to reject the application merely on the 
ground that the accused concerned could argue legal 
and factual issues at the time of framing of charges. We 
have no doubt with respect to the scope and amplitude 
of the inherent powers under Section 482, Cr.P.C., which 
virtually saves inherent powers of the High Court that the 
said power could be exercised to prevent abuse of the 
process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of 
justice. In such circumstances if the High Court feels that 
ends of justice requires that an order should be made in 
the application, technicality shall not deter the court from 
passing necessary orders to secure ends of justice. 
19. 
In the said circumstances, the question is whether 
the factum of filing of final report prior to filing of the 
petition under Section 482, Cr.P.C., should be a ground 
for interfering with the impugned judgment whereunder 
 
5 (2013) 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
the subject FIR and all further proceedings therefore, 
were quashed qua accused No.6 and declined to do so in 
the case of accused No.5. The fact that the High Court 
was appraised of the factum of filing of final report is 
evident from the fact that the said position was 
specifically mentioned in the impugned order itself. In 
the contextual situation, while considering the aforesaid 
question it is relevant to refer to the so-called specific 
allegations made against the accused Nos.5 and 6 in the 
FIR. It is alleged that accused Nos.2 and 3 who are 
respectively the father-in-law and mother-in-law of the 
complainant’s daughter demanded Rs.15 lakhs from her 
daughter for the purpose of enabling to obtain visa and 
ticket for her travel to join her husband in Canada and 
told her to hand over the same to accused Nos.5 and 6 
who had been consulting the travel agent for that 
purpose. Furthermore, it was alleged therein that in 
pursuance the same amount of Rs.2 lakhs was given to 
accused Nos.2 and 3. In the final report also the same 
accusation has been made. In this context, it is relevant 
to note that both the FIR and the final report would reveal 
that the husband of the complainant’s daughter 
subsequently left for Canada on 02.10.2020. Now it is to 
be noted that the very contention of accused Nos.5 and 6 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
is that they were residing in a different city viz., at Mohali 
in Punjab and that the complainant’s daughter was 
residing in her matrimonial home at Jalandhar in Punjab. 
The said fact is indisputable as it is evident from the 
materials on record. Taking note of the nature of their 
relation with husband of the complainant’s daughter and 
the fact that both the families were residing in different 
cities and in the conspicuous absence of allegation/ 
accusation that they came to the place where 
complainant’s daughter was residing and committed 
cognizable offence as alleged on any particular date or 
dates, we are at a loss to understand how the 
complainant could contend that the quashment of the 
proceedings based on subject FIR against the accused 
No.6 warrants appellate interference and how they could 
justify the disinclination to interfere with and qua the FIR 
and all subsequent proceedings qua accused No.5. 
Another allegation/ accusation against the accused 
Nos.5 and 6 is that he along with other accused made 
complainant’s daughter to believe that house at 6, 
Gurunagar, near Goal Market, Mithapur Road, Jalandhar 
belongs to the husband of the complainant’s daughter 
viz., the first accused which later came to the knowledge 
of the complainant and her daughter to be incorrect. In 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
short, a careful scanning of the FIR and the subsequently 
filed final report would show that the latter contains only 
reiteration of the allegations in the FIR qua accused Nos.5 
and 6. Evidently in the final report based on such bald 
assertions different sections were put against them. 
20. 
The decisions referred above on the subject of 
exercise of power under Section 482, Cr.P.C., would 
undoubtedly cast a duty on the Courts to consider the 
contentions that there is lack of specific allegations 
against the accused concerned to constitute the 
offence(s) alleged against a relative or that the 
implication was nothing but an over implication to 
pressurise the family of the husband to yield to the 
demands. The Courts cannot refrain from discharging 
the obligation to consider such contentions. It appears 
that in the case on hand despite raising of specific 
contentions which require deeper consideration, may be 
taking note of the submissions made on behalf of the 
complainant that the challan was presented and the 
matter stood listed for framing charges and hence, it 
would be open to accused No.5 to raise all plea at the 
time of framing of the charges, the Court refrained itself 
from considering the contentions raised against accused 
No.5. 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
21. 
 As noticed hereinbefore except what was 
observed in paragraph 7, as extracted above, there is 
total non-consideration of the serious contentions of 
accused No.5. In the context of the case, it is worthwhile 
to note that such accusations have actually come not from 
the horse’s mouth and only from the father of the wife of 
the first accused. That apart, except making vague 
allegations against accused Nos.5 and 6, the complainant 
did not make specific allegation with details against 
them with details. A scanning of the materials on record 
would reveal that the complainant was fully aware of the 
fact that accused Nos.5 and 6 were living in Mohali in 
Punjab whereas his daughter was living in Jalandhar. 
Even then he did not state when the appellant visited the 
place where his daughter was living. As noted above, 
the marriage of the daughter of the complainant with the 
first accused-Amit Sharma was solemnised on 23.02.2019 
and Amit Sharma left for Canada on 07.03.2019. The 
daughter of the second respondent–claimant stayed 
back in her matrimonial home at Jalandhar and later on 
02.12.2019 she also left for Canada. 
22. 
The fact that the present complaint which 
ultimately culminated in the impugned order was filed 
by the complainant subsequent to the grant of divorce 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
between the first accused and the complainant’s 
daughter, is a fact discernible and indisputable. This had 
occurred in Canada. A perusal of the final report would 
reveal that even after the investigation no material 
whatsoever worthy to connect the appellant with the 
offences was seen collected. Therefore, the question is 
whether the vague, and at the same time, highly 
exaggerated versions of FIR and the proceedings 
subsequent thereto can be permitted to be proceeded 
against accused Nos.5 and 6. In short, on a careful 
consideration of FIR and the final report and materials we 
have no hesitation to hold that there is nothing on record 
to suggest, even prima facie that they would constitute 
the alleged offences against the accused No.6. In the 
aforesaid circumstances and based on the decisions of 
this Court as referred supra viz., Preeti Gupta’s case, 
Geeta Mehrotra’s case and Kahkashan Kausar onam’s case, the subject FIR and all further 
proceedings therefrom against accused No.5 are liable 
to be quashed and rightly they were quashed by the 
High Court. We do not find any reason to interfere with 
the impugned order to that effect qua accused No.6. In 
other words, Criminal Appeal arising from SLP(Crl.) 
No.13579 of 2024 is liable to be dismissed. 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
23. 
 A scanning of the FIR and the subsequently filed 
final report would reveal that the allegation against 
accused No.5, who is the wife of accused No.6, are also 
of the same nature. It is relevant to note that she is 
related to the husband of complainant’s daughter only 
through her marriage with cousin brother of the first 
accused viz., accused No.6. When the subject FIR and all 
further proceedings pursuant therefrom were quashed 
against the said cousin brother viz., accused No.6, the 
same reasons must apply to the case of accused No.5 as 
well. We are of the considered view that the High Court 
ought to have interfered and quashed the subject FIR and 
all other proceedings therefrom in relation to accused 
No.5 viz., the wife of accused No.6 as well. To secure 
interest of justice in the circumstances obtained, we are 
of the considered view that filing of the chargesheet 
cannot be a reason for interfering with impugned order 
in respect of accused No.6 or rejecting the prayer of 
accused No.5 to quash the proceedings and to make 
them to argue or to raise the legal and factual issues at 
the stage of framing of the charges. It is evident that 
making them to face the trial based on the allegations or 
accusation as referred above would be nothing but an 
abuse of process of court. 

SLP (Crl.) No. 3995 of 2022 
24. 
For all the reasons given as above, Criminal 
Appeal arising out from SLP (Crl.) No.3995 of 2022 is 
allowed and the impugned order qua the accused No.5 
is liable to be set aside. As a necessary sequel, the 
subject FIR and all further proceedings therefrom 
including the chargesheet qua accused No.5 are 
quashed and set aside. Criminal Appeal arising out from 
SLP (Crl.) No.13579 of 2023 filed by the complainant is 
dismissed confirming the impugned order qua accused 
No.6. 
25. 
Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of. 

……………………, J. 
 (C.T. Ravikumar) 

……………………, J. 
 (Rajesh Bindal) 
New Delhi; 
November 26, 2024