IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

THE STATE OF KARNATAKA...APPELLANT 

VERSUS 
CHANDRASHA...RESPONDENT 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
R.MAHADEVAN, J. 
1. 
At the outset, it would be apposite to point out the observation of this Court 
in Swatantar Singh v. State of Haryana1 (SCC p. 17, para 6), which reads as under: 
“6….. Corruption is corroding, like cancerous lymph nodes, the vital 
veins of the body politic, social fabric of efficiency in the public service and 
demoralizing the honest officers. The efficiency in public service would improve 
only when the public servant devotes his sincere attention and does the duty 
diligently, truthfully, honestly and devotes himself assiduously to the 
performance of the duties of his post. The reputation of being corrupt would 
gather thick and unchaseable clouds around the conduct of the officer and gain 
notoriety much faster than the smoke.” 
 
2. 
This is an appeal filed by the State against the final Judgment and Order 
dated 16.02.2022 passed by the High Court of Karnataka, Kalaburagi Bench2 in. 
 
1 (1997): 1997 SCC (L&S) 909 
2 Hereinafter shortly referred to as “the High Court” 

3. 
By the impugned Judgment, the High Court set aside the order of 
conviction dated 13.10.2015 passed by the Principal Sessions Judge, Kalaburagi3 
in Special Case No.586 of 2010 and thereby acquitted the respondent herein from 
the charges punishable under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) r/w Section 13(2) of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 19884. 
4. 
The case of the prosecution as culled out from the records is as follows: 
One Subhashchandra S. Alur (P.W.1), who was working as Second Division 
Assistant in Shri Mahanteshwar High School situated at Mahantapura 
Chinamagera Village, Afzalpur Taluk, Kalaburagi District, made a complaint 
(Ex.P1) on 05.08.2009, alleging that after preparing a bill for encashment of 
surrender leave salary payable to himself and three non-teaching staff of his 
school, he submitted the bill to the Sub Treasury Office, Afzalpur on 29.07.2009, 
as per the instructions of the Block Education Officer, Afzalpur. On examination 
of the same, the respondent, who was working as First Division Assistant in the 
said office of the Sub Treasury, directed the complainant (P.W.1) to take back the 
bill as it cannot be passed. When the complainant made request for passing the 
same, the respondent demanded illegal gratification of Rs.500/- each (in total, 
Rs.2,000/-). On enquiry, he came to know that the respondent was in the habit of 
passing the bills only after receiving the bribe amount. Since the complainant was 
not inclined to pay the demanded amount, he went to the office of Lokayukta, 
 
3 Hereinafter shortly referred to as “the trial Court” 
4 For short, “the Act” 

Gulbarga, Karnataka, on 30.07.2009, wherein, a tape recorder was handed over 
to him to record the conversation of the respondent in the Sub Treasury Office. 
Accordingly, the complainant went to the office of the Sub Treasury and enquired 
with the respondent, who demanded the bribe amount of Rs.2,000/- and told him 
that only after payment of the same, the bill will be passed, and cheque will be 
issued. The said conversation was recorded in the tape recorder and was handed 
over by the complainant to the Lokayukta Police on 05.08.2009 with a request to 
take action against the respondent. After receipt of the complaint, the Lokayukta 
Police registered a case in Crime No.13 of 2009 for the offence under Section 
13(1)(d) r/w Section 13(2) of the Act. 
5. 
Based on the complaint lodged by the complainant, trap was laid on 
05.08.2009, in which, the bribe amount of Rs.2,000/- was recovered from the 
possession of the respondent. Upon conducting a thorough investigation, the 
Lokayukta Police filed a charge sheet, which was taken on file as Special Case 
No.586 of 2010 and thereafter, charges were framed against the respondent for 
the offences punishable under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) r/w Section 13(2) of the 
Act. The respondent pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 
6. 
To substantiate the charges framed against the respondent, the prosecution 
examined P.W.1 to P.W.12 witnesses and marked Exs.P1 to P30 documents, 
besides M.O.1 to M.O.10 material objects. However, no oral and documentary 
evidence were let in, on the side of the respondent. 

7. 
After hearing both sides and upon examining the materials available on 
record, the trial Court by judgment dated 13.10.2015, found the respondent guilty 
of the offences under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) r/w Section 13(2) of the Act and 
convicted him and sentenced him to undergo imprisonment for a period of six 
months and to pay a fine of Rs.2,500/-, in default to undergo further period of two 
months’ imprisonment for the offence under Section 7 of the Act, and to undergo 
imprisonment for a period of two years and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/-, in default 
to undergo further period of six months imprisonment for the offence under 
Section 13(1)(d) r/w Section 13(2) of the Act. Both the sentences were ordered to 
run concurrently. 
8. 
Challenging the aforesaid judgment of conviction and sentence passed by 
the trial Court, the respondent preferred an appeal in A.No.200105 of 2015, 
which was allowed, and the respondent was acquitted from the charges by the 
High Court, by judgment dated 16.02.2022. Feeling aggrieved and being 
dissatisfied with the same, the State has preferred the instant appeal. 
9. 
Assailing the judgment and order passed by the High Court, the learned 
counsel for the appellant made the following submissions: 
9.1. 
As per the evidence of the complainant (P.W.1), the respondent initially 
refused to pass the bill, and he asked the complainant to take back the same; 
however, at the request of the complainant, the respondent agreed to get the bill 
passed by influencing his higher officials and demanded illegal gratification for 
the same. 

9.2. 
According to the respondent, he passed the bill relating to the complainant 
and others on 29.07.2009 and the cheque was prepared by the Treasury Office on 
30.07.2009 and hence, no work was pending with him as on the date of trap i.e., 
on 05.08.2009. However, the cheque was not issued to the complainant nor any 
intimation in this regard, was given to the school authorities. 
9.3. 
The case of the prosecution was that the respondent demanded illegal 
gratification of Rs.2,000/- for showing official favour in the matter of getting the 
bill sanctioned that was due to be paid to the complainant and others by 
influencing his higher officials. Even if the respondent has no pending work with 
him, and he demands and accepts any gratification, the essential ingredients for 
the offence under Section 7 of the Act get attracted. 
9.4. 
After obtaining necessary sanction (Ex.P25) from the Director of Treasury, 
Bangalore, (P.W.11) who is the competent authority as well as disciplinary 
authority at the relevant point of time, the prosecution was launched against the 
respondent for the charges framed against him and hence, there was no infirmity 
or illegality in initiating the prosecution against the respondent. 
9.5. 
P.W.1 to P.W.3 along with P.W.4 and P.W.5 coupled with Investigating 
Officers (P.W.10 and P.W.12) consistently deposed about the drawing of seizure 
mahazar (Ex.P11) and their evidence also supported the case of the prosecution 
in entirety qua demand and acceptance of bribe amount and recovery of the same 
from the respondent. Therefore, the presumption under Section 20 (1) of the Act 
must be raised in favour of the prosecution. 

9.6. 
Placing reliance on the decision of this Court in Krishna Ram v. State of 
Rajasthan5, it is submitted that once it is proved that money was recovered from 
the possession of the respondent, the burden of rebutting the presumption 
contemplated under section 20(1) of the Act shifts upon the respondent, but he 
failed to do the same in the cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses. 
9.7. 
Though the respondent has taken a plea that there were loan transactions 
between himself and the complainant (PW1) and 8 to 10 days prior to the date of 
trap, P.W.1 had borrowed a sum of Rs.2,000/- from the respondent and when the 
respondent pressurised PW1 to return back the said amount, the present case was 
falsely registered against him, no reliable and convincing evidence was adduced 
in support of the same. 
9.8. 
Thus, the prosecution proved its case beyond reasonable doubt that the 
respondent being Government servant while working as First Division Assistant 
in the office of the Sub-Treasury Office at Afzalpur, demanded Rs.2,000/- from 
PW1 as illegal gratification for the bill to be passed by influencing his higher 
officials and on 05.08.2009, the respondent, while accepting the bribe of 
Rs.2,000/- was trapped by the Lokayukta police and thereby committed the 
offences punishable under Section 7 and 13(1)(d) r/w Section 13(2) of the Act. 
9.9. 
Considering all these aspects, the trial Court rightly convicted the 
respondent for the offences as stated above and punished him for the same. 
 
5 2009 (2) Crimes 337 

However, the High Court erred in passing the judgment of acquittal against the 
respondent, which has to be set aside in this appeal. 
10., the learned senior counsel for the respondent submitted that the 
respondent passed the bill on 29.07.2009 and the cheque was made ready on 
30.07.2009 and no work was pending with him as on 05.08.2009 and hence, he 
did not demand any bribe amount from the complainant as alleged by the 
prosecution. Taking note of the same and also after analysing the oral and 
documentary evidence let in by the parties, the High Court rightly allowed the 
appeal filed by the respondent and set aside the judgment of conviction passed by 
the trial Court and hence, the same need not be interfered with by this court. 
11. 
We have considered the submissions made by the parties and perused the 
materials available on record carefully and meticulously. 
12. 
In the instant case, the respondent was charged under Sections 7 and 
13(1)(d) r/w Section 13(2) of the Act, for demand and acceptance of bribe amount 
of Rs.2,000/- from the complainant (P.W.1) for passing the bill of encashment of 
Earned Leave Surrender for Rs.43,323/- pertaining to the complainant and three 
non-teaching staff of his school. Though the trial Court found him guilty of the 
aforesaid offences and sentenced him for the same, the High Court reversed the 
said findings and acquitted the respondent from the charges framed against him. 
Thus, this appeal is against the judgment of acquittal of the respondent. 

13. 
Section 7 of the Act deals with public servants accepting or attempting to 
accept illegal gratification other than their legal remuneration. Its essential 
ingredients are (i)that the person accepting the gratification should be a public 
servant; and (ii)that he should accept the gratification for himself, and the 
gratification should be as a motive or reward for doing or forbearing to do any 
official act or for showing or forbearing to show, in the exercise of his official 
function, favour or disfavour to any person6. Insofar as Section 13(1)(d) of the 
Act, it was amended by the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Act, 2018, 
with effect from 26th July, 2018. However, in view of Section 6 of the General 
Clauses Act, Section 13(1)(d) prior to the amendment, is applicable to the facts 
of the present case, as the offence was stated to have been committed on 
05.08.2009. Thus, its essential ingredients are (i)that he should have been a public 
servant; (ii)that he should have used corrupt or illegal means or otherwise abused 
his position as such public servant, and (iii)that he should have obtained a 
valuable thing or pecuniary advantage for himself or for any other person. 
14. 
The law is well settled. In C.M.Girish Babu v. CBI7 and in B.Jayaraj v. 
State of A.P.8, while considering the case under Sections 7, 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of 
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, it is reiterated that it has to be proved 
beyond reasonable doubt that the accused voluntarily accepted money knowing 
it to be bribe; absence of proof of demand for illegal gratification and mere 
 
6 A.Subair v. State of Kerala (2009) 
7 (2009): (2009) 2 SCC (Cri) 1 
8 (2014): (2014) 5 SCC (Cri) 543 

possession or recovery of currency notes is not sufficient to constitute such 
offence; and the presumption under Section 20 of the Act can be drawn only after 
demand for and acceptance of illegal gratification is proved. 
15. 
Pertinently, it is also to be noted that the Constitutional Bench in Neeraj 
Dutta v. State (Govt of NCT of Delhi)9 has answered the issue ‘whether in the 
absence of evidence of the complainant / direct or primary evidence of demand 
of illegal gratification, it is permissible to draw an inferential deduction of 
culpability / guilt of a public servant under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) read with 
Section 13(2) based on other evidence adduced by the prosecution’ in affirmative, 
with the following conclusions: 
“88. What emerges from the aforesaid discussion is summarised as under: 
88.1.(a) Proof of demand and acceptance of illegal gratification by a public 
servant as a fact in issue by the prosecution is a sine qua non in order to establish 
the guilt of the accused public servant under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of 
the Act. 
88.2.(b) In order to bring home the guilt of the accused, the prosecution has 
to first prove the demand of illegal gratification and the subsequent acceptance as 
a matter of fact. This fact in issue can be proved either by direct evidence which 
can be in the nature of oral evidence or documentary evidence. 
88.3.(c) Further, the fact in issue, namely, the proof of demand and 
acceptance of illegal gratification can also be proved by circumstantial evidence in 
the absence of direct oral and documentary evidence. 
88.4.(d) In order to prove the fact in issue, namely, the demand and 
acceptance of illegal gratification by the public servant, the following aspects have 
to be borne in mind: 
(i) if there is an offer to pay by the bribe giver without there being any 
demand from the public servant and the latter simply accepts the offer and receives 
the illegal gratification, it is a case of acceptance as per Section 7 of the Act. In 
such a case, there need not be a prior demand by the public servant. 
(ii) On the other hand, if the public servant makes a demand and the bribe 
giver accepts the demand and tenders the demanded gratification which in turn is 
received by the public servant, it is a case of obtainment. In the case of obtainment, 
the prior demand for illegal gratification emanates from the public servant. This is 
an offence under Section 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act. 
(iii) In both cases of (i) and (ii) above, the offer by the bribe giver and the 
demand by the public servant respectively have to be proved by the prosecution as 
 
9 (2023): 

a fact in issue. In other words, mere acceptance or receipt of an illegal gratification 
without anything more would not make it an offence under Section 7 or Section 
13(1)(d), (i) and (ii) respectively of the Act. Therefore, under Section 7 of the Act, 
in order to bring home the offence, there must be an offer which emanates from the 
bribe giver which is accepted by the public servant which would make it an offence. 
Similarly, a prior demand by the public servant when accepted by the bribe giver 
and in turn there is a payment made which is received by the public servant, would 
be an offence of obtainment under Section 13(1)(d) and (i) and (ii) of the Act. 
88.5.(e) The presumption of fact with regard to the demand and acceptance 
or obtainment of an illegal gratification may be made by a court of law by way of 
an inference only when the foundational facts have been proved by relevant oral 
and documentary evidence and not in the absence thereof. On the basis of the 
material on record, the Court has the discretion to raise a presumption of fact while 
considering whether the fact of demand has been proved by the prosecution or not. 
Of course, a presumption of fact is subject to rebuttal by the accused and in the 
absence of rebuttal presumption stands. 
88.6.(f) In the event the complainant turns ‘hostile’, or has died or is 
unavailable to let in his evidence during trial, demand of illegal gratification can 
be proved by letting in the evidence of any other witness who can again let in 
evidence, either orally or by documentary evidence or the prosecution can prove 
the case by circumstantial evidence. The trial does not abate nor does it result in 
an order of acquittal of the accused public servant. 
88.7.(g) In so far as Section 7 of the Act is concerned, on the proof of the 
facts in issue, Section 20 mandates the court to raise a presumption that the illegal 
gratification was for the purpose of a motive or reward as mentioned in the said 
Section. The said presumption has to be raised by the court as a legal presumption 
or a presumption in law. Of course, the said presumption is also subject to rebuttal. 
Section 20 does not apply to Section 13(1)(d) (i) and (ii) of the Act. 
88.8.(h) We clarify that the presumption in law under Section 20 of the Act is 
distinct from presumption of fact referred to above in point (e) as the former is a 
mandatory presumption while the latter is discretionary in nature.” 
 
16. 
Concededly, the respondent herein is a government servant. As per Section 
19 of the Act, to proceed against any public servant of Central Government or 
State Government, necessary sanction should be obtained for a Court to take 
cognizance of an offence punishable under Sections 7, 10, 11, 13 and 15 of the 
Act. In this case, the prosecution obtained necessary sanction (Ex.P25) from 
P.W.11, who is the disciplinary authority as well as the competent authority. The 
sanction order (Ex.P25) clearly states that the Director of Treasury, Bangalore, 
(P.W.11) after perusal of the documents forwarded by the Lokayukta police, such 

as, complaint, FIR, entrustment panchanama, seizure panchanama, report from 
F.S.L, sketch of the scene of occurrence along with the relevant documents 
pertaining to the case including the statements of witnesses and also the statement 
of the respondent, accorded sanction to initiate prosecution against the 
respondent. Therefore, we do not find any procedural irregularity in grant of 
sanction. It was also deposed by the sanctioning authority (P.W.11) that after 
going through all these documents which were made available to him by the 
Lokayukta Police and after satisfying himself that there was a prima facie case to 
initiate the prosecution against the respondent and after having arrived at such 
satisfaction, he accorded sanction (Ex.P.25). Thus, it is clear that the prosecution 
initiated the proceedings against the respondent, after obtaining the sanction order 
from the competent authority. 
 17. 
Keeping in mind the aforesaid legal principles, let us examine the 
depositions of the prosecution witnesses to prove the charges framed against the 
respondent. P.W.1 is the complainant, who lodged complaint (Ex.P1) against the 
respondent, based on which the prosecution was set in motion. He deposed in his 
evidence that after getting instructions from the Block Education Officer, he 
presented a bill for Rs.43,323/- towards encashment of surrender leave salary of 
himself and three non-teaching staff of the school, on 29.07.2009 to the Sub 
Treasury Office, Afzalpur and requested the respondent to pass the same; on 
verifying the said bill, the respondent instructed the complainant to take back the 
same and it cannot be approved; however, the complainant requested him to pass 

the bill, for which, the respondent demanded a bribe of Rs.2,000/- for influencing 
his higher officers; since the complainant did not accede to the demand made by 
the respondent, on 30.07.2009, he went to the office of Lokayukta and informed 
the same; the officials of Lokayukta handed over a tape recorder for recording the 
conversation with the respondent; on 31.07.2009, the complainant went to the 
Sub Treasury Office and enquired with the respondent for passing the bill, who 
demanded illegal gratification of Rs.2,000/-; and the said conversation was 
recorded in the tape recorder and was handed over to the Lokayukta police along 
with complaint (Ex.P1) on 05.08.2009; and Ex.P.l (a) is his signature. 
17.1. The complainant further stated in his evidence that on 05.08.2009, the 
Lokayukta Inspector summoned PW2 and PW3 as panchnama witnesses and 
introduced the complainant, who informed them about the illegal gratification 
made by the respondent and thereafter, conversation recorded in the tape recorder 
was heard by them, which was reduced in writing (Ex.P21); subsequently, the 
complainant produced four currency notes of Rs.500/- denomination; the 
Lokayukta police smeared phenolphthalein powder to the currency notes and 
handed over the same to Ishappa (PW3), who counted the notes, kept the same in 
the left side pant pocket of the complainant, then, both hands of P.W.3 were 
dipped into sodium carbonate solution, which turned into pink colour and the 
solution was collected in a bottle (M.O.1) and thereafter, entrustment mahazar 
(Ex.P2) was prepared and Exs.P3 to P10 photographs were also taken. 

17.2. The evidence of P.W.1 also proceeds to state that the complainant along 
with PW.2 and P.W.3. and Lokayukta Inspector and his staff started to go to the 
Sub Treasury Office in a jeep and they parked their jeep in the bus stand; then, 
the complainant and shadow witness (P.W.2) went inside the office of the 
respondent; the complainant met the respondent and enquired about the passing 
of the bill; at that time, the respondent demanded the bribe amount and also took 
the complainant to a hotel, in which, the complainant handed over the amount; 
after counting the currency notes, the respondent kept the same in his left side 
pant pocket; and on giving signal, the Lokayukta police came to treasury office, 
caught hold of the respondent, after following due procedure, seized the tainted 
currency notes from the left side pant pocket of the respondent and thereafter, 
prepared seizure mahazar (Ex.P11), besides collecting the material objects 
(M.O.2 to M.O.7); and the photographs taken during such seizure, were marked 
as Exs.P12 to P17. 
17.3. The deposition of P.W.1 was corroborated by P.W.2 and P.W.3 panch 
witnesses. The shadow witness Basawaraj (P.W.2) who accompanied the 
complainant at the time of trap, categorically stated in his evidence about the 
drawing of seizure mahazar (Ex.P11), more particularly, the recovery of tainted 
currency notes from the possession of the respondent and the pant worn by the 
respondent at the time of trap. The trap witness Ishappa (P.W.3) also stated about 
the same in his evidence. Thus, the evidence of P.W.1 to P.W.3 clearly 
demonstrated the successful completion of trap, the demand and acceptance of 

illegal gratification by the respondent for passing the bill pertaining to the 
complainant and others. 
17.4. P.W.4 and P.W.5 are the officials working in the office of the Sub Treasury 
of Afzalpur, who produced the records connected with this case, as directed by 
the Investigating Officer. PW.4 - Basawaraj deposed in his evidence that on the 
date of alleged trap, himself and the respondent were working in the Sub Treasury 
Office of Afzalpur. Through him, the copy of the work allotment order was placed 
on record as Ex.P.29, which states that the respondent was working as First 
Division Assistant, who was looking after the section of passing the bills for 
encashment of surrender leave salary, which were liable to be submitted to his 
higher officials for approval. The evidence of PW.4 coupled with Ex.P29 makes 
it clear that the respondent was entrusted with the work of receiving and checking 
the surrender leave salary bill presented by the complainant. Further, P.W.4 in his 
chief examination, categorically stated that the money was recovered from the 
respondent; and in the cross-examination stated that the bills prepared in the 
school were produced to treasury through staff and he did not know that the 
respondent has no pending work relating to the complainant as on 05.08.2009. 
The certified copies of Attendance register, Token receipt, Cheque and Bill 
passing register were marked through him, as Exs.P18 to P20 and P23. 
17.5. P.W.5 – Shankreppa, who is the Chief Accounts Officer of STO, Afzalpur, 
deposed in his evidence that on 05.08.2009 at about 02.15 p.m., two persons came 
and took the respondent out of their office; thereafter, nearly 6 to 7 persons came 

along with the respondent, made him to sit in his seat; two persons were holding 
his hands, among them one person introduced himself as the Police Inspector of 
Lokayukta and informed that they have trapped the respondent, while he was 
receiving the bribe amount of Rs.2,000/- from the complainant; both hands of the 
respondent were dipped in sodium carbonate solution and the same turned into 
light pink colour; the respondent handed over the amount from his pant pocket to 
the Police; the pant of the respondent was also dipped in sodium carbonate 
solution, which turned into light pink colour; and the solution was collected in a 
separate bottles and was sealed. Thus, P.W.4 and P.W.5 consistently deposed in 
respect of trap laid by the Lokayukta Police on the respondent and seizure of 
tainted currency notes from the possession of the respondent. 
17.6. P.W.6 - Dattatreya who is the owner of the Hotel, deposed that on 
05.08.2009 the respondent came to his Hotel and drank tea. 
17.7. P.W.7 – Mahantappa, who is the watchman working in Mahanteshwar High 
School of Chinamgera Village, deposed that the complainant prepared the 
surrender leave salary bill pertaining to himself and others through Block 
Education Officer, who presented the said bill to the S.T.O, Afzalpur for 
encashment. He further deposed that the complainant informed him that only after 
payment of Rs.500/- each, the bill will be passed from the Treasury office and 
hence, all of them contributed the amount and handed over the same to the 
complainant. Thus, P.W.7 being a circumstantial witness, categorically deposed 
about the demand of bribe by the respondent and contribution of Rs.500/- each 

and handing over the same to the complainant to make payment of bribe amount 
to the respondent. 
17.8. P.W.8 - Subbaraya who is the Headmaster of Mahanteshwar High School 
of Mahantpur deposed that the complainant was working in the said School. In 
the year 2009- 2010, they prepared a bill for encashment of surrender leave salary 
pertaining to the complainant and other staff members and submitted for the 
signature of the Block Education Officer through complainant; subsequently, he 
came to know that the official in the Sub Treasury Officer demanded bribe amount 
of Rs.2,000/-; and thereafter, about trap of the respondent by the Lokayukta 
Police. 
17.9. P.W.9 - Rajshekhar who is the Assistant Engineer, stated in his evidence 
that on 11.08.2009, the Lokayukta Police requested him to prepare the sketch of 
the scene of occurrence; and accordingly, on 02.09.2009, he went to the spot, 
which was shown by one Basawaraj, and prepared the sketch of the scene of 
occurrence (Ex.P.24) and Ex.P.24 (a) is his signature. 
17.10. P.W.10- Basawaraj, ASI of DCIB Unit, deposed about the lodging of the 
complaint by the complainant and the registration of the First Information Report. 
He further deposed about the institution of trap on the respondent and drawing of 
entrustment mahazar (Ex.P2). 
17.11. PW.12 - Maheshwargouda is the Investigating Officer, who deposed that 
on 05.08.2009, the complainant came and lodged a complaint and also produced 

the tape recorder conversation recorded by him; on the basis of the same, FIR 
(Ex.P26) was registered against the respondent. He narrated in detail about the 
trap proceedings conducted on 05.08.2009 and successful completion of the same 
and drawing of seizure mahazar and material objects. Thus, PW.10 and P.W.12 
consistently and categorically deposed about the demand and acceptance of bribe 
amount by the respondent and also recovery of tainted currency notes from the 
possession of the respondent and the same was reiterated by them in their cross-
examination, which clearly corroborated with the evidence of P.W.l to P.W.3. 
18. 
On the side of the respondent, no oral and documentary evidence were 
adduced to substantiate his stand. Though the learned counsel for the respondent 
made elaborate cross-examination, nothing was elicited to disbelieve the 
evidence of prosecution side witnesses. 
19. 
Thus, from the aforesaid materials, it is absolutely clear that the evidence 
of P.W.1 to P.W.3 read with the evidence of P.W.4 and P.W.5 along with 
Investigating Officers (P.W.10 and P.W.12) who supported the case of the 
prosecution in entirety about ‘demand’ and ‘acceptance’ of the bribe amount and 
also recovery of the same from the possession of the respondent. 
20. 
The main contention of the learned senior counsel for the respondent is that 
the bill was passed on 29.07.2009 and it was sent for preparation of cheque to 
P.W.4 on the same day itself and the cheque (Ex.P19) was also made ready on 
30.07.2009 and hence, on the date of alleged trap i.e., on 05.08.2009, there was 
no work pending with the respondent and he did not demand or accept bribe from 

the complainant. However, the said cheque was not issued to the complainant and 
neither any intimation in this regard was sent to the school authorities, till 
05.08.2009 nor was the complainant informed that the cheque was already ready. 
That apart, no plausible reason was adduced on the side of the respondent, as to 
why, it was retained in the office of the Sub Treasury without being issued to the 
party concerned. It is a common knowledge that when the bill was submitted to 
the office of Sub Treasury for sanction, only after issuance of the cheque to the 
concerned, the work will be treated as completed. In the instant case, no cheque 
was issued, and it was kept pending as on the date of trap. Therefore, the 
contention so made on the side of the respondent cannot be countenanced by us. 
21. 
It is settled law that the two basic facts viz., ‘demand’ and ‘acceptance’ of 
gratification have been proved, the presumption under Section 20 can be invoked 
to the effect that the gratification was demanded and accepted as a motive or 
reward as contemplated under Section 7 of the Act. However, such presumption 
is rebuttable. Even on the basis of the preponderance of probability, the accused 
can rebut the same. In the present case, the prosecution proved its case beyond 
reasonable doubt, in respect of the ‘demand’ and ‘acceptance’ of the bribe amount 
from the complainant and recovery of tainted currency notes from the possession 
of the respondent. The said operation is preceded by recording of the demand in 
the tape recorder. In such circumstances, the respondent has to rebut the 
presumption by disproving the case of the prosecution either in the cross-
examination of the prosecution side witnesses or by adducing material evidence 

that the receipt of Rs.2,000/- was not a bribe amount, but a legal fee or repayment 
of loan. However, he failed to do so and on the contrary, we find the prosecution 
to have proved the case beyond any doubt. 
22. 
Though the respondent in his statement recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C 
as well as before the Lokayukta Police, stated that there were loan transactions 
between himself and the complainant; 8 to 10 days prior to the date of incident 
the complainant borrowed a hand loan of Rs.2,000/- from the respondent; and 
when the respondent pressurized the complainant to return the loan amount, the 
present false case was registered against him, there was absolutely no evidence 
either in oral or documentary adduced to substantiate the same. It is an admitted 
fact that the complainant was working in a private aided school and the 
respondent was working as First Division Assistant in the Office of the Sub 
Treasury, Afzalpur. There was no material evidence produced to the effect that 
both were related closely to each other so as to grant a hand loan and to prove 
the grant of loan. In the absence of such material evidence produced, the plea so 
taken by the respondent, seems to be unbelievable. Therefore, it can safely be 
inferred that the respondent had received or accepted the currency notes on his 
own volition and the testimony of P.W.1 to P.W.5 including the testimony of 
P.W.10 and P.W.12 would go to show the demand, acceptance and recovery of 
the bribe amount from the possession of the respondent and the prosecution 
proved the charges framed against the respondent beyond reasonable doubt. 

23. 
In view of the aforesaid analysis, we find that the trial Court based on 
the oral and documentary evidence adduced by the parties, rightly found the 
respondent guilty of the offences punishable under Sections 7 and 13 (1) (d) r/w 
Section 13 (2) of the Act and sentenced him for the same. However, the High 
Court by placing reliance on the decision of this Court in A.Subair's case (supra), 
held that since no work was pending with the respondent as on the date of trap, 
the ingredient to attract and complete the offences punishable under Sections 7, 
13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the Act was not met. The view so taken by 
the High Court is unsustainable as the decision of this Court in A.Subair’s case 
(supra) did not support the view. It was a case where the complainant was not 
even examined and there were discrepancies in the evidence of the other 
witnesses. In the present case, we do not find such infirmities. Insofar as the 
reference to sub section (3) to Section 20 regarding the triviality of the 
gratification, the act sought or performed, and the amount demanded cannot be 
considered in isolation to each other. The value of gratification is to be considered 
in proportion to the act to be done or not done, to forbear or to not forebear, favour 
or disfavour sought, so as to be trivial to convince the Court, not to draw any 
presumption of corrupt practice. It is also not necessary that only if substantial 
amount is demanded, the presumption can be drawn. The overall circumstances 
and the evidence will also have to be looked into. Section 20 would come into 
operation only when there is no nexus between the demand and the action 
performed or sought to be performed. But, when the fact of receipt of payment or 

an agreement to receive the gratification stands proved, there is a clear case of 
nexus or corroboration and the presumption itself is irrelevant. Section 20 gets 
attracted when it is proved that the public servant has accepted or agreed to accept 
any gratification other than legal remuneration and in that case, presumption is 
that it is the motive or reward for any of the acts covered under Section 7, 11 or 
13(1)(b) of the Act. The presumption under Section 20 is similar to Section 118 
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, where the onus is on the accused to 
prove that he is not guilty of the offences charged. The first two limbs under sub-
sections (1) and (2) of Section 13 make it clear that adequacy of consideration is 
irrelevant to draw the presumption. That apart, sub-section (3) only grants a 
discretion to Court to decline from drawing any presumption if the amount is so 
trivial so that such inference of corruption is not fairly possible in the facts of the 
case. Therefore, it is not a rule but an exception available to the Court to exercise 
its discretionary power in the facts and circumstances of the case. In the present 
facts of the case, we are not inclined to exercise such discretion. As such, the 
judgment of acquittal passed by the High Court is illegal, erroneous and contrary 
to the materials on record. 
24. 
We are conscious of the fact that in an appeal against acquittal, if two views 
are possible and the Court below has acquitted the accused, the appellate Court 
would not be justified in setting aside the acquittal merely because the other view 
is also possible. In the present case, the recovery of bribe amount from the 
respondent having been proved, the explanation offered by the respondent in the 

absence of any concrete material, is clearly of the wall. Once the aspects of 
‘demand’ and ‘acceptance’ of the bribe amount having been established beyond 
doubt, in our opinion, no two views are possible in the matter, and thus the 
approach adopted by the High Court is perverse and liable to be interfered with. 
25. 
Accordingly, this Criminal Appeal stands allowed by setting aside the 
judgment and order passed by the High Court and by restoring the judgment and 
order passed by the trial Court. The trial Court is directed to take necessary steps 
to secure the respondent and commit him in prison to undergo the remaining 
period of sentence and to recover the fine imposed on him....CJI.

 [Sanjiv Khanna] 

 [Sanjay Kumar] 

[R. Mahadevan]