IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). OF 2024 
( SLP(Civil)No(s). of 2024 
 (Diary No. 43488 of 2023) 

GOVERNMENT OF WEST BENGAL & ORS... 

VERSUS 
 
DR. AMAL SATPATHI & ORS. 
 ….RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Mehta, J. 

1. 
Delay condoned. 
2. 
Leave granted. 
3. 
The present appeal has been filed by the Government of West 
Bengal1 and its components, challenging the judgment dated 1st 
February, 20232 passed by the High Court at Calcutta, in WPST 
No. 157 of 2019. The High Court vide impugned judgment upheld 
the order of the West Bengal Administrative Tribunal3, which 
directed that respondent No. 1, Dr. Amal Satpathi, though not 
 
1 Hereinafter being referred to as “appellant No. 1”. 
2 Hereinafter being referred to as “Impugned judgment”. 
3 Hereinafter being referred to as “Tribunal”. entitled to retrospective promotion after his superannuation, 
should be awarded notional financial benefits for the promotional 
post of Chief Scientific Officer as of his retirement date i.e., 31st 
December, 2016. The appellants are aggrieved by this direction, 
contending that no financial benefits, even on a notional basis, are 
admissible to respondent No. 1 who never assumed charge of the 
promotional post. 
Brief Facts: - 
 
4. 
Respondent No.1, Dr. Amal Satpathi, was promoted to the 
post of Principal Scientific Officer on an officiating basis on 24th 
March, 2008. On 6th January, 2016, following an amendment to 
the relevant Recruitment Rules, respondent No.1 became eligible 
for promotion to the post of Chief Scientific Officer. The 
Department4 initiated the promotional process by approaching the 
Public Service Commission5 on 13th April, 2016. The PSC, vide its 
minutes dated 29th December, 2016, recommended the name of 
respondent No.1 for the promotion to the said post. However, the 
Department received the final approval for his promotion on 4th 
January, 2017, but by that time, respondent No.1 had already 
superannuated on 31st December, 2016. Respondent No.1 made 
 
4 Science and Technology Department 
5 In short, ‘PSC’ 

a representation to the Department to give effect to his promotion. 
The 
matter 
was 
then 
referred 
to 
the 
Finance 
Department, Government of West Bengal. The reply of the Finance 
Department is extracted below: - 
“In terms of rule 54(1)(a) of W.B.S.R. Part-I, a Govt. employee 
shall not draw pay higher than that of his permanent post 
unless the officiating appointment involves the assumption of 
duties and responsibilities of greater importance. 
 
In the instant case Dr. Amal Satpathi could not join to the 
promotional post within his service tenure. He retired on 
superannuation on 31.12.2016. As a result officiation to the 
higher post with greater responsibilities and importance does 
not arise. 
 
As such appointment on promotion after retirement with 
retrospective effect can not be awarded for Gr.-'A' posts. 
 
We are, therefore, of the same opinion stated by F.A., dated 
16.2.2017.” 
 
5. 
Aggrieved by the denial of the benefits flowing from 
promotion, respondent No. 1 approached the Tribunal by filing 
O.A. No. 555 of 2017. The Tribunal vide order dated 26th June, 
2019 observed that, as per Rule 54(1)(a) of the West Bengal Service 
Rules, Part-I of 19716, promotion cannot be granted retrospectively 
after the retirement of a Government employee. However, the 
Tribunal acknowledged that respondent No. 1 had been duly 
recommended for promotion before his superannuation, which 
 
6 Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘West Bengal Service Rules’ 

was only delayed due to procedural obstructions beyond his 
control. Therefore, while actual promotion was not acceded to, the 
Tribunal directed that respondent No.1 should be granted notional 
financial benefits of the promotional post with effect from 31st 
December, 2016, to ensure pensionary benefits commensurate 
with the promotional post. 
6. 
The appellants challenged this order before the High Court in 
WPST No. 157 of 2019. The High Court, vide judgment dated 1st 
February, 2023 dismissed the writ petition, concurring with the 
Tribunal that retrospective promotion was impermissible but 
noting that notional financial benefits were justified given that no 
fault can be attributed to respondent No. 1. Aggrieved, the State 
has preferred this appeal by special leave. 
Submissions on behalf of the appellants: - 
7. 
Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the High 
Court erred by awarding pensionary benefits of the promotional 
post to respondent No. 1 while rejecting his plea for notional 
promotion. This direction is in teeth of Rule 54(1)(a) of the West 
Bengal Service Rules, which provides that a Government employee 
cannot draw a higher pay without assuming duties of greater 
responsibility. 

8. 
He further submitted that service jurisprudence does not 
recognize retrospective promotion without a specific enabling 
provision, therefore, notional promotion cannot be granted 
retrospectively unless there exists a specific rule or exceptional 
circumstances. In the present case, Rule 54(1)(a) of the West 
Bengal Service Rules, precludes retrospective promotion. 
9. 
Learned counsel further submitted that the final approval for 
the Chief Scientific Officer position was granted on 4th January, 
2017, after the respondent’s superannuation on 31st December, 
2016, thus, the promotion could not be effected during his service 
tenure and therefore, in the absence of any specific rule permitting 
retrospective promotion, the effective date of promotion should be 
the date on which it is granted, not the date of the vacancy. 
10. He also submitted that respondent No.1 has no legally 
enforceable right to receive a higher pay scale without having 
assumed the post, and referred to the State’s Promotion Policy 
(Notification No. 4982-F, 17.06.2005), which mandates that 
promotions are effective only upon the assumption of charge. 
11. In support of these contentions, learned counsel for the 
appellants relied upon the case of Union of India v. N.C. Murali7, 
 
7 (2017) 

to contend that without a specific rule entitling employees to 
promotion from the date of vacancy, the right to promotion arises 
only when it is actually effected. He also relied upon Sunaina 
Sharma v. State of Jammu & Kashmir8, wherein this Court held 
that promotion cannot be retrospectively granted from a date 
before the employee was in the cadre, as it would violate Articles 
14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. He thus implored the Court 
to set aside the impugned judgment and accept the appeal. 
Submissions on behalf of respondent No. 1: - 
12. E-converso, learned counsel for respondent No.1 submitted 
that respondent No.1 had been serving as Principal Scientific 
Officer since 24th March, 2008, and could have been promoted to 
Chief Scientific Officer as early as in the year 2013, had the 
Department submitted a timely proposal to fill up the vacancy. It 
was submitted that the Department failed to timely provide the 
confidential reports and other details of respondent No.1 to the 
PSC by 13th April, 2016, as required under the Rules. This 
inaction, for reasons best known to the officials concerned, led to 
a significant delay in the promotion process and thus, respondent 
 
8 (2018) 

No.1 was deprived of this rightful claim to the fruits of promotion 
from the date of occurrence of vacancy as per his entitlement. 
13. It was further submitted that, had the Department officials 
acted with promptitude and diligence, respondent No.1 would have 
in all probability received the promotion long before his retirement. 
The delay in processing the respondent’s documents and service 
record, which were forwarded by the PSC on 29th December, 2016 
i.e. only two days before his superannuation on 31st December, 
2016, deprived him of the opportunity to serve in a higher post and 
to benefit from the associated financial benefits of the promotional 
post of Chief Scientific Officer which would include a higher 
pension. 
14. It was further submitted that the laches on the part of the 
Department in moving the PSC after the Gazette notification on 6th 
January, 2016, and the submission of incomplete documents on 
13th April, 2016, reflects a lackadaisical approach by the officials 
that led to the denial of the promotion to respondent No.1. He thus, 
contended that the impugned judgments which provided equitable 
relief to respondent No.1 do not warrant interference. 

Discussion and Conclusion: - 
15. The primary question that arises for our consideration in the 
present 
appeal 
is 
whether 
respondent 
No.1, 
who 
was 
recommended for the promotion before his retirement but did not 
receive actual promotion to the higher post due to administrative 
delays, is entitled to notional financial benefits of the promotional 
post after his retirement? 
16. We have perused the pleadings and the records and have 
given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions advanced 
by the learned counsel for the parties. 
17. The relevant provision i.e., Rule 54(1)(a) of the West Bengal 
Service Rules, is extracted hereinbelow for the sake of ready 
reference: 
“Pay on Officiating Appointment- 54(I)(a): Subject to the 
provisions of Chapter VII, a Government employee who is 
appointed to officiate in a post shall not draw pay higher than* 
“his substantive pay” in respect of a permanent post, other 
than a tenure post, unless the officiating appointment 
involves the assumption of duties and responsibilities of 
greater importance than those attaching to the post, other 
than a tenure post, on which he holds a lien, or would hold 
a lien had it not been suspended: 
 
Provided that the Governor may specify posts outside the 
ordinary line of a service the holders of which may, 
notwithstanding the provisions of this rule and subject to such 
conditions as the Governor may prescribe, be given any 
officiating promotion in the cadre of the service which the 
authority competent to order promotion may decide, and may 
thereupon be granted the same pay as they would have received 
if still in the ordinary line.” 
(emphasis supplied) 

18. Upon a bare perusal of Rule 54(1)(a) of the West Bengal 
Service Rules, it is clear that promotion cannot be retrospectively 
granted after retirement, as it requires the actual assumption of 
duties and responsibilities of the promotional post. In the present 
case, since respondent No. 1 superannuated before the final 
approval of his promotion, he could not have formally assume the 
charge of the promotional post of Chief Scientific Officer. Therefore, 
although respondent No. 1 was recommended for promotion, Rule 
54(1)(a) of the West Bengal Service Rules precludes him from 
getting the financial benefits of the promotional post without 
having taken on the responsibilities of the said post i.e. Chief 
Scientific Officer. 
19. It is a well settled principle that promotion becomes effective 
from the date it is granted, rather than from the date a vacancy 
arises or the post is created. While the Courts have recognized the 
right to be considered for promotion as not only a statutory right 
but also a fundamental right, there is no fundamental right to the 
promotion itself. In this regard, we may gainfully refer to a recent 
decision of this Court in the case of Bihar State Electricity 

Board and Others v. Dharamdeo Das9, wherein it was observed 
as follows: 
“18. It is no longer res integra that a promotion is effective 
from the date it is granted and not from the date when a 
vacancy occurs on the subject post or when the post itself 
is created. No doubt, a right to be considered for promotion 
has been treated by courts not just as a statutory right but 
as a fundamental right, at the same time, there is no 
fundamental right to promotion itself. In this context, we 
may profitably cite a recent decision in Ajay Kumar Shukla v. 
Arvind Rai10 where, citing earlier precedents in Director, Lift 
Irrigation Corporation Ltd. v. Pravat Kiran Mohanty 11and Ajit 
Singh v. State of Punjab12, a three-Judge Bench observed thus: 
 
41. This Court, time and again, has laid emphasis on right 
to be considered for promotion to be a fundamental right, 
as was held by K. Ramaswamy, J., in Director, Lift Irrigation 
Corpn. Ltd. v. Pravat Kiran Mohanty in para 4 of the report 
which is reproduced below: 
 
 ‘4……. There is no fundamental right to promotion, 
but an employee has only right to be considered for 
promotion, when it arises, in accordance with 
relevant rules. From this perspective in our view the 
conclusion of the High Court that the gradation list 
prepared by the corporation is in violation of the right 
of respondent-writ petitioner to equality enshrined 
under Article 14 read with Article 16 of the 
Constitution, and the respondent-writ petitioner was 
unjustly denied of the same is obviously unjustified.’ 
 
42. A Constitution Bench in Ajit Singh v. State of Punjab, 
laying emphasis on Article 14 and Article 16(1) of the 
Constitution of India held that if a person who satisfies the 
eligibility and the criteria for promotion but still is not 
considered for promotion, then there will be clear violation 
of his/her’s fundamental right. Jagannadha Rao, J. speaking for himself and Anand, C.J., Venkataswami, 
Pattanaik, Kurdukar, JJ., observed the same as follows in 
paras 22 and 27: 

10 (2022) 
11 (1991) 
12 (1999) 

‘Articles 14 and 16(1): is right to be considered for 
promotion a fundamental right 
 
22. Article 14 and Article 16(1) are closely 
connected. They deal with individual rights of the 
person. Article 14 demands that the ‘State shall 
not deny to any person equality before the law or 
the equal protection of the laws’. Article 16(1) 
issues a positive command that: 
 
‘there shall be equality of opportunity for all 
citizens in matters relating to employment 
or appointment to any office under the 
State’. 
 
It has been held repeatedly by this Court that 
clause (1) of Article 16 is a facet of Article 14 and 
that it takes its roots from Article 14. The said 
clause particularises the generality in Article 14 
and identifies, in a constitutional sense “equality 
of opportunity” in matters of employment and 
appointment to any office under the State. The 
word “employment” being wider, there is no 
dispute that it takes within its fold, the aspect of 
promotions to posts above the stage of initial 
level of recruitment. Article 16 (1) provides to 
every employee otherwise eligible for promotion 
or who comes within the zone of consideration, a 
fundamental right to be “considered” for 
promotion. Equal opportunity here means the 
right to be “considered” for promotion. If a person 
satisfies the eligibility and zone criteria but is not 
considered for promotion, then there will be a 
clear infraction of his fundamental right to be 
“considered” for promotion, which is his personal 
right. “Promotion” based on equal opportunity 
and seniority attached to such promotion are 
facets of fundamental right under Article 16(1). 
 
* 

* 

 * 
 
27. In our opinion, the above view expressed in 
Ashok Kumar Gupta [Ashok Kumar Gupta v. 
State of U.P.13, and followed in Jagdish Lal 
[Jagdish Lal v. State of Haryana14, and other 
cases, if it is intended to lay down that the right 
 
13 (1997) 
14 (1997) 

guaranteed to employees for being “considered” 
for promotion according to relevant rules of 
recruitment by promotion (i.e. whether on the 
basis of seniority or merit) is only a statutory 
right and not a fundamental right, we cannot 
accept the proposition. We have already stated 
earlier that the right to equal opportunity in the 
matter of promotion in the sense of a right to be 
“considered” 
for 
promotion 
is 
indeed 
a 
fundamental right guaranteed under Article 
16(1) and this has never been doubted in any 
other case before Ashok Kumar Gupta [Ashok 
Kumar Gupta v. State of U.P.], right from 1950.’ 

“20. In State of Bihar v. Akhouri Sachindra Nath15, it was 
held that retrospective seniority cannot be given to an employee 
from a date when he was not even borne in the cadre, nor can 
seniority be given with retrospective effect as that might 
adversely affect others. The same view was reiterated in Keshav 
Chandra Joshi v. Union of India16, where it was held that 
when a quota is provided for, then the seniority of the employee 
would be reckoned from the date when the vacancy arises in 
the quota and not from any anterior date of promotion or 
subsequent date of confirmation. The said view was restated in 
Uttaranchal Forest Rangers’ Assn. (Direct Recruit) v. State 
of U.P17, in the following words: 
 
‘37. We are also of the view that no retrospective promotion 
or seniority can be granted from a date when an employee 
has not even been borne in the cadre so as to adversely 
affect the direct recruits appointed validly in the 
meantime, as decided by this Court in Keshav Chandra 
Joshi v. Union of India held that when promotion is outside 
the quota, seniority would be reckoned from the date of the 
vacancy within the quota rendering the previous service 
fortuitous. The previous promotion would be regular only 
from the date of the vacancy within the quota and seniority 
shall be counted from that date and not from the date of 
his earlier promotion or subsequent confirmation. In order 
to do justice to the promotes, it would not be proper to do 
injustice to the direct recruits…… 
 
38. This Court has consistently held that no 
retrospective promotion can be granted nor can any 
 
15 1991 Supp (1) SCC 334 
16 1992 Supp (1) SCC 272 
17 (2006) 

seniority be given on retrospective basis from a date 
when an employee has not even been borne in the 
cadre particularly when this would adversely affect the 
direct recruits who have been appointed validity in the 
meantime.” 
 (emphasis supplied) 
 
20. In the instant case, it is evident that while respondent No. 1 
was recommended for promotion before his retirement, he could 
not assume the duties of the Chief Scientific Officer. Rule 54(1)(a) 
of the West Bengal Service Rules, clearly stipulates that an 
employee must assume the responsibilities of a higher post to draw 
the 
corresponding 
pay, 
thus, 
preventing 
posthumous 
or 
retrospective promotions in the absence of an enabling provision. 
21. While we recognize respondent No.1’s right to be considered 
for promotion, which is a fundamental right under Articles 14 and 
16(1) of the Constitution of India, he does not hold an absolute 
right to the promotion itself. The legal precedents discussed above 
establish 
that 
promotion 
only 
becomes 
effective 
upon 
the assumption of duties on the promotional post and not on the 
date of occurrence of the vacancy or the date of recommendation. 
Considering that respondent No. 1 superannuated before his 
promotion was effectuated, he is not entitled to retrospective 
financial benefits associated to the promotional post of Chief 
Scientific Officer, as he did not serve in that capacity. 

22. As a result of the above discussion, the judgment dated 1st 
February, 2023 passed by the High Court of Calcutta and the 
judgment dated 26th June, 2019 passed by the Tribunal are 
unsustainable in the eyes of law and are hereby reversed and set 
aside. 
23. The appeal is allowed accordingly. No order as to costs. 
24. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 

………………….……….J. 

(PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA) 

 ………………………….J. 

 (SANDEEP MEHTA) 
New Delhi; 
November 27, 2024.