IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
( SLP (C) No.16123 OF 2018) 
 
NALIN CHOKSEY 
 
APPELLANT 
 
 VERSUS 
 
THE COMMISSIONER OF CUSTOMS, 
KOCHI 

RESPONDENT 

ORDER 
 Leave granted. 
2. 
Being aggrieved by the judgment dated 03.04.2018 passed 
by the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in Customs Appeal 
No.18/2009, the appellant is before this Court. By the said 
judgment, the High Court allowed the Customs Appeal filed by 
the respondent-Department answering the questions in favour 
of the Revenue and against the appellant herein. 
3. 
Briefly stated, the facts are that one Sri Jalaludheen 
Kunhi Thayil had imported the vehicle in question being a 
Porsche Carrera Car on 28.06.2002. The said car was later sold 

to one Sri Shailesh Kumar in the year 2003. Subsequently, the 
appellant herein is stated to have purchased the said car in the 
month of October, 2004. It is stated that in the year 2006, the 
appellant, along with the importer Sri Jalaludheen Kunhi 
Thayil, the first possessor Sri Shailesh Kumar and a broker 
named Sri Haren Choksey who was the brother of the 
appellant, was served with the Show-Cause Notice dated 
27.06.2007 demanding short-levied customs duty to the tune of 
Rs.17,92,847/-. The said Show-Cause Notice was issued under 
Section 28(1) read with Section 124 of the Customs Act, 1962 
[“Customs Act”] and stated that it was a case of deliberate 
misdeclaration of model and the year of manufacture, along 
with tampering with the chassis number of the imported car for 
the purpose of under invoicing and under valuation of the 
vehicle and evading the payment of the differential duty of 
customs amounting to Rs.17,92,847/-. The appellant replied to 
the same by letter dated 24.07.2007. This was followed by an 
order-in-original dated 29.01.2008 passed by the Commissioner 
of Customs, Cochin. The Commissioner of Customs confirmed 
the demand of duty of Rs.17,92,847/- being the duty short-

levied and short-paid on the imported vehicle and ordered the 
confiscation of the car with an option of redemption of the 
confiscated car on payment of fine and the differential duty. 
The demand was raised jointly and severely against the 
importer and the appellant. 
4. 
Being aggrieved by the said order, the appellant herein 
preferred Appeal No. C/311/2008 before the Customs, Excise 
and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, South Zonal Bench at 
Bangalore (“Appellate Tribunal”), which was allowed in favour of 
the appellant herein vide Final Order No.1235/2008 dated 
23.09.2008. The Appellate Tribunal held that the appellant 
herein is a bonafide purchaser who had not purchased the car 
from the original importer and therefore, he had no role in the 
import of the car or in the misdeclaration or in any offence 
connected with the import. Consequently, the appeal preferred 
by the appellant was allowed. 
5. 
Being aggrieved by the said order of the Appellate 
Tribunal, the Department filed the Customs Appeal No.18/2009 
before the High Court of Kerala. As already noted, by the 
impugned order dated 03.04.2018, the High Court set aside the 

order passed by the Appellate Tribunal by allowing the said 
appeal. The High Court, while answering the questions of law in 
favor of the respondent herein, observed that the payment of 
short-levy of duty is a necessary consequence of redemption of 
the goods under Section 125 of the Customs Act and since the 
appellant herein had exercised the option to redeem the goods, 
he was liable to pay the customs duty despite being a 
subsequent purchaser. Hence, this appeal before this Court. 
6. 
We have heard learned counsel for the appellant and 
learned senior counsel for the respondent-Department and 
perused the material on record. 
7. 
During the course of submissions, learned counsel for the 
appellant Sri Shashibhushan P. Adgaonkar drew our attention 
to Section 28 as well as Section 124 of the Customs Act and 
submitted that what is in issue herein is with regard to the 
non-payment of the import duty in respect of the Porsche 
Carrera car. The appellant is not the importer of the car but 
only a subsequent purchaser. The liability to pay customs duty 
is on the importer and not on a subsequent purchaser. Further, 
the said car is a motor vehicle within the meaning of the Motor 

Vehicles Act, 1988. The appellant herein is in fact not the 
owner of the car (goods) within the meaning of Sections 124 
and 125 of the Customs Act, 1962 inasmuch as the appellant 
herein does not fall within the scope and ambit of the 
expression ‘owner’ as defined under Section 2(30) of the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1988. This is because the appellant is not the 
registered owner in terms of Section 39 and other relevant 
provisions which are under Chapter IV of the Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1988. In the absence of there being any registration 
certificate issued in the name of the appellant herein 
incorporating his name as owner of the vehicle, the appellant 
cannot be construed to be the owner of the motor vehicle in 
question. Therefore, according to learned counsel for the 
appellant, the very initiation of the proceeding by the issuance 
of the summons and Show-Cause Notice to the appellant is 
vitiated. In the circumstances, the impugned order may be set 
aside and the Show Cause Notice impugned as well as the 
proceedings against the appellant herein may be dropped was 
the submission on behalf of the appellant. 

8., learned senior counsel Sri Rupesh Kumar 
appearing for the respondent-Department drew our attention to 
Section 28 as well as Section 124 of the Customs Act and 
contended that the vehicle in question was seized when it was 
in the possession of the appellant herein, and while it may be 
that the vehicle has not been registered in the name of the 
appellant as per the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 
but the fact remains that the appellant is the owner of the 
vehicle, that is the good, having regard to the fact that he had 
admittedly purchased the same. 
9. 
Therefore, the vehicle in question was rightly confiscated 
from the appellant’s possession as insufficient customs duty 
was paid by the importer and the other subsequent purchaser, 
under Section 125 of the Customs Act. Thus, the appellant was 
liable to pay the differential customs duty and all other 
payments to the Department herein. Supporting the impugned 
judgment, learned senior counsel submitted that there is no 
merit in this appeal. 
10. We have examined the arguments advanced at the bar in 
light of the facts of the present case. It is noted that the Show-

Cause Notice was issued, inter alia, to the appellant herein 
under Section 28(1) read with Section 124 of the Customs Act, 
1962 on the premise that there had been a confiscation of the 
goods, i.e., the car in question and if the appellant was 
interested in redeeming it, an option was available under 
Section 125 to pay the redemption fine and seek release of the 
car. That according to the respondent Department, the 
appellant has not complied with the provisions under the 
Customs Act and instead has sought to evade the customs duty 
payable by him; that in fact the vehicle in question was seized 
from the possession of the appellant herein and thereafter 
confiscated and therefore he was liable to pay the custom duty 
as well as the redemption fine. 
11. We have considered Section 28(1) of the Customs Act in 
order to ascertain whether the appellant herein is the importer 
of the car in question. On a reading of the definition of the 
expression ‘importer’ under clause (26) of Section 2 of the 
Customs Act. The definition reads as under: 
“Section 2 – Definitions. - In this Act, unless the 
context otherwise requires, - 
 x x x x 

(26) "importer", in relation to any goods at any time 
between their importation and the time when they are 
cleared for home consumption, includes any owner, 
beneficial owner or any person holding himself out to 
be the importer;” 
 
12. As per the above inclusive definition, an “importer” can 
include an owner, a beneficial owner or any person holding 
himself out to be the importer. But these personae would fall 
under the above definition only during the time between the 
importation of goods and the time when they are cleared for 
home consumption. Admittedly, the appellant was not the 
importer of the car in question, nor was the appellant involved 
in the process of importation of the car. The car was neither 
imported for his benefit nor on his behalf. It was Sri 
Jalaludheen Kunhi Thayil who was the importer from whom no 
recovery of the differential duty had been made. The appellant 
herein is only a subsequent purchaser of the said vehicle from a 
person who had purchased the same from the importer. Thus, 
the appellant cannot be charged for paying customs duty under 
Section 28 of the Customs Act as an importer or owner of the 
goods within the meaning of the definition of importer. 

13. We have also considered the reliance of the learned senior 
counsel for the respondent on Section 125 of the Customs Act. 
The relevant portion is as follows: 
“125. Option to pay fine in lieu of confiscation.—(1) 
Whenever confiscation of any goods is authorised by 
this Act, the officer adjudging it may, in the case of any 
goods, the importation or exportation whereof is 
prohibited under this Act or under any other law for 
the time being in force, and shall, in the case of any 
other goods, give to the owner of the goods or, where 
such owner is not known, the person from whose 
possession or custody such goods have been seized, an 
option to pay in lieu of confiscation such fine as the 
said officer thinks fit: 
 
Provided that where the proceedings are deemed to 
be concluded under the proviso to sub-section (2) of 
section 28 or under clause (i) of sub-section (6) of that 
section in respect of the goods which are not prohibited 
or restricted, no such fine shall be imposed: 
 
Provided further that, without prejudice to the 
provisions of the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 
115, such fine shall not exceed the market price of the 
goods confiscated, less in the case of imported goods 
the duty chargeable thereon. 
 
(2) Where any fine in lieu of confiscation of goods is 
imposed under sub-section (1), the owner of such 
goods or the person referred to in sub-section (1), shall, 
in addition, be liable to any duty and charges payable 
in respect of such goods.” 
 
14. It is undisputed that there is a confiscation of the car in 
question in this case and the import of the said car is not 

prohibited. Also, as per the aforesaid definition, the owner of 
the goods, or where such owner is not known, the person from 
whose possession or custody such goods have been seized, 
shall be given the option to pay a fine in lieu of confiscation and 
where such fine is imposed on the owner or the other person, 
they shall be also liable to pay any duty and charges payable in 
respect of such goods. However, firstly, the appellant is not the 
owner of the car coming within the definition of importer under 
the customs Act as discussed above. Secondly, in order that the 
appellant is to be construed to be the owner of the vehicle in 
question, it is necessary to advert to the provisions of the Motor 
vehicles Act, 1988, which defines ‘owner’ under Section 2(30) of 
the said Act. The said section reads as under: 
“2. Definitions. - In this Act, unless the context 
otherwise requires, 
 x x x 
(30) “owner” means a person in whose name a 
motor vehicle stands registered and where such 
person is a minor, the guardian of such minor, and 
in relation to a motor vehicle which is the subject of 
a hire-purchase, agreement, or an agreement of 
lease or an agreement of hypothecation, the person 
in possession of the vehicle under that agreement;” 

15. A reading of the above would indicate that when a motor 
vehicle stands registered in the name of a person, he would be 
the owner of the said motor vehicle. Section 49 of the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1988 deals with the necessity for registration. 
Admittedly, in the instant case, the car in question has not 
been registered in the name of the appellant herein but the 
registration certificate continues to be in the name of the 
original importer Sri Jalaludheen Kunhi Thayil. Therefore, the 
latter is the owner of the vehicle in law. It may be that there has 
been a transfer of the vehicle from Sri Jalaludheen Kunhi 
Thayil to Sri Shailesh Kumar from whom the appellant has 
purchased the vehicle. However, there is no ownership in law 
which can be recognized insofar as the appellant herein is 
concerned inasmuch as his name has not been entered in the 
registration certificate concerning the vehicle in terms of the 
provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. Hence, the appellant 
herein cannot be construed to be the owner of the vehicle and 
hence, he does not fall within the scope and ambit of Section 
125 of the Customs Act, 1962. Further, the argument that the 

appellant can be made liable to pay the duty because the seized 
car was in the possession of the appellant cannot also be 
accepted, since as per Section 125(1) of the Customs Act, the 
possessor of the car can be made liable only when the owner of 
the goods is not known. However, in the instant case, it is an 
admitted position that the ownership of the vehicle in law is 
still with the importer Sri Jalaludheen Kunhi Thayil and thus, 
the owner of the vehicle is known. 
16. Consequently, the very initiation of the proceedings 
against the appellant herein under the provisions of Customs 
Act by summoning him by issuance of Show-Cause Notice and 
subsequent seizure and confiscation of the vehicle in question 
are not in accordance with law and are unlawful. 
17. Hence, the impugned judgment of the High Court, Show-
Cause Notices and other proceedings initiated against the 
appellant herein being not in accordance with law stand 
quashed. The order of the Appellate Tribunal dated 23.09.2008 
stands restored. 
18. It is however clarified that the quashing of the proceedings 
as against the appellant herein would not come in the way of 

respondent-Department proceeding against the proper person, 
namely, the importer and owner of the car in question. 
19. The appeal is allowed and disposed of in the aforesaid 
terms. 
20. No costs........................... J. 
 [B.V. NAGARATHNA]........................... J. 
 [NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH]