IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

SURESH CHANDRA TIWARI & ANR. 
 Criminal Appeal No. 82 of 

VERSUS 
 
STATE OF UTTARAKHAND 

JUDGMENT 

MANOJ MISRA, J. 
 
1. 
This criminal appeal impugns the judgment and 
order of the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital1 
dated 24.5.2012 passed in, whereby the appeal of the appellants against the 
judgment and order of the Sessions Judge, Pithoragarh 
passed in Session Trial No. 36 of 1997 was partly 
allowed and the conviction of the appellants was altered 
from Section 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code, 18602 to 
 
1 The High Court 
2 IPC 

Section 304 Part I of IPC, and the sentence, inter alia, 
was reduced from imprisonment for life to 7 years R.I3. 
FACTUAL MATRIX 
2. 
 On 3.2.1997, at about 10 AM, PW-7, a cousin of 
the deceased, lodged a first information report4 (Exb. Ka-
2) at PS5 Lohaghat, District Pithoragarh, inter alia, 
alleging that on 3.2.1997, at about 9.30 AM, he came to 
know that dead body of the deceased was lying in the 
verandah of Mohan Singh’s shop. Pursuant to the 
aforesaid report, the police proceeded to the spot, carried 
out inquest and prepared an inquest report (Exb. Ka-8). 
It also lifted blood-stained and plain earth/ floor from 
the spot and prepared a seizure memo (Exb. Ka-4) 
thereof. Belongings of the deceased lying near the spot 
were also seized and a seizure memo (Exb. Ka-5) was 
prepared. Besides that, a black polythene bag containing 
goat meat was also recovered from near the spot and 
another seizure memo (Exb. Ka-3) was prepared. 
3. 
Autopsy of the cadaver was conducted by PW-1 on 
3.2.1997 at about 2.45 PM. Autopsy report (Exb. Ka-1) 
indicated that the deceased died due to shock because 
of head injury. The estimated time of death, as per 
autopsy report, was about a day before autopsy. Ante-
mortem injuries noticed at the time of autopsy were: 
 
3 Rigorous Imprisonment 
4 FIR 
5 Police Station 

“1. Incised wound on head on occipital region 4 x 1 
cm, margins of wound clear cut and bleeding from 
the wound, direction of the wound was oblique. 
2. Incised wound 2-1/2 x 1 cm x bone deep in 
occipital area, 6 cm back of the right ear, direction 
of wound was slanting and clear-cut margins. 
Bleeding from wound. 
3. Contusion on left region of the forehead, 1-1/2 
cm x 1 cm, size of wound was unclear. Colour of 
the wound brown and was above 1 cm from left 
eyelashes. 
4. Contusion with abrasion, from right shoulder to 
elbow, in about 15 x 3 cm area, colour of the wound 
was brown. 
5. Contusion on the joints of both the wrists. 
6. Contusion 4 cm x 1-1/2 cm at right knee, colour 
of the wound was brown. 
7. Contusion 3 cm x 1 cm on the left knee, colour 
of the wound was brown. 
8. Contusion 2 cm x 1 cm below 10 cm from the 
knee on left leg. 
9. Abrasion on the right hip 3 cm x 2 cm. 
10. Abrasion 4 cm x 1-1/2 cm on the left hip. 
Internal examination disclosed fracture of occipital 
bone” 
 
4. 
On 6.2.1997, the police arrested the appellants on 
suspicion and, according to the police, at the pointing 
out of the appellants, the place where the deceased was 
allegedly assaulted was discovered. From that place, 
allegedly, some bloodstained stones and mud were lifted 
and a seizure memo (Exb. Ka-6) was prepared. 
5. 
During investigation, inter alia, statements of 
witnesses who had seen the deceased in the company of 
the accused on 2.2.1997 during daytime and who had 
seen the two accused in the company of each other, late 
in the night of 2.2.1997, on the pathway, near the place 

from where the dead body of the deceased was recovered 
were recorded. Based on that, a charge sheet was 
submitted against the appellants. 
6. 
After taking cognizance on the charge sheet, the 
case was committed to the Court of Session. The 
Sessions Court framed charges against the appellants 
for offences punishable under Sections 302 /201 read 
with Section 34 IPC. The accused appellants denied the 
charges and claimed for trial. 
PROSECUTION EVIDENCE 
7. 
As the prosecution case rests on circumstantial 
evidence, to test the correctness of the findings, a 
scrutiny of the evidence would be apposite. We would, 
therefore, notice the prosecution evidence in some detail. 
8. 
Prosecution had examined 10 witnesses: 

PW-1 (the autopsy surgeon) proved the 
autopsy report. He accepted the possibility of: (a) 
head injuries being caused by a sharp-edged stone 
or a sharp-edged weapon; (b) death having occurred 
a day before i.e., on 2.2.1997 around 5.30 PM. 

PW-2 – Hayat Singh – He had his shop about 
30 yards away from Mohan Singh’s shop (i.e., from 
where the dead body was recovered on 3.2.1997). 
According to him, on 2.2.1997, at about 7 PM, while 
he was sitting at his shop, next to a fire-place to 
ward off cold winter night, he saw three persons 
coming from near Mohan Singh’s shop. Those three 

were Jagdish Punetha and the two accused. Later, 
that night, between 10 PM and 11 PM, while he was 
returning to his shop to fetch his purse, in torch 
light, he saw the two accused going together on the 
same path towards village Bhumlai. 
 During cross-examination, PW-2 stated (a) that 
his statement was recorded by the investigating 
officer on 9.2.1997; (b) prior to that, he made no 
disclosure about it to any one; (c) that night, it was 
drizzling; (d) that from his shop, Mohan Singh’s shop 
is 30-35 yards away and in between his shop and 
Mohan Singh’s shop there are shrubs, therefore, it 
is difficult to notice as to who is doing what there, 
from his shop; (e) that in 1995 he had a fight with 
accused Bhuwan (appellant no.2), which was 
compromised on payment of Rs.3000 by him. 

PW-3 – Mohan Singh (i.e., the shop-owner 
from whose shop’s verandah, dead body was 
recovered) stated that on 2.2.1997, at about 6 PM, 
the two accused had come to his shop at Tolan and 
had asked for milk. After having milk, they asked 
each other about the deceased. He heard them 
saying that the deceased has not been seen. Shortly 
thereafter, they left his shop with Jagdish Punetha, 
who was present at the shop from before. Thereafter, 
PW-3 left his shop. Next day, at about 8.30 AM, 
when PW-3 returned to his shop, he noticed the 

dead body of the deceased in the verandah of his 
shop. 
 During cross-examination, PW-3 stated that on 
2.2.1997 it was very cold and there was a slight 
drizzle. PW-3 stated that he left his shop at about 8 
PM on 2.2.1997. 

PW-4 – Shankar Dutt Upreti – He stated that 
on 2.2.1997, at about 4.30 PM, while he was coming 
to Lohaghat, he met accused appellants near Degree 
College, Gadhera. Deceased was also with them. 
Then he clarified that the deceased was with Suresh 
Chandra Tiwari (i.e., appellant no.1) whereas 
Bhuwan (appellant no.2) was 50-60 paces behind 
them. 
 During cross-examination, PW-4 admitted that 
after the death of the deceased, he had observed 
rituals as are to be observed when death occurs in 
the family. However, he denied belonging to the 
family of the deceased. 

PW-5- Mahesh Upreti- He stated that the 
accused appellants are very close friends of each 
other. In 1996 panchayat elections, the deceased, 
who 
is 
PW-5’s 
cousin, 
supported 
PW-5’s 
candidature whereas accused supported a rival 
candidate, who was nephew of Suresh Chandra 
(appellant no.1). During elections, Suresh Chandra 
had extended death-threats. Later, when PW-5 

contested election for the office of Pradhan, Suresh 
Chandra supported a rival candidate. In the first 
meeting of Gram Panchayat, held on 19.1.1997, 
Suresh Chandra extended death threat to the 
deceased. 
 During cross-examination, he admitted that he 
made no report about extension of threats. However, 
he denied making false accusations because 
deceased was his cousin. 
(f) PW-6 – Jahangir- He stated that he is a meat 
vendor. On 2.2.1997, at about 3.30 PM, Suresh 
Chandra had purchased a kilogram of meat from his 
shop. 
 During cross-examination, PW-6 stated that there 
are 2 or 3 other meat vendors at Lohaghat. 

PW-7 – Harish Chandra Upreti- He stated that 
the deceased was his first cousin. On receipt of 
information about his death, he lodged the report 
(Exb. Ka-2). 

PW-8 – Jeevan Chandra Upreti – He stated 
that on 3.2.1997 upon receiving information about 
deceased’s death, he went to the spot. That day 
itself, three seizure memos (Exb. Ka-3, 4 and 5) were 
prepared, which bear his signature. These memos 
related to: (i) seizure of a black polythene bag 
containing meat from open field near the spot; (ii) 
lifting of blood-stained floor and plain floor from the 

spot; and (iii) seizure of blood-stained clothes and a 
pair of Lakhani half-shoes of the deceased from open 
field near the spot. He added that on 6.2.1997, at 
the pointing of the accused, in the presence of 
Investigating Officer, a blood-stained stone, a blood-
stained Patti and plain earth was seized from 
Madhkhetla and a seizure memo (Exb. Ka-6) was 
prepared, which bears his signature. He also stated 
that on 9.2.1997 Hayat Singh handed over his torch 
to the investigating officer and a seizure memo (Exb. 
Ka-7) was prepared, which bears his signature. 
 During cross examination, PW-8 stated that he 
did not accompany the police on those three dates 
but was present there. In respect of seizure made on 
6.2.1997 he stated that he did not go with the police. 
Rather, he was present at the village. Police had 
reached between 11 and 12. Accused were arrested 
in the evening of 6.2.1997. He stated that 
Madhkhetla is about 2 km away from his village. He, 
however, denied the suggestion that all papers were 
prepared at one go, while sitting at the police 
station, and that nothing was recovered. 
(i) PW-9- Anand Lal- the first investigating officer - 
He stated that on 3.2.1997 he was posted as Sub-
inspector at PS Lohaghat when the FIR was lodged. 
He conducted initial stages of investigation such as 
making GD entry of the report, conducting inquest, 

sending the dead body for autopsy and lifting of: (i) 
blood-stained floor/plain floor from the spot; and (ii) 
clothes, half-shoes of deceased and black polythene 
bag containing meat from Madhkhetla. He also 
stated that the seized articles were deposited at the 
Maalkhana. Thereafter, investigation was carried 
out by PW-10. He had produced material exhibits 
during trial. 
 During cross-examination, PW-9 admitted that 
PW-8 is relative of the deceased. He also admitted 
that at the time of inquest, Hayat Singh (PW-2) and 
Mohan Singh (PW-3) were present. He then clarified 
that distance between Tolan and Madhketla is about 
80 yards. 
(j) PW-10 
– 
Kundan 
Singh 
- 
the 
second 
investigating officer - He stated that he took over 
investigation of the case on 4.2.1997. On 5.2.1997 
he conducted spot inspection of the place where 
deceased’s belongings such as clothes etc. were 
found and prepared site plan (Exb. Ka-16). On 
5.2.1997 itself, he inspected place from where dead 
body was recovered and prepared site plan (Exb. Ka-
17). On 6.2.1997 he arrested the accused appellants 
and interrogated them at the police station, of which 
GD entry no.27 (Exb. Ka-18) was prepared at 19:20 
hrs. On the same day, based on disclosure made by 
the accused, blood-stained stone and plain stone as 

well as earth were seized, of which seizure memo is 
Exb. Ka-6. According to him, complicity of the 
accused in the crime had come to light before 
6.2.1997. However, on 6.2.1997, he visited, 
separately, the house of the two accused and 
arrested them. On interrogation they accepted their 
guilt and showed him the place where the deceased 
was assaulted. From there, he recovered blood-
stained 
stone, 
etc. 
Thereafter, 
the 
accused 
appellants were lodged in the lock-up where their 
statements were recorded. On 9.2.1997, the 
statement of Hayat Singh was recorded, and his 
torch was recovered. Based on his statement, a site 
plan (Exb. Ka-20), showing the place from where 
Hayat Singh saw the accused appellants on 
2.2.1997, was prepared. On 9.2.1997, site plan 
(Exb. Ka-21) of the place from where stone etc. had 
been recovered was prepared. He stated that seized 
case property was sent for forensic examination vide 
letter 
(Exb. 
Ka-22), 
and 
on 
completion 
of 
investigation, charge sheet (Exb. Ka-23) was 
submitted against the accused on 18.3.1997. PW-10 
also produced the stones which were recovered from 
the place pointed out by the accused. 
 During cross-examination, he admitted that in the 
site plan prepared by him, he had not mentioned the 
distances. He also admitted that the accused were 

produced before the remand magistrate on 8.2.1997 
and not on 7.2.1997. He, however, denied the 
suggestion that all investigative steps were bogus 
and completed while sitting at the police station. 
STATEMENT UNDER SECTION 313 Cr.PC 
9. 
In his statement under Section 313 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 19736, Suresh Chandra Tiwari 
(appellant no.1) either denied, or feigned ignorance of, 
the incriminating circumstances put to him. But 
admitted (a) that the body of the deceased was found in 
front of the shop of Mohan Singh; (b) that the autopsy 
report was prepared by PW-1; (c) that panchayat 
elections were held in the year 1996; and (d) that he was 
interrogated on 6.2.1997, though he disclosed nothing 
incriminating. Notably, the incriminating circumstance 
qua discovery of blood-stained stone, etc. at his instance 
on 6.2.1997, vide seizure memo Exb. Ka-6, was not put 
to him. At last, he stated that owing to enmity he has 
been falsely implicated. 
10. Identical is the statement of Bhuwan Chandra 
Punetha (appellant no.2). Notably, the incriminating 
circumstance of recovery of blood-stained stone etc. on 
6.2.1997, of which seizure memo Exb. Ka-6 was 
prepared, was not put to him. 

6 CrPC 

TRIAL COURT FINDINGS 
11. Trial court found the following circumstances 
proved: (i) the deceased was last seen alive in the 
company of the accused on 2.2.1997 at about 4.30 PM; 
(ii) the accused, in the night of 2.2.1997, were seen on 
the pathway going towards Madhkhetla (where articles 
of the deceased were found) and were also noticed 
coming back from the same route on which shop of 
Mohan Singh falls; (iii) Suresh Chandra Tiwari had 
purchased a kilogram of meat on 2.2.1997 from PW-6, 
and there was recovery of a polythene bag, containing 
meat, from the place where other articles of the deceased 
were found; (iv) the accused were looking for Suresh 
Upreti (the deceased) in the evening of 2.2.1997, as was 
evident from their talks, while they were present at the 
shop of Mohan Singh (PW-3); (v) autopsy report and 
medical evidence confirmed a homicidal death of the 
deceased as also the fact that ante-mortem head injury 
could have been caused by a sharp-edged stone; (vi) 
blood-stained stone was found at the place pointed out 
by the accused appellants, and forensic report confirmed 
presence of human blood on it, therefore, the chain of 
circumstances stood complete, which pointed that 
sometime in the night of 2.2.1997 the accused 
appellants killed the deceased due to past enmity and 
kept his body in front of Mohan Singh’s shop. 

Consequently, the trial court convicted the accused-
appellants for offences punishable under Sections 
302/34 and 201/34 of IPC. 
HIGH COURT FINDINGS 
12. Aggrieved by the judgment and order of the trial 
court, the appellants filed an appeal before the High 
Court. The High Court affirmed the findings of the trial 
court on strength of the circumstances narrated above 
and held that recovery of blood-stained stone(s) at the 
instance of the accused, of which seizure memo (Exb. 
Ka-6) was prepared, corroborated the prosecution case 
to dispel any doubt about their guilt. In addition, the 
High Court relied on the disclosure statement (Exb. Ka-
18) which, according to the High Court, led to discovery 
of the place and consequential recovery. However, the 
High Court, upon finding that the accused had no 
previous criminal record and except injuries 1 and 2 
none were dangerous to life and those two could be a 
result of a solitary blow, thought fit to alter the 
conviction from offence of murder, punishable under 
Section 302 of IPC, to offence of culpable homicide not 
amounting to murder, punishable under Section 304 
Part I of IPC, and thereby reduced the sentence, 
accordingly. 
13. Aggrieved by their conviction, the appellants are 
before us. 

14. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties 
and have perused the record. 
 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS 
15. On behalf of the appellants, it was submitted: 

The circumstances relied upon were not proved 
beyond reasonable doubt. 
(ii) The last seen circumstance narrated by PW-2 is 
not conclusive as there is no proximity between the 
place where the deceased was last seen alive in the 
company of the accused and the place from where 
the body of the deceased was recovered. Further, the 
time gap between the time when the deceased was 
last seen alive with the accused and the time when 
dead body was recovered is so large that intervening 
circumstances cannot be ruled out. Moreover, the 
circumstance of walking side by side on a pathway 
by itself is not an incriminating circumstance. 
(iii) The incriminating circumstance of discovery 
/recovery at the instance of the accused has not 
been put to either of the two accused while recording 
their statements under Section 313 of CrPC, 
therefore the same cannot be relied upon. 
(iv) The disclosure statement was inadmissible as it 
did not lead to discovery because, according to PW-
10, recovery was made from the place pointed out by 
the accused-appellants even before their disclosure 

statement was recorded at the police station. 
Otherwise also, it is not clear from the evidence as 
to which of the two accused pointed out the place 
first, to effectuate the recovery. Hence, recovery 
cannot be imputed to any of the two accused. 
(v) Assuming that recovery of stone is imputable to 
the accused, it is not proved that it carried blood of 
the deceased or that it could have caused such 
injuries as were found on deceased’s body. Thus, the 
recovered article was not connected to the crime. 
(vi) PW-2’s 
narration 
about 
seeing 
accused-
appellants walking on the path in front of Mohan 
Singh’s shop is inconsequential as anyone could 
walk on a public path. Moreover, testimony of PW-
2 does not inspire confidence because, despite being 
present at the time of inquest on 3.2.1997, he 
remained silent till 9.2.1997. 
(vii) The recovery of a polythene bag containing 
meat from the spot, coupled with the testimony of 
meat vendor, is not an incriminating circumstance 
because, firstly, the meat vendor admitted that there 
are many other meat vendors in the area and, 
secondly, there is no evidence that the bag recovered 
was the one which he sold to the accused. 
(viii) Neither the trial court nor the High Court tested 
the evidence to ascertain (a) whether circumstances 
were proved beyond reasonable doubt; and (b) 

whether they constituted a chain so complete as to 
rule out all other hypotheses save the one consistent 
with the guilt of the accused. 
 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE STATE 
16., on behalf of the State, it was submitted 
that each of the incriminating circumstances were 
proved beyond doubt; the chain of circumstances stood 
complete; and it pointed towards the guilt of the 
appellants by ruling out all hypotheses consistent with 
their innocence. The matter is concluded by concurrent 
findings of fact, therefore, there is no merit in the appeal. 
ANALYSIS 
17. We have considered the rival submissions and have 
perused the materials on record. 
18. At the outset, we may put on record that if finding 
of guilt is returned without properly evaluating and 
testing the evidence by applying the requisite legal 
principles, it can always be corrected by this Court in 
exercise of its powers under Article 136 of the 
Constitution of India. 
LEGAL PRINCIPLES QUA CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE 
19. Before we proceed to test the correctness of the 
findings returned by the trial court as well as the High 
Court, we must bear in mind that the prosecution case 
rests on evidence circumstantial in nature. As to when 
on strength of such evidence an accused can be 

convicted, the legal principles, as propounded in a series 
of decisions7 of this Court, may be summarized thus: 

the circumstances from which the conclusion of 
guilt is to be drawn should be fully established; 
(ii) the circumstances should be of a definite 
tendency unerringly pointing towards the guilt of the 
accused; 
(iii) the circumstances taken cumulatively should 
form a chain so far complete that there is no escape 
from the conclusion that within all human 
probability the crime was committed by the accused; 
(iv) the circumstances should be consistent only 
with the hypothesis regarding the guilt of the 
accused; and 
(v) they must exclude every possible hypothesis 
except the one which is sought to be proved. 
 
20. Adding on to the aforesaid legal principles, in Devi 
Lal vs. State of Rajasthan8, a three-judge bench of this 
Court held that in a case based on circumstantial 
evidence where two views are possible, one pointing to 
the guilt and the other to his innocence, the accused is 
entitled to the benefit of one which is favorable to him. 
 
7 See: Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra (1984); Hanumat Govind Nargundkar v. State of 
Madhya Pradesh AIR 1952 SC 343; Santosh hure versus State (G.N.C.T) of Delhi, 
8 (2019) 

21. Besides that, before recording conviction, the court 
must be satisfied that the accused ‘must be’ and not 
merely ‘may be’ guilty. In Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade vs. 
State of Maharashtra9, this Court, elaborating upon 
the above principle, observed that the mental distance 
between ‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long and divides vague 
conjectures from sure conclusions. Therefore, even if the 
prosecution evidence generates strong suspicion against 
the accused, it cannot be a substitute for proof. 
22. Bearing in mind the aforesaid legal principles, we 
would examine and consider – (a) whether the 
circumstances relied by the prosecution have been 
proved beyond reasonable doubt; (b) whether those 
circumstances are of a definite tendency unerringly 
pointing towards the guilt of the accused; (c) whether 
those circumstances taken cumulatively form a chain so 
far complete that there is no escape from the conclusion 
that within all human probability the crime was 
committed by the accused; (d) whether they are 
consistent only with the hypothesis of the accused being 
guilty; and (e) whether they exclude every possible 
hypothesis except the one to be proved. 
CIRCUMSTANCES RELIED BY THE PROSECUTION 
23. The prosecution case rests on the following 
circumstances: 
 
9 (1973) 

Accused-appellant no.1 and the deceased had 
supported rival candidates in the last panchayat 
elections held in 1996, and on 19.01.1997 accused 
– appellant no.1 had threatened the deceased in a 
Gram Sabha meet, therefore there existed motive for 
the crime. 
(ii) The deceased was last seen alive on 2.2.1997, at 
about 4.30 PM, with the accused-appellants by PW-
4. 
(iii) According to PW-3, whilst accused-appellants 
were at his shop on 2.2.1997, at about 6.30 PM, they 
were looking for the deceased. 
(iv) In the night hours of 2.2.1997, the accused-
appellants were noticed walking on the pathway in 
front of Mohan Singh’s shop from where deceased’s 
body with multiple ante-mortem injuries, confirming 
a homicidal death, was recovered next day morning. 
(v) A polythene bag containing meat was recovered 
from the place where belongings of the deceased 
were littered. Testimony of PW-6 proved that 
accused-appellant no.1 had purchased 1 kg of meat 
on 2.2.1997 at about 3.30 PM. 
(vi) On the disclosure made by the accused-
appellants, as well as at their pointing out, on 
6.2.1997 blood-stained stone(s) were recovered 
which might have been used to inflict head injury to 
the deceased, resulting in his death. 

24. We shall now deal with each of the above 
circumstances separately. 
MOTIVE 
25. Though prosecution has been successful in 
establishing that in 1996 panchayat elections the 
deceased and accused-appellant no.1 had supported 
rival candidates, but it could lead no concrete evidence 
as regards any untoward incident precipitating the crime 
in question. No doubt, evidence about extension of death 
threat in a public meet of the Gram Sabha, held in 
January 1997, has come, but, admittedly, no such 
incident was reported to the police. Hence, motive 
proved is not such as may have a material bearing on 
the prosecution case. Otherwise also, motive on its own 
cannot make or break the prosecution case. 
LAST SEEN CIRCUMSTANCE 
26. The circumstance of deceased being last seen alive 
in the company of the deceased is a vital link in the chain 
of other circumstances but on its own strength it is 
insufficient to sustain conviction unless the time-gap 
between the deceased being last seen alive with the 
accused and recovery of dead body of the deceased is so 
small that possibility of any other person being the 
author of the crime is just about impossible. Where the 
time-gap is large, intervening circumstances including 

act by some third person cannot be ruled out.10 In such 
a case, adverse inference cannot be drawn against the 
accused merely because he has failed to prove as to 
when he parted company of the deceased. 
27. In the instant case, PW-4 allegedly saw the 
deceased walking on a street with accused-appellant 
no.1 on 2.2.1997, at about 4.30 PM, near Gadhera 
Degree College. PW-4 further stated that accused-
appellant no.2 was walking 50-55 paces behind them. 
No evidence was led by the prosecution to demonstrate 
that the place where the deceased was last seen alive 
with the accused was near the place from where 
deceased’s body was recovered. Further, the time gap 
between 4.30 PM of 2.2.1997 and 8.30 AM of 3.2.1997 
(i.e., when the dead body was recovered) is so large that 
third party hand in the crime cannot be ruled out. 
Otherwise also, if two or more persons are seen walking 
on a public street, either side by side, or behind one 
another, it is not such a circumstance from which it may 
be inferred with a degree of certainty that those were 
together or in company of each other. Quite often on a 
public path a person may happen to walk side by side a 
stranger for a considerable distance without even talking 
to him. Likewise, a person may exchange pleasantries 
with another person walking on the path, but that by 
 
10 See Nizam v. State of Rajasthan, (2016); Navaneethakrishnan v. State, (2018); Kanhaiya Lal 
v. State of Rajasthan, (2014); State of U.P. v. Satish, (2005); Ramreddy Rajesh Khanna Reddy & 
Anr. V. State of A.P., (2006); and Bodhraj v. State of J & K, (2002) 

itself is not sufficient to infer that the two are in company 
of each other. Importantly, the prosecution case is not 
that the deceased was picked up from his house by the 
accused-appellant(s). Had it been so, in absence of 
evidence as to when they parted company of each other, 
adverse inference against the accused might be 
permissible, if the other circumstances so warrant. But 
here there is no evidence of that kind. Therefore, taking 
into account (a) the place where the accused appellants 
and the deceased were allegedly seen together; and (b) 
lack of proximity of the time and place when the three 
were seen together with the time and place when, and 
from where, the body of the deceased was recovered, we 
are of the considered view that the last seen 
circumstance as canvassed by the prosecution is not of 
a definite tendency unerringly pointing towards the guilt 
of the accused-appellants. 
APPELLANT(S) LOOKING FOR THE DECEASED 
28. PW-3 speaks of accused-appellants’ presence at his 
shop on 2.2.1997, at about 6.30 PM, as also of they 
being looking for the deceased. This circumstance has 
been considered incriminating by the courts below 
because it throws a possibility of accused being looking 
for the deceased with an intent to finish him off. In our 
view, this circumstance is not of a definite tendency in 
unerringly pointing towards the guilt of the accused, 
inasmuch as there may be multiple reasons for a person 

to look for another. Importantly, there is no evidence 
that the accused appellants were heard conspiring 
against the deceased or expressing their animosity 
towards him. Rather, this circumstance runs contrary to 
the last seen circumstance because if the accused were 
in the company of the deceased, why would they be 
looking for the deceased. 
APPELLANTS WERE NOTICED IN THE NIGHT HOURS 
29. PW-2 stated that on 2.2.1997 he noticed the 
appellants with Jagdish Punetha coming from the shop 
of Mohan Singh on 2.2.1997 between 6.30 PM and 7 PM. 
This circumstance is not an incriminating circumstance 
because from the statement of Mohan Singh (PW3) he 
was at his shop when the above three left his shop. 
However, PW-2 goes on to state that in the night hours 
of 2.2.1997 when he returned to his shop to fetch his 
purse, he noticed the accused-appellants walking on the 
path in front of Mohan Singh’s shop. This circumstance 
is taken as highly incriminating by the courts below 
because there was no reason for the appellants to be 
there at that odd hour of cold winter night. According to 
the courts below, this circumstance explains the 
presence of deceased’s body in front of Mohan Singh’s 
shop. 
30. If we test the statement of PW-2 against the weight 
of other evidence on record, it does not inspire 
confidence, firstly, because from PW-9’s (the first 

investigating officer) statement it appears that PW-2 was 
present at the time of inquest, which was held on 
3.2.1997, yet he chose not to disclose about what he saw 
till 9.2.1997. Interestingly, statement of PW-2 was 
recorded by PW-10 (i.e., the second investigating officer) 
on 9.2.1997 after the accused-appellants had already 
been arrested and even recovery of incriminating articles 
at their instance had allegedly been made. In what 
circumstances PW-2 withheld his statement that long 
and thereafter came to make a disclosure is not 
explained in the prosecution evidence. Secondly, the site 
plan (Exb. Ka-20) does not disclose the distance from 
where PW-2 spotted the two accused in the company of 
each other. Thirdly, PW-2 admits that in between his 
shop and Mohan Singh’s shop there are shrubs, and it 
is not possible to see from his own shop as to what is 
happening at Mohan Singh’s shop. Fourthly, PW-2’s 
presence is fortuitous because, admittedly, he had shut 
his shop and retired to the comfort of his home. It is 
highly unlikely that a person would take the pains of 
returning in late hours of winter night, particularly when 
it is drizzling, only to fetch his purse inadvertently left at 
his own shop. Fifthly, he is a witness inimical to the 
accused because he had a fight with appellant no.2 prior 
to the incident, which, however, resulted in a 
compromise on his shelling out Rs.3000/-. Besides that, 
walking on a public pathway in front of a shop where 

dead body is found lying next day morning is by itself 
not an incriminating circumstance on which alone, 
conviction could be sustained. More so, when there is no 
evidence that the accused appellants were seen dragging 
or lifting the body of the deceased to the shop of Mohan 
Singh. Unfortunately, neither the trial court nor the High 
Court thoroughly tested the testimony of PW-2 against 
other proven circumstances on record, as discussed 
above. 
RECOVERY OF POLYTHENE BAG 
31. Prosecution proved recovery of a black polythene 
bag containing 1 kg of meat from the place where other 
belongings of the deceased were littered. This recovery 
was made on 3.2.1997 and is considered incriminating 
by the prosecution because, according to PW-6, on 
2.2.1997 at about 3.30 PM the appellant no.1 had 
purchased a kilogram of meat from him. In our view, this 
circumstance cannot be considered incriminating as 
there is no evidence that the meat bag found was 
identified by PW-6 as the one sold by him to the accused. 
Otherwise also, black colored polythene is quite 
commonly used for carrying goods including meat 
products. Admittedly, there were two or three other meat 
vendors in the vicinity. In such circumstances which 
vendor’s meat was found can be anybody’s guess. This 
was, therefore, hardly an incriminating circumstance to 
link the appellant no.1 to the crime. More particularly, 

when fingerprints on the polythene were neither lifted 
nor compared with those of any of the accused. 
DISCLOSURE/ DISCOVERY 
32. Exb. Ka-18 is the disclosure statement recorded 
vide GD Entry no.27 at 19:20 hrs. on 6.2.1997. Exb. Ka-
6, which is also dated 6.2.1997, is the memorandum of 
seizure of blood-stained stones, plain stones, and plain 
earth from the spot where, according to the disclosure 
made by the two accused, the deceased was assaulted 
and killed. PW-8 is witness of that seizure, whereas PW-
10 is the investigating officer who got the disclosure 
statement recorded. The articles seized vide Exb. Ka-6 
were initially produced as material exhibits 1 to 5 by PW-
9 (i.e., the first investigating officer) and were later 
identified by PW-10 (i.e., the second investigating 
officer). 
33. Exb. Ka-21 is the site plan prepared by the 
investigating officer (PW-10) on 9.2.1997 showing the 
place from where that seizure was made. A perusal 
thereof would reveal that the place from where recovery 
of stone, etc. was shown was an open pathway. 
34. Exb. Ka-6 reveals that after arrest while the two 
accused were being brought to the police station, in the 
presence of Jeevan Upreti (PW-8) and Mahesh Upreti, 
they pointed out the place where the deceased was 
assaulted by them with the help of a stone and thereafter 
dragged to a field at Madhkhetla where he was again 

assaulted and killed. Exb. Ka-6, however, does not 
record that any of the accused had specifically pointed 
out a particular stone or spot. Rather, it records that on 
way to the police station the accused had showed the 
place of assault, therefore the police stopped the vehicle 
to look for clues, and then the stone, etc. mentioned 
therein were collected. 
35. Importantly, PW-9 who investigated the case on 
3.2.1997 (i.e., the first investigating officer) produced 
these stones, etc. (i.e., one big stone, three small stones, 
wooden plank, blood-stained and plain earth) as 
material exhibits 1 to 5 respectively. During cross-
examination, PW-9 admitted that the large stone 
produced as material exhibit no.1 bore no blood stain. 
PW-9 also stated, during cross-examination, that in the 
night of 2.2.1997 it had rained, and that rain shower 
converted into a drizzle on 3.2.1997. He went on to state 
that the entire land terrain from Lohaghat to 
Madhkhetla had turned slippery due to rain. Notably, 
the seizure memorandum (Exb. Ka-6) records that blood 
on the stone appeared to have been washed away due to 
rain. In these circumstances there was no chance of 
blood being found on the stone etc., which was lying in 
open, on 6.2.1997 (i.e., 4 days after the incident). The 
forensic report Exb. Ka-22 seems to confirm that there 
was no blood found on the stone. In fact, as per forensic 
report (Exb. Ka-22), three items were received by the 

laboratory for chemical examination, namely, (1) stone/ 
blood-stained/ plain earth, (2) cement plaster (blood-
stained) and plain earth and (3) blood-stained earth and 
plain earth. However, the chemical examination report 
clearly discloses that in respect of items (1) and (2) above 
no blood was found. Though human blood was found on 
item (3), it is not clear from the oral testimony of the 
witnesses as to from where item (3) was lifted. However, 
from the seizure memorandum (Exb. Ka-4) it appears 
that item (3) was lifted on 3.2.1997 from that spot where 
body of the deceased was found in the morning of 
3.2.1997. In these circumstances, we are of the view that 
even if we accept the recovery of stone(s) at the instance 
of the accused-appellants on 6.2.1997, the same is 
inconsequential because it could not be connected to the 
crime. 
36. Besides that, two incised wounds with clear cut 
margins were found on the head of the deceased. Though 
doctor (PW-1) said that they could be caused by a sharp-
edged stone but whether the seized stone could have 
caused it is not proved. Importantly, the stone was not 
shown to the doctor to have his opinion as to whether 
those head injuries could be caused by use of it. For all 
the reasons above, we are of the considered view that the 
recovery allegedly made from the place discovered 
consequent to the disclosure statement/pointing out by 
the accused is inconsequential as it could not be 

connected to the crime. The High Court erred by placing 
reliance on the same. 
37. Otherwise also, the disclosure statement (Exb. Ka-
18) was not admissible in evidence because the alleged 
discovery was not made pursuant to that statement. 
Disclosure statement was recorded at the police station 
whereas recovery was made from the place pointed out 
by the accused enroute to the police station. It was, 
therefore, a case of recovery from the place allegedly 
pointed out by the accused and not based on a 
disclosure statement. In Geejaganda Somaiah vs. 
State of Karnataka11, this Court has cautioned the 
courts about misuse of provision of Section 27 of the 
Evidence Act, 1872 while observing as under: 
“22. As the section is alleged to be frequently 
misused by the police, the courts are required to be 
vigilant about its application. The court must 
ensure the credibility of evidence by police because 
this provision is vulnerable to abuse. It does not, 
however, mean that any statement made in terms 
of the aforesaid section should be seen with 
suspicion and it cannot be discarded only on the 
ground that it was made to a police officer during 
investigation. The court has to be cautious that no 
effort is made by the prosecution to make out a 
statement of the accused with a simple case of 
recovery as a case of discovery of fact in order to 
attract the provisions of section 27 of the Evidence 
Act.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
 
38. Above apart, there is another reason to doubt the 
alleged discovery (i.e., based on disclosure made by the 
 
11 (2007) 

accused-appellants) or recovery (i.e., at their pointing 
out), as the case may be. This we say so, because in all 
seizure memorandums including that of torch, prepared 
on three dates i.e., 3.2.1997, 6.2.1997 and 9.2.1997, 
there is one common witness, namely, PW-8. Recovery 
made on 6.2.1997 is a chance recovery because by then 
there was no disclosure statement on record. Notably, 
as per evidence on record, accused appellants were on 
their way to the police station when they allegedly 
pointed out the place where they had assaulted the 
deceased before dragging him to the field. In such 
circumstances, it is quite unlikely that PW-8 would be 
present at the spot to be available as a witness of the 
recovery. 
For 
this 
very 
reason, 
during 
cross-
examination, suggestion was given to the investigating 
officer (PW-10) that recoveries were bogus, and 
documents were prepared at one go while sitting at the 
police station. Similarly, PW-8 was cross-examined 
about his presence at the time of recovery. PW-8, 
initially, responded by stating that he had not 
accompanied the police, though he happened to be 
present at that time. On further query, PW-8 stated that 
the police must have arrived between 11 and 12. Later, 
PW-8 stated that the accused were arrested in the 
evening of 6.2.1997. This indicates that he is not sure as 
to when the recovery took place. Further, distance of 
PW-8’s village from Madhkhetla is 2 km. All these 

circumstances create a serious doubt about the 
presence of the witness at the time and place of the 
alleged recovery. Besides that, the site plan of the place 
from where recovery was made on 6.2.1997 was not 
prepared until 9.2.1997. This makes us wonder whether 
papers in connection therewith were prepared at one go 
as suggested by the defense. Unfortunately, the High 
Court did not at all advert to these circumstances and 
relied on the disclosure statement/discovery/recovery 
without carefully weighing the evidence on record. 
 
CONCLUSION 
39. In view of the discussion above, we conclude as 
under: 
(a) The trial court and the High Court failed to test 
the evidence on record to find out whether the 
incriminating 
circumstances 
were 
proved 
beyond reasonable doubt and whether they were 
of definite tendency unerringly pointing towards 
the guilt of the accused-appellants. 
(b) The circumstance of (i) last seen; (ii) recovery of 
a meat bag from near the spot; (iii) accused-
appellants walking on the pathway near Mohan 
Singh’s shop in the night; and (iv) accused-
appellants inquiring about the deceased in the 
evening of 2.2.1997 are not of a definite tendency 
unerringly pointing towards the guilt of the 

accused-appellants. Circumstance (iii) above, 
was not even proved beyond reasonable doubt. 
(c) The disclosure statement was not admissible as 
it did not lead to discovery. The stone, etc. were 
allegedly recovered even before the disclosure 
statement was recorded. That apart, neither 
Doctor’s (PW-1’s) statement nor forensic report 
could connect them with the crime. 
(d) In consequence, no case was made out to hold 
the appellants guilty. Hence, the appeal deserves 
to be allowed. 
40. 
Before parting, we would like to put on record that 
the High Court also erred in converting the conviction 
from one punishable under Section 302 to Section 304 
Part I of IPC only because, according to it, the fatal 
injury could be a result of a solitary blow. What it 
overlooked was that there were multiple injuries on the 
body of the deceased apart from two incised wounds on 
the head with underlying fracture of occipital bone of 
the skull. In such a scenario, whosoever committed the 
crime had clear intention to kill the deceased. Once that 
is the position, in a case based on circumstantial 
evidence, when no effort is made on the part of the 
accused either to take a plea, or lead evidence to show, 
that their act would fall in any of the exceptions to 
Section 300 IPC, there was no justification at all to alter 
the conviction. 

41. However, since we have held that the prosecution 
had failed to establish the chain of incriminating 
circumstances, the accused appellants are entitled to be 
acquitted of the charges for which they have been tried 
and convicted. The appeal is, therefore, allowed. The 
impugned order is set aside. The appellants are 
acquitted of the charges for which they have been tried 
and convicted. They are on bail. They need not 
surrender. Their bail bonds stand discharged. 

New Delhi; 
November 28, 2024