IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

CIVIL APPEAL NO. ……………. OF 2024 
( S.L.P.(C) No.11733-11734 of 2023) 

NUTAN BHARTI GRAM VIDYAPITH 
 
 … Appellant(s) 
 
VERSUS 
 
GOVERNMENT OF GUJARAT AND ANR. … Respondent(s) 

JUDGMENT 
 
Rajesh Bindal, J. 
 
1. 
 
Leave granted. 
2. 
 
The Private College1 covered under the Grant-in-Aid 
scheme of the State Government has filed the present appeal 
impugning the orders passed by the High Court2 dated 26.07.20223 and 
21.04.20234. 
 
1 Nutan Bharti Gram Vidyapith 
2 High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad 
3 Letters Patent Appeal Number 1456 of 2010 
4 Miscellaneous Civil Application (for Review) Number 01 of 2022 

3. 
 
At the time of hearing, the learned senior counsel 
appearing for the appellant submitted that he only wishes to press the 
claim regarding liability of the appellant-college to pay retiral benefits 
to the respondent-employee. 
4. 
 
Briefly noticed, the facts are that the respondent no.2 was 
appointed as lecturer by the appellant. On account of certain 
misconduct, he was issued a chargesheet on 07.08.1993. After inquiry, 
he was dismissed from service on 06.06.1994. 
4.1 
 
Aggrieved by the dismissal, the respondent no.2 preferred 
an appeal to the Joint Director of Higher Education (appellate 
authority). The said appeal was dismissed as not maintainable vide 
order dated 15.11.1994. 
4.2 
 
By order dated 20.03.1996, in an application5 filed by the 
respondent no.2 before the High Court, his appeal before the Joint 
Director of Higher Education was held to be maintainable and the same 
was directed to be heard by appellate authority-respondent no.1. The 
appeal was allowed vide order dated 21.08.1996. 
4.3 
 
Aggrieved against the aforesaid order, the appellant 
preferred an application6 before the High Court where the above said 
 
5 Special Civil Application Number 12822 of 1994 
6 Special 

order was set aside and the matter was directed to be heard afresh vide 
order dated 07.10.1996. Thereafter vide order dated 02.03.2000, the 
appeal filed by the private respondent was allowed by appellate 
authority. He was directed to be reinstated as the dismissal was found 
to be an extreme punishment. 
5. 
 
The appellant challenged the aforesaid order before the 
High Court by filing an application7. The Learned Single Judge vide 
order dated 30.06.2010, noticing the fact that the private respondent 
had already superannuated, upheld the order of reinstatement passed 
in the aforesaid appeal. However, the High Court directed the 
appellant to pay back wages to the extent of 75%. The aforesaid order 
was challenged by the appellant by filing Letters Patent Appeal8. Vide 
order dated 26.07.2022, the appeal was disposed of while passing the 
following directions: 
“Private respondent No.2 would not be entitled 
for any backwages as ordered by learned Single 
Judge. 
Services of the private respondent No.2 shall be 
treated as continuous service from the date of his 
appointment till date of his superannuation. Private 
 
7 Special Civil Application Number 4357 of 2000 
8 Appeal No. 1456 of 2010 

respondent shall be entitled for all the retiral benefits 
of his employment. 
All the benefits shall be granted to the private 
respondent No.2 by the appellant as well as by the 
State authority within a period of eight weeks from 
the date of receipt of this order along with interest, 
as per the prevailing policy in such cases. 
If the amount is not paid within a period of eight 
weeks, the appellant as well as respondent authority 
shall pay the entire amount along with interest at the 
rate of 9% per annum till it is actually paid.” 

6. 
 
A perusal of the aforesaid direction shows that the back 
wages granted to the respondent no.2 were set aside and the appellant 
as well as the State were directed to pay retiral dues to the respondent 
No.2. Aggrieved against the aforesaid order, the State as well as the 
appellant filed Review Petitions9. The review filed by the State was 
allowed vide order dated 21.04.2023 and it was directed that the 
appellant shall be liable to pay the retiral dues. The order as modified 
is extracted below: 
“7. 
We do recollect that the parties – the 
appellant University and the employee (original 
respondent No.2) have agreed for such order and, 
 
9 Miscellaneous Civil Application Number 01 of 2022 and 
 Mescellaneous Civil Application Number 01 of 2023 

therefore, the order was passed directing to grant 
benefits to the employee. However, through 
oversight, we have observed appellant as well as 
respondent – State shall be liable to pay the amount. 
Hence, we hereby modify the order. Paragraphs 6 
sub-para (3) and (4) shall read as under: 
“All the benefits shall be granted to the private 
respondent No.2 by the appellant within a period of 
eight weeks from the date of receipt of today’s order 
along with interest, as per the prevailing policy in 
such cases. 
If the amount is not paid within a period of eight 
weeks, the appellant shall pay the entire amount 
along with interest at the rate of 9% per annum till it 
is actually paid”.” 
 
7. 
 
Aggrieved against the aforesaid modification, where the 
direction has been issued to the appellant to pay retiral dues to the 
private respondent, the college is before this Court. 
8. 
 
Learned counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that 
the order passed by the High Court is not in consonance with the 
Scheme10 applicable for grant of retiral dues to an employee of an 
 
10 Pension Scheme for the teaching/ non-teaching staff in the Gram Vidyapeeth, Government of Gujarat, 
Education Department, Resolution Number GUS/1089-5369/B Sachivalaya, Gandhinagar dated 
13.07.1990 

aided institution. The relevant paragraph of the Scheme applicable is 
extracted below: 
“11. 
The pension papers of the members of the 
staff entitled to pension, gratuity, etc. under the 
scheme should be prepared in case of Gram 
Vidyapeeth staff by the Principal of the Gram 
Vidyapeeth on the basis of service record 
maintained by the Gram Vidyapeeth concerned. The 
entries in the service book of the staff will be made 
and attested by the Principal of Gram Vidyapeeths 
and in case of Principal, by the management of the 
Gram Vidyapeeth concerned and such entries 
should be verified by the Director of Higher 
Education of the officer authorized by him and a 
certificate of verification recorded in the service 
books. The Director of Higher Education should 
sanction the pension, gratuity, etc. and forward the 
pension completed to the Director of Pension and 
Provisions Fund. The pension, gratuity, etc. so 
sanctioned will be payable from the Government 
Treasurers. The Director of pension and Provident 
Fund will produced be clean and issue a pension 
payment order and/or gratuity payment order on the 
Treasury, from which the pensioner illegible pension 
gratuity, under intimation to Director of Higher 
Education.” 

9. 
 
Learned counsel argued that the aforesaid Paragraph 11 of 
the Scheme provides that the liability to pay pension is on the State 
Government. The direction given by the High Court in the order 
passed in the Review Application is not in consonance with the 
aforesaid provisions. Hence, the same be set aside and the State 
should be held liable to pay retiral dues to the respondent no.2. 
10. 
 
On the other hand, learned counsel for the State submitted 
that the conduct of the appellant is to be seen before putting any 
liability with the State to pay retiral dues to an employee. It is a case in 
which the respondent no.1/appellate authority vide order dated 
02.03.2000 directed reinstatement of the respondent no.2. However, 
thereafter the college continued litigating, raising frivolous grounds, 
as a result of which, the State is now sought to be burdened with liability 
to pay pension to the respondent no.2, who had not actually worked for 
the requisite period. More than two decades have passed thereafter 
and during this period, respondent no.2 attained the age of 
superannuation. In support, reliance has been placed upon judgment 
of this Court in Educational Society, Tumsar and Others vs. State of 
Maharashtra and Others11. 
 
11 (2016); 2016 SCC Online SC 93 

11. 
 
Learned counsel appearing for respondent no.2 supported 
the argument raised by learned counsel for the appellant while stating 
that in terms of the laws applicable to the appellant, being Grant-in-Aid 
Institution, the duty to pay retiral dues lies with the State, which cannot 
escape it’s liability. 
12. 
 
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the 
paper book. 
13. 
 
It is not a matter of dispute that the appellant is an institution 
entitled to Grant-in-Aid and the employees thereof are entitled to 
pensionary benefits in terms of the aforesaid Scheme. The only 
argument raised by the learned counsel for the State is regarding 
conduct of the appellant in fighting litigation after the State had 
directed reinstatement of the respondent no.2 and finally settling the 
matter before the High Court. In our opinion, the same cannot be fatal 
for the appellant and burden it with the retiral benefits of respondent 
no.2 whereas the Scheme provides for otherwise. There is no 
exception provided in the Scheme to enable the State to deny payment 
of retiral benefits to an employee of the Grant-in-Aid Institution under 
certain circumstances and shift the burden on the institution. 
14. 
 
The judgment relied upon by the State may not have 
application in the facts of the case, wherein it was found that the action 

of the Education Institution was without jurisdiction, transgressing its 
power to terminate its employee. If the facts of the present case are 
concerned, no such finding has been recorded by the appellate 
authority. There were serious charges against the respondent no.2 
which included inter alia instigation of students to go on strike, 
improper behaviour with the co-employees, attempt to pollute the 
atmosphere in the institution, violation of rules and regulations of the 
institution and involvement in the activities which may cause damage 
to the institution. Out of 30 charges, 10 were proved. After inquiry, 
with a view to maintain discipline in the institution, it was found 
appropriate that the respondent no.2 be dismissed from service. 
However, the appellate authority found the charges established to be 
trivial in nature and opined that those should have been sorted out. The 
appellate authority found that the punishment of dismissal is too harsh 
and the issues could have been resolved by way of discussion. 
15. 
 
The appellant, keeping in view the discipline in the 
institution, thought it appropriate to challenge the same. In such 
circumstances, it cannot be opined that it’s conduct was such that it 
should be burdened with the retiral benefits of delinquent employee. 
It is not the opinion of the appellate authority or any Court that the 
action taken by the appellant against the respondent no.2 was without 

jurisdiction as was the case in Educational Society, Tumsar and 
Others (supra). 
16. 
 
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeals are allowed. 
The impugned order dated 21.04.2023 passed by the High Court, 
allowing the Review Application filed by the State and dismissing the 
Review Application filed by the appellant, is set aside. The Review 
Application filed by the appellant is allowed. As a consequence, the 
order dated 26.07.2022 is modified. The consequence thereof is that 
the State, respondent no.1 shall be liable to pay retiral dues to 
respondent no.2. 

 ……………….……………..J. 
 (J.K. MAHESHWARI) 

……………….……………..J. 
(RAJESH BINDAL) 
New Delhi 
December 02, 2024.