IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

NEERAJ SHARMA 

Versus 
 
STATE OF CHHATTISGARH 

(@ ) 

ASHWANI KUMAR YADAV 

Versus 
 
STATE OF CHHATTISGARH 

JUDGMENT 

SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J. 
 
Leave granted. 
2. 
Both these appeals arise out of a common judgment and 
order dated 26.06.2018 passed by the High Court of Chhattisgarh 

at Bilaspur in, which has 
dismissed the Criminal Appeal of the present appellants, 
upholding the conviction and sentence of the trial court. The two 
appellants were convicted for offences under Sections 307/120B, 
364-A and 392/397 and were sentenced, inter alia, for life 
imprisonment under Section 364A Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for 
short ‘IPC’). 
The third accused in this case, called Ravi Kumar Dwivedi, 
was acquitted by the trial court. 
3. 
The case of the prosecution is that appellants had abducted 
one Arjit Sharma (PW-6), a Class 12th student of KPS School, Durg. 
The abduction, as per the prosecution, was for ransom, and a 
dastardly attempt was also made by the accused to kill the victim, 
although the victim miraculously escaped, but not before 
sustaining grievous injuries, which eventually led to the 
amputation of his right leg. 
The complainant/victim (PW-6) was at the relevant time 
residing as a paying guest in the house of Smt. Seema Singh 
(PW-7) at Priyadarshni Nagar, Durg. The accused, Neeraj Sharma 
and complainant were known to each other and on 02.01.2013, 
the two decided to go on a motorcycle ride to Nehru Nagar and 

Yugandar College, Rajnandgaon. The complainant was picked 
from his guest house by the two accused i.e., Neeraj Sharma and 
Ashwani Kumar Yadav and the three took off on their motorcycle 
to a place called “Doundilohara”. At about 1:00 am in the night 
when the complainant was trying to ease himself, the two accused 
made an attempt to kill him by throttling his neck by the clutch 
wire of the motorcycle. As a result, the complainant fell on the 
ground unconscious and the appellants thinking that the 
complainant had died, poured petrol on his body and set him on 
fire. 
As per the prosecution case the body was set on fire, but 
before setting the body on fire, the complainant/victim’s mobile 
phone and cash of Rs.5000/- (Rupees Five Thousand only) were 
looted from him, by the two accused Neeraj Sharma and Ashwani 
Kumar Yadav. 
4. 
The complainant, however, was not dead, but as it turned out 
managed to escape from the scene and was later rescued by 
strangers whom he met on his way while escaping who helped him 
call an ambulance and he was taken to Doundilohara Hospital 
from where he was referred to Rajnandgaon and ultimately to 
Sector -9 Hospital, Bhilai. While he was at Doundilohara hospital, 

the doctor (PW-4) who had examined the complainant had also 
informed the Police and therefore a “Dehati Nalishi”1 (Ex.P/12) was 
recorded on 03.01.2013. The doctor PW-4 (Jai Kumar Chunarkar) 
who had examined the complainant/victim at Doundilohara 
hospital, notes the following burn injuries in his report (Ex.P/09). 
“Injured had worn underwear of dark 
chocolate colour, which was not burnt and 
smell of skin burning was emitting from his 
entire body and he was in semi-conscious 
condition. He was very restless and he 
had complaint of plain and burn on the 
burning spots.” 
 
“Burn injuries were found on frontal and 
backside of both legs of the injured and 
skin of that spots had peeled out from 
surface. Burn injuries and many burning 
blisters on the lower portion of his belly 
and burn injury was on the waist and burn 
injury was on the upper portion of right 
side on the chest and a ligature mark like 
a lining was present on the frontal portion 
of neck of the injured, which was in light 
red colour, it had length of 122 to 14 cms 
and abrasion injuries were found on the 
frontal portion of his neck which had size 
of 3x2, 2x2 and 2x2 cms respectively. In 
this connection he had submitted his 
Report (exhibit P-9).” 

There were first degree burn injuries on the body of the victim 
as the burnt area was 45% to 48% of his body. Statement of the 
 
1 Dehati Nalishi is something akin to a zero FIR. victim (PW-6) was recorded before a Nayab Tehsildar on 
04.01.2013 at 12 noon. The overall circumstances under which 
this statement was recorded makes it an important piece of 
evidence. We must also remember that this is a statement given 
by an eighteen year old boy who has just come out of a harrowing 
incident where a dastardly attempt was made on his life. He is also 
grievously injured and apparently had consulted no one before 
giving this statement before an Executive Magistrate. The veracity 
of this statement should not be in doubt. He states how he was 
taken on a motorcycle by Neeraj Sharma and Ashwani Kumar 
Yadav and how he was asked to consume alcohol on the way and 
then at 1:00 AM in the night, how the two accused first tried to 
strangulate him with clutch wire and later set his body on fire, 
thinking he is dead. It is important here to note that there is no 
mention here of any demand or talk of ransom. 
5. 
The police after completing its investigation filed its 
Chargesheet against the three accused under Sections 120B, 
364A, 307, 392/397 and in the alternative section 394 of IPC. As 
it was a Sessions triable offence, it was committed to Sessions from 
where it went to First Additional Sessions Judge Balod, who 
ultimately framed charges on 15.04.2013 under Sections 364A, 

307, 120B, 392, 397 and in the alternative 394 of IPC against all 
the accused persons i.e., Neeraj Sharma, Ashwani Kumar Yadav 
and Ravi Kumar Dwivedi. 
The prosecution examined in all 11 witnesses and placed 
several exhibits before the Court. The accused pleaded not guilty 
and faced trial. The Trial Court passed its Judgement dated 
03.01.2015 by which the accused appellants were convicted for 
offences under sections 307/120B, 364A and 392/397 IPC for 
which they were sentenced to life imprisonment inter alia for the 
major offence under section 364-A IPC which has also been upheld 
by the High Court. 
6. 
While issuing notice in the Special Leave Petition on 
30.11.2018 this Court in the case of Neeraj Sharma in fact issued 
a limited notice to his conviction under section 364-A while 
confirming his conviction under sections 307 read with 120B along 
with sections 392 read with 397 of IPC. The said order is produced 
below: 
“We do not find any good ground 
warranting interference with the conviction 
of the petitioner under Section 307 IPC 
read with 120 (B) and Section 392 IPC 
read with 397. 

Issue notice limited to the conviction under 
Section 364A returnable within eight 
weeks.” 

All the same nothing of this nature has been observed by this 
Court while issuing notice in the case of Ashwani Kumar Yadav 
which was issued on 02.08.2021. 
As far as an attempt to murder and robbery are concerned, 
we have no doubt in our mind that the prosecution has been able 
to establish its case beyond a reasonable doubt. At the same time, 
we have our doubts about the conviction of the accused under 364-
A of the IPC. In fact, this doubt was also in the mind of this Court, 
at least in the case of Neeraj Sharma, as this Court has issued a 
limited notice as only to the applicability of 364-A in the case. 
7. 
The most important witness in this case is the complainant 
himself. He is also an injured witness. The injuries sustained by 
him in the incident match the case of the prosecution. An attempt 
was made by the two accused to dispose of the body of the victim 
by burning the body. There were burn injuries on both his legs. 
The strong ligature mark on his neck was again significant as it is 
the case of the prosecution that the two accused had tried to 
strangulate him with the clutch wire. The condition of the victim 
was precarious to say the least, and he gave a statement before the 

Executive Magistrate, B.K. Verma who was the Nayab Tehsildar 
and Executive Magistrate, Durg, he said: 
“At 6.30-7.00 hrs in the evening Neeraj 
Sharma and Ashwini Yadav came to me and 
said that lets go to Youganthar College 
Rajnandgaon. I had not seen Youganthar 
College so I went along with them in motor 
cycle to see the college.” 
 
He also said, 
“In the night of 3rd at 1.30 hrs there is a 
plant towards Balod I do not know its 
name, near to that, Neeraj Sharma and 
Ashwini Yadav first strangulated me with 
clutch wire I had stopped my breath they 
thought that me dead, then set me fire by 
pouring petrol.” 
 
8. 
Apart from this, the veracity of the incident is further 
established by the deposition of Santosh Shukla (PW-1), who was 
the first person in the Bhilai Plant who saw the complainant in a 
burnt condition and who inquired from him as to what led to his 
injuries and was informed that these injuries were caused by his 
friends, and his money was also looted by them. PW-4, Dr. Jai 
Kumar Chunarkar, was the first to medically examine the 
complainant at Doundilohara Hospital. He had recorded burn 
injuries on his body which we have already referred above. Praneet 
Sharma (PW-5), is the father of the complainant who stated that 

on the midnight of 03.01.2013, he was informed by Aman Singh, 
that his son Arijit Sharma is not well and his son has been 
hospitalized at Sector -9 Hospital, Bhilai and when he reached the 
hospital, he saw his son in burnt condition and in severe pain. His 
son informed him that the two appellants were the ones who tried 
to kill him. He also said that at 12 noon on 03.01.2023 he received 
a phone call from the mobile number 7869590607, where the 
caller demanded a sum of Rs.8,00,000/- as ramson for the release 
of his son, Arijit Sharma. When he said that his son is in hospital 
with him and he would file a complaint against the caller, the 
phone got disconnected. This part of the statement of this witness 
(PW-5) who is the father of the complainant/injured, as regards 
the demand of ransom, however, has not been established in any 
manner. 
The complainant himself was examined as PW-6 who said in 
his examination in chief that he was staying in Bhilai as paying 
guest and on 02.01.2013 the accused Neeraj Sharma who was 
known to him called on his mobile phone and asked him to come 
to Nehru Nagar, Bhilai, from where they were supposed to go 
somewhere on a motorbike. After informing his land lady, he went 
to meet Neeraj Sharma at Nehru Nagar. Neeraj Sharma arrived 

after a few minutes on a motorcycle with Ashwani Kumar Yadav 
riding their pillion. The three went on this motorcycle towards 
Yugandar College and on their way, they also consumed liquor. 
They had also met Rahul, the brother of Neeraj Sharma, on their 
way. Past midnight, he requested Neeraj Sharma to stop the 
vehicle, as he wanted to ease himself and when the complainant 
was talking to Neeraj Sharma, the other accused Ashwani Kumar 
Yadav, came from behind and tied clutch wire around his neck and 
then both Ashwani Kumar Yadav and Neeraj Sharma made an 
attempt to strangulate him with the clutch wire. As a result, he 
fell down semi-conscious and he was thought to be dead by the 
two assailants who then poured petrol on him. He also heard 
Neeraj Sharma and Ashwani Kumar fetching petrol from their 
motorcycle. Neeraj Sharma also took away Rs.5000/- from his 
purse, and his cell phone. Later petrol was poured on him and 
then he was set on fire. He somehow escaped and reached the 
nearby Bhilai plant and he informed the guard about the incident 
and gave the number of his landlord to him and subsequently 
ambulance was called and he was sent to the hospital. 

This witness was cross-examined at length by the defence 
counsel but nothing has come out which may cast a doubt on any 
of his statements. 
9. 
PW-7 is the land lady Seema Singh, where the complainant 
was staying as a paying guest who also testified against the 
accused. She has said that the complainant had informed her that 
he is going with his friend towards another place on 02.01.2013 
for which he sought her permission. 
 
The mobile phone was traced by the police belonged to one of 
the accused Ashwani Kumar Yadav. The police during their 
investigation arrested Neeraj Sharma and Ashwani Kumar Yadav 
on 03.01.2013 and their Hero Honda Motorcycle and Mobile 
Phones were recovered. 
 
The prosecution story therefore as far as abduction and 
attempt to murder is concerned can hardly be in doubt. The 
prosecution has been able to prove its case beyond a reasonable 
doubt. The most important witness here is the complainant 
himself, who is an 18-year-old boy, studying at the relevant time 
in a college near Bhilai, who trusted his friends, not aware that he 
is being taken by deceit by his friends who had planned his 
murder. PW-6 is also an injured witness. 

10. The first doctor who had examined PW-6 was Dr. Jai Kumar 
Chunarkar (PW-4), who works at the District Hospital at Balod. He 
had examined the injured complainant in the early hours of 
morning on 03.01.2013. His observation as to the injuries of PW-
6 and his general condition are as follows: 
“Opinion: - 
Burn injuries were found over 
the body of the patient, which were of durmel 
peed burn nature, which expressed the first 
degree burn. The area of burnt was 
approximately 45 to 48 percentage. Exhibit P-
9 is the examination report given by me, part 
A to A of which bears my signature. 
 
 On the same date, on receiving the memo from 
the Station House Officer Daundilohara for 
recording, statement of injured Arjit Sharma, I 
had opined that, “injured Arjit Sharma was 
not in the condition to give statement on 
03.01.13 at 4:30 hours in the morning.” 
 
The injured was then referred to Bhilai Hospital where he was 
examined by Dr. Uday (PW-9). His observation is as follows: 
“On examination, I found that both legs of the 
patient were deeply burnt from top to bottom 
and some blisters were therein stomach and 
both hands, which were burnt up to 40 to 45 
percentage. There were mark in his neck, 
which probably was comes due to pressure of 
clutch wire. The treatment of which was 
undergone in my Hospital at about 60 days, in 
which he was operated twice, First operation 
was done on 15.01.13, during which we 
compelled to cut his right legs below the knee, 
which was rotten due to heavily burnt. 

Second operation was done on 12.02.13, 
wherein at the place on deep injury, the skin 
from other places were grafted. Therafter, it 
started improving gradually the condition of 
the patient and on 04.03.13, he has been 
discharged from the hospital. Registration 
Sheed (Bedhead Ticket) of indoor patient 
regarding admission in our hospital is Exhibit 
P-14, which is in 166 pages, wherein on each 
pages at part A to A bears my signature.” 
 
The other person who had met the injured while he had escaped 
was PW-1 i.e. Santosh Shukla. The statement of PW-1 is as follows: 
“I am posted to the post of Senior Executive 
H.R. in Godawari Steel Plant Gidhali since 
January, 2009. It is the matter of first week of 
the January of this year, at that time I was on 
duty at night shift. On the night in between 
about 2 to 3, the Guard of the plant informed 
me that one boy in burning condition has come 
inside the plant and then reaching out from the 
office I saw that the boy was burnt at leg, back 
and hand etc., he had worn underwear only. 
On enquiring by me, the boy told that, “My 
friends carried me to the forest and burnt me 
and looted money from me”. Then I phoned to 
the Police-station of Daundilohara and had 
also phone to Sanjivani 108. Thereafter, 
Sanjivani Ambulance reached and had taken 
the boy to Daundilohara Hospital for 
treatment. 
 
 Police personnel Station House Officer Sahu 
had come to investigate the incident and had 
prepared Nazari map (Exhibit P-01) of the 
incident, part A to A of which bears my 
signature. Similarly, Halka Patwari had 
prepared the Nazari map (Exhibit P-02) of the 

incident, part A to A of which bears my 
signature. The police personnel had seized 
pants, which was burnt, burnt shirt and pants 
jeep in burnt condition, disposal glass, 
cigarette box etc. before me and two hand cuff 
persons. The said seizure proceeding of above 
articles was done according to Seizure memo 
(Exhibit P-3), from the place of the incident in 
the presence of accused Neeraj Sharma, 
present in the Court, wherein at part A to A, 
there was my signature. The Police personal 
had recorded my statement after enquiry.” 
 
11. The importance of injured witness in a criminal trial cannot 
be over stated. Unless there are compelling circumstances or 
evidence placed by the defence to doubt such a witness, this has 
to be accepted as an extremely valuable evidence in a criminal 
Trial. 
In the case of Balu Sudam Khalde v. State of Maharashtra 
 this Court summed up the principles 
which are to be kept in mind when appreciating the evidence of an 
injured eye-witness. This court held as follows: 
“26. When the evidence of an injured 
eye-witness is to be appreciated, the 
under-noted legal principles enunciated 
by the Courts are required to be kept in 
mind: 
 
(a) The presence of an injured eye-
witness at the time and place of the 
occurrence cannot be doubted unless 
there are material contradictions in his 
deposition. 

(b) Unless, it is otherwise established 
by the evidence, it must be believed 
that an injured witness would not allow 
the real culprits to escape and falsely 
implicate the accused. 
 
(c) The evidence of injured witness 
has greater evidentiary value and 
unless compelling reasons exist, 
their statements are not to be 
discarded lightly. 
 
(d) The evidence of injured witness 
cannot be doubted on account of some 
embellishment in natural conduct or 
minor contradictions. 
 
(e) If there be any exaggeration or 
immaterial 
embellishments 
in 
the 
evidence of an injured witness, then 
such contradiction, exaggeration or 
embellishment should be discarded 
from the evidence of injured, but not the 
whole evidence. 
 
(f) The broad substratum of the 
prosecution version must be taken into 
consideration and discrepancies which 
normally creep due to loss of memory 
with passage of time should be 
discarded.” 
 
12. In the case at hand the case of abduction and attempt to 
murder are well established by the prosecution. All that is now left 
for us to determine is whether an offence under Section 364A of 
IPC is made out? 

While abduction simpliciter may not technically be an offence 
under the IPC, it becomes a punishable offence when it is 
combined with another act. For example, abduction in order to 
commit murder is an offence under Section 364 IPC. So is 
abduction an offence if it is done with an intent to secretly or 
wrongfully confine a person (Section 365, IPC), or when it is done 
to compel a woman for marriage etc. (Section 366, IPC). Similarly, 
Section 364A is an offence where kidnapping or abduction is made 
and a person is put to death or hurt; or a person is threatened with 
death or actually murdered, on demand of ransom. 
Section 364A IPC was inserted in the Indian Penal Code by 
an Act of Parliament (Act No.42 of 1993 with effect from 22nd May, 
1993). That was a period when kidnapping and abduction for the 
purposes of ransom were on the rise and therefore, the Law 
Commission of India in its 42nd Report in 1971 had recommended 
insertion of Section 364A in IPC, though it was ultimately 
incorporated in the year 1993, it reads as under: 
“364-A. Kidnapping for ransom, 
etc.—Whoever kidnaps or abducts any 
person or keeps a person in detention 
after such kidnapping or abduction, 
and threatens to cause death or hurt to 
such person, or by his conduct gives 
rise to a reasonable apprehension that 
such person may be put to death or 

hurt, or causes hurt or death to such 
person 
in 
order 
to 
compel 
the 
Government or [any foreign State or 
international 
inter-governmental 
organisation or] any other person to do 
or abstain from doing any act or to pay 
a ransom, shall be punishable with 
death, or imprisonment for life, and 
shall also be liable to fine.” 
 
This Court in the case of Vikram Singh v. Union of India 
(2015) has observed as follows: 
“53. Applying the above to the case at 
hand, we find that the need to bring in 
Section 
364-A 
IPC 
arose 
initially 
because of the increasing incidence of 
kidnapping and abduction for ransom. 
This 
is 
evident 
from 
the 
recommendations made by the Law 
Commission to which we have made 
reference in the earlier part of this 
judgment. While those recommendations 
were pending with the Government, the 
spectre of terrorism started raising its 
head threatening not only the security 
and safety of the citizens but the very 
sovereignty and integrity of the country, 
calling for adequate measures to curb 
what has the potential of destabilising 
any country. With terrorism assuming 
international dimensions, the need to 
further amend the law arose, resulting in 
the amendment to Section 364-A IPC, in 
the year 1994. The gradual growth of the 
challenges posed by kidnapping and 
abductions for ransom, not only by 
ordinary criminals for monetary gain or 
as an organised activity for economic 
gains but by terrorist organisations is 
what necessitated the incorporation of 

Section 364-A IPC and a stringent 
punishment for those indulging in such 
activities.” 
 
It needs to be clarified, as it was done in Vikram Singh 
(supra), that Section 364A IPC does not merely cover acts of 
terrorism against the Government or Foreign State but it also 
covers cases where the demand of ransom is made not as a part of 
a terrorist act but for monetary gains for a private individual. 
 
13. In the present case, the evidence placed by the prosecution 
to establish a case under Section 364-A is in the form of a phone 
call to the father of the victim at 12 noon by Ravi Kumar Dwivedi 
(the third accused who was acquitted by the Trial Court). 
Although, according to the prosecution the number has been 
traced to Ashwani Kumar Yadav, one of the two accused here, but 
no evidence to this effect, as required under Section 165 of the 
Evidence Act, has been placed before the Court. 
The supplementary statement given by the complainant before 
the police on 21.03.2013, (his first statement is on 03.01.2013), 
has little relevance as PW-6 never speaks of this in his examination 
in chief. 

14. This court in the case of Shaik Ahmed v. State of 
Telangana (2021) has held that in order to make out 
an offence under Section 364 A, three conditions must be met: 
A) There should be a kidnapping or abduction of a person or a 
person is to be kept in detention after such kidnapping or 
abduction; 
B) There is a threat to cause death or hurt to such a person or 
the accused by their conduct give rise to a reasonable 
apprehension that such person may be put to death or hurt 
C) Or cause death or hurt to such a person in order to compel 
the Government or any foreign state or intergovernmental 
organisation or any other person to do or abstain from doing 
any act or to pay a ransom. 
The necessary ingredients which the prosecution must prove, 
beyond a reasonable doubt, before the Court are not only an act of 
kidnapping or abduction but thereafter the demand of ransom, 
coupled with the threat to life of a person who has been kidnapped 
or abducted, must be there. It was reiterated by this Court in the 
case of Ravi Dhingra v. State of Haryana (2023). 
In the present case, what the prosecution has miserably failed 
to establish is the demand of ransom. As per the prosecution, the 

complainant’s father i.e., Praneet Sharma (PW-5) received a phone 
call from which a demand of ransom was made. The phone call 
was allegedly traced as being of one Ravi Kumar Dwivedi but no 
evidence was placed on record to establish the demand of ransom 
before the Court which was absolutely necessary in view of the law 
laid done by this Court in Rajesh v. State of Madhya Pradesh,. 
15. For making out a case under Section 364-A, the first 
condition i.e., kidnapping or abduction must be coupled with 
either the second or the third condition as held by this Court in 
Shaik Ahmed (supra)2. Under the said provision, the accused is 
liable to be punished either by death or imprisonment for life and 
is also liable to be fined considering the gravity of the offence. In 
the present case, even if it is presumed for the sake of argument 
that an offence under Section 364 is made out, we do not find that 
the offence would come under the ambit of Section 364A. 
‘Abduction’ is defined under Section 362 which reads as 
under: 
“362. Abduction.—Whoever by force 
compels, or by any deceitful means 
 
2 Para 33 

induces, any person to go from any 
place, is said to abduct that person.” 
 
The offence which is made out is definitely under Section 364 
which read as under: 
“364. Kidnapping or abducting in 
order to murder.—Whoever kidnaps or 
abducts any person in order that such 
person may be murdered or may be so 
disposed of as to be put in danger of 
being murdered, shall be punished with 
[imprisonment 
for 
life] 
or 
rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be 
liable to fine.” 
 
16. However, in order to come under the ambit of Section 364A, 
something more than abduction is required, which is demand of 
ransom. We do not find that there was a demand of ransom as 
alleged by the prosecution. There is no worthwhile evidence placed 
by the prosecution in this regard. 
The demand of ransom does not come in the examination in 
chief of the complainant (PW-6). He sticks to his theory of 
abduction, attempt to murder, etc., but there is no whisper about 
any demand of ransom, though in his supplementary statement 
before the Police (under Section 161 of Criminal Procedure Code), 
on 21.03.2013, he says that while he was lying on the ground after 
an attempt to strangulate him was made by the two accused, he 

had heard Neeraj Sharma telling Ashwani Kumar Yadav that they 
should now demand a ransom from his father. The only deposition 
in Court regarding demand of ransom has come as a bald 
statement by Praneet Sharma (PW-5) who is the father of the 
complainant that on 03.01.2013 when he was in the hospital one 
Ravi Kumar Dwivedi demanded Rs.8,00,000/- as ransom. Ravi 
Kumar Dwivedi the third accused, has already been acquitted by 
the Trial Court. There was no evidence at all before the Trial Court 
to have convicted the appellants under Section 364A, IPC. The 
conviction of the appellants under Section 364A is not made out 
and is therefore liable to be set aside. 
17. Appellants’ conviction and sentence of life imprisonment 
under Section 364A of IPC is therefore set aside. All the same, we 
do find that PW-6 was abducted so that he could be murdered. We 
therefore convert the findings under Section 364A to that of 
Section 364. Appellants are hereby convicted under Section 364 of 
IPC, instead of Section 364A IPC. 
 
Both the trial court and the High Court have failed to detect 
the flaw in the evidence led by the prosecution under Section 364A 
IPC. The trial court as well as the appellate court have completely 
relied upon the evidence of PW-5 (Praneet Sharma, father of the 

victim) and PW-6 his son, the victim. As far as the evidence of 
PW-6 is concerned, he makes no mention of any demand or 
ransom in the court as a prosecution witness. In his first statement 
given to the Executive Magistrate on 03.01.2013, again he makes 
no mention of any ransom. He only mentions about ransom in his 
supplementary statement recorded by the Police after two months 
on 21.03.2013. The High Court believes it and calls it a “dying 
declaration”. The statement given to the Police on 21.03.2023 
cannot be called a dying declaration. Dying declaration is defined 
under Section 32 of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 which is 
reproduced below: 
32. Cases in which statement of 
relevant fact by person who is dead 
or 
cannot 
be 
found, 
etc., 
is 
relevant.—Statements, 
written 
or 
verbal, of relevant facts made by a 
person who is dead, or who cannot be 
found, or who has become incapable of 
giving evidence, or whose attendance 
cannot be procured without an amount 
of delay or expense which under the 
circumstances of the case appears to the 
Court unreasonable, are themselves 
relevant facts in the following cases:— 
(1) When it relates to cause of death.—
When the statement is made by a person 
as to the cause of his death, or as to any 
of the circumstances of the transaction 
which resulted in his death, in cases in 

which the cause of that person's death 
comes into question. 
Such statements are relevant whether 
the person who made them was or was 
not, at the time when they were made, 
under 
expectation 
of 
death, 
and 
whatever may be the nature of the 
proceeding in which the cause of his 
death comes into question. 
(2) Or is made in course of business.—
When the statement was made by such 
person in 
the ordinary course of 
business, and in particular when it 
consists of any entry or memorandum 
made by him in books kept in the 
ordinary course of business, or in the 
discharge of professional duty; or of an 
acknowledgment written or signed by 
him of the receipt of money, goods, 
securities or property of any kind; or of a 
document used in commerce written or 
signed by him; or of the date of a letter 
or other document usually dated, written 
or signed by him. 
(3) Or against interest of maker.—When 
the statement is against the pecuniary or 
proprietary interest of the person making 
it, or when, if true, it would expose him 
or would have exposed him to a criminal 
prosecution or to a suit for damages. 
(4) Or gives opinion as to public right or 
custom, or matters of general interest.—
When the statement gives the opinion of 
any such person, as to the existence of 
any public right or custom or matter of 
public 
or 
general 
interest, 
of 
the 
existence of which, if it existed, he would 
have been likely to be aware, and when 
such statement was made before any 
controversy as to such right, custom or 
matter had arisen. 

(5) Or 
relates 
to 
existence 
of 
relationship.—When 
the 
statement 
relates 
to 
the 
existence 
of 
any 
relationship [by blood, marriage or 
adoption] between persons as to whose 
relationship [by blood, marriage or 
adoption] 
the 
person 
making 
the 
statement 
had 
special 
means 
of 
knowledge, and when the statement 
was made before the question in dispute 
was raised. 
(6) Or is made in will or deed relating to 
family affairs.—When the statement 
relates 
to 
the 
existence 
of 
any 
relationship [by blood, marriage or 
adoption] between persons deceased, 
and is made in any will or deed relating 
to the affairs of the family to which any 
such deceased person belonged, or in 
any family pedigree, or upon any 
tombstone, family portrait or other thing 
on which such statements are usually 
made, and when such statement was 
made before the question in dispute was 
raised. 
(7) Or 
in 
document 
relating 
to 
transaction mentioned in Section 13, 
clause (a).—When the statement is 
contained in any deed, will or other 
document which relates to any such 
transaction as is mentioned in Section 
13, clause (a). 
(8) Or is made by several persons and 
expresses feelings relevant to matter in 
question.—When the statement was 
made by a number of persons, and 
expressed feelings or impressions on 
their part relevant to the matter in 
question. 

The statement given by the complainant/victim (PW-6) on 
03.01.2013 was firstly to the investigating officer (PW-10). But 
more importantly it cannot be called “a dying declaration” simply 
because PW-6 had mercifully survived. This statement cannot be 
read as a dying declaration because the person making this 
statement or declaration had ultimately survived. This 
supplementary statement given to the investigating officer on 
21.03.2013 is nothing more than a statement under Section 162 
of Criminal Procedure Code (see: Gentela Vijayavardhan Rao 
and Another v. State of A.P. (1996); Sunil Kumar 
and Others v. State of M.P. (1997); Shrawan 
Bhadaji Bhirad and Others v. State of Maharashtra (2002); State of U.P. v. Veer Singh and Others (2004) and S. Arul Raja v. State of Tamil Nadu (2010). 
18. In our considered opinion both the Trial Court as well as the 
High Court were completely misdirected in holding this to be, inter 
alia, a case under Section 364A of the IPC. There was no 
 
3 Para 13 
4 Para 20 
5 Para 8 
6 Para 5 
7 Para 31 

worthwhile evidence placed by the prosecution on this aspect. The 
findings of the Courts on this aspect therefore needs to be 
set aside. We, therefore, partly allow the present appeals to the 
extent that findings recorded by the Trial Court and the High Court 
of conviction under Section 364A of the IPC are hereby set aside. 
We, however, find that the accused had committed an offence 
under Section 364 IPC, as the offence of abduction in order to 
murder the victim i.e., PW-6 stands proved. In other words, we 
convert the findings of conviction under Section 364A to that of 
Section 364 IPC and sentence the two accused (present appellants) 
for rigorous imprisonment of Ten years each on this count and a 
fine of Rs.10,000/- each, and in default further imprisonment of 
three months. The rest of the conviction and sentence that is under 
Section 307 of the IPC read with Section 120B as well as under 
Section 392 of IPC read with Section 397 are hereby affirmed. We 
are also aware that in addition to the sentence, a fine of 
Rs.50,000/- each against the two accused was imposed by the 
High Court. We retain the same and direct that the fine be 
recovered from the present appellants, in default of payment of the 
fine, the appellants shall undergo further imprisonment of one 

year each. The above fine shall be thereafter remitted to the victim 
in accordance with law. 
19. A victim of a crime cannot be treated merely as a prosecution 
witness. Section 357(1) of Criminal Procedure Code empowers the 
court to order that the fine amount recovered be given to any 
person as compensation who has suffered any loss or injury 
caused due to that offence. In this case, the victim had suffered 
burn injuries of 45-48% and lost one leg, when he was only 
eighteen years of age. There may be times when the situation may 
demand that a substantive amount of compensation be paid to the 
victim and the convict may not be financially that strong to bear 
that burden. For such situations, Section 357A was therefore 
introduced in Criminal Procedure Code for this reason, where 
compensation to the victims may be paid out of State funds, as the 
State had the responsibility to protect the victim against the 
offence that had been committed against the victim of the crime. 
20. In the present case, the victim i.e., PW-6 has suffered 
grievous injuries, not only this, his left leg below his knee had to 
be amputated. Consequently, we direct that an amount of 
Rs.5,00,000/- (Five Lakhs only) be paid by the State of 
Chhattisgarh to the victim as compensation under Section 357A of 

Cr.PC., instead of Rs.1,00,000/- as directed by the High Court. 
Let the same be done within a period of three months from today. 
21. Ashwani Kumar Yadav shall be released, subject to the 
payment of fine/compensation, provided he has completed his 10 
years of imprisonment and if not required in any other case. Order 
dated 17.09.2019 of this Court up to the extent of suspending the 
sentence of appellant Neeraj Sharma and granting him bail is 
hereby vacated. The bail bonds of appellant Neeraj Sharma stand 
cancelled and he is directed to surrender within two weeks from 
today to complete his remaining sentence. 
 
A copy of this judgment shall also be sent to the victim. 

 ……...……….………………….J. 

 [SUDHANSHU DHULIA] 

 ……...………………………….J. 
 [SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA] 

New Delhi. 
January 3, 2024.