IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
EXTRA-ORDINARY ORIGINAL JURISDICTION 

KABIR SHANKAR BOSE …PETITIONER (S) 

VERSUS 

STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ORS. …RESPONDENT (S) 

JUDGMENT 

PANKAJ MITHAL, J. 
 
1. 
We have heard Shri Mahesh Jethmalani, learned Senior 
Counsel for the petitioner, Shri Tushar Mehta, learned 
Solicitor General of India for the CBI, Shri Vikramjeet 
Banerjee, learned Additional Solicitor General of India, for 
the CISF, Ms. Astha Sharma, learned Standing Counsel 
for the State of West Bengal and Shri Zoheb Hossain, 
learned counsel for respondent No. 7. 
2. 
The petitioner who is an advocate by profession as also 
being in politics contends that he has a fundamental 
right to have a fair investigation in connection with FIR 
No.400 of 2020 dated 07.12.2020 lodged against him 
with Police Station Serampore, West Bengal under 

Sections 341, 323, 325, 326, 307, 354, 504, 506, 34 of 
Indian Penal Code1 and FIR No. 401 of 2020 dated 
07.12.2020 again with Police Station Serampore, West 
Bengal under Section 341, 325, 354A, 34 IPC. He 
therefore, has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court 
under Article 32 of the Constitution of India seeking a 
writ in the nature of mandamus commanding the 
respondent authorities to transfer the investigation in 
pursuance of the above FIRs to any independent agency 
other than the local police, namely, the Central Bureau of 
Investigation2 or Special Investigation Team3. 
3. 
The Writ Petition was entertained by the three Judge 
Bench of this Court. On 13.01.2021 while issuing notice 
to the State-respondents, proceedings in pursuance to 
the 
aforesaid 
FIRs 
were 
stayed. 
Thereafter, 
the 
respondents i.e. State of West Bengal, Central Industrial 
Security Force4 and the CBI have filed separate replies to 
the writ petition. Another counter-affidavit has been filed 
by the private respondent No.7 opposing the writ petition. 
 
1 In short ‘IPC’ 
2 In short ‘CBI’ 
3 In short ‘SIT’ 
4 In short ‘CISF’ 

4. 
Ordinarily we would have relegated the petitioner to the 
High Court to seek appropriate remedy in connection 
with the reliefs claimed here in this petition but we 
refrain from doing so after the petition had been 
entertained 
and 
the 
parties 
have 
exchanged 
the 
necessary pleadings which are sufficient to adjudicate the 
matter on merits. 
5. 
It may be pertinent to mention here that on account of 
the interim order passed in this petition on 13.01.2021, 
the local police had not proceeded in this matter and as 
such no investigation has been done pursuant to the 
above FIRs. 
6. 
The petitioner alleges that he was married on 18.11.2010 
to the daughter of Mr. Kalyan Banerjee, respondent No.7, 
a sitting Member of Parliament5 from Serampore Lok 
Sabha constituency but the said marriage could not last 
long and was dissolved in terms of the settlement 
between the parties vide order dated 06.03.2018 passed 
by this Court in 
wherein apart from dissolving the marriage, it was 
 
5 In short ‘MP’ 

ordered that all pending litigations between the parties 
would stand quashed. However, the father of the 
petitioner’s ex-wife continued to harass the petitioner and 
pressurized the state administration to victimise and 
torture him. 
7. 
Accordingly, on the request of the petitioner on 
11.01.2019, he was granted CISF security owing to 
political vendetta and threats extended to him allegedly 
by the State Government and his ex-father-in-law. 
8. 
The petitioner alleges that on 06.12.2020 his house and 
car were surrounded by 200 Trinamool Congress6 goons 
when he was about to leave his house at Serampore 
along with CISF security guards. His life was saved by his 
guards who also suffered injuries in the melee to protect 
him. The local police failed to take any action, rather, 
under political pressure, FIR No.400 of 2020 was 
registered against the petitioner at the behest of one 
Santosh Kumar Singh appu Singh on 07.12.2020 
with Police Station Serampore, West Bengal under 
Sections 341, 323, 325, 326, 307, 354, 504, 506, 34 IPC. 
 
6 In short ‘TMC’ 

9. 
It was followed by another FIR No.401 of 2020 on 
07.12.2020 with Police Station Serampore, West Bengal 
under Sections 341, 325, 354A, 34 IPC which was lodged 
by one Tanushree Singh. 
10. In connection with aforesaid FIRs, at around 1 O’clock in 
the afternoon of 07.12.2020, the petitioner was arrested 
by the local police but was ordered to be released on bail 
by the Court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, 
Serampore vide order dated 07.12.2020 in case No. 400 
of 2020. 
11. The petitioner contends that on account of the fact that 
the petitioner is actively involved in politics as a BJP7 
worker/spokesperson; that respondent No.7, sitting MP 
wants to settle scores with him; and as the atmosphere in 
the State is politically charged, the petitioner apprehends 
that the local police would not carry out a fair 
investigation in the matter, thus, infringing upon his 
fundamental right to have a fair investigation and trial. 
12. The petitioner, at the very outset, has detailed as to how 
he had been victimized and subjected to extreme torture 
 
7 Bharatiya Janta Party 

by the administrative authorities of the State of West 
Bengal. He has tried to emphasize the complete misuse of 
power and use of the State machinery as a “private army” 
against him. He has further asserted that the State 
machinery is acting at the behest of the political masters 
as he happened to be the prominent spokesperson of a 
party in opposition in the State of West Bengal. 
13. The petitioner also alleges that he has actively worked 
and canvassed on behalf of the BJP in Serampore, West 
Bengal, during the Lok Sabha election from where 
respondent No.7 was the TMC candidate. He has also 
highlighted that the member of Ramesh Mahato gang had 
threatened him with dire consequences. 
14. He has been continuously receiving threats from the 
family members of respondent No.7, the sitting MP of 
TMC party. 
15. It is the result of the above oppressive acts of the State 
and respondent No.7 that the aforesaid FIRs have been 
mala fidely lodged and registered against the petitioner 
and even the security personnel belonging to CISF. 

16. The respondent No.8-CISF has filed a counter affidavit of 
its Deputy Inspector General, Greater Noida, Uttar 
Pradesh. The said affidavit states that the court vide 
order dated 18.12.2020 had required the CISF to file 
Special Incident Report as the petitioner was under its 
protection. Accordingly, a report was filed on 06.01.2021. 
The report submitted pursuant to the order of the court 
reveals that the vehicle of the petitioner (Mahindra 
Scorpio bearing Registration No.WB 74 AD 9822) was 
severely damaged in the alleged incident. Thereafter, 
notice was issued to the CISF to file counter affidavit. 
17. The CISF in the counter affidavit accepts that the 
petitioner is a practicing advocate and is on the panel of 
the Central Government. He is an active spokesperson for 
BJP whereas respondent No.7 is a sitting MP of the TMC 
party from Serampore, West Bengal. 
18. Petitioner’s marriage was solemnized with the daughter of 
respondent No.7 in the year 2010 but eventually on a 
divorce petition, the marriage was dissolved in the year 
2018. The petitioner is being provided with ‘X’ category 
security since 10.04.2019 because of the perception of 

threat, both on account of his enmity with the sitting MP 
due to matrimonial feud as well as his alliance with the 
party at the Centre. 
19. The counter affidavit of the CISF further states that on 
the date of incident i.e. 06.12.2020 at about 08:15 pm, 
an unruly crowd led by respondent No.7 gathered in front 
of the house of the petitioner and tried to manhandle him 
and the accompanying CISF personnel. The crowd 
resorted to use of blunt objects in which one of the CISF 
personnel Mahesh Singh sustained minor injuries. The 
CISF personnel took the petitioner to a shelter of the 
premises on the second floor. The petitioner was kept in a 
separate flat above his own flat under CISF security. The 
local police, present at the scene, did not permit the CISF 
reinforcement team which had arrived from Kolkata led 
by two officers namely Vikas Chaudhary and Yadram 
Yadav to enter the premises. The next day, two FIRs came 
to be lodged. The local police insisted on the arrest of the 
petitioner. The CISF personnel deployed with the 
petitioner were substantially withdrawn and sent to the 
CISF headquarters at Greater Noida. 

20. On behalf of the State administration-respondent Nos.1, 
3, 4 and 5, a separate counter affidavit has been filed by 
the Inspector of Police, Government of West Bengal 
denying all the allegations made by the petitioner in the 
writ petition. In the preliminary submissions, it has been 
stated that the FIRs against the petitioner are in relation 
to cognizable offences which involve the CISF officials as 
well. The allegations against the petitioner are serious, 
inter alia, causing grievous hurt to the complainants and 
others and relating to outraging the modesty of a woman. 
The petitioner is refusing to co-operate with the 
investigation and is an absconder. The petitioner in the 
writ petition has narrated a fabricated version to give a 
political colour to the said incident. 
21. The State administration further submitted that since the 
FIRs disclosed the commission of cognizable offences, the 
police was bound to register the FIRs. It has enclosed the 
injury reports of some persons who were grievously hurt 
in relation to the above incident and submits that due to 
the stay order dated 13.01.2021, no further investigation 
could be conducted in pursuance of the aforesaid FIRs 

and that the investigation is still at a nascent stage. 
Therefore, under the facts and circumstances and in view 
of the law laid down by the Apex Court, there is no 
necessity for transferring the investigation from the local 
police to any independent agency. 
22. Respondent No. 7 has filed his independent counter 
affidavit denying the averments made in the writ petition 
and has submitted that the petition is liable to be 
dismissed on the ground of non-joinder of necessary 
parties as the complainants of the FIRs have not been 
arrayed as the respondents and that the petitioner has no 
right to intervene in the matter of investigation and the 
mode of prosecution. The investigations are not supposed 
to be transferred to CBI in a routine manner. The 
petitioner 
cannot 
bypass 
the 
alternative 
remedies 
available to him and cannot directly invoke the writ 
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 32 of the 
Constitution. 
23. Respondent No.7 further submits that he is also a 
practicing lawyer of the Calcutta High Court who has 
been designated as a senior counsel. He was elected as 

an MLA in 2001 and then as an MP. He was also member 
of various committees of the Parliament. 
24. It is further averred that on account of the marital 
discord and as the answering respondent stood by his 
daughter, the petitioner is having a strong grudge against 
him and is unnecessarily trying to malign the answering 
respondent No.7. The respondent No.7 came to know that 
in the said incident, five CISF personnel entered into an 
argument with the complainants and later took out rods 
and sticks and assaulted them. He was also informed 
that the lady worker of the party was also molested. The 
entire story, as narrated by the petitioner in the writ 
petition, is all concocted and fabricated. The petition is 
misconceived and is liable to be dismissed. 
25. The undisputed facts as revealed from the pleadings of 
the parties are as under: - 

The petitioner and respondent No. 7 are both 
practicing advocates as well as politicians of some 
repute belonging to the State of West Bengal; 

The petitioner was married to the daughter of 
respondent No. 7 but the said marriage ended in a 

decree of divorce, as such, there is bitter enmity 
between the two; 
(iii) To add fuel to the fire, the petitioner belongs to BJP 
party whereas respondent No. 7 belongs to the 
ruling party in the State of West Bengal. The 
petitioner has canvassed against respondent No. 7 
during 
the 
election 
campaign 
when 
he 
was 
contesting as an MP from Serampore constituency; 

The political scenario in the State of West Bengal is 
apparently opposed to the party in power at the 
Centre; and 

There is no denial to the alleged incident involving 
CISF officials attached to the petitioner. 
26. In the above admitted position, the possibility that the 
petitioner may not get a fair investigation at the hands of 
the local police or that the local police may not behave 
cordially with him in the course of investigation may not 
be baseless and cannot be brushed aside outrightly or 
lightly. 
27. Now, the sole question which falls for our consideration, 
in the aforesaid admitted facts and circumstances, is 

whether the investigation pursuant to the two FIRs 
against the petitioner are necessary to be transferred to 
some 
independent 
agency 
like 
CBI 
or 
Special 
Investigation Team. 
28. We are conscious of the legal position that no party, 
either the accused or the complainant/informant, is 
entitled to choose the investigating agency or to insist for 
investigation of a crime by a particular agency. 
29. The power to transfer an inquiry or a trial is exercised 
through the intervention of the constitutional courts in 
exceptional circumstances and the constitutional courts 
are expected to use the said extraordinary power 
sparingly, cautiously and in exceptional situation where 
it becomes necessary to provide credibility and instil 
confidence in the investigation or where the incident may 
have national or international ramifications or where it is 
necessary for doing complete justice and enforcing 
fundamental rights as is explained in State of West 
Bengal vs. Committee for Protection of Democratic 
Rights8. In other words, transfer of any investigation may 
 
8 (2010) 

not be ordered by the court in a routine/perfunctory 
manner or merely for the reason that one party makes 
allegations against the other. 
30. In Rubabbuddin Sheikh vs. State of Gujarat9, it has 
been concluded that in an appropriate case when the 
court feels that the investigation by the police authorities 
is not in the proper direction, and in order to do complete 
justice in the case when the high profile officials are 
involved in the crime, it is always open to the court to 
handover the investigation to an independent agency like 
CBI. It may be noted that constitutional courts can even 
direct 
for 
further 
investigation 
by 
some 
other 
investigating agency to ensure completion of fair 
investigation and fair trial. 
31. In K.V. Rajendran vs. CBCID10, it has been observed 
that where high officials of the State authorities are 
involved or the accusation itself is against the top officials 
of the investigating agency who may probably influence 
the investigation, and where the investigation is bound to 
be tainted, to instil confidence in the investigation, the 
 
9 (2010) 
10 (2013) 

constitutional courts ought not to be shy in exercising 
power of transferring an investigation from the State 
agency to any other independent agency like CBI. 
32. It is well recognised that investigation should not only be 
credible but also appear to be credible vide R.S. Sodhi 
vs. State of U.P.11. Even otherwise, the law requires that 
justice may not only be done but it must appear to have 
been done. Thus, following the above dictum, to ensure a 
fair investigation in the matter, there appears to be 
weight in the argument of the learned counsel for the 
petitioner to transfer the investigation in relation to the 
two FIRs to an independent agency, more particularly 
keeping 
in 
mind 
the 
factual 
background 
and 
circumstances of the case. 
33. It is admitted on record that the investigation in 
pursuance of the two FIRs is at a nascent stage and that 
it had not proceeded any further, due to the interim order 
dated 13.01.2021, till date. Therefore, it is but natural to 
get the investigation completed at the earliest. The 
 
11 1994 Supp (1) SCC 143 

primary object is to ensure fair completion of the 
investigation so that, if necessary, the trial may proceed. 
34. The matter of entrusting investigation to a particular 
agency is basically at the discretion of the court which 
has to be exercised on sound legal principles. Therefore, 
the presence of complainant/informants are not very 
necessary before the Court. We do not feel that any 
prejudice would be caused to either of the parties if the 
investigation is conducted by an independent agency 
other than the State police. Thus, looking to the facts of 
this case particularly, that respondent No. 7 is a 
parliamentarian from the ruling party in the State of West 
Bengal and that the petitioner belongs to the ruling party 
at the Centre, the politically charged atmosphere in the 
State of West Bengal may not be very conducive to a fair 
investigation being conducted in the instant case. It is, 
hence, considered appropriate that instead of keeping the 
investigation pending for an indefinite period, the 
investigation be transferred to the CBI. 
35. The case involves the investigation of the role of CISF or 
its personnel which cannot be left in the hands of the 

local police also for reasons of conflicting interests. Thus, 
in our view, it is not appropriate to permit the local police 
to examine the conduct of CISF personnel in the instant 
case. 
36. Accordingly, for all the above reasons and in the peculiar 
facts of this case, a writ of mandamus is issued to the 
State-respondents 
to 
handover 
the 
investigation 
pursuant to the two FIRs aforesaid to the CBI along with 
all records, for its completion so that, if necessary, the 
trial may commence and justice is done to the parties. 
37. The writ petition is allowed accordingly....………………………….. J. 
(B. V. NAGARATHNA)...……………………………….. J. 
(PANKAJ MITHAL)