IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

( SLP (C) No.8026 of 2024) 

BASUDEV DUTTA... APPELLANT(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ORS.... RESPONDENT(S) 

JUDGMENT 

R.MAHADEVAN, J. 

Leave granted. 

2. 
Assailing the final judgment and order dated 16.08.2023 passed by the 
High Court of Calcutta1 in W.P.S.T. No. 106 of 2013, the appellant has come up 
with this appeal. Vide the said order, the High Court set aside the order dated 
28.08.2012 passed by the West Bengal State Administrative Tribunal at Calcutta2 
in O.A.No.331 of 20113, in which, the order of termination passed against the 
appellant herein was set aside, however, the authority concerned was granted 
liberty to proceed against the appellant in accordance with law, following the 
 
1 Hereinafter shortly referred to as “the High Court” 
2 Hereinafter shortly referred to as “the Tribunal” 
3 Basudev Dutta v. The State of West Bengal and Others 

principles of natural justice. 
 
3. 
According to the appellant, when he was aged about 16 years, he along 
with his father by name Hariananda Dutta, came to India from East Pakistan (now 
Bangladesh) and his father was issued with a Migration Certificate being 
No.D/65/69 dated 19.05.1969 by the authority concerned. Subsequently, the 
appellant joined Bangabasi College, Calcutta and passed the Pre-University 
Examination in Science in May, 1971 under the University of Calcutta. 
Thereafter, he got admission in Regional Institute of Ophthalmology, Calcutta 
and successfully completed Ophthalmic Assistant Course in 1984. Later, he 
participated in the selection process and was appointed as Para Medical 
Ophthalmic Assistant by the Director of Health Services, Government of West 
Bengal, vide order dated 21.02.1985 and in terms of the said appointment order, 
the appellant joined at Kadambini Block Primary Health Centre, Monteswar, 
Burdwan on 06.03.1985. The Department received satisfactory report of the 
medical examination and Police Verification Roll from the concerned authorities. 
He continued in service and was granted yearly increment and other 
consequential service benefits. While so, based on the secret verification report 
dated 25.05.2010 of the Government of West Bengal, which was communicated 
by the police to the department on 07.07.2010, the appellant was served with a 
memo dated 23.08.2010, stating that he is ‘unsuitable’ for employment and 
directing him to submit his defense, within 10 days from the date of receipt of the 

memo. In response, the appellant sent the details of his candidature on 
09.09.2010. However, by order dated 11.02.2011 passed by the Director of Health 
Services, Government of West Bengal, the appellant was terminated from service 
with immediate effect without any enquiry. Challenging the said order of 
termination, the appellant preferred Original Application No.331 of 2011, which 
was allowed by the Tribunal, by order dated 28.08.2012. Aggrieved by the same, 
the State filed a and the High Court 
by the order impugned herein, allowed the same by setting aside the order passed 
by the Tribunal and affirming the order of termination passed by the authority 
concerned. Therefore, the appellant is before us with the present appeal. 
 
4. 
The learned counsel for the appellant strenuously argued that on the basis 
of migration certificate issued in favour of the appellant’s father, in which, the 
appellant’s name also finds place, the appellant is a citizen of India with effect 
from 19.05.1969; he was issued with ration card, Voter Identity Card and Aadhaar 
Card by the Government of India and he participated in all local Assembly and 
Parliamentary elections; and he is also an assessee under the Income Tax Act and 
is regularly submitting his returns. Adding further, it is contended that upon 
participating in the selection process, the appellant was appointed as Ophthalmic 
Assistant, on 21.02.1985 and he joined the service upon submission of the 
satisfactory report of medical examination and police verification roll. After 
having rendered 26 years of unblemished service, the appellant was terminated 

from service, based on the secret verification report of the Government. While 
passing such order, the appellant was not given an opportunity of personal hearing 
and was not furnished the alleged verification report. Therefore, the order of 
termination passed against the appellant is arbitrary, illegal and in violation of the 
principles of natural justice. 
 
4.1. 
The learned counsel for the appellant also emphatically submitted that it is 
mandatory on the part of the police authority to submit the police verification 
report within a period of three months from the date of appointment. Whereas, in 
the present case, though the appellant joined the service on 06.03.1985, the 
verification report was communicated by the police to the department only on 
07.07.2010, that too, just two months prior to the date of retirement of the 
appellant. Hence, there was inordinate delay on the part of the police authority 
for submission of verification report to the appointing authority. 
 
4.2. 
Ultimately, the learned counsel for the appellant submitted that considering 
the facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal rightly set aside the order of 
termination. However, the High Court erred in allowing the writ petition filed by 
the State by setting aside the order of the Tribunal. Therefore, the learned counsel 
prayed for allowing this appeal by setting aside the order of the High Court. 
 
5. 
On the contrary, the learned senior counsel for the respondent(s) submitted 
that except the migration certificate, the appellant did not produce any document 

to prove that he is an Indian national. Migration certificate does not recognize 
him as a citizen of India and he has to register his citizenship with the authority 
concerned. Though the appellant stated that he applied for citizenship certificate 
and the Government of West Bengal issued no objection certificate to him with 
respect to his citizenship, no such document was placed on record. The Aadhaar 
Card, voter ID and Pan Card are not the conclusive proof of evidence for 
citizenship or nationality as held by this Court. Thus, the appellant being a non-
citizen, he cannot claim employment against the post reserved for the Indian 
citizen. 
 
5.1. 
Elaborating further, the learned senior counsel for the respondent(s) 
submitted that it was clearly stated in the appointment order that the same is 
subject to satisfactory reports of police verification and medical examination; 
though the appellant cleared the medical examination, his police verification 
report was still awaited; upon receipt of the communication from the Deputy 
Inspector General of Police, Intelligence Branch, Kolkata, vide Memo 
No.1899/S.231-04/SA-I/VR dated 07.07.2010, pursuant to the secret verification 
report dated 25.05.2010 of the Government, to the effect that the appellant was 
considered as ‘unsuitable’ for employment to the post in question, the Director of 
Health Services, Government of West Bengal, issued a show cause notice by way 
of memo dated 23.08.2010, calling upon the appellant to submit his defence; 
accordingly, the appellant submitted his reply on 09.09.2010; being dissatisfied 

with the same, the authority concerned terminated the appellant from service with 
immediate effect on 11.02.2011. Thus, according to the learned counsel, only 
after receipt of the reply submitted by the appellant and upon considering the 
same, the termination order came to be issued and hence, there was no violation 
of the principles of natural justice. 
 
5.2. 
Referring to the decisions of this court in Nirma Industries Ltd. v. 
Securities and Exchange Board of India4; State of UP v. Sudhir Kumar Singh5; 
and Dharampal Satyapal Ltd v. Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise, Gauhati 
and Others6, wherein, it was observed that ‘the principles of natural justice 
means, a fair hearing should be given to the concerned person and the same 
would not necessarily imply oral hearing’, the learned senior counsel for the 
respondent(s) submitted that merely because the appellant was not given an 
opportunity of hearing, that by itself is not sufficient to quash the proceedings, 
unless and until it is pointed out by him that he was prejudiced by the order, which 
was passed behind his back and therefore, the denial of personal hearing before 
passing the termination order would not amount to violation of the principles of 
natural justice. 
 
5.3. 
Adding further, the learned senior counsel for the respondent(s) submitted 
 
4 (2013) 
5 (2021) 
6 (2015) 

that police verification is essential for joining any service and it is a settled 
principle of law that any act contrary to law cannot be given the sanctity of being 
legal under law by mere passage of time and hence, the delay in submission of 
the verification report, cannot be a ground to quash the termination order passed 
against the appellant. 
 
5.4. 
Therefore, the learned senior counsel for the respondent(s) submitted that 
the High Court correctly set aside the order of the Tribunal and restored the 
termination order passed against the appellant herein, by a reasoned order, which 
does not call for any interference by this court. 
 
6. 
By way of reply, the learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the 
grandfather of the appellant was a permanent resident of Calcutta and the father 
of the appellant was born in the year 1911 at Calcutta and through migration 
certificate, the appellant came to India along with his father in the year 1969, 
before creation of Bangladesh (Formerly East Pakistan) and hence, he is a citizen 
of India. Further, the police department has no authority to neutralize the 
citizenship of a person. However, based on the information provided by the police 
authority and without ascertaining the veracity of the same and without any report 
/ order following the provisions of the Citizenship Act, 1955 and the Foreigners 
Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) and the Foreigners (Tribunal) Order, 1964, the authority 
concerned terminated the appellant from service with immediate effect, that too, 

without affording an opportunity of hearing to the appellant to adjudicate his 
claim of nationality. Though the Tribunal set aside the said order of termination, 
the High Court erred in reversing the same, by the order impugned in this appeal. 
It is also submitted by the learned counsel that the right guaranteed under Articles 
14 and 21 of the Constitution of India is seriously violated, in view of the State 
not taking proper steps to continue the service of the appellant and in failing to 
sanction and disburse the pensionary benefits to him, after having served nearly 
26 years of service. 
 
7. 
Heard the learned senior counsel/counsel appearing for the parties and also 
perused the materials available on record. 
 
8. 
It cannot be disputed that as per the interim order of the High Court, the 
appellant received the amount of general provident fund, group insurance and 
leave Salary. However, the authority concerned did not disburse the pension, 
gratuity and arrears of salary. 
 
9. 
As indicated earlier, by order dated 11.02.2011, the appellant was 
terminated from service after rendering 26 years of service, based on the police 
verification report that he was considered as ‘unsuitable’ for employment to the 
post of Ophthalmic Assistant. The said termination order was set aside by the 
Tribunal, by order dated 28.08.2012 in O.A.No.331 of 2011. However, the High 
Court reversed the order of the Tribunal and restored the order of termination 

passed by the authority concerned, by the order impugned herein. 
 
10. 
The contentions raised by the learned counsel for the appellant, assailing 
the order of termination passed by the authority concerned, as affirmed by the 
High Court, are three-fold, though interlinked and intertwined. Firstly, the 
appellant claimed his nationality as Indian on the strength of the migration 
certificate dated 19.05.1969 issued in favour of his father. Secondly, in the show 
cause notice, there was no mention as to why the appellant was declared as 
‘unsuitable’ for employment to the Government service; the alleged secret police 
verification report was not served on the appellant; and no opportunity of personal 
hearing was provided to the appellant to defend his stand and hence, there was 
total violation of the principles of natural justice. Thirdly, the appellant joined the 
service in the year 1985, but the police verification report, which was supposed 
to have been filed, within a period of three months from the date of appointment, 
was submitted to the department only in the year 2010 and thus, there was 
inordinate and unexplained delay on the part of the police authority in submission 
of the same. 
 
ANALYSIS 
11. 
Let us consider the first contention. According to the appellant, he is an 
Indian citizen. Section 9 of the Foreigners Act, 1946 mandates that the onus of 
proving citizenship of a person is upon that person who claims to be a citizen of 

India. For better appreciation, Section 9 of the Foreigners Act, 1946, is extracted 
below: 
“9. Burden of proof.—If in any case not falling under section 8 any question 
arises with reference to this Act or any order made or direction given 
thereunder, whether any person is or is not a foreigner of a particular class or 
description the onus of proving that such person is not a foreigner or is not a 
foreigner of such particular class or description, as the case may be, shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 
1872), lie upon such person.” 
 
11.1. In Sarbananda Sonowal v. Union of India7, this Court pointed out that 
‘there is good and sound reason for placing the burden of proof upon the person 
concerned who asserts to be a citizen of a particular country. In order to establish 
one's citizenship, normally he may be required to give evidence of his date of 
birth, place of birth, name of his parents, their place of birth and citizenship. 
Sometimes the place of birth of his grandparents may also be relevant. All these 
facts would necessarily be within the personal knowledge of the person concerned 
and not of the authorities of the State’. 
 
11.2. In Lal Babu Hussein v. Electoral Registration Officer8, it was held by this 
Court that ‘the question whether a person is a foreigner, is a question of fact which 
would require careful scrutiny of evidence since the enquiry is quasi-judicial in 
character’. 
 
11.3. In the instant case, the appellant claimed that his grandparents are Indian 
 
7 (2007) 
8 (1995) 

citizens because of their birth. The provisions relating to citizenship are enshrined 
in Part II of the Constitution of India under Articles 5 to 11. Section 4 of the 
Indian Citizenship Act, 1955, entitles the appellant’s father to be treated as a 
citizen by descent. The appellant is also entitled to citizenship by registration as 
per Section 5 of the Act. As per Section 5 (1) (a), a person of Indian origin who 
has been an ordinary resident in India for seven years prior to the application and 
as per 5(1)(b), a person of Indian origin who is an ordinary resident of any country 
or place outside undivided India is entitled to citizenship. “Undivided India” has 
been defined in Section 2 (h) as “India, as defined in the Government of India 
Act, 1935” as originally enacted. The intention of the Central Government to 
award citizenship to minorities from neighboring countries has been spelled out 
by way of amendment to Section 2, by introducing Proviso in Section 2 vide 
Amendment Act No.47 of 2019 with effect from 10.01.2020, which states that 
the persons like the appellant herein are not be treated as “illegal migrants”. Once 
an application has been submitted, the authority concerned has to take appropriate 
decision within a reasonable time by taking into consideration all the applicable 
laws and the documents produced by the appellant. However, no decision has 
been taken against the appellant. Therefore, we answer the first contention in 
favour of the appellant. 
 
12. 
Qua the second contention, we have carefully considered the documents 
placed before us. Vide Memo No.944-P.S. dated 25.05.2010, the Assistant 

Secretary to the Government of West Bengal, Home (Political) Department, 
Secret Section, Kolkata, informed to the Additional Director General of Police, 
Intelligence Branch, West Bengal, Kolkata, that the Government considered the 
appellant ‘unsuitable’ for employment to the post of Ophthalmic Assistant under 
the Chief Municipal Officer of Health, Burdwan. Vide Memo No.1899/S.231-
04/SA-I/VR dated 07.07.2010, the said information was communicated by the 
Deputy Inspector General of Police, Intelligence Branch, West Bengal to the 
Chief Municipal Officer of Health, Burden. Subsequently, by memo dated 
04.11.2010, the Director of Health Services, Government of West Bengal, 
Kolkata, informed to the Special Superintendent of Police(C), Intelligence 
Branch, West Bengal, that the case of the appellant was referred to the 
Government to decide over the suitability or otherwise of the verification of his 
employment under the Chief Municipal Officer of Health, Burdwan, because the 
nationality of the appellant could not be determined as Indian national, during 
enquiry; and finally, the appellant was considered ‘unsuitable’ by the 
Government. Pursuant to the same, the Director of Health Service, West Bengal, 
sent the show cause notice styled as ‘Memorandum’ dated 23.08.2010 directing 
the appellant to submit his defense within a period of 10 days. For better 
appreciation, the contents of the said Memorandum are reproduced below: 
 
“Whereas Shri Basudev Dutta, S/o.Hari Ananda Dutta of 30/C 
Buildings, Bonhooghly, Alambazar, Kolkata-700035 was offered appointment 
to the post of “Ophthalmic Assistant” vide order No.A 6012 dated 21-02-1985 
along with 32 other incumbents subject to satisfactory reports of Police 

Verification and Medical Examination; 

And whereas the said Shri Basudev Dutta joined in the forenoon of 06-
03-1985 at Kadambini P.H.C., Monteswar, Burdwan; 

And whereas the Dy. Inspector General of Police, Intelligence Branch, 
13, Lord Sinha Road, Kolkata -71 in his No.1899/S. 231-04/SA-I/VR dated 07-
07-2010 has informed that the Government under his No.944-PS dated 25-05-
2010 of Home (Pol) Department, Government of West Bengal has declared Shri 
Basudev Dutta “UNSUITABLE” for employment to the post of Ophthalmic 
Assistant; 

And whereas the case of Shri Basudev Dutta, Ophthalmic Assistant, 
attached to Kurmun B.P.H.C., Burdwan, has since been reviewed in the light of 
terms and condition laid down in the order of appointment bearing No.A 6012 
dated 21-02-1985 and also declaring Shri Basudev Dutta “UNSUITABLE” for 
employment to the Government service; 

And as such, on going through the relevant papers / documents in 
respect of the case of Shri Basudev Dutta and applying my full mind on to it, I, 
the D.H.S., West Bengal, being the appointing and disciplinary authority in 
respect of the post held by Shri Basudev Dutta, Ophthalmic Assistant, hold the 
view that the said Shri Basudev Dutta does not have any right to continue 
further in Government service and accordingly propose that the service of Shri 
Basudev Dutta may be terminated with immediate effect; 

Shri Basudev Dutta is hereby directed to say, if any, in his defence 
within 10 (ten) days from the date of receipt of the memorandum through the 
C.M.O.H., Burdwan, positively failing which it may be presumed that he has 
nothing to say and decision will be taken against him without any further 
reference to him.” 
 
12.1. Curiously, in all these documents, including the show cause notice, no 
reason was mentioned as to why the appellant was considered as ‘unsuitable’ for 
employment to the post of Ophthalmic Assistant. Furthermore, the alleged police 
verification report was not served on the appellant. As such, the appellant was 
unable to make his defense with supportive materials. Resultantly, he was 
terminated from service vide order dated 11.02.2011 of the Director of Health 
Services, West Bengal. Even in the termination order, there was nothing about 

the unsuitability of the appellant for employment to the Government service. 
 
12.2. It is settled law that every administrative or quasi-judicial order must 
contain the reasons. Such reasons go a long way in not only ensuring that the 
authority has applied his mind to the facts and the law, but also provide the 
grounds for the aggrieved party to assail the order in the manner known to law. 
In the absence of any reasons, it also possesses a difficulty for the judicial 
authorities to test the correctness of the order or in other words, exercise its power 
of judicial review. In this context, it will be useful to refer to the judgment of this 
Court in Kranti Associates (P) Ltd. v. Masood Ahmed Khan9, wherein after a 
detailed analysis of various judgments, it was held as follows: 
“27. In Rama Varma Bharathan Thampuram v. State of Kerala [(1979): AIR 1979 SC 1918] V.R. Krishna Iyer, J. speaking for a three-Judge Bench 
held that the functioning of the Board was quasi-judicial in character. One of the 
attributes of quasi-judicial functioning is the recording of reasons in support of 
decisions taken and the other requirement is following the principles of natural 
justice. The learned Judge held that natural justice requires reasons to be written 
for the conclusions made (see SCC p. 788, para 14: AIR p. 1922, para 14). 
 
28. In Gurdial Singh Fijji v. State of Punjab [(1979): 1979 SCC 
(L&S) 197] this Court, dealing with a service matter, relying on the ratio 
in Capoor [(1973): 1974 SCC (L&S) 5: AIR 1974 SC 87], held that 
“rubber-stamp reason” is not enough and virtually quoted the observation 
in Capoor (supra), SCC p. 854, para 28, to the extent that: 
 
“28. … Reasons are the links between the materials on which certain 
conclusions are based and the actual conclusions.” (See AIR p. 377, para 
18.) 
 
29. In a Constitution Bench decision of this Court in H.H. Shri Swamiji of Shri 
Amar 
Mutt v. Commr., 
Hindu 
Religious 
and 
Charitable 
Endowments 
Deptt. [(1979): 1980 SCC (Tax) 16: AIR 1980 SC 1] while giving the 
majority judgment Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J. referred to (SCC p. 658, para 
29) Broom's Legal Maxims (1939 Edn., p. 97) where the principle in Latin runs 
 
9 (2010): (2010) 3 SCC (Civ) 852: 

as follows: 
“Cessante ratione legis cessat ipsa lex.” 

30. The English version of the said principle given by the Chief Justice is that: 
(H.H. Shri Swamiji case [(1979): 1980 SCC (Tax) 16: AIR 1980 SC 
1], SCC p. 658, para 29) 
“29. … ‘reason is the soul of the law, and when the reason of any 
particular law ceases, so does the law itself’.” (See AIR p. 11, para 29.) 
……… 
 
33. In Star 
Enterprises v. City 
and 
Industrial 
Development 
Corpn. of 
Maharashtra Ltd. [(1990) ] a three-Judge Bench of this Court held that 
in the present day set-up judicial review of administrative action has become 
expansive and is becoming wider day by day and the State has to justify its action 
in various fields of public law. All these necessitate recording of reason for 
executive actions including the rejection of the highest offer. This Court held that 
disclosure of reasons in matters of such rejection provides an opportunity for an 
objective review both by superior administrative heads and for judicial process 
and opined that such reasons should be communicated unless there are specific 
justifications for not doing so (see SCC pp. 284-85, para 10). 
 
……….. 
 
46. The position in the United States has been indicated by this Court in S.N. 
Mukherjee [(1990): 1990 SCC (Cri) 669: 1991 SCC (L&S) 242: 
(1991) 16 ATC 445: AIR 1990 SC 1984] in SCC p. 602, para 11: AIR para 11 at 
p. 1988 of the judgment. This Court held that in the United States the courts have 
always insisted on the recording of reasons by administrative authorities in 
exercise of their powers. It was further held that such recording of reasons is 
required as “the courts cannot exercise their duty of review unless they are 
advised of the considerations underlying the action under review”. In S.N. 
Mukherjee [(1990): 1990 SCC (Cri) 669: 1991 SCC (L&S) 242: 
(1991) 16 ATC 445: AIR 1990 SC 1984] this Court relied on the decisions of the 
US Court in Securities and Exchange Commission v. Chenery Corpn. [87 L Ed 
626: 318 US 80 (1942)] and Dunlop v. Bachowski [44 L Ed 2d 377: 421 US 560 
(1974)] in support of its opinion discussed above. 
 
47. Summarising the above discussion, this Court holds: 
(a) In India the judicial trend has always been to record reasons, even in 
administrative decisions, if such decisions affect anyone prejudicially. 
(b) A quasi-judicial authority must record reasons in support of its conclusions. 
(c) Insistence on recording of reasons is meant to serve the wider principle of 
justice that justice must not only be done it must also appear to be done as well. 
(d) Recording of reasons also operates as a valid restraint on any possible 
arbitrary exercise of judicial and quasi-judicial or even administrative power. 
(e) Reasons reassure that discretion has been exercised by the decision-maker on 
relevant grounds and by disregarding extraneous considerations. 
(f) Reasons have virtually become as indispensable a component of a decision-

making process as observing principles of natural justice by judicial, quasi-
judicial and even by administrative bodies. 
(g) Reasons facilitate the process of judicial review by superior courts. 
(h) The ongoing judicial trend in all countries committed to rule of law and 
constitutional governance is in favour of reasoned decisions based on relevant 
facts. This is virtually the lifeblood of judicial decision-making justifying the 
principle that reason is the soul of justice. 
(i) Judicial or even quasi-judicial opinions these days can be as different as the 
judges and authorities who deliver them. All these decisions serve one common 
purpose which is to demonstrate by reason that the relevant factors have been 
objectively considered. This is important for sustaining the litigants' faith in the 
justice delivery system. 
(j) Insistence on reason is a requirement for both judicial accountability and 
transparency. 
(k) If a judge or a quasi-judicial authority is not candid enough about his/her 
decision-making process then it is impossible to know whether the person 
deciding is faithful to the doctrine of precedent or to principles of incrementalism. 
(l) Reasons in support of decisions must be cogent, clear and succinct. A pretence 
of reasons or “rubber-stamp reasons” is not to be equated with a valid decision-
making process. 
(m) It cannot be doubted that transparency is the sine qua non of restraint on 
abuse of judicial powers. Transparency in decision-making not only makes the 
judges and decision-makers less prone to errors but also makes them subject to 
broader scrutiny. (See David Shapiro in Defence of Judicial Candor [(1987) 100 
Harvard Law Review 731-37]). 
(n) Since the requirement to record reasons emanates from the broad doctrine of 
fairness in decision-making, the said requirement is now virtually a component of 
human rights and was considered part of Strasbourg Jurisprudence. See Ruiz 
Torija v. Spain [(1994) 

EHRR 
553] 
EHRR, 
at 

para 

and Anya v. University of Oxford [2001 EWCA Civ 405 (CA)], wherein the Court 
referred to Article 6 of the European Convention of Human Rights which requires, 
“adequate and intelligent reasons must be given for judicial decisions”. 
(o) In all common law jurisdictions judgments play a vital role in setting up 
precedents for the future. Therefore, for development of law, requirement of 
giving reasons for the decision is of the essence and is virtually a part of “due 
process”.” 
 
12.3. That apart, before passing the termination order, no opportunity of personal 
hearing was provided to the appellant to defend his stand effectively. In Mazharul 

Islam Hashmi v. State of U.P.10, it was categorically held by this Court that 
‘personal hearing should be given, before termination of employee from service’. 
The relevant paragraph of the same is quoted below for ready reference: 
“25. It was observed in that case that it is a fundamental rule of law that 
no decision must be taken which will affect the rights of any person without first 
giving him an opportunity of putting forward his case. The main requirements 
of a fair hearing, as pointed out by this Court earlier, are: (i) A person must 
know the case that he is to meet; and (ii) he must have an adequate opportunity 
of meeting that case. These rules of natural justice, however, operate in voids of 
a statute. Their application can be expressly or implicitly excluded by the 
legislature. But, such is not the case here. On the contrary, the two circulars 
issued by the State Government, to which a reference has been made earlier, 
expressly imported these principles of natural justice and required that in all 
cases in which the services of an officer or servant were to be determined on the 
ground of his unsuitability, they must be given an opportunity of personal 
hearing by the Committee. The whole purpose of the personal interview was that, 
when it was proposed to declare an official unsuitable for absorption, the 
Committee had to afford him an opportunity to appear before it and clear up his 
position. Since it is nobody’s case that such an opportunity was afforded to the 
appellant, we would hold that the order dated August 26, 1967 (of termination 
of his services passed by the State) suffers from a serious legal infirmity and 
must be quashed. He will, therefore, have to be treated as having continued in 
service till the age of superannuation and entitled to all the benefits incidental 
to such a declaration. 

12.4. In S.Govindaraju v. Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation11 again, 
this Court held thus: 
“7…..There is no dispute that the appellant’s services were terminated 
on the ground of his being found unsuitable for the appointment and as a result 
of which his name was deleted from the select list, and he forfeited his chance 
for appointment. Once a candidate is selected and his name is included in the 
select list for appointment in accordance with the Regulations, he gets a right to 
be considered for appointment as and when vacancy arises. On the removal of 
his name from the select list serious consequences entail as he forfeits his right 
to employment in future. In such a situation even though the Regulations do not 
stipulate for affording any opportunity to the employee, the principles of natural 
justice would be attracted and the employee would be entitled to an opportunity 
of explanation, though no elaborate enquiry would be necessary. Giving an 
opportunity of explanation would meet the bare minimal requirement of natural 
 
10 (1979) 
11 (1986) 

justice. Before the services of an employee are terminated, resulting in forfeiture 
of his right to be considered for employment, opportunity of explanation must be 
afforded to the employee concerned. The appellant was not afforded any 
opportunity of explanation before the issue of the impugned order; consequently 
the order is rendered null and void being inconsistent with the principles of 
natural justice…” 

12.5. This Court in Aureliano Fernandes v. State of Goa12, in an unequivocal 
terms observed as follows: 
“73……This Court has repeatedly observed that even when the rules are 
silent, principles of natural justice must be read into them. 
 
74. In its keen anxiety of being fair to the victim / complainants and wrap 
up the complaints expeditiously, the Committee has ended up being grossly 
unfair to the appellant. It has completely overlooked the cardinal principle that 
justice must not only be done, but should manifestly be seen to be done. The 
principles of audi alteram partem could not have been thrown to the winds in 
this cavalier manner.” 

12.6. It is manifestly clear from the above judgments that reasons are heartbeat 
of every order and every notice must specify the grounds on which the 
administrative or quasi-judicial authority intends to proceed; if any document is 
relied upon to form the basis of enquiry, such document must be furnished to the 
employee; it is only then a meaningful reply can be furnished; and the failure to 
furnish the documents referred and relied in the notice would vitiate the entire 
proceedings as being arbitrary and in violation of the principles of natural justice; 
and before taking any adverse decision, the aggrieved person must be given an 
opportunity of personal hearing. In the light of the same, we have no hesitation 
to hold that the order of termination passed against the appellant is arbitrary, 
 
12 (2024): 

illegal and violative of the principles of natural justice and it cannot be sustained. 
 
12.7. Though we are in agreement with the proposition laid down in the 
decisions cited on the side of the respondent(s), the same does not apply to the 
present case, which factually differs. 
 
12.8. Thus, in the ultimate analysis, we find that the Tribunal was right in 
observing that without following the principles of natural justice and without 
affording any opportunity to explain his case before the authority, the appellant 
was terminated and hence, his termination order cannot be sustained in the eye of 
law; and accordingly, set aside the order of termination. However, the High Court 
erroneously allowed the writ petition filed by the State and set aside the order of 
the Tribunal by observing that the action of the authorities in issuing a show cause 
notice and inviting a reply therefrom and the availing of such opportunity by the 
appellant, is in adherence with the principles of natural justice. Hence, we are 
inclined to set aside the order of the High Court and restore the order of the 
Tribunal to that extent. 
 
13. 
As far as the third contention is concerned, it appears to us that the 
appellant joined the post of Ophthalmic Assistant on 06.03.1985 upon production 
of satisfactory report of medical examination and police verification roll. Yet, the 
police verification report, which was supposed to have been filed within three 
months from the date of initial appointment of the appellant, was filed only in the 

year 2010, i.e., after 25 years of service and just two months prior to the date of 
his retirement. Placing reliance on such report, he was terminated from service. 
In view of the enormous delay on the part of the respondent authorities in 
submission of the verification report, the appellant has been rendered ineligible 
to receive his pensionary benefits, though he had put in 26 years of unblemished 
service. The respondents in their reply affidavit categorically admitted about the 
inordinate delay occasioned to ascertain the unsuitability of the appellant for 
appointment to the Government service. However, they did not assign any reason 
much less valid reason for the same. Such a callous and lackadaisical attitude on 
the part of the respondent authorities cannot be countenanced by us. As held by 
us in paragraph 12.6 supra, the order of termination passed against the appellant 
is arbitrary, illegal and in violation of the principles of natural justice and it cannot 
be sustained. In view of the same, the second limb of the order of the Tribunal 
granting liberty to the authority to proceed against the appellant in accordance 
with the principles of natural justice, after a period of 14 years from the date of 
retirement, would not serve any purpose. Hence, the appellant is entitled to 
receive all the service benefits that are duly payable to him. 
 
13.1. The given factual matrix would also compel this Court to issue a direction 
to the police official(s) of all the States to complete the enquiry and file report as 
regards the character, antecedents, nationality, genuineness of the documents 
produced by the candidates selected for appointment to the Government service, 

etc., within a stipulated time provided in the statute / G.O., or in any event, not 
later than six months from the date of their appointment. It is made clear that only 
upon verification of the credentials of the candidates, their appointments will 
have to be regularized so as to avoid further complications, as in the case on hand. 
 
14. 
With the aforesaid observations and directions, this appeal is allowed and 
the order of the High Court is set aside. As a sequel, the service benefits which 
remain unpaid as on date, be paid to the appellant within a period of three months 
from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment. There is no order as to costs. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand closed. 

…………………………J. 
 [J.K. Maheshwari] 

…………………………J. 
 [R. Mahadevan]