IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 

DARA LAKSHMI NARAYANA & OTHERS 
… APPELLANTS 
VERSUS 
STATE OF TELANGANA & ANOTHER 
 
… RESPONDENTS 
 
JUDGMENT 
NAGARATHNA, J. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
Being aggrieved by the order dated 16.02.2022 passed by the 
High Court for the State of Telangana in Criminal Petition No.1479 
of 2022 refusing to quash the criminal proceedings in FIR No.82 of 
2022 dated 01.02.2022 registered with Neredmet Police Station, 

Rachakonda against the appellant Nos.1 to 6 herein (collectively 
referred as “appellants”) under Sections 498A of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (“IPC”, for short) and Section 3 and 4 of Dowry 
Prohibition Act, 1961 (“Dowry Act”, for short), the appellants have 
preferred this appeal. 
3. 
Briefly stated the facts of this case are that the marriage of 
appellant No.1 husband and respondent No.2 wife was solemnised 
on 08.03.2015 as per Hindu rites and rituals at Chennakesava 
Swamy Temple, Marakapuram, Andhra Pradesh. Appellant Nos.2 
and 3 are the father-in-law and mother-in-law respectively of 
respondent No.2 and appellant Nos.4 to 6 are sisters-in-law of 
respondent No.2. Respondent No.2 lodged a complaint against the 
appellant Nos.1 to 6 and accused No.7 who is her brother-in-law 
which was registered as FIR No.82 of 2022 dated 01.02.2022 for 
the offences punishable under Section 498A of the IPC and 
Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Act registered with Neredmet Police 
Station, Rachakonda. As per the said FIR, it was alleged that at the 

time of her marriage, the father of respondent No.2 gave net cash 
of Rs.10 lakhs, 10 tolas of gold, and other household articles as 
dowry and also spent Rs. 5 lakhs towards marriage expenses. After 
the marriage, the couple started residing at Jollarpeta, Tamil Nadu 
where appellant No.1 was working in Southern Railways. Out of 
their wedlock, respondent No.2 and appellant No.1 have 2 minor 
children. The first child was born in the year 2016 and the second 
child was born in the year 2017. After marriage, appellant No.1 
started harassing her both physically and mentally for want of 
additional dowry. Appellant No.1 also used to abuse respondent 
No.1 in filthy language and used to suspect her character. He also 
used to come home inebriated and harassed her by having an 
illegal affair with one Mounika. In so far as appellant Nos.2 to 6 are 
concerned, respondent No.2 alleged that they used to instigate 
appellant No.1 for demanding more dowry her. 
4. 
Being aggrieved by the said criminal proceedings pending 
against them, the appellants and accused No.7 approached the 

High Court by filing under 
Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1908 (“CrPC”) 
seeking quashing of the FIR No.82 of 2022 dated 01.02.2022 
registered with Neredmet Police Station, Rachakonda. 
5. 
By the impugned order dated 16.02.2024, the High Court 
refused to quash the criminal proceedings pending against the 
appellants and accused No.7 in FIR No.82 of 2022 dated 
01.02.2022 and disposed of the 
directing the Investigation Officer to follow the mandatory 
procedure contemplated under Section 41-A of CrPC and also the 
guidelines issued by this Court in Arnesh Kumar vs. State of 
Bihar (2014). The High Court further granted 
protection by directing the Investigation Officer not to arrest to 
appellants until the chargesheet is filed. The High Court noted that 
there are matrimonial disputes between appellant No.1 and 
respondent No.2 and that in matrimonial disputes, custodial 
interrogation of the accused is not required. Being aggrieved by the 

High Court’s refusal to quash the criminal proceedings arising out 
of FIR No.82 of 2022 dated 01.02.2022, the appellants herein have 
preferred the instant appeal. 
6. 
Subsequent to the impugned order dated 16.02.2022, the 
police have filed a chargesheet dated 03.06.2022 before the Court 
of 1st Metropolitan Magistrate, Malkajgiri, Cyberabad vide C.C. 
No.1544 of 2022 against the appellant Nos.1 to 6 under Section 
498A of the IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Act. However, 
the charges were dropped against accused No.7 (respondent No.2’s 
brother-in-law). The criminal case against the appellants herein is 
pending trial in the Court of 1st Additional Junior Civil Judge-cum- 
Additional Metropolitan Magistrate, Malkajgiri. 
7. 
We have heard learned counsel for the appellants and learned 
counsel for the respondent-State and perused FIR No.82 of 2022 
dated 01.02.2022. There is no appearance on behalf of respondent 
No.2 despite service of notice. 

8. 
Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the 
appellants never demanded any dowry from respondent No.2. 
Respondent No.2 in fact used to leave the matrimonial house 
uninformed. In fact, on one such occasion when she left the 
matrimonial house on 03.10.2021, appellant No.1 made a police 
complaint on 05.10.2021. When the police found her whereabouts, 
she was allegedly living with someone. Respondent No.2 after being 
counselled, returned to her matrimonial house. It was further 
submitted that respondent No.2 addressed a letter dated 
11.11.2021 to the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Thirupathur 
Sub Division requesting to close the complaint made by appellant 
No.1 wherein she admitted that she had left her matrimonial house 
after quarrelling with appellant No.1 because of one Govindan, with 
whom she was talking over the phone for the past ten days 
continuously. She also stated that she would not repeat such acts 
in future. Learned counsel for the appellants further submitted 
that respondent No.2 again left the matrimonial house leaving 
appellant No.1 and children behind. It was submitted that having 

no other option, appellant No.1 issued a legal notice dated 
13.12.2021 to respondent No.2 seeking divorce by mutual consent. 
Therefore, it was argued that only as a counterblast, the present 
FIR has been lodged by respondent No.2. on 01.02.2022. Insofar 
as appellant Nos.2 to 6 are concerned, learned counsel for the 
appellants submitted that no specific allegation is made against 
them in the FIR. It was further submitted that appellant Nos.2 to 6 
did not live in the matrimonial house of the couple and have been 
unnecessarily dragged into this case. Therefore, it was submitted 
that the present case is a fit case for quashing the FIR and 
accordingly prayed that this Court may set-aside the impugned 
order dated 16.02.2022 and quash the criminal proceedings 
pending against the appellants herein FIR No. 82 of 
2022 dated 01.02.2022. 
9., the learned counsel for the respondent-State 
submitted that on a perusal of the FIR, it would reveal that a prima 
facie case has been made out against the appellants. It was 

submitted that, as per the FIR, respondent No.2 was harassed both 
physically and mentally for want of additional dowry and that 
appellant No.1 used to come home in a drunken state and used to 
have an illicit affair with one Mounika. Learned counsel for the 
respondent-State submitted that the father of respondent No.2 was 
examined as LW3 who stated in the examination that at the time 
of marriage, he gave Rs.10 lakhs and 10 tolas of gold as dowry. It 
was further submitted that after the marriage, appellant No.1 used 
to harass and abuse respondent No.2 and appellant Nos.2 to 6 used 
to provoke and instigate appellant No.1. Hence, learned counsel for 
the respondent-State argued that the High Court, vide impugned 
order, was justified in declining to quash the criminal proceedings 
pending against the appellants herein FIR No.82 of 
2022 dated 01.02.2022 and prayed for the dismissal of the present 
appeal as well. 
10. Having heard the learned counsel for the respective parties 
and having perused the material on record, the only question that 

arises for our consideration is whether FIR No.82 of 2022, dated 
01.02.2022, lodged against the appellants herein should be 
quashed. 
11. In State of Haryana vs. Bhajan Lal, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 
335 (“Bhajan Lal”), this Court formulated the parameters under 
which the powers under Section 482 of the CrPC could be 
exercised. While it is not necessary to revisit all the parameters, a 
few that are relevant to the present case may be set out as under: 
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various 
relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of 
the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series 
of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary 
power under Article 226 or the inherent powers under 
Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted and 
reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases 
by way of illustration wherein such power could be 
exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any 
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it 
may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly 
defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible 
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list 
of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be 
exercised. 
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information 
report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face 

value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie 
constitute any offence or make out a case against the 
accused. x x x 
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with 
mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously 
instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance 
on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private 
and personal grudge.” 
 
12. In the instant case, the allegations in the FIR are under 
Section 498A of the IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Act. 
13. Section 498A of the IPC deals with offences committed by the 
husband or relatives of the husband subjecting cruelty towards the 
wife. The said provision reads as under: 
“498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman 
subjecting her to cruelty.— Whoever, being the husband 
or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such 
woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to three years and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, “cruelty” 
means— 
(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is 
likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause 

grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether 
mental or physical) of the woman; or 
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is 
with a view to coercing her or any person related to her 
to meet any unlawful demand for any property or 
valuable security or is on account of failure by her or 
any person related to her to meet such demand.” 
 
14. Further, Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Act talk about the 
penalty for giving or taking or demanding a dowry. 
“3. Penalty for giving or taking dowry.— 
(1) If any person, after the commencement of this Act, 
gives or takes or abets the giving or taking of dowry, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than five years, and with fine 
which shall not be less than fifteen thousand rupees 
or the amount of the value of such dowry, whichever 
is more. 
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and 
special reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose 
a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than five 
years. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to, or in 
relation to,— 
(a) presents which are given at the time of a 
marriage to the bride without any demand 
having been made in that behalf: 

Provided that such presents are entered in a list 
maintained in accordance with the rules made 
under this Act; 
(b) presents which are given at the time of a 
marriage to the bridegroom without any demand 
having been made in that behalf: 
Provided that such presents are entered in a list 
maintained in accordance with the rules made under 
this Act: 
Provided further that where such presents are made 
by or on behalf of the bride or any person related to the 
bride, such presents are of a customary nature and the 
value thereof is not excessive having regard to the 
financial status of the person by whom, or on whose 
behalf, such presents are given. 
4. Penalty for demanding dowry.—If any person 
demands, directly or indirectly, from the parents or other 
relatives or guardian of a bride or bridegroom, as the case 
may be, any dowry, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six 
months, but which may extend to two years and with fine 
which may extend to ten thousand rupees: 
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and 
special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose 
a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six 
months.” 
 
15. An offence is punishable under Section 498A of the IPC when 
a husband or his relative subjects a woman to cruelty, which may 

result in imprisonment for a term extending up to three years and 
a fine. The Explanation under Section 498A of the IPC defines 
“cruelty” for the purpose of Section 498A of the IPC to mean any of 
the acts mentioned in clauses (a) or (b). The first limb of clause (a) 
of the Explanation of Section 498A of the IPC, states that “cruelty” 
means any wilful conduct that is of such a nature as is likely to 
drive the woman to commit suicide. The second limb of clause (a) 
of the Explanation of Section 498A of the IPC, states that cruelty 
means any wilful conduct that is of such a nature as to cause grave 
injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) 
of the woman. Further, clause (b) of the Explanation of Section 
498A of the IPC states that cruelty would also include harassment 
of the woman where such harassment is to coerce her or any 
person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property 
or valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person 
related to her to meet such demand. 

16. Further, Section 3 of the Dowry Act deals with penalty for 
giving or taking dowry. It states that any person who engages in 
giving, taking, or abetting the exchange of dowry, shall face a 
punishment of imprisonment for a minimum of five years and a fine 
of not less than fifteen thousand rupees or the value of the dowry, 
whichever is greater. Section 4 of the Dowry Act talks of penalty for 
demanding dowry. It states that any person demanding dowry 
directly or indirectly, from the parents or other relatives or 
guardians of a bride or bridegroom shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months, 
but which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend 
to ten thousand rupees. 
17. The issue for consideration is whether, given the facts and 
circumstances of the case and after examining the FIR, the High 
Court was correct in refusing to quash the ongoing criminal 
proceedings against the appellants FIR No. 82 of 2022 

dated 01.02.2022 under Section 498A of the IPC and Sections 3 
and 4 of the Dowry Act. 
18. A bare perusal of the FIR shows that the allegations made by 
respondent No.2 are vague and omnibus. Other than claiming that 
appellant No.1 harassed her and that appellant Nos.2 to 6 
instigated him to do so, respondent No.2 has not provided any 
specific details or described any particular instance of harassment. 
She has also not mentioned the time, date, place, or manner in 
which the alleged harassment occurred. Therefore, the FIR lacks 
concrete and precise allegations. 
19. Further, the record reveals that respondent No.2 on 
03.10.2021 left the matrimonial house leading appellant No.1 to 
file a police complaint on 05.10.2021. When the police officials 
traced her, respondent No.2 addressed a letter dated 11.11.2021 
to the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Thirupathur Sub Division 
requesting to close the complaint made by appellant No.1. In the 
said letter, respondent No.2 admitted that she left her matrimonial 

house after quarrelling with appellant No.1 as she was talking to a 
person by name Govindan over the phone for the past ten days 
continuously. She further admitted that appellant No.1 was taking 
good care of her. She also stated that she will not engage in such 
actions in future. Despite that, in 2021 itself, respondent No.2 once 
again left the matrimonial house leaving appellant No.1 and also 
her minor children. 
20. Losing hope in the marriage, appellant No.1 issued a legal 
notice to respondent No.1 seeking divorce by mutual consent on 
13.12.2021. Instead of responding to the said legal notice issued 
by appellant No.1, respondent No.2 lodged the present FIR 82 of 
2022 on 01.02.2022 registered with Neredmet Police Station, 
Rachakonda under Section 498A of the IPC and Sections 3 and 4 
of the Dowry Act. 
21. Given the facts of this case and in view of the timing and 
context of the FIR, we find that respondent No.2 left the 
matrimonial house on 03.10.2021 after quarrelling with appellant 

No.1 with respect to her interactions with a third person in their 
marriage. Later she came back to her matrimonial house assuring 
to have a cordial relationship with appellant No.1. However, she 
again left the matrimonial house. When appellant No.1 issued a 
legal notice seeking divorce on 13.12.2021, the present FIR came 
to be lodged on 01.02.2022 by respondent No.2. Therefore, we are 
of the opinion that the FIR filed by respondent No. 2 is not a 
genuine complaint rather it is a retaliatory measure intended to 
settle scores with appellant No. 1 and his family members. 
22. Learned counsel for respondent No.1 State contended that a 
prima facie case was made out against the appellants for harassing 
respondent No.2 and demanding dowry from her. However, we 
observe that the allegations made by respondent No.2 in the FIR 
seem to be motivated by a desire for retribution rather than a 
legitimate grievance. Further, the allegations attributed against the 
appellants herein are vague and omnibus. 

23. Respondent No.2 has not contested the present case either 
before the High Court or this Court. Furthermore, it is noteworthy 
that respondent No. 2 has not only deserted appellant No. 1 but 
has also abandoned her two children as well, who are now in the 
care and custody of appellant No.1. The counsel for the appellants 
has specifically submitted that respondent No.2 has shown no 
inclination to re-establish any relationship with her children. 
24. Insofar as appellant Nos.2 to 6 are concerned, we find that 
they have no connection to the matter at hand and have been 
dragged into the web of crime without any rhyme or reason. A 
perusal of the FIR would indicate that no substantial and specific 
allegations have been made against appellant Nos.2 to 6 other than 
stating that they used to instigate appellant No.1 for demanding 
more dowry. It is also an admitted fact that they never resided with 
the couple namely appellant No.1 and respondent No.2 and their 
children. Appellant Nos.2 and 3 resided together at Guntakal, 

Andhra Pradesh. Appellant Nos. 4 to 6 live in Nellore, Bengaluru 
and Guntur respectively. 
25. A mere reference to the names of family members in a criminal 
case a matrimonial dispute, without specific 
allegations indicating their active involvement should be nipped in 
the bud. It is a well-recognised fact, borne out of judicial 
experience, that there is often a tendency to implicate all the 
members of the husband’s family when domestic disputes arise out 
of a matrimonial discord. Such generalised and sweeping 
accusations unsupported by concrete evidence or particularised 
allegations cannot form the basis for criminal prosecution. Courts 
must exercise caution in such cases to prevent misuse of legal 
provisions and the legal process and avoid unnecessary 
harassment of innocent family members. In the present case, 
appellant Nos.2 to 6, who are the members of the family of 
appellant No.1 have been living in different cities and have not 
resided in the matrimonial house of appellant No.1 and respondent 

No.2 herein. Hence, they cannot be dragged into criminal 
prosecution and the same would be an abuse of the process of the 
law in the absence of specific allegations made against each of 
them. 
 
26. In fact, in the instant case, the first appellant and his wife i.e. the second respondent herein resided at Jollarpeta, Tamil Nadu 
where he was working in Southern Railways. They were married in 
the year 2015 and soon thereafter in the years 2016 and 2017, the 
second respondent gave birth to two children. Therefore, it cannot 
be believed that there was any harassment for dowry during the 
said period or that there was any matrimonial discord. Further, the 
second respondent in response to the missing complaint filed by 
the first appellant herein on 05.10.2021 addressed a letter dated 
11.11.2021 to the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Thirupathur 
Sub Division requesting for closure of the said complaint as she 
had stated that she had left the matrimonial home on her own 
accord owing to a quarrel with the appellant No.1 because of one 
Govindan with whom the second respondent was in contact over 

telephone for a period of ten days. She had also admitted that she 
would not repeat such acts in future. In the above conspectus of 
facts, we find that the allegations of the second respondent against 
the appellants herein are too far-fetched and are not believable. 
27. We find that the High Court noted that there were also 
allegations against respondent No.2 and matrimonial disputes are 
pending between the parties. Therefore, the High Court came to the 
conclusion that custodial interrogation of the appellants was not 
necessary and protected the personal liberty of the appellants 
directing the Investigation Officer not to arrest the appellants till 
the completion of the investigation and filing of the charge-sheet. 
Albeit the said findings and observations, the High Court ultimately 
refused to quash the criminal proceedings against the appellants. 
28. The inclusion of Section 498A of the IPC by way of an 
amendment was intended to curb cruelty inflicted on a woman by 
her husband and his family, ensuring swift intervention by the 
State. However, in recent years, as there have been a notable rise 

in matrimonial disputes across the country, accompanied by 
growing discord and tension within the institution of marriage, 
consequently, there has been a growing tendency to misuse 
provisions like Section 498A of the IPC as a tool for unleashing 
personal vendetta against the husband and his family by a wife. 
Making vague and generalised allegations during matrimonial 
conflicts, if not scrutinized, will lead to the misuse of legal 
processes and an encouragement for use of arm twisting tactics by 
a wife and/or her family. Sometimes, recourse is taken to invoke 
Section 498A of the IPC against the husband and his family in order 
to seek compliance with the unreasonable demands of a wife. 
Consequently, this Court has, time and again, cautioned against 
prosecuting the husband and his family in the absence of a clear 
prima facie case against them. 
29. We are not, for a moment, stating that any woman who has 
suffered cruelty in terms of what has been contemplated under 
Section 498A of the IPC should remain silent and forbear herself 

from making a complaint or initiating any criminal proceeding. 
That is not the intention of our aforesaid observations but we 
should not encourage a case like as in the present one, where as a 
counterblast to the petition for dissolution of marriage sought by 
the first appellant-husband of the second respondent herein, a 
complaint under Section 498A of the IPC is lodged by the latter. In 
fact, the insertion of the said provision is meant mainly for the 
protection of a woman who is subjected to cruelty in the 
matrimonial home primarily due to an unlawful demand for any 
property or valuable security in the form of dowry. However, 
sometimes it is misused as in the present case. 
30. In the above context, this Court in G.V. Rao vs. L.H.V. 
Prasad, (2000) observed as follows: 
“12. There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes 
in recent times. Marriage is a sacred ceremony, the main 
purpose of which is to enable the young couple to settle 
down in life and live peacefully. But little matrimonial 
skirmishes suddenly erupt which often assume serious 
proportions resulting in commission of heinous crimes in 
which elders of the family are also involved with the result 
that those who could have counselled and brought about 

rapprochement are rendered helpless on their being 
arrayed as accused in the criminal case. There are many 
other reasons which need not be mentioned here for not 
encouraging matrimonial litigation so that the parties may 
ponder over their defaults and terminate their disputes 
amicably by mutual agreement instead of fighting it out in 
a court of law where it takes years and years to conclude 
and in that process the parties lose their “young” days in 
chasing their “cases” in different courts.” 
 
31. Further, this Court in Preeti Gupta vs. State of Jharkhand 
(2010) held that the courts have to be extremely careful 
and cautious in dealing with these complaints and must take 
pragmatic 
realties 
into 
consideration 
while 
dealing 
with 
matrimonial cases. The allegations of harassment by the husband’s 
close relatives who had been living in different cities and never 
visited or rarely visited the place where the complainant resided 
would have an entirely different complexion. The allegations of the 
complainant are required to be scrutinized with great care and 
circumspection. 
32. We, therefore, are of the opinion that the impugned FIR No.82 
of 2022 filed by respondent No.2 was initiated with ulterior motives 

to settle personal scores and grudges against appellant No.1 and 
his family members i.e., appellant Nos.2 to 6 herein. Hence, the 
present case at hand falls within category (7) of illustrative 
parameters highlighted in Bhajan Lal. Therefore, the High Court, 
in the present case, erred in not exercising the powers available to 
it under Section 482 CrPC and thereby failed to prevent abuse of 
the Court’s process by continuing the criminal prosecution against 
the appellants. 
33. We, accordingly allow the appeal and set aside the impugned 
order of the High Court dated 16.02.2022 in Criminal Petition 
No.1479 of 2022 filed under Section 482 CrPC. The Criminal 
Petition No.1479 of 2022 under Section 482 of CrPC shall 
accordingly stand allowed. FIR No.82 of 2022 dated 01.02.2022 
registered with Neredmet Police Station, Rachakonda under 
Section 498A of the IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Act 
against appellant Nos.1 to 6, charge-sheet dated 03.06.2022 filed 
in the Court of 1st Metropolitan Magistrate, Malkajgiri, Cyberabad 

and the trial pending in the Court of 1st Additional Junior Civil 
Judge-cum-Additional Metropolitan Magistrate, Malkajgiri against 
the appellants herein shall accordingly stand quashed............................. J. 
 [B.V. NAGARATHNA]............................ J. 
 [NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH]