SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
( SLP (Crl.) No.7957 of 2024) 
 
JAYEDEEPSINH PRAVINSINH 
CHAVDA & ORS....APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
STATE OF GUJARAT...RESPONDENT(S) 
 
JUDGMENT 
VIKRAM NATH, J. 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present criminal appeal arises from an order of 
the Gujarat High Court, dated 09.05.2024, whereby 
the Court rejected the Criminal Revision Application 
No. 536 of 2024 filed by the appellants herein and 
refused to discharge the appellants – accused from 
offences punishable under sections 306, 498A and 
114 of the Indian Penal Code, 18601. 

1 IPC 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

3. 
FIR No. 11206038210259 of 2021 dated 18.04.2021 
was registered at the instance of the deceased’s father 
against the appellants herein for offences under 
sections 306, 498A, 114 of the IPC. It was alleged that 
the appellant no.1 was married to the deceased – wife 
in the year 2009. The deceased – wife was residing in 
the matrimonial house with her in-laws, that is, 
appellant nos. 2 and 3. For the first five years of the 
marriage, no child was born to the couple. The 
deceased – wife was subjected to physical and mental 
harassment owing to this and thus returned to her 
parental 
home. 
When 
she 
returned 
to 
her 
matrimonial home on being convinced by her 
parents, a son was born to the deceased in the next 
few years. Around twelve months before the alleged 
incident, the deceased had informed her father – the 
informant that the appellant – accused had sold her 
ornaments, given to her as streedhan during her 
marriage, and whenever she demanded return of the 
same, she was physically and mentally harassed. On 
18.04.2021, the informant received information that 
the deceased had committed suicide by hanging 
herself. It is alleged that it was due to the physical 
and mental harassment meted out by the appellant – 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

accused that the deceased was compelled to commit 
suicide. 
 
4. 
Appellants had earlier sought quashing of the FIR, 
which petition was dismissed by the High Court and 
even the Special Leave Petition before this Court 
against the dismissal order of the High Court was 
dismissed as withdrawn. The appellants thereafter 
preferred an application seeking discharge under 
Section 227 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19732 
on the ground that, prima facie, the ingredients for 
the offence of abetment as provided under Section 
107 of IPC are not made out against them. As per the 
complaint the incident had taken place twelve 
months ago. In the circumstances prima facie 
instigation is not proved, therefore the offence as per 
sections 306, 498A, 114 of the IPC are not made out 
against them. The Sessions Court, vide order dated 
28.02.2024, dismissed the discharge application 
observing that in the circumstances of the case, it did 
not seem just and proper to discharge or acquit any 
accused person without recording evidence on all the 
facts alleged. 
 
2 CrPC 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

5. 
Appellants challenged the above order before the 
High Court in a Criminal Revision Petition, wherein 
the High Court in the impugned order has dismissed 
the same and held that the appellants failed to bring 
any material on record to prove that a prima facie 
case is not made out to frame charges against them. 
The Court, while dismissing the revision petition, 
observed that at the stage of charge framing, the 
Court's role is preliminary and limited to determining 
whether a prima facie case exists. The test applied is 
whether the materials presented by the prosecution, 
taken at its face value, disclose ingredients of the 
alleged offence. The Court is not required to evaluate 
the probative value of the evidence or assess its 
sufficiency for conviction. Instead, it only has to 
consider whether there is a strong suspicion that the 
accused might have committed the offence. This 
suspicion must be based on credible material and not 
on arbitrary conclusions. In the present case, witness 
statements revealed that the deceased had faced 
consistent physical and mental harassment by the 
accused. The harassment included selling the 
deceased's 
gold 
ornaments, 
which 
was 
her 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

streedhan, and torturing her when she demanded 
their return. Witnesses also indicated that the 
harassment 
intensified 
before 
her 
suicide, 
particularly during a recent family event, and directly 
contributed to her decision to end her life. These 
statements provided sufficient material to establish 
strong suspicion against the accused. The Court 
further noted that the appellants failed to present any 
material demonstrating that the allegations were 
patently absurd or inherently improbable. As such, 
the High Court upheld the decision of the Sessions 
Court to frame charges under Sections 306 and 498A 
of the IPC. The revision petition was dismissed, with 
the High Court finding it devoid of merit and an 
attempt to delay the trial. 
 
6. 
Aggrieved by this judgment, the appellants are before 
us on several grounds, inter alia, that the allegations 
against them are completely baseless and they have 
been roped in on concocted facts and there is nothing 
on record to show how the appellants were even 
remotely involved in abetting the suicide of the 
deceased. Further, the appellants also claimed that 
allegations made against them in the FIR as well as 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

statements brought on the record are vague and 
general, and do not constitute an offence either under 
section 306 or section 498A, IPC. And thus, there is 
no prima facie case against them to condemn them to 
face trial as the key ingredient of mens rea required 
to make out a case under section 306, IPC is 
absolutely lacking. That apart, from the alleged 
selling of the ornaments there was no bone of 
contention between the deceased and the appellants. 
Having been together with appellant no. l for a 
duration of almost twelve years there has been no 
other complaint filed against any of the appellants 
under section 498A, IPC nor is the claim made by the 
informant that there was a constant demand for 
dowry or that the appellant kept the deceased badly 
or treated her badly. The only instance, as alleged in 
the FIR, of harassment was allegedly met out to the 
deceased when she inquired about getting back the 
jewellery that was allegedly sold off by appellant no.1 
and his family members which, admittedly, as per the 
order of the Trial Court, occurred a year prior to 
death of the deceased. 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

7. 
We have heard the learned counsels for parties and 
have perused the material on record. We find that the 
following issues arise for our consideration: 
1. 
Whether a prima facie case under Section 
498A, IPC is made out against the appellant 
– accused? 
2. 
Whether a prima facie case under Section 
306, IPC is made out against the appellant – 
accused? 
3. 
Whether the appellant – accused can be 
discharged for the offences under sections 
306 and 498A, IPC? 
 
8. 
Section 498A, IPC provides for punishment to the 
husband or to relatives of the husband of a woman 
subjecting the woman to cruelty. ‘Cruelty’ under this 
provision has been explained to mean – 
a. any willful conduct which is of such a nature as 
is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide 
or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb 
or health (whether mental or physical) of the 
woman; or 
b. harassment 
of 
the 
woman 
where 
such 
harassment is with a view to coercing her or any 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

person related to her to meet any unlawful 
demand for any property or valuable security or 
is on account of failure by her or any person 
related to her to meet such demand. 
 
9. 
This Court in the case of U. Suvetha v. State3, laid 
down the following ingredients to constitute the 
offence under section 498-A, IPC: 
i. 
The woman must be married; 
ii. 
She must be subjected to cruelty or 
harassment; and 
iii. 
Such cruelty or harassment must have been 
done either by husband of the woman or by 
the relative of her husband. 
 
10. This Court has also held in the judgment in the case 
of State of A.P. v. M. Madhusudhan Rao4, that not 
every kind of harassment would amount to ‘cruelty’ 
within the meaning of the provision, to constitute the 
offence punishable therein. Every case has to be 
analysed on its individual facts to assess whether the 
act of the accused persons constitutes cruelty. 
 
3 (2009) 
4 (2008) 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

Further, cruelty can either be mental or physical, and 
it is to be seen on the facts of each case. 
 
11. From the above understanding of the provision, it is 
evident that, ‘cruelty’ simpliciter is not enough to 
constitute the offence, rather it must be done either 
with the intention to cause grave injury or to drive 
her to commit suicide or with intention to coercing 
her or her relatives to meet unlawful demands. 
 
12. In the present case, the deceased has committed 
suicide after twelve years of marriage. In these twelve 
years, the informant and other witnesses on record 
have stated that the deceased had informed them on 
multiple occasions that she was subjected to physical 
and mental harassment by the appellants herein. It 
has also been stated that once before she had 
returned to her parental home owing to the alleged 
cruelty and was later sent back to her matrimonial 
house. Deceased’s father, who is the informant, has 
also stated that around twelve months prior to her 
death, the appellants had sold the deceased’s 
streedhan and had tortured her when she demanded 
them back. The same has also been stated by her 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

relatives 
who 
have 
been 
examined 
by 
the 
Investigating Officer during investigation. 
 
13. The appellants’ argument that the deceased had not 
made a single complaint for cruelty or harassment 
against the appellants in the twelve years of marriage 
cannot be sustained. Merely because she did not file 
any complaint for twelve years does not guarantee 
that there was no instance of cruelty or harassment. 
 
14. Further, the argument that ingredients of section 
498A, IPC are not made as the allegations made 
therein are general and vague, also does not 
strengthen the case of the appellants as the 
allegations, with specific, instances stated by the 
informant and other witnesses prima facie constitute 
a case for offence under section 498-A, IPC. From a 
perusal of the FIR, findings of the Investigating 
Officer in the chargesheet as well as the statements 
of 
the 
deceased’s 
cousins 
recorded 
during 
investigation prima facie indicate that the deceased 
was subjected to physical as well as mental cruelty 
by her husband and the in-laws. There is also the 
specific instance related to the alleged selling of the 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

gold ornaments and subsequent cruelty upon the 
demand for return made by the deceased. A 
preliminary analysis, as required during the stage of 
charge-framing, 
points 
towards 
the 
probable 
commission of the offence of cruelty as provided 
under section 498-A, IPC. 
 
15. Hence, the appellants cannot be discharged for 
offence under section 498-A, IPC and should be 
charged with and tried for the same. 
 
16. Section 306 of the IPC provides for punishment for 
the offence of abetment of suicide. It has to be read 
with Section 107 of the IPC which defines the act of 
‘abetment’. The provisions read as follows: 
 
“306. Abetment of suicide.—If any person 
commits 
suicide, 
whoever 
abets 
the 
commission of such suicide, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to 
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.” 
 
“107. Abetment of a thing.—A person abets 
the doing of a thing, who— 
 
First.—Instigates any person to do that 
thing; or 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

Secondly.—Engages with one or more other 
person or persons in any conspiracy for the 
doing of that thing, if an act or illegal 
omission takes place in pursuance of that 
conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that 
thing; or 
 
Thirdly.—Intentionally aids, by any act or 
illegal omission, the doing of that thing. 
 
Explanation 1.—A person who by wilful 
misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment 
of a material fact which he is bound to 
disclose, voluntarily causes or procures, or 
attempts to cause or procure, a thing to be 
done, is said to instigate the doing of that 
thing. 
 
Explanation 2.— Whoever, either prior to or 
at the time of the commission of an act, does 
anything 
in 
order 
to 
facilitate 
the 
commission of that act, and thereby 
facilitate the commission thereof, is said to 
aid the doing of that act.” 
 
17. Section 306 of the IPC penalizes those who abet the 
act of suicide by another. For a person to be charged 
under this section, the prosecution must establish 
that the accused contributed to the act of suicide by 
the deceased. This involvement must satisfy one of 
the three conditions outlined in Section 107 of the 
IPC. These conditions include the accused instigated 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

or encouraged the individual to commit suicide, 
conspiring with others to ensure that the act was 
carried out, or engaging in conduct (or neglecting to 
act) that directly led to the person taking his/her own 
life. 
 
18. For a conviction under Section 306 of the IPC, it is a 
well-established legal principle that the presence of 
clear mens rea—the intention to abet the act—is 
essential. Mere harassment, by itself, is not sufficient 
to find an accused guilty of abetting suicide. The 
prosecution must demonstrate an active or direct 
action by the accused that led the deceased to take 
his/her own life. The element of mens rea cannot 
simply be presumed or inferred; it must be evident 
and 
explicitly 
discernible. 
Without 
this, 
the 
foundational requirement for establishing abetment 
under the law is not satisfied, underscoring the 
necessity of a deliberate and conspicuous intent to 
provoke or contribute to the act of suicide. The same 
position was laid down by this Court in S.S. 
Chheena v. Vijay Kumar Mahajan5, wherein it was 
observed that: 
 
5 (2010) 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

“25. Abetment involves a mental process of 
instigating a person or intentionally aiding a 
person in doing of a thing. Without a positive 
act on the part of the accused to instigate or 
aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot 
be sustained. The intention of the legislature 
and the ratio of the cases decided by the 
Supreme Court is clear that in order to 
convict a person under Section 306IPC there 
has to be a clear mens rea to commit the 
offence. It also requires an active act or direct 
act which led the deceased to commit suicide 
seeing no option and that act must have been 
intended to push the deceased into such a 
position that he committed suicide.” 
 
19. To bring a conviction under section 306, IPC it is 
necessary to establish a clear mens rea to instigate or 
push the deceased to commit suicide. It requires 
certain 
such 
act, 
omission, 
creation 
of 
circumstances, or words which would incite or 
provoke another person to commit suicide. This 
Court in the case of Ramesh Kumar v. State of 
Chhattisgarh6, defined the word “instigate” as 
under: 
“20. Instigation is to goad, urge forward, 
provoke, incite or encourage to do “an act”. 
To satisfy the requirement of instigation 
 
6 (2001) 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

though it is not necessary that actual words 
must be used to that effect or what 
constitutes instigation must necessarily 
and specifically be suggestive of the 
consequence. Yet a reasonable certainty to 
incite the consequence must be capable of 
being spelt out. The present one is not a 
case where the accused had by his acts or 
omission or by a continued course of 
conduct created such circumstances that 
the deceased was left with no other option 
except to commit suicide in which case an 
instigation may have been inferred. A word 
uttered in the fit of anger or emotion without 
intending the consequences to actually 
follow cannot be said to be instigation.” 
 
20. The essential ingredients to be fulfilled in order to 
bring a case under Section 306, IPC are: 
i. the abetment; 
ii. the intention of the accused to aid or instigate 
or abet the deceased to commit suicide. 
 
21. Thus, to bring a case under this provision, it is 
imperative that the accused intended by their act to 
instigate the deceased to commit suicide. Thus, in 
cases of death of a wife, the Court must meticulously 
examine the facts and circumstances of the case, as 
well as assess the evidence presented. It is necessary 
to determine whether the cruelty or harassment 
inflicted on the victim left them with no other option 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

but to end their life. In cases of alleged abetment of 
suicide, there must be concrete proof of either direct 
or indirect acts of incitement that led to the suicide. 
Mere allegations of harassment are insufficient to 
establish guilt. For a conviction, there must be 
evidence of a positive act by the accused, closely 
linked to the time of the incident, that compelled or 
drove the victim to commit suicide. 
 
22. It is essential to establish that the death was a result 
of suicide and that the accused actively abetted its 
commission. This can involve instigating the victim 
or engaging in specific actions that facilitated the act. 
The prosecution must prove beyond doubt that the 
accused played a definitive role in the abetment. 
Without clear evidence of an active role in provoking 
or assisting the suicide, a conviction under Section 
306 IPC cannot be sustained. 
 
23. The act of abetment must be explicitly demonstrated 
through actions or behaviors of the accused that 
directly contributed to the victim’s decision to take 
their own life. Harassment, in itself, does not suffice 
unless it is accompanied by deliberate acts of 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

incitement or facilitation. Furthermore, these actions 
must be proximate to the time of the suicide, 
showcasing a clear connection between the accused’s 
behavior and the tragic outcome. It is only through 
the establishment of this direct link that a conviction 
under Section 306 IPC can be justified. The 
prosecution bears the burden of proving this active 
involvement to hold the accused accountable for the 
alleged abetment of suicide. The same position has 
been laid down by this court in several judgments, 
such as: 
i. 
M. Mohan v. State7; 
ii. 
Amalendu Pal alias Jhantu v. State of 
West Bengal8; 
iii. 
Kamalakar v. State of Karnataka9. 
 
24. Therefore, for a conviction under Section 306 IPC, 
there must be clear evidence of direct or indirect acts 
of incitement to commit suicide. The cause of suicide, 
especially in the context of abetment, involves 
complex attributes of human behavior and reactions, 
 
7 (2011) 
8 (2010) 
9 (2007) SCC OnLine Kar 824 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

requiring the Court to rely on cogent and convincing 
proof of the accused’s role in instigating the act. Mere 
allegations of harassment are not enough unless the 
accused’s actions were so compelling that the victim 
perceived no alternative but to take their own life. 
Such actions must also be proximate to the time of 
the suicide. The Court examines whether the 
accused’s conduct, including provoking, urging, or 
tarnishing the victim’s self-esteem, created an 
unbearable situation. If the accused's actions were 
intended only to harass or express anger, they might 
not meet the threshold for abetment or investigation. 
Each case demands a careful evaluation of facts, 
considering the accused’s intent and its impact on 
the victim. 
 
25. This Court in Ude Singh v. State of Haryana10, 
held that to convict an accused under Section 306 
IPC, the intent or mental state to commit the specific 
crime must be evident when assessing culpability. It 
was observed as under: 
 
“16. In cases of alleged abetment of suicide, 
there must be a proof of direct or indirect 
 
10 (2019) 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

act(s) of incitement to the commission of 
suicide. It could hardly be disputed that the 
question of cause of a suicide, particularly in 
the context of an offence of abetment of 
suicide, remains a vexed one, involving 
multifaceted and complex attributes of 
human behaviour and responses/reactions. 
In the case of accusation for abetment of 
suicide, the court would be looking for cogent 
and convincing proof of the act(s) of 
incitement to the commission of suicide. In 
the case of suicide, mere allegation of 
harassment of the deceased by another 
person would not suffice unless there be 
such action on the part of the accused which 
compels the person to commit suicide; and 
such an offending action ought to be 
proximate to the time of occurrence. Whether 
a person has abetted in the commission of 
suicide by another or not, could only be 
gathered from the facts and circumstances of 
each case. 
 
16.1. For the purpose of finding out if a 
person has abetted commission of suicide by 
another, the consideration would be if the 
accused is guilty of the act of instigation of 
the act of suicide. As explained and 
reiterated by this Court in the decisions 
abovereferred, instigation means to goad, 
urge forward, provoke, incite or encourage to 
do an act. If the persons who committed 
suicide had been hypersensitive and the 
action of accused is otherwise not ordinarily 
expected to induce a similarly circumstanced 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

person to commit suicide, it may not be safe 
to hold the accused guilty of abetment of 
suicide. But, on the other hand, if the 
accused by his acts and by his continuous 
course of conduct creates a situation which 
leads the deceased perceiving no other 
option except to commit suicide, the case 
may fall within the four corners of Section 
306IPC. If the accused plays an active role in 
tarnishing the self-esteem and self-respect of 
the victim, which eventually draws the victim 
to commit suicide, the accused may be held 
guilty of abetment of suicide. The question of 
mens rea on the part of the accused in such 
cases would be examined with reference to 
the actual acts and deeds of the accused and 
if the acts and deeds are only of such nature 
where the accused intended nothing more 
than harassment or snap show of anger, a 
particular case may fall short of the offence 
of abetment of suicide. However, if the 
accused kept on irritating or annoying the 
deceased by words or deeds until the 
deceased reacted or was provoked, a 
particular case may be that of abetment of 
suicide. Such being the matter of delicate 
analysis of human behaviour, each case is 
required to be examined on its own facts, 
while taking note of all the surrounding 
factors having bearing on the actions and 
psyche of the accused and the deceased.” 
 
26. On a careful and close consideration of the facts and 
the material on record in the present case and in light 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

of the law laid down by this Court regarding Section 
306, IPC, there appears no proximate link between 
the alleged facts, instances of harassment and her 
subsequent death by hanging. The alleged incident of 
selling of gold ornaments and subsequent physical 
and mental harassment, as alleged, occurred almost 
a year before the FIR was registered at the instance 
of the father of the deceased. Even the statements of 
the deceased’s cousins only mention instances which 
occurred a year prior to the death of the deceased. 
Further, selling of gold ornaments and the same was 
followed by discord and harassment upon their 
demand, even if true, do not reflect any intention to 
instigate, incite or provoke the deceased to commit 
suicide. Mere harassment and such issues between 
the wife and her husband along with the in-laws do 
not appear to create a scenario where she was left 
with no option other than to end her life. There is, 
therefore, absence of mens rea to instigate suicide of 
the deceased persons. Therefore, prima facie, it 
appears that the appellants did not have the requisite 
mens rea and neither did they commit any positive or 
direct act or omission to instigate or aid in the 
commission of suicide by the deceased. 

SLP(Crl.) No.7957 of 2024 

27. Hence, the ingredients for the offence under Section 
306, IPC are not made out even on a preliminary 
analysis of the material on record. Therefore, they 
cannot be charged under Section 306, IPC and thus 
deserve to be discharged of the same. 
 
28. Consequently, the appeal filed by the appellants is 
partly allowed, they are discharged from the charges 
under Section 306 of the IPC, however the charge 
under Section 498A of the IPC is upheld and the trial 
under this provision shall proceed against them. 
 
29. Pending application(s) if any, shall stand disposed of. 

……………………………………J. 
(VIKRAM NATH) 

……………………………………J. 
 (PRASANNA B. VARALE) 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER 10, 2024