IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. OF 2024 
( SLP(C) No.10996 of 2018) 

BABY SAKSHI GREOLA …APPELLANTS(S) 
 
VERSUS 
 
MANZOOR AHMAD SIMON 
AND ANOTHER 

JUDGMENT 
 
B.R. GAVAI, J. 
 
1. 
Leave granted. 
2. 
The present appeal calls into question the correctness and 
validity of the final judgment and order passed by a learned 
Single Judge of the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi dated 7th 
November 2017 in MAC. APP. 1107/2011. 
3. 
The appellant had approached the High Court seeking 
enhancement of the compensation awarded on account of 
injuries suffered in a motor vehicle accident. The Motor Accident 

Claims Tribunal, Central District, Delhi (hereinafter referred to 
as “Tribunal”) had by a judgment and order dated 13th June 2011 
awarded compensation of Rs. 5,90,750/- along with interest at 
the rate of 7.5% per annum from the date of filing of the claim 
petition. The learned Single Judge of the High Court, vide 
impugned judgment and order, disposed of the appeal filed by 
the appellant seeking enhancement by granting a further 
amount of Rs. 5,60,000/- along with interest at the rate of 9% 
per annum from the date of filing till realization. Aggrieved 
thereby, the appellant has approached this Court. 
4. 
The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeal are as 
follows: 
4.1 On 2nd June, 2009, the appellant, aged seven years, was 
going on foot along with her mother and brother to her house 
from National Bal Bhawan, Kotla Road, New Delhi. At about 
01:00 PM, when they reached a red light on Deen Dayal 
Upadhyay Marg and Vishnu Digambar Marg, ITO, Delhi, and 
were crossing the road on a zebra crossing, a car bearing 
Registration No. DL-3C-AX-1502 being driven at a high speed, 

hit the appellant, as a result of which, she sustained grievous 
injuries. 
4.2 On 3rd September 2009, the appellant, through her father, 
filed a claim petition for grant of compensation under Section 
166 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as 
“MV Act”), before the learned Tribunal against the driver-cum-
owner of the offending vehicle and United India Insurance 
Company Limited, New Delhi arrayed as Respondent Nos. 1 and 
2 respectively. 
4.3 The learned Tribunal framed three issues for its 
consideration. First, whether the appellant had suffered grievous 
injuries on account of the road accident on 2nd June 2009, due 
to rash and negligent driving of vehicle by Respondent No. 1. 
Second, whether the appellant is entitled to any compensation, 
if so, to what amount and from whom. Third, as to what relief 
should be granted to the appellant. 
4.4 The appellant got examined five witnesses in support of her 
claim. Respondent No. 1 was proceeded ex-parte and Respondent 
No. 2 did not lead any evidence. 

4.5 The learned Tribunal, on appreciation of the evidence, 
decided the first two issues in favour of the appellant. The 
learned Tribunal held the respondents jointly and severally liable 
to make the payment of compensation to the appellant. 
4.6 The appellant was awarded the following compensation: 
S. No. 
Head 
Amount (In ₹) 
1. 
Medicines and Medical Treatment 
32,000/- 
2. 
Loss of Earning Capacity due to 
Disability 
1,68,750/- 
3. 
Pain and Suffering 
50,000 
4. 
Future Treatment 
30,000/- 
5. 
Attendant Charges 
15,000/- 
6. 
Loss of Amenities of Life 
1,00,000/- 
7. 
Loss of Future Prospect 
1,00,000/- 
8. 
Special Education Expenditure 
75,000/- 
9. 
Conveyance and Special Diet 
20,000/- 
 
Total 
5,90,750/- 
 
4.7 Vide judgment and order dated 13th June 2011, the learned 
Tribunal, therefore, held that the appellant is entitled to a 
compensation of Rs. 5,90,750/-. The appellant was also held 
entitled to interest at the rate of 7.5% per annum from the date 
of filing of the claim petition i.e. 3rd September 2009. 

4.8 Seeking enhancement of the compensation awarded by the 
learned Tribunal, the appellant approached the High Court. 
4.9 The learned Single Judge of the High Court, on appreciation 
of the material placed on record, enhanced the compensation as 
follows (in bold): 
S. No. 
Head 
Amount (In ₹) 
1. 
Medicines and Medical 
Treatment 
32,000/- 
2. 
Loss of Earning Capacity due 
to Disability 
1,68,750/- 
3. 
Pain and Suffering 
50,000 + 50,000 = 
1,00,000/- 
4. 
Future Treatment 
30,000/- 
5. 
Attendant Charges 
15,000 + 4,10,000 = 
4,25,000/- 
6. 
Loss of Amenities of Life 
1,00,000/- 
7. 
Loss of Future Prospect 
1,00,000/- 
8. 
Special Education Expenditure 
75,000/- 
9. 
Conveyance and Special Diet 
20,000/- 
10. 
Loss of Marriage Prospects 
1,00,000/- 
 
Total 
5,90,750 + 5,60,000 
= 11,51,000/- 

4.10 Vide impugned judgment and order dated 7th November 
2017, the learned Single Judge of the High Court, therefore, 
enhanced the compensation by Rs.5,60,000/- to Rs.11,51,000/- 
along with interest at the rate of 9% per annum from the date of 
filing of the claim petition till realization. 
4.11 Challenging the compensation awarded by the High Court, 
the appellant has filed the present appeal. 
5. 
We have heard Smt. Aruna Mehta, learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the appellant and Shri Ravi Bakshi, 
learned counsel appearing on behalf of Respondent No. 2 (United 
India Insurance Company Limited). 
6. 
Smt. Mehta submitted that the compensation awarded by 
the Tribunal as enhanced by the High Court deserves 
reconsideration by this Court. Placing reliance on the evidence of 
Dr. Monica Juneja (PW-3) who examined the appellant, the 
learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the appellant 
has sustained 75% mental moderate retardation and has no 
control over the passage of her urine. Further, it is submitted 
that the disability of the appellant is in relation to the whole body 

and is non-progressive. She submitted that children with 
moderate mental retardation are generally able to learn skills up 
to the level of a child of 2nd standard/class as adults and can 
work under close supervision only. She further submitted that, 
the appellant will require close supervision of an attendant for 
her day-to-day work. She further submitted that the appellant 
would need admission in a special school or training by a special 
education teacher and that due to her condition, the appellant’s 
marriage prospects may be severely affected. 
7. 
Smt. Mehta submitted that, taking into consideration the 
condition of the appellant, the High Court has erred in granting 
only Rs. 4,25,000/- towards the attendant charges by taking 
minimum wages of unskilled worker (Rs. 3,934/- per month) for 
a part time attendant. She further submitted that, the High 
Court has failed to award suitable amount of compensation 
under the head pain and suffering, as well as for future medical 
treatment of the appellant. 
8. 
The learned counsel for the appellant has placed reliance 
on three judgments of this Court viz. Kajal v. Jagdish Chand 

and Others1, Master Ayush v. Branch Manager, Reliance 
General Insurance Company Limited and Another2 and K.S. 
Muralidhar v. R. Subbulakshmi and Another3. 
9., Shri Bakshi, learned counsel appearing for 
Respondent No. 2 (Insurance Company) submitted that the High 
Court has rightly followed the settled principles of law and 
increased the compensation. He submitted that the High Court 
has been very liberal in awarding an additional sum of 
Rs.5,60,000/- over and above the amount awarded by the 
Tribunal. 
10. Placing reliance on the Disability Certificate dated 10th 
January 2011, the learned counsel for Respondent No. 2 
submitted that there is a likelihood of improvement in the 
condition of the appellant. He therefore, submitted that, this 
Court should not interfere with the amount awarded by the High 
Court. 
 
1 (2020): 2020 INSC 135 
2 (2022): 2022 INSC 363 
3: 

11. To consider the present case, it would be appropriate to 
refer to the evidence of Smt. Prakashi Devi (PW-2), mother of the 
appellant, who had the misfortune to recount the incident before 
the Tribunal. It is stated by Smt. Prakashi Devi (PW-2) that on 
2nd June 2009 when she was going back from National Bal 
Bhawan to her home, along with her children on foot, they had 
to cross the road. When they were crossing the road, on a zebra 
crossing meant for pedestrians, a Tata Safari car bearing 
registration number DL-3C-AX-4502, driven by Respondent 
No.1, at a very high speed, hit her daughter (appellant/Baby 
Sakshi) with great force as a result of which her daughter 
sustained grievous injuries to her brain, sustained fracture over 
left side of femur and lacerated injuries all over her body. 
12. Smt. Prakashi Devi (PW-2) stated that her daughter has 
become permanently partially disabled from her skull area. 
Further, her daughter cannot enjoy her life like a normal person 
and cannot walk properly. The prospect of her marriage has been 
ruined due to the unfortunate accident. Her daughter will not get 
any government job in her remaining life. Thus, life has become 

just like hell for her and her daughter will have to suffer trauma 
and loss of amenities of life. 
13. It was also stated by the mother of the appellant (PW-2), 
that she wanted to make her daughter a badminton player but 
all her hopes have now vanished due to the unfortunate accident. 
It was stated by her that the appellant was a brilliant student 
and had she not met with the accident, she would have got a job 
of at least Rs. 25,000-30,000/- per month, but as a result of the 
accident she has become a dull student. 
14. It would also be appropriate to refer to the evidence of Dr. 
Monica Juneja (PW-3), who proved the Disability Certificate 
dated 10th January 2011. As per the said certificate, the 
appellant has suffered 75% disability, which is permanent in 
nature on account of moderate mental retardation. This 
disability is in relation to the whole body, which is non-
progressive. It is stated in the certificate that this is a case of 
road traffic accident with Subarachnoid Haemorrhage with 
healed fracture femur left with moderate mental retardation 

which means she has an Intelligence Quotient of 41 and social 
Quotient of 43. 
15. It is recorded in the testimony of Dr. Monica Juneja (PW-3) 
that, children with moderate mental retardation are generally 
able to learn skills up to the level of 2nd Standard/Class as adults 
and can work under close supervision only. Further, the 
appellant also has severe apathy and has no control over passage 
of her urine. Because of severe apathy, the appellant has no 
interest in playing or interacting with other children. The 
appellant would require very close supervision of an attendant 
for her day-to-day care. The appellant would also require 
admission in a special school or training by a special education 
teacher. 
16. Dr. Monica Juneja (PW-3) has also stated that, due to all 
these problems, her marriage prospects may be affected. 
However, her possibility of procreation is not affected on account 
of mental retardation. 
17. This Court, in the case of Kajal (supra), had an opportunity 
to consider a case with identical facts. In the said case, a girl 

(Kajal) aged 12 sustained brain injuries on account of an 
accident. The accident had very serious consequences on her. 
Kajal was examined for an assessment of her disability. It was 
assessed that, because of the head injury, Kajal is left with very 
low IQ and severe weakness in all her four limbs, she suffers from 
severe hysteria and severe urinary incontinence. Her disability 
had been assessed as 100%. 
18. This Court, in the said case, referred to a number of cases 
where the principles for grant of compensation have been 
enunciated. Cases from foreign jurisdiction as well as cases of 
this Court were relied upon to extract the principles to be applied 
while assessing compensation. It would be apposite to refer to 
the following paragraphs of the said case: 
“8. In Phillips v. London & South Western Railway 
Co. [Phillips v. London & South Western Railway Co., 
(1879) [L.R.] 5 Q.B.D. 78 (CA)], Field, J., while 
emphasising that damages must be full and 
adequate, held thus: (QBD p. 79) 
“… You cannot put the plaintiff back again 
into his original position, but you must 
bring your reasonable common sense to 
bear, and you must always recollect that 
this is the only occasion on which 
compensation can be given. The plaintiff 
can never sue again for it. You have, 

therefore, now to give him compensation 
once and for all. He has done no wrong, he 
has suffered a wrong at the hands of the 
defendants and you must take care to give 
him full fair compensation for that which 
he has suffered.” 
Besides, the Tribunals should always remember that 
the measures of damages in all these cases “should 
be such as to enable even a tortfeasor to say that he 
had amply atoned for his misadventure”. 
9. In Mediana, In re [Mediana, In re, 1900 AC 113 
(HL)], Lord Halsbury held: (AC pp. 116-17) 
“… Of course the whole region of inquiry 
into damages is one of extreme difficulty. 
You very often cannot even lay down any 
principle upon which you can give 
damages; nevertheless, it is remitted to the 
jury, or those who stand in place of the 
jury, to consider what compensation in 
money shall be given for what is a 
wrongful act. Take the most familiar and 
ordinary case: how is anybody to measure 
pain and suffering in moneys counted? 
Nobody can suggest that you can by any 
arithmetical calculation establish what is 
the exact amount of money which would 
represent such a thing as the pain and 
suffering which a person has undergone 
by reason of an accident. In truth, I think 
it would be very arguable to say that a 
person would be entitled to no damages for 
such things. What manly mind cares 
about pain and suffering that is past? But 
nevertheless the law recognises that as a 
topic upon which damages may be given.” 
10. The following observations of Lord Morris in his 
speech in H. West & Son Ltd. v. Shephard [H. West & 

Son Ltd. v. Shephard, 1964 AC 326: (1963) 2 WLR 
1359 (HL)], are very pertinent: (AC p. 346) 
“… Money may be awarded so that something 
tangible 
may 
be 
procured 
to 
replace 
something else of the like nature which has 
been destroyed or lost. But money cannot 
renew a physical frame that has been battered 
and shattered. All that Judges and courts can 
do is to award sums which must be regarded 
as giving reasonable compensation. In the 
process there must be the endeavour to 
secure some uniformity in the general method 
of approach. By common assent awards must 
be reasonable and must be assessed with 
moderation. Furthermore, it is eminently 
desirable that so far as possible comparable 
injuries 
should 
be 
compensated 
by 
comparable awards.” 
In the same case, Lord Devlin observed (at p. 357) 
that the proper approach to the problem was to adopt 
a test as to what contemporary society would deem 
to be a fair sum, such as would allow the wrongdoer 
to “hold up his head among his neighbours and say 
with their approval that he has done the fair thing?”, 
which should be kept in mind by the court in 
determining compensation in personal injury cases. 
11. Lord Denning while speaking for the Court of 
Appeal in Ward v. James [Ward v. James, (1966) 1 
QB 273: (1965) 2 WLR 455: (1965) 1 All ER 563 (CA)], laid down the following three basic principles to be 
followed in such like cases: (QB pp. 299-300) 
“First, assessibility: In cases of grave 
injury, where the body is wrecked or the 
brain destroyed, it is very difficult to 
assess a fair compensation in money, so 
difficult that the award must basically be 
a 
conventional 
figure, 
derived 
from 

experience or from awards in comparable 
cases. Secondly, uniformity: There should 
be some measure of uniformity in awards 
so that similar decisions are given in 
similar cases; otherwise there will be great 
dissatisfaction in the community, and 
much criticism of the administration of 
justice. 
Thirdly, predictability: 
Parties 
should be able to predict with some 
measure of accuracy the sum which is 
likely to be awarded in a particular case, 
for by this means cases can be settled 
peaceably and not brought to court, a 
thing very much to the public good.” 
(emphasis in original) 
12. The assessment of damages in personal injury 
cases raises great difficulties. It is not easy to convert 
the physical and mental loss into monetary terms. 
There has to be a measure of calculated guesswork 
and conjecture. An assessment, as best as can, in the 
circumstances, should be made. 
13.McGregor's Treatise on Damages, 14th Edition, 
Para 1157, referring to heads of damages in personal 
injury actions states: 
“The 
person 
physically 
injured 
may 
recover both for his pecuniary losses and 
his non-pecuniary losses. Of these the 
pecuniary losses themselves comprise two 
separate items viz. the loss of earnings and 
other gains which the plaintiff would have 
made had he not been injured and the 
medical and other expenses to which he is 
put as a result of the injury, and the courts 
have 
sub-divided 
the 
non-pecuniary 
losses into three categories viz. pain and 
suffering, loss of amenities of life and loss 
of expectation of life.” 

14. In Concord of India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Nirmala 
Devi [Concord of India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Nirmala 
Devi, (1979): 1979 SCC (Cri) 996: 1980 
ACJ 55], this Court held: (SCC p. 366, para 2) 
“2. … the determination of the quantum 
must be liberal, not niggardly since the 
law values life and limb in a free country 
in generous scales.” 
15. In R.D. Hattangadi v. Pest Control (India) (P) 
Ltd. [R.D. Hattangadi v. Pest Control (India) (P) Ltd., 
(1995): 1995 SCC (Cri) 250], dealing with 
the different heads of compensation in injury cases 
this Court held thus: (SCC p. 556, para 9) 
“9. Broadly speaking while fixing the 
amount of compensation payable to a 
victim of an accident, the damages have to 
be assessed separately as pecuniary 
damages and special damages. Pecuniary 
damages are those which the victim has 
actually incurred and which are capable of 
being calculated in terms of money; 
whereas 
non-pecuniary 
damages 
are 
those which are incapable of being 
assessed by arithmetical calculations. In 
order 
to 
appreciate 
two 
concepts 
pecuniary damages may include expenses 
incurred by the claimant: (i) medical 
attendance; (ii) loss of earning of profit up 
to the date of trial; (iii) other material loss. 
So far as non-pecuniary damages are 
concerned, they may include: (i) damages 
for mental and physical shock, pain and 
suffering, already suffered or likely to be 
suffered in the future; (ii) damages to 
compensate for the loss of amenities of life 
which may include a variety of matters i.e. on account of injury the claimant may not 
be able to walk, run or sit; (iii) damages for 

loss of expectation of life i.e. on account of 
injury the normal longevity of the person 
concerned 
is 
shortened; 

inconvenience, 
hardship, 
discomfort, 
disappointment, frustration and mental 
stress in life.” 
16. In Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar [Raj Kumar v. Ajay 
Kumar, (2011): (2011) 1 SCC (Civ) 164: 
(2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 1161], this Court laid down the 
heads under which compensation is to be awarded 
for personal injuries: (SCC p. 348, para 6) 
“6. The heads under which compensation 
is awarded in personal injury cases are the 
following: 
Pecuniary damages (Special damages) 

Expenses 
relating 
to 
treatment, 
hospitalisation, 
medicines, 
transportation, 
nourishing 
food, 
and 
miscellaneous expenditure. 
(ii) Loss of earnings (and other gains) 
which the injured would have made had 
he not been injured, comprising: 
(a) Loss of earning during the period of 
treatment; 
(b) Loss of future earnings on account of 
permanent disability. 
(iii) Future medical expenses. 
Non-pecuniary 
damages 
(General 
damages) 
(iv) Damages for pain, suffering and 
trauma as a consequence of the injuries. 
(v) Loss of amenities (and/or loss of 
prospects of marriage). 
(vi) Loss of expectation of life (shortening 
of normal longevity). 

In 
routine 
personal 
injury 
cases, 
compensation will be awarded only under 
heads (i), (ii)(a) and (iv). It is only in serious 
cases of injury, where there is specific 
medical 
evidence 
corroborating 
the 
evidence 
of 
the 
claimant, 
that 
compensation will be granted under any of 
the heads (ii)(b), (iii), (v) and (vi) relating to 
loss of future earnings on account of 
permanent 
disability, 
future 
medical 
expenses, loss of amenities (and/or loss of 
prospects 
of 
marriage) 
and 
loss 
of 
expectation of life.” 
17. In K. Suresh v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd. [K. 
Suresh v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd., (2012): (2013) 2 SCC (Civ) 279: (2013) 4 SCC (Cri) 
638], this Court held as follows: (SCC p. 276, para 
2) 
“2. 
… 
There 
cannot 
be 
actual 
compensation for anguish of the heart or 
for 
mental 
tribulations. 
The 
quintessentiality lies in the pragmatic 
computation of the loss sustained which 
has to be in the realm of realistic 
approximation. Therefore, Section 168 of 
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for brevity 
“the Act”) stipulates that there should be 
grant of “just compensation”. Thus, it 
becomes a challenge for a court of law to 
determine “just compensation” which is 
neither a bonanza nor a windfall, and 
simultaneously, 
should 
not 
be 
a 
pittance.”” 
 
19. This Court, in the said case, thereafter, formulated various 
heads such as loss of earnings, expenses related to treatment, 

attendant charges, pain and suffering and loss of amenities, loss 
of marriage prospects, future medical treatment. Ultimately, this 
Court enhanced the compensation awarded by the High Court 
from Rs. 25,78,501/- to Rs.62,27,000/-. 
20. In another case titled Master Ayush (supra), this Court was 
called upon to adjudicate on an appeal filed by a 5-year-old 
victim of a road accident seeking enhancement of compensation 
awarded by the Tribunal. 
21. In the said case, Ayush was left as a paraplegic patient as 
a result of the accident. He was examined by two doctors. He was 
not able to move both his legs and had complete sensory loss in 
the legs, urinary incontinence, bowel constipation and bed sore. 
Ayush was aged about 5 years on the date of the accident, hence, 
he lost his childhood and became dependant on other(s) for his 
routine work. 
22. This Court, in the said case, relying on the decision of Kajal 
(supra) enhanced the compensation under the head of loss of 
future earnings due to permanent disability for life, medical 
expenses, future medical expenses, pain and suffering and loss 

of amenities, loss of marriage prospects, attendant charges and 
conveyance charges. This Court enhanced the compensation 
awarded to the appellant therein from Rs.13,46,805/- to 
Rs.49,93,000/-. 
23. Recently, this Court in the case of K.S. Muralidhar (supra) 
on an elaborate consideration of certain authorities (scholarly as 
also judicial) on the aspect of “pain and suffering” set out the 
contours. It would be relevant to refer to the following paragraphs 
of the said case: 
“14. In respect of ‘pain and suffering’ in cases where 
disability suffered is at 100%, we may notice a few 
decisions of this Court:— 
14.1 In R.D Hattangadi v. Pest Control (India) (P) Ltd. 
It was observed: 
“17. The claim under Sl. No. 16 for ‘pain 
and suffering’ and for loss of amenities of 
life under Sl. No. 17, are claims for non-
pecuniary loss. The appellant has claimed 
lump sum amount of Rs. 3,00,000 each 
under the two heads. The High Court has 
allowed Rs. 1,00,000 against the claims of 
Rs. 6,00,000. When compensation is to be 
awarded for ‘pain and suffering’ and loss 
of 
amenity 
of 
life, 
the 
special 
circumstances of the claimant have to be 
taken into account including his age, the 
unusual deprivation he has suffered, the 
effect thereof on his future life. The 
amount 
of 
compensation 
for 
non-

pecuniary loss is not easy to determine but 
the award must reflect that different 
circumstances have been taken into 
consideration. According to us, as the 
appellant was an advocate having good 
practice in different courts and as because 
of the accident he has been crippled and 
can move only on wheelchair, the High 
Court should have allowed an amount of 
Rs. 1,50,000 in respect of claim for ‘pain 
and suffering’ and Rs. 1,50,000 in respect 
of loss of amenities of life. We direct 
payment of Rs. 3,00,000 (Rupees three 
lakhs only) against the claim of Rs. 
6,00,000 under the heads “‘pain and 
suffering’” and “Loss of amenities of life”. 
(Emphasis Supplied) 
14.2 This Judgment was recently referred to by this 
Court in Sidram v. United India Insurance Company 
Ltd. reference 
was 
also 
made 
to Karnataka 
SRTC v. Mahadeva 
Shetty (irrespective 
of 
the 
percentage of disability incurred, the observations 
are instructive), wherein it was observed: 
“18. A person not only suffers injuries on 
account of accident but also suffers in 
mind and body on account of the accident 
through out his life and a feeling is 
developed that his no more a normal man 
and cannot enjoy the amenities of life as 
another normal person can. While fixing 
compensation for pain and suffering as 
also for loss of amenities, features like his 
age, 
marital 
status 
and 
unusual 
deprivation he has undertaken in his life 
have to be reckoned.” 
14.3 In Kajal v. Jagdish Chand considering the facts 
of the case, i.e., 100% disability, child being 

bedridden for life, her mental age being that of a nine-
month-old for life - a vegetative existence, held that 
“even after taking a conservative view of the matter 
an amount payable for the ‘pain and suffering’ of this 
child should be at least Rs. 15,00,000/-.” 
14.4 In Ayush v. Reliance General Insurance relying 
on Kajal (supra) the amount awarded in ‘pain and 
suffering’ was enhanced to Rs. 10,00,000. The child 
who had suffered the accident was five years old and 
the Court noted in paragraph 2 that: 
“As per the discharge certificate, the 
appellant is not able to move both his legs 
and had complete sensory loss in the legs, 
urinary incontinence, bowel constipation 
and bed sores. The appellant was aged 
about 5 years as on the date of the 
accident, hence has lost his childhood and 
is dependent on others for his routine 
work.” 
14.5 
In Lalan (supra) 
cited 
by 
the 
claimant-
appellant, the Tribunal awarded Rs. 30,000/- which 
was enhanced to Rs. 40,000/- by the High Court. 
Considering the fact that the appellant therein has 
suffered 
extensive 
brain 
injury 
awarded 
compensation under ‘pain and suffering’ to the tune 
of Rs. 3,00,000/-.” 
 
24. Ultimately, this Court in the said case, in light of the 
authorities cited, the injuries suffered, the pain and suffering 
caused, and the lifelong nature of the disability afflicted upon the 
appellant therein (a workman who sustained multiple brain 
injuries which resulted in 90% permanent disability) enhanced the 

compensation awarded under the head of pain and suffering to 
Rs. 15,00,000/-. 
25. In the present case, therefore, we will have to consider the 
case of the appellant under various heads. a) Loss of income/earning capacity 
26. In this respect, it will be appropriate to refer to the evidence 
of Dr. Monica Juneja (PW-3). The Doctor proved the disability 
certificate. As per the said certificate, the appellant has suffered 
75% disability. The appellant is suffering from moderate mental 
retardation. It was stated by the Doctor that the appellant would 
only be able to learn skills up-to the level of a child of 2nd 
Standard/Class. The appellant also has severe apathy and no 
control over passage of her urine. 
27. Even though Dr. Monica Juneja (PW-3) on assessment of 
the appellant opined that the disability suffered by the appellant 
is 75%, however, on a complete overview of the situation, it is 
clear that for all practical purposes, the disability of the appellant 
should be treated to be 100%. 

28. The learned Tribunal on appreciation of the medical 
evidence came to a conclusion that, since the appellant was only 
seven years at the time of the accident, it would be appropriate 
to take notional income as per the MV Act to be Rs. 15,000/- per 
annum. The learned Tribunal applied a multiplier of 15 which 
was taken up-to the age of fifteen years. Therefore, an amount of 
15,000/- x 15 x 75/100 = Rs. 1,68,750/- was awarded by the 
learned Tribunal. The High Court did not enhance the amount 
awarded under this head. 
29. This Court in the case of Kajal (supra) has held that taking 
notional income is not the correct approach. Instead, the 
minimum wages payable to a skilled workman in the concerned 
State has to be taken into consideration because, that would be 
the minimum amount which she would have earned on becoming 
a major. In this case, the minimum wage payable to a skilled 
workman in the State of Delhi at the time of the accident, i.e., 2nd 
June 2009, was Rs. 4,358/- per month. 

30. Further, a Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of 
National Insurance Company Limited v. Pranay Sethi and 
Others4 in paragraph 59 recorded its conclusion as follows: 
“59. In view of the aforesaid analysis, we proceed to 
record our conclusions: 
59.1. The 
two-Judge 
Bench 
in Santosh 
Devi [Santosh Devi v. National Insurance Co. Ltd., 
(2012): (2012) 3 SCC (Civ) 726: (2012) 3 
SCC (Cri) 160: (2012) 2 SCC (L&S) 167] should have 
been well advised to refer the matter to a larger 
Bench as it was taking a different view than what has 
been stated in Sarla Verma [Sarla Verma v. DTC, 
(2009): (2009) 2 SCC (Civ) 770: (2009) 2 
SCC (Cri) 1002], a judgment by a coordinate Bench. 
It is because a coordinate Bench of the same strength 
cannot take a contrary view than what has been held 
by another coordinate Bench. 
59.2. As Rajesh [Rajesh v. Rajbir Singh, (2013): (2013) 4 SCC (Civ) 179: (2013) 3 SCC (Cri) 
817: (2014) 1 SCC (L&S) 149] has not taken note of 
the 
decision 
in Reshma 
Kumari [Reshma 
Kumari v. Madan Mohan, (2013): (2013) 4 
SCC (Civ) 191: (2013) 3 SCC (Cri) 826], which was 
delivered at earlier point of time, the decision 
in Rajesh [Rajesh v. Rajbir Singh, (2013): 
(2013) 4 SCC (Civ) 179: (2013) 3 SCC (Cri) 817: 
(2014) 1 SCC (L&S) 149] is not a binding precedent. 
59.3. While determining the income, an addition of 
50% of actual salary to the income of the deceased 
towards future prospects, where the deceased had a 
permanent job and was below the age of 40 years, 
should be made. The addition should be 30%, if the 
age of the deceased was between 40 to 50 years. In 
case the deceased was between the age of 50 to 60 
 
4 (2017): 2017 INSC 1068 

years, the addition should be 15%. Actual salary 
should be read as actual salary less tax. 
59.4. In case the deceased was self-employed or 
on a fixed salary, an addition of 40% of the 
established income should be the warrant where 
the deceased was below the age of 40 years. An 
addition of 25% where the deceased was between 
the age of 40 to 50 years and 10% where the 
deceased was between the age of 50 to 60 years 
should be regarded as the necessary method of 
computation. The established income means the 
income minus the tax component. 
59.5. For determination of the multiplicand, the 
deduction for personal and living expenses, the 
tribunals and the courts shall be guided by paras 
30 to 32 of Sarla Verma [Sarla Verma v. DTC, 
(2009): (2009) 2 SCC (Civ) 770: (2009) 
2 SCC (Cri) 1002] which we have reproduced 
hereinbefore. 
59.6. The selection of multiplier shall be as 
indicated in the Table in Sarla Verma [Sarla 
Verma v. DTC, (2009): (2009) 2 SCC 
(Civ) 770: (2009) 2 SCC (Cri) 1002] read with para 
42 of that judgment. 
59.7. The age of the deceased should be the basis 
for applying the multiplier. 
59.8. Reasonable figures on conventional heads, 
namely, loss of estate, loss of consortium and funeral 
expenses should be Rs 15,000, Rs 40,000 and Rs 
15,000 respectively. The aforesaid amounts should 
be enhanced at the rate of 10% in every three years.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
31. Accordingly, to arrive at the compensation to be awarded 
under the head of loss of income and earnings due to disability, 

40% should be added for future prospects and a multiplier of 18 
would have to be applied in view of the age of the appellant. 
32. The same approach was adopted by this Court in the cases 
of Kajal (supra) and Master Ayush (supra). 
33. Therefore, in the present case, the compensation under this 
head would be Rs. [4,358 + (40% of 4,358)] x 12 x 18 = 
Rs.13,17,859/- and rounded it off to Rs. 13,18,000/-. b) Pain and Suffering 
34. As has been referred to hereinabove, this Court recently in 
the case of K.S. Muralidhar (supra) relying inter-alia upon the 
previous decisions of this Court in the cases of Kajal (supra) and 
Master Ayush (supra) awarded a sum of Rs. 15,00,000/- under 
the head of pain and suffering to the appellant therein. 
35. In this respect, it would be appropriate to refer to 
paragraphs 26 and 27 of the judgment of this Court in the case 
of Kajal (supra), which read thus: 
“Pain, suffering and loss of amenities 
26. Coming to the non-pecuniary damages under the 
head of pain, suffering, loss of amenities, the High 
Court has awarded this girl only Rs 3,00,000. 

In Mallikarjun v. National 
Insurance 
Co. 
Ltd. [Mallikarjun v. National 
Insurance 
Co. 
Ltd., 
(2014): (2015) 1 SCC (Civ) 335: (2015) 
1 SCC (Cri) 372: (2013) 10 Scale 668], this Court 
while dealing with the issue of award under this head 
held that it should be at least Rs 6,00,000, if the 
disability is more than 90%. As far as the present 
case is concerned, in addition to the 100% physical 
disability, the young girl is suffering from severe 
incontinence, she is suffering from severe hysteria 
and above all she is left with a brain of a nine-month-
old child. This is a case where departure has to be 
made from the normal rule and the pain and 
suffering suffered by this child is such that no 
amount of compensation can compensate. 
27. One factor which must be kept in mind while 
assessing the compensation in a case like the 
present one is that the claim can be awarded only 
once. The claimant cannot come back to court for 
enhancement of award at a later stage praying 
that something extra has been spent. Therefore, 
the courts or the Tribunals assessing the 
compensation in a case of 100% disability, 
especially where there is mental disability also, 
should take a liberal view of the matter when 
awarding the compensation. While awarding this 
amount, we are not only taking the physical disability 
but also the mental disability and various other 
factors. This child will remain bedridden for life. Her 
mental age will be that of a nine-month-old child. 
Effectively, while her body grows, she will remain a 
small baby. We are dealing with a girl who will 
physically become a woman but will mentally remain 
a 9-month-old child. This girl will miss out playing 
with her friends. She cannot communicate; she 

cannot enjoy the pleasures of life; she cannot even be 
amused by watching cartoons or films; she will miss 
out the fun of childhood, the excitement of youth; the 
pleasures of a marital life; she cannot have children 
who she can love, let alone grandchildren. She will 
have no pleasure. Her's is a vegetable existence. 
Therefore, we feel in the peculiar facts and 
circumstances of the case even after taking a very 
conservative view of the matter an amount payable 
for the pain and suffering of this child should be at 
least Rs 15,00,000.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
36. This Court has observed that it has to be borne in mind that 
while assessing compensation in a case like the present one, the 
claim can be awarded only once. It was observed that the 
claimant cannot come back to the court for enhancement at a 
later stage praying that something extra has been spent. This 
Court further observed that courts or tribunals assessing 
compensation in a case of 100% disability, especially where there 
is mental disability also, should take a liberal view of the mater 
when awarding compensation. It was observed that while 
awarding this amount, courts are not only taking into account 
physical disability but also mental disability and various other 
factors. 

37. Similarly, in the case of Master Ayush (supra), this Court 
in paragraph 14 observed as under: 
“14. The determination of damages in personal 
injury cases is not easy. The mental and physical 
loss cannot be computed in terms of money but 
there is no other way to compensate the victim 
except 
by 
payment 
of 
just 
compensation. 
Therefore, we find that in view of the physical 
condition, the appellant is entitled to one attendant 
for the rest of his life though he may be able to walk 
with the help of assistant device. The device also 
requires to be replaced every 5 years. Therefore, it is 
reasonable to award cost of 2 devices i.e. Rs 10 lakhs. 
The appellant has not only lost his childhood but also 
adult life. Therefore, loss of marriage prospects would 
also be required to be awarded. The learned Tribunal 
has rejected the claim of taxi expenses for the reason 
that the taxi driver has not been produced. It is 
impossible to produce the numerous taxi drivers. 
Still further, the Tribunal should have realised the 
condition of the child who had complete sensory loss 
in the legs. Therefore, if the parents of the child have 
taken him in a taxi, probably that was the only option 
available to them. Accordingly, we award a sum of Rs 
2 lakhs as conveyance charges.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
38. In the present case also, the appellant will remain 
dependant on another person for the rest of her life. Even though 
the physical age will increase, but her mental age will be that of 
a child studying in the 2nd Standard/Class. Effectively, while her 
body grows, she will remain a small baby. 

39. Similar to the case of Kajal (supra), the appellant in the 
present case will also miss out on partaking in activities which 
she would have normally done, if she had not met with this 
unfortunate accident. 
40. The High Court, vide impugned judgment and order, only 
enhanced the compensation under the head of pain and suffering 
from Rs. 50,000/- as awarded by the learned Tribunal to 
Rs.1,00,000/-. The same is not commensurate to the impact the 
unfortunate accident had and will have on the appellant as well 
as her family members for the rest of their lives. In our view, the 
compensation should be enhanced further. Therefore, in the 
peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, we are of the 
considered view that it would be appropriate to award 
compensation to the tune of Rs. 15,00,000/- to the present 
appellant under the head of pain and suffering. c) 
Loss of marriage prospects 
41. In this respect, we reiterate the evidence given by the Dr. 
Monica Juneja (PW-3) vide the disability certificate wherein she 
has opined that the mental status of the appellant would be the 

same as that of a child studying in the 2nd Standard/Class. 
Further, it was stated that the appellant would also have severe 
apathy and therefore, maintaining/forming marital/familial 
bonds with the aforementioned conditions for the appellant is 
very difficult. 
42. The appellant, therefore, has not only lost her childhood but 
also her adult life. Marriage/companionship is an integral part 
of the natural life of a human being. Although, in the present 
case the appellant is capable of reproduction, it is near 
impossible for her to rear children and enjoy the simple 
pleasures of marital life and companionship. However, the 
learned Tribunal in the present case did not award any 
compensation to the appellant under this head and the High 
Court, in appeal, without appreciating the impact of the non-
pecuniary loss suffered by the appellant only awarded 
compensation of Rs. 1,00,000/- for the loss of marriage 
prospects. 
43. We are, therefore, of the opinion that this a fit case where 
the compensation awarded under the head of loss marriage 

prospects by the High Court is inadequate and the same must 
be enhanced to Rs. 5,00,000/-. d) 
Attendant Charges 
44. In the present case, the learned Tribunal recorded the 
evidence of the appellant’s mother (PW-2). She stated that they 
had engaged a maid servant to do the household work whom they 
were paying Rs. 2,500/- per month for a period of 6 months. 
Considering the same, the learned Tribunal awarded Rs. 2,500 x 
6 = Rs. 15,000/- under the head of attendant charges. 
45. In appeal, the High Court, in paragraph 3 of the impugned 
judgment and order, observed that owing to the condition to 
which the appellant has been reduced, she would require the 
services of an attendant, though part-time. Accordingly, the High 
Court adopted the minimum wages of an unskilled worker in the 
State of Delhi at the time of the accident being Rs. 3,934/-, for a 
part time attendant, and applied the multiplier of 18. Considering 
the same, the High Court computed attendant charges to be 
awarded as Rs. (3,934/- ÷ 2) x 12 x 18 = Rs. 4,24,872/- and 
rounded it off to Rs. 4,25,000/-. 

46. We find that, the approach of the High Court on 
appreciation of the evidence that the appellant would only be 
requiring a part time attendant is erroneous. On the contrary, 
we are of the opinion that the appellant, would be dependent on 
an attendant throughout her life and on a full-time basis. 
Considering her medical situation, the attendant would have to 
be skilled and not unskilled. The appellant would be requiring 
special care and attention which can only be provided by a skilled 
attendant. It was, therefore, incorrect on the part of the High 
Court to proceed on the basis that the appellant could be taken 
care of by an unskilled attendant and that too on a part-time 
basis. 
47. In this respect, it will be relevant to refer to paragraphs 22, 
23 and 24 of Kajal (supra), which read thus: 
“Attendant charges 
22. The attendant charges have been awarded by the 
High Court s 2500 per month for 44 years, which 
works out to Rs 13,20,000. Unfortunately, this 
system is not a proper system. Multiplier system is 
used to balance out various factors. When 
compensation is awarded in lump sum, various 
factors are taken into consideration. When 
compensation is paid in lump sum, this Court has 
always followed the multiplier system. The 

multiplier system should be followed not only for 
determining the compensation on account of loss 
of income but also for determining the attendant 
charges, etc. This system was recognised by this 
Court in Gobald Motor Service Ltd. v. R.M.K. 
Veluswami [Gobald Motor Service Ltd. v. R.M.K. 
Veluswami, AIR 1962 SC 1]. The multiplier 
system factors in the inflation rate, the rate of 
interest payable on the lump sum award, the 
longevity of the claimant, and also other issues 
such as the uncertainties of life. Out of all the 
various alternative methods, the multiplier 
method has been recognised as the most realistic 
and reasonable method. It ensures better justice 
between the parties and thus results in award of 
“just compensation” within the meaning of the 
Act. 
23. It would be apposite at this stage to refer to the 
observation 
of 
Lord 
Reid 
in Taylor v. O'Connor [Taylor v. O'Connor, 1971 AC 
115: (1970) 2 WLR 472 (HL)]: (AC p. 128) 
“Damages to make good the loss of 
dependency over a period of years must be 
awarded as a lump sum and that sum is 
generally 
calculated 
by 
applying 
a 
multiplier to the amount of one year's 
dependency. That is a perfectly good 
method in the ordinary case but it 
conceals the fact that there are two quite 
separate matters involved — the present 
value of the series of future payments, and 
the discounting of that present value to 
allow for the fact that for one reason or 
another the person receiving the damages 
might never have enjoyed the whole of the 
benefit of the dependency. It is quite 
unnecessary in the ordinary case to deal 
with these matters separately. Judges and 
counsel have a wealth of experience which 

is an adequate guide to the selection of the 
multiplier and any expert evidence is 
rightly discouraged. But in a case where 
the facts are special I think that these 
matters must have separate consideration 
if even rough justice is to be done and 
expert evidence may be valuable or even 
almost essential. The special factor in the 
present case is the incidence of income tax 
and, it may be, surtax.” 
24. This Court has reaffirmed the multiplier method 
in 
various 
cases 
like MCD v. Subhagwanti [MCD v. Subhagwanti, AIR 
1966 SC 1750: 1966 ACJ 57], U.P. SRTC v. Trilok 
Chandra [U.P. SRTC v. Trilok Chandra, (1996) ], Sandeep Khanuja v. Atul Dande [Sandeep 
Khanuja v. Atul Dande, (2017): (2017) 2 
SCC (Civ) 276: (2017) 2 SCC (Cri) 178]. This Court 
has also recognised that Schedule II of the Act can be 
used as a guide for the multiplier to be applied in 
each case. Keeping the claimant's age in mind, the 
multiplier in this case should be 18 as opposed to 44 
taken by the High Court.” 
[emphasis supplied] 
 
48. Consistent with the approach adopted by this Court in the 
cases of Kajal (supra) and Master Ayush (supra), we deem it 
appropriate to enhance the compensation to be awarded under 
this head. The minimum wages paid to a skilled worker on a full-
time basis in the State of Delhi at the time of the accident was 
Rs. 4,358/-. Keeping the appellant’s age in mind, the multiplier 
in the present case should be 18. Accordingly, the compensation 

to be awarded to the appellant under this head shall be enhanced 
to Rs. 4,358 x 12 x 18 = Rs. 9,41,328/- and rounded it off to 
Rs.9,42,000/-. e) 
Future Medical Treatment 
49. As has been referred to hereinabove, the appellant would 
have to be under the supervision of a full-time skilled attendant. 
Further, Dr. Monica Juneja (PW-3) has opined that the appellant 
suffers from severe apathy and has no control over the passage 
of her urine. Therefore, it is not difficult to see that the appellant 
would be requiring medical assistance in the form of medicines, 
diapers, etc., so as to live a relatively comfortable life. 
50. It was also opined by Dr. Monica Juneja (PW-3) that in all 
cases of mental retardation there is an increased risk of 
developing convulsions. The Doctor, however, in her testimony 
before the learned Tribunal had stated that at that time, the 
appellant was not suffering from the same yet. The possibility of 
the same, however, cannot be ruled out. 
51. Faced with such a situation, the family of the appellant 
must be financially equipped to deal with the medical conditions, 

current and potential. It would, therefore, be appropriate to 
enhance the compensation to be awarded under this head to 
Rs.5,00,000/-. 
52. For ease of understanding and compliance, the revised 
compensation awarded to the appellant is as follows: 
S. No. 
Head 
Amount (In ₹) 
1. 
Medicines and Medical Treatment 
32,000/- 
2. 
Loss of Earning Capacity due to 
Disability 
13,18,000/- 
3. 
Pain and Suffering 
15,00,000/- 
4. 
Future Treatment 
5,00,000/- 
5. 
Attendant Charges 
9,42,000/- 
6. 
Loss of Amenities of Life 
1,00,000/- 
7. 
Loss of Future Prospect 
1,00,000/- 
8. 
Special Education Expenditure 
75,000/- 
9. 
Conveyance and Special Diet 
20,000/- 
10. 
Loss of Marriage Prospects 
5,00,000/- 
 
Total 
50,87,000/- 
 
53. The High Court, vide impugned judgment and order, has 
enhanced the rate of interest awarded by the trial court to 9% 
per annum from the date of the filing of the claim petition till the 
actual realisation. We do not find any error with the same and 
maintain the rate of interest. 

54. We direct the Insurance Company (Respondent No. 2) to 
disburse the compensation awarded to the appellant as above. 
Obviously, the Insurance Company shall be entitled to adjust the 
amount already paid, if any. 
55. Needless to state, as the learned Tribunal has held the 
driver-cum-owner (Respondent No.1) and the insurance company 
(Respondent No. 2) to be jointly and severally liable to make the 
payment of compensation to the appellant, the inter-se liability 
of the two respondents herein shall be decided in accordance 
with law. However, the Insurance Company is directed to make 
good the compensation awarded to the appellant as per this 
order so that the appellant and her family members are not put 
to any further agony. 
56. Lastly, we find it appropriate to refer to the order of this 
Court in the case of General Manager, Kerala State Road 
Transport Corporation, Trivandrum v. Susamma Thomas 
(Mrs.) and Others5, wherein it has been reiterated that the 
claims tribunal should, in the case of minors, invariably order 
 
5 (1994) 

the amount of compensation awarded to the minor be invested 
in long term Fixed Deposits at least till the date of the minor 
attaining majority. However, the expenses incurred by guardian 
or next friend may be allowed to be withdrawn. 
57. We are cognizant of the fact that the appellant has attained 
majority, however, since the appellant was a minor at the time of 
the accident, we direct that at present an amount of 
Rs.10,00,000/- should be disbursed to the father of the 
appellant as her guardian. If, however, an amount more than Rs. 
10,00,000/- has already been disbursed, the said amount shall 
not be adjusted. We further direct that the rest of the amount be 
invested in one or more Fixed Deposits Receipts so as to attract 
the maximum rate of interest. The interest amount shall be 
payable to the guardian of the appellant every month. Further, it 
shall be open to the guardian to seek orders from the Tribunal 
for withdrawal of the amount on the basis of medical opinion, if 
any major medical expenses are required to be incurred. 
58. In the result, the impugned judgment and order dated 7th 
November 2017 passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi 

in MAC. APP. 1107/2011 is quashed and set aside. The appeal 
stands allowed in the above terms. Needless to state, that the 
Insurance Company (Respondent No. 2) shall comply with this 
order within a period of eight weeks from today. 
59. We place on record our appreciation for the learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the parties for their valuable assistance. 
60. Pending application(s), if any, are disposed of.