IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

(. 34174 OF 2023 

DUSHYANT JANBANDHU...APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
 
M/S HYUNDAI AUTOEVER INDIA PVT. LTD. 
 
 JUDGMENT 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
 
1. 
Delay condoned. Leave Granted. 
2. 
Questioning the appointment of an arbitrator by the High Court 
of Madras under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 19961, by the order impugned before us2, the appellant has 
filed this appeal on the ground that the dispute with the 
respondent-employer, M/S Hyundai AutoEver India Pvt. Ltd. is 
governed by statute under the Payment of Wages Act, 19363 and 
 
1 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’. 
2 Order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras in Arb O.P. No. 31 of 2022 dated 
20.12.2022. 
3 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘PW Act’. the Industrial Disputes Act, 19474. In the normal course and in 
recognition of judicial restraint, as incorporated in Section 5 of 
the Act, we would have asked the appellant to raise these 
objections before the Arbitral Tribunal itself. However, as the 
following narration of facts speaks for itself, we have found that 
the application under Section 11 of the Act is a clear abuse of the 
remedial process. We have therefore allowed the appeal and 
dismissed the Section 11(6) petition with cost. 
3. 
The appellant was appointed as an Assistant Manager on 
15.03.2019. Within a year, due to Covid-19 pandemic, the 
appellant was asked to work from home from 22.03.2020 to 
06.01.2021. However, the respondent called upon the appellant 
to resume physical attendance of office from August 2020. As the 
appellant refused to comply, a show cause notice was issued on 
04.09.2020, followed by an inquiry, report of which is in the 
following terms; 
“Conclusion 
• There has been prima facie evidence against Dushyant for his 
purposeful absenteeism to work and its impact on Company’s 
business and Customer relations. 
• Possibility of too due to his absenteeism. A detailed Charge 
sheet can be issued to Mr. Dushyant and refer to Disciplinary 
committee to take final decision. 
• Till the final decision, he should attend office regularly as per 
the roster. 
• If he is having access from remote, those days should be 
recorded separately by his HOS. 
 
4 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘ID Act’. 

• Based on the final decision of the disciplinary committee 
further action can be taken.” 
 
4. 
The inquiry led to issuance of a charge memo on 25.11.2020 for 
violating certain contractual clauses and these related to non-
cooperation and absenteeism. It is necessary to mention here 
itself that there is no reference to Clause 195 of the appointment 
conditions relating to violation of the non-disclosure obligation. 
Ultimately, an order of termination was passed on 21.01.2021, 
the relevant portion of the said order of termination is important 
for our consideration and it is extracted hereinbelow for ready 
reference. 
“Please refer our Show Cause Notices dated 4th Sep 2020, 
Emails dated (05th Aug, 03rd Sep, 07 Sep 2020 & 07 Jan 2021) 
and the charge sheet dated (26 Nov 2020). You have continued 
to remain absent at work premises without authorisation and 
also you did not present yourself for our enquiry meetings 
called for as per our disciplinary Policy. Considering all the 
above, as per your agreed employment terms Clause 11, 12(V), 
17, 24 & 25, your employment has been terminated with 
effective from the closing hours of 06 Jan 2021. […]” 
 
5. 
It is evident from the above that there is no allegation whatsoever 
that the appellant has violated clause 19 of the appointment order 
leading to the order of termination. 
6. 
During the pendency of disciplinary action, as the appellant was 
not paid his salary, he issued a legal notice for payment of wages 
 
5 “You will not give out to any one, by word of mouth or otherwise, particulars of HAEI’s business or 
an administrative or organizational matter of a confidential nature which may be your privilege to 
know by virtue of you being HAEI’’s employee.” 

on 29.05.2021 and filed a petition under Section 15(2) of the PW 
Act before the authority under the PW Act. As a counterblast, the 
respondent issued a notice alleging that the disputes must be 
settled through arbitration and proceeded to unilaterally appoint 
an arbitrator. We may mention here itself that even in the said 
reply notice dated 22.06.2021 issued by the respondent, there is 
no specific allegation of violation of the non-disclosure obligations 
by the appellant herein. The claim for arbitration naturally related 
to stoppage of payment of wages, which according to the appellant 
was within the jurisdiction of the Authority under the PW Act as 
per its statutory provisions. 
7. 
Before we deal with the facts relating to the proceedings before 
the Authority under the PW Act, it is necessary to mention that 
as the unilaterally appointed arbitrator commenced the arbitral 
proceedings, the appellant filed an application under Section 16 
of the Act calling upon the arbitrator to rule on his competence. 
It is interesting to note that the arbitrator himself passed an order 
on 01.05.2022 taking into account the decision of this Court in 
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd.6 and 
closing the arbitral proceedings. The relevant portion is 
reproduced here as follows: 
 
6 (2020). 

“[…] In the present case, as detailed herein above, the 
appointment of the undersigned as the Arbitrator and the 
Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal thereof are without the 
consent or the participation of the Respondent. Once the 
jurisdiction of this Arbitral Tribunal has been put into question 
on that ground, this Tribunal ceases to have the power or 
authority to proceed with the matter in any manner. 
I therefore have no hesitation in holding that the constitution 
of this Arbitral Tribunal is not in accordance with or in 
consonance with the provisions of Section 11 of the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act as amended, particularly in the light of 
the ratio set out by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Perkins 
Eastman Architects DPC & another V/s HSCC (India) Ltd. 
In the light of the same, the arbitral proceedings between the 
parties above-named before this Tribunal is closed forthwith 
with liberty being granted to both the parties to work out their 
respective remedies in accordance with law.” 
 
8. 
Returning to the proceedings commenced before the Authority, we 
note that the respondent moved an application under Section 8 of 
the Act seeking reference of the dispute involved in the petition 
under Section 15(2) of the PW Act to arbitration. The Authority 
under PW Act dismissed the said application on 03.03.2022 
holding that; “In view of Section 23 of the Payment of Wages Act, 
arbitration agreement cannot stand in the way of the claimant in 
respect of illegally deducted wages under Payment of Wages Act.” 
9. 
There is yet another development. Questioning the order of 
termination dated 21.01.2021, the appellant approached the 
Industrial Tribunal by filing a petition under Section 2(A) of the 
ID Act and the same is pending adjudication and determination 
by the Industrial Tribunal. 

10. It is in the above referred background that the respondent 
approached the High Court by filing a petition under Section 11(6) 
of the Act in August 2022 seeking appointment of an arbitrator. 
The disputes between the appellant and the respondent, as 
indicated in the arbitration petition relate to non-payment of 
wages and also the legality and validity of termination order dated 
21.01.2021. Over and above these disputes, for the first time the 
respondent sought to give a new angle to the dispute by stating 
that the appellant has also violated the non-disclosure obligations 
under clause 19 of the appointment order. 
11. In the order impugned before us, the High Court has proceeded 
to note an arbitration agreement and therefore, appointed an 
advocate as the arbitrator. 
12. The issue relating to violation of the non-disclosure obligation 
under clause 19 is only an afterthought. This was evidently not 
the ground when the respondent issued the show cause notice on 
04.09.2020, nor was it a part of the inquiry report, the relevant 
portion of which we have extracted in the para 3 above. This is 
also not a part of the charge memo dated 25.11.2020. 
13. Crucially, the termination was not based on any such allegation 
as is evident from the termination order dated 21.01.2021 that we 
have extracted earlier. Under these circumstances, we can 

conclude that there is no dispute about violation of non-
disclosure obligations and Section 11(6) petition, to this extent is 
non-existent. 
14. Insofar as other disputes are concerned, they relate to non-
payment of wages and the legality and validity of the order of 
termination dated 21.01.2021. The appellant approached the 
Authority under the PW Act much before the order of termination 
and the said authority would exercise jurisdiction under Section 
15(2) of the PW Act to the exclusion of civil courts and these 
disputes are non-arbitrable. Section 22 of the PW Act reads as 
under: 
“22. Bar of Suits.—No Court shall entertain any suit for the 
recovery of wages or of any deduction from wages in so far as 
the sum so claimed— 
(a) forms the subject of an application under section 15 which 
has been presented by the plaintiff and which is pending 
before the authority appointed under that section or of an 
appeal under section 17; or 
(b) has formed the subject of a direction under section 15 in 
favour of the plaintiff; or 
(c) has been adjudged, in any proceeding under section 15, not 
to be owed to the plaintiff; or 
(d) could have been recovered by an application under section 
15.” 
 
15. Equally, legality of the order of termination dated 21.01.2021 is 
within the jurisdiction of Industrial Tribunal under Section 2(A) 
of the ID Act and it is important to mention that the jurisdiction 
of the Industrial Court is also to the exclusion of the civil courts 
and is not arbitrable. It is also important to note that remedies 

under these statutes were invoked much prior to the filing of 
petition under Section 11(6) by the respondent. In Vidya Drolia v. 
Durga Trading Corporation7, the principle of subject-matter 
arbitrability is enunciated as follows: 
“76. In view of the above discussion, we would like to 
propound a fourfold test for determining when the subject-
matter of a dispute in an arbitration agreement is not 
arbitrable: 
76.1 (1) When cause of action and subject-matter of the 
dispute relates to actions in rem, that do not pertain to 
subordinate rights in personam that arise from rights in rem. 
76.2 (2) When cause of action and subject-matter of the 
dispute affects third-party rights; have erga omnes effect; 
require centralised adjudication, and mutual adjudication 
would not be appropriate and enforceable. 
76.3 (3) When cause of action and subject-matter of the 
dispute relates to inalienable sovereign and public interest 
functions of the State and hence mutual adjudication would be 
unenforceable. 
76.4 (4) When the subject-matter of the dispute is expressly or 
by necessary implication non-arbitrable as per mandatory 
statute(s).” 
(emphasis supplied) 
 
16. Having considered the factual background in which the Section 
11(6) petition has been filed, we are of the opinion that it is an 
abuse of process. It was clearly intended to threaten the appellant 
for having approached the statutory authorities under the PW Act 
and the ID Act. There is no basis for invoking clause 19 of the 
agreement and demanding compensation of Rs. 14,02,822/- 
when that fact situation did not arise. 
 
7 (2021) 

17. The Section 11(6) petition has two facets. The first relates to 
disputes that were anyway pending before the statutory 
authorities, and they related to non-payment of wages and legality 
and propriety of termination which are non-arbitrable. The second 
facet relates to the alleged violation of clause 19 relating to non-
disclosure obligation, which was not raised in the show cause 
notice, inquiry report, chargesheet and termination order and as 
such is non-existent. 
18. In view of the above, we allow the Civil Appeal and set-aside the 
judgment and the order passed by the High Court and dismiss the 
petition under Section 11(6) filed by the respondent under the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act. 
19. The appellant will also be entitled to cost quantified at Rs. 5 lakhs 
payable within a period of 3 months from today. 

………………………………...J. 
[PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA] 

………………………………...J. 
[SANDEEP MEHTA]