IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

SMT. NARESH KUMARI & ORS. 
 
Versus 

SMT. CHAMELI & ORS. 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J. 
 
1. 
The appellants / plaintiffs are before this Court against the 
judgement of the Punjab & Haryana High Court dated 20.08.2009, 
whereby the second appeal of the respondents / defendants was 
allowed and the concurrent decisions of the courts below, which 
had decreed the suit, were set aside. 
The facts are as follows: 
2. 
Land measuring 38 Bighas 8 Biswas (hereinafter “suit land”) 
was gifted by one Rai Bahadur Randhir Singh (“donor”) to 
Sanwalia, Ratiram and Sheochand, all sons of one Chhailu 
(“donees”) in 1953. The oral gift was duly executed and mutation 

was carried out in favour of the donees on 13.12.1953. The 
possession of this land was also given to the donees on 13.12.1953. 
 
Things remained peaceful, for 45 long years, then a suit was 
filed in the year 1998 for declaration and for possession, or more 
precisely for resumption of this property. The case of the plaintiffs 
was that they are the heirs of the erstwhile donor and that the suit 
land was gifted in lieu of the services, which had to be rendered by 
the donees and their heirs to the donor and his heirs lifelong. It 
was then asserted that since the defendants have stopped 
rendering these services and since the original donees have died 
anyway, the suit land should revert to the plaintiffs in terms of the 
gift condition. 
These plaint averments were countered in an extremely dull 
even unimaginative manner in the written statements of the 
defendants. Nevertheless, the defendants opposed the plaint 
averments, contending that though the gift was for services 
rendered, there was no condition for the gift to revert to the donor 
upon the death of the donees. Even otherwise, they contended that 
the plaintiffs have no cause of action as the terms of the gift are 
being complied with and the defendants have been rendering “all 
kind of services”, to the plaintiffs! It was also asserted that records 

relating to possession and ownership of the suit land have been 
mutated in their favour since 1953 and that the suit is hopelessly 
barred by limitation. 
3. 
The Trial Court, after hearing the parties, concluded that 
what was crucial was that the subject matter of the gift was only a 
life interest in suit land and since the services have been stopped, 
the land was liable to be reverted in favour of the plaintiffs. 
Consequently, the suit was held to be within time and as the 
plaintiffs’ title was proved, the suit was decreed. The First Appellate 
Court agreed with these findings and dismissed the defendant’s 
appeal! 
The High Court though allowed the defendant’s second appeal 
and dismissed the suit, largely on the ground of limitation, though 
it was, inter alia, also observed that nowhere in the mutation dated 
13.12.1953 is it mentioned that the donees had to serve the heirs 
of the donor as well and it could be presumed that proper services 
were rendered to the donor during his lifetime. Further, the 
plaintiffs failed to disclose what these “services” were and when 
exactly they were stopped. 
Apart from making a bald statement in the plaint that the 
defendants have stopped rendering services, there is no worthwhile 

evidence placed by the plaintiffs before the Trial Court. On the 
contrary, evidence has been placed by the defendants in form of 
DW-1 who has stated that after the death of the donor-Randhir 
Singh, his children had left the village and nobody from the family 
of the donor remained in the village and therefore there was no one 
who could be served. This evidence, however, has not been 
considered either by the Trial Court or by the First Appellate Court 
and no reason has been assigned as to why this was done. 
4. 
At the centre of this dispute lies the oral gift, which came to 
be recorded in the mutation order dated 13.12.1953. The same, as 
translated to English, is reproduced below: 
In a general meeting Rai Bahadur Randhir Singh 
donor along with identifier Neki Ram Lambardar 
who appeared and made a statement that he has 
gifted the land measuring 38 Bigha 8 Biswas in 
lieu of services till life to Sanwalia etc. and 
delivered the possession to them. if donees 
refused to render the services in that case the land 
shall revert to the donor or to his heirs. Sanwalia, 
Rati Ram and Sheo Chand donees are also present 
who admit the above statement as correct. As 
such with the consent of the parties the land 
comprised 
in 
Khewat 
No.64, 
Khasra 
Nos. 
1169[13-18], 1171[6-11], 1173[7-0], 1174 [10-19] 
total 38 Bigha 8 Biswas on behalf of Rai Bahadur 
Randhir Singh donor in favour of donees 
Sanwalia, Rati Ram, Sheo Chand in equal 
share.Mutation is sanctioned in favour of donees. 

5. 
Unfortunately, the courts have lost sight of an important 
aspect here which has a crucial bearing on the case, which is the 
background of the transfer of land made in the year 1953. 
The transaction which is the subject matter of the dispute 
admittedly occurred in December, 1953. This was the period 
immediately after our independence where each State in the 
country had already framed or was in the process of framing 
legislations on land reforms with a focus on redistribution of land. 
Since land was in the State list (List II of the Seventh Schedule of 
the Constitution of India), such legislation was being brought by 
almost every State in the country. Punjab was no exception. The 
land reforms were for acquisition of land from big landlords and 
zamindars after placing a limit on land holding and then to 
redistribute it to the landless and the marginal agriculturist. This 
was being done as this was the pledge given during our freedom 
movement by the leaders to the nation and immediately after our 
independence, this was the first task sought to be achieved 
everywhere in the country. 
The reference in our case would be to the Punjab Security 
and Land Tenures Act, 1953 (hereinafter “1953 Act”), which had 
become effective on 15th April, 1953. Even prior to this, attempts 

were made to reform land ownership such as the Punjab Act No.12 
of 1950 and the Punjab Act No.5 of 1951, which were repealed by 
the 1953 Act. The big zamindars and big land owners were fully 
conscious that they would not be able to retain land beyond the 
ceiling fixed by the Statute, which had an outer limit of 30 
standard Acres for a family. The surplus land (beyond 30 acres) 
was to vest with the State. The land owners, therefore, either were 
gifting their land to their helpers, agricultural workers, even to 
priests or to temples, or in any other manner where they thought 
their best interest would lie. One thing was clear that technically 
they would not be able to keep land beyond the surplus limit. 
 
During this period, gifting, donation or transfer of land in any 
possible manner permitted by law was common place, not only in 
Punjab but in all parts of the country. We have to examine the 
present transfer of land which took place in December, 1953 with 
this context and background in our mind. It is true again, that 
what we have here is a pure civil matter and considerations as we 
have just referred above are outside the scope of pure civil 
litigation. The answer to this would be that civil matters will 
undoubtedly be decided on facts and law as they exist and as they 
are applicable, but again in order to appreciate the facts we have 

to keep the context in mind. Context is always very important. 
The above reference was only with that aspect in mind. 
6. 
Another factor which has an extremely important bearing in 
this case and which has again not been satisfactorily dealt with by 
the Trial Court and the First Appellate Court is the long delay by 
the plaintiffs in seeking resumption of their so-called property. It 
is a settled position of law that in cases of resumption of land or 
immovable property where there has been long and uninterrupted 
possession of the defendants, strong evidence is required to be 
placed by the plaintiffs to set up a claim, when the plaintiff is 
seeking a decree of possession. In this case, the nature of pleadings 
have already been referred to in the preceding paragraphs. The 
entire case of the plaintiffs rests on the proposition that their 
predecessors-in-interest have gifted this land to the forefathers of 
the defendants with the condition that the land is being given to 
them so that they continue to provide lifelong services to the donor 
as well as to their descendants, and since they have discontinued 
these services, the land is liable to revert to the descendants/legal 
heirs of the original donor. This assertion, however, is not backed 
by any plausible evidence. Moreover, this proposition has legal 
implications which may go against the plaintiffs. 

7. 
This suit is based on the aforesaid extremely thin proposition 
of law and on top of it there is no worthwhile evidence placed by 
the plaintiffs in their case, except for their reliance on words and 
phrases in the gift deed, to which unfortunately the defendants 
have also fallen prey. It is the case of none other but the plaintiffs 
that the agricultural land, which was the subject matter of the suit, 
was given in gift to the predecessors-in-interest of the defendants, 
but it was not an unconditional gift. It was an onerous gift with a 
condition and since the respondents have violated the conditions 
of the gift, the land is liable to be reverted to the plaintiffs. Even if 
we look at this case as a land given as a gift to the defendants or 
their predecessors-in-interest, the nature of the gift, the context in 
which 
it 
has 
been 
given 
and 
the 
entire 
accumulating 
circumstances including the fact that the possession of land was 
handed over the same day goes to show that it was actually an 
absolute transfer of property with transfer of interest in favour of 
the donees and their descendants, the only exception being that 
the donees were not given right over the “common land” of the 
village, known as “shamlat land”. 
8. 
Now the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (for short “TPA”) was 
not in force in erstwhile Punjab when the gift was executed in 

19531, yet such provisions in TPA which are based on principles of 
justice, equity and good conscience have always been enforced by 
Courts.2 In any case, before the enforcement of Transfer of 
Property Act, 1882, the transfer of immovable property in India was 
governed by the principles of English laws of equity. 
Sections 126 and 127 of the TPA where provisions regarding 
the suspension or revocation of gifts and onerous gifts is defined 
respectively are quoted below: 
Section 126. When gift may be suspended or 
revoked.— The donor and donee may agree that 
on the happening of any specified event which 
does not depend on the will of the donor a gift shall 
be suspended or revoked, but a gift which the 
parties agree shall be revocable wholly or in part 
at the mere will of the donor is void wholly or in 
part, as the case may be. 
 
A gift may also be revoked in any of the cases (save 
want or failure of consideration) in which, if it were 
a contract, it might be rescinded. 
 
Save as aforesaid, a gift cannot be revoked. 
 
Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed 
to affect the rights of transferees for consideration 
without notice. 
 
Illustrations 
(a) A gives a field to B, reserving to himself, with 
B's assent, the right to take back the field in case 
 
1 Parts of Transfer of Property Act, 1882 came to be enforced in erstwhile Punjab vide 
Gazette Notification No. 1605-R(CH)-55/589 dated March 26, 1955. 
2 Partap Das v. Nand Singh, AIR 1924 Lah 729 (1); Captain Parmodh Singh v. Labh Singh, 
AIR 1955 P&H 49. 

B, and his descendants die before A. B dies 
without descendants in A's lifetime. A may take 
back the field. 
 
(b) A gives a lakh of rupees to B, reserving to 
himself, with B's assent, the right to take back at 
pleasure Rs. 10,000 out of the lakh. The gift holds 
good as to Rs. 90,000 but is void as to Rs. 10,000 
which continue to belong to A. 
Section 127. Onerous gifts.—Where a gift is in 
the form of a single transfer to the same person of 
several things of which one is, and the others are 
not, burdened by an obligation, the donee can 
take nothing by the gift unless he accepts it fully. 
Where a gift is in the form of two or more separate 
and independent transfers to the same person of 
several things, the donee is at liberty to accept one 
of them and refuse the others, although the former 
may be beneficial and the latter onerous. 
Onerous gift to disqualified person.—A donee 
not competent to contract and accepting property 
burdened by any obligation is not bound by his 
acceptance. But if, after becoming competent to 
contract and being aware of the obligation, he 
retains the property given, he becomes so bound. 
Illustrations 
(a) A has shares in X, a prosperous joint stock 
company, and also shares in Y, a joint stock 
company, in difficulties. Heavy calls are expected 
in respect of the shares in Y. A gives B all his 
shares in joint stock companies. B refuses to 
accept the shares in Y. He cannot take the shares 
in X. 
(b) A, having a lease for a term of years of a house 
at a rent which he and his representatives are 
bound to pay during the term, and which is more 
than the house can be let for, gives to B the lease, 
and also, as a separate and independent 
transaction, a sum of money. B refuses to accept 

the lease. He does not by this refusal forfeit the 
money. 
 
9. 
As far back as 1870, the Privy Council in Forbes v. Meer 
Mahomed Tuquee, had an occasion to 
consider broadly a similar case, where the appellant/plaintiff 
sought resumption of land granted to the defendants. The land was 
originally granted on the condition of rendering services, which 
were to keep off the incursion of wild elephants and attend to the 
safety of tenants in nearby areas. It was the appellants case that 
since the services are not required any more as the incursion of 
elephants has itself ceased, the land should revert to him as part 
of their zamindari. Lower Court decreed the suit in favour of the 
plaintiff on the grounds, inter alia, that since the defendants 
therein have ceased to render the services, the land must revert to 
the plaintiff therein. This decree of the lower court was reversed by 
the High Court and the matter finally reached the Privy Council 
where defendants/grantees argued that they had rendered the 
services till they were required to do so and since the elephant 
incursion has stopped on its own, they are no longer bound by the 
condition. Privy Council considered that grantees had enjoyed 
peaceful possession of land for a long period of time and they were 

in long cultivation of this land, and hence, the agreement was 
construed in such a manner that the Sunnad was “…partly as a 
reward for past, partly as an inducement for future, services.” 
Similarly in the present case, the gift was for past services but 
even if it is assumed that it was for some past and some future 
services, there was no occasion for the defendants to render the 
services as the appellants had left the village and now, when 
defendants have been enjoying peaceful possession of land for long, 
resumption of land in favour of appellants will not be justified. The 
defendants had produced their witness DW-1 before the Court who 
gave the evidence that the plaintiffs had left the village long ago, 
immediately after the death of the Donor, which would be only a 
few years after the gift deed was executed in 1953 and therefore, 
there was no question of rendering any further service. 
10. The conditional oral gift was executed on 13.12.1953 and all 
land records pertaining to ownership were transferred in the 
defendant's names along with possession. The oral gift, as recorded 
in the Mutation, has a default clause, i.e., “if the donee refuses to 
render services in that case the land shall revert to the donor or to 
his heirs”. The position regarding revocation of gifts upon breach is 
a possible condition. However, merely incorporating a defeasance 

clause will not exempt the plaintiff from discharging his burden. 
The plaintiff has to satisfy the Court and lead evidence to show 
what exactly was the nature of the services agreed upon, that a 
demand for these services was communicated and that the 
defendants refused rendering of services having reneged on the 
agreement. 
11. On a perusal of the material on record, both the plaint and 
PW-1’s deposition are conspicuously silent regarding any specific 
instances where services were denied by the defendants or their 
predecessors-in-interest. There was only a vague and conclusory 
allegation that services have been refused, without any evidence in 
support of the same. 
 
The defendants primarily asserted that they have continued 
to render services and did not raise any plea of adverse possession. 
Their assertion has to be read only to the extent that they 
continued to render services to the donor or even his heirs, till the 
time they were physically residing in the village. 
12. PW-1 deposed in his cross-examination (on 17.05.2000) that 
the donor died some 40 to 45 years back. What this means is that 
the donor passed away in the late 1950s soon after the gift was 
executed and possession was transferred. However, the plaintiffs 

only filed their suit in 1998, around 45 years after the gift’s 
execution and around 20 years after the last original surviving 
donee died during the 1970s. While the defendants enjoyed 
uninterrupted possession throughout this period. 
13. Transfer of suit land by way of gift took place in the year 1953 
in Jhajjar district of present day Haryana which at that time was a 
part of the erstwhile State of Punjab, where provisions of TPA were 
not applicable. All the same, as stated in the preceding paragraphs, 
even though TPA was not applicable, what would definitely be 
applicable would be the provisions in TPA which are based on the 
principles of equity, justice and good conscience. 
 The admitted case of the plaintiffs is that the land (the 
subject matter of the case), was given in gift to the defendants (their 
predecessors-in-interest), in the year 1953. But since the condition 
in the gift was that the defendants will continue to render services 
(what was meant by these ‘services’ has nowhere been explained), 
and since they are not providing the services anymore, the land 
should resume to the ownership of the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs i.e., 
appellants before this Court had asserted that their forefathers / 
predecessors-in-interest had donated a piece of land to the 
defendants as a gift which was an onerous gift with a condition 

that it is not only being given for past services but also for future 
services, the donees and their successors will continue to provide 
to the donor and his successors and if the services stop, the 
property will revert to the donor or his successors. Now, since the 
successors of the defendants have stopped rendering services as 
claimed by the plaintiffs, the gift is being revoked. This was the 
precise claim set up in the plaint. A banal written statement was 
filed by the defendants where it was admitted that their forefathers 
were donated this property by the forefathers of the plaintiffs and 
they had a permanent interest in the property, they are its absolute 
owners. Moreover, they have continued to render “all kinds of 
services” to the plaintiffs and their successors and therefore, there 
is no question of property being now revoked in favour of the 
plaintiffs as no condition of the gift deed has been breached by 
them. 
14. Now admittedly, the TPA which is of the year 1882 and came 
to be enforced on 01st July, 1882 was not applicable to all parts of 
India. For our convenience, it must be stated that it was not in 
force in the State of Punjab (including the present territory of 
Haryana) in the year 1953 when the gift deed was executed. 
Nevertheless, the TPA itself is a codification of broad principles 

which were applicable at the relevant point of time, relating to 
transfer of property, though after codification it also has some new 
provisions, such as registration of gift deed etc. The TPA was not 
applicable to Punjab but, as discussed earlier and also held by this 
Court in various cases, the broad principles in TPA based on 
equity, justice and good conscience, would definitely be applicable. 
(See: Shivshankara v. H.P. Vedavyasa Char & Chander Bhan v. Mukhtiar Singh ) 
 
 One of such principles in TPA based on equity, justice and 
good conscience is the definition of gift itself which is contained in 
Section 122 of TPA and reads as under: 
Section 122. “Gift” defined.—“Gift” is the transfer of 
certain existing moveable or immoveable property 
made voluntarily and without consideration, by one 
person, called the donor, to another, called the donee, 
and accepted by or on behalf of the donee. 
Acceptance when to be made.—Such acceptance 
must be made during the lifetime of the donor and 
while he is still capable of giving. 
If the donee dies before acceptance, the gift is void. 
 
15. Now all conditions for a valid gift deed were in existence when 
it was made on 13.12.1953. The subject matter of transfer was an 

immovable property (land), and it was without any consideration. 
There was also an acceptance of this gift deed by the donees, when 
the donor was alive, as possession of this land was given the very 
same day to the donees and this undisputed fact is on record. 
Another important factor which must be kept in mind is that 
in a case of gift of land, possession has an extremely important 
bearing. Although, after the enforcement of TPA, registration 
became essential in a gift of immoveable property as the transfer 
will now be seen in terms of Section 123 of TPA, which is as follows: 
Section 123. Transfer how effected.—For the 
purpose of making a gift of immoveable property, the 
transfer must be effected by a registered instrument 
signed by or on behalf of the donor, and attested by at 
least two witnesses. 
For the purpose of making a gift of moveable property, 
the transfer may be effected either by a registered 
instrument signed as aforesaid or by delivery. 
Such delivery may be made in the same way as goods 
sold may be delivered. 
 
16. Under TPA a valid gift can be made without giving immediate 
possession to the donee as has been held by this Court in 
Renikuntla Rajamma v. K. Sarwanamma (2014) 
where it was held that section 123 of TPA supersedes Hindu Law 

and delivery of possession is not an essential requirement for the 
gift to be valid under provisions of TPA. 
Nevertheless, in Punjab and in all other places of North India 
where Mitakshara law was applicable, gift of land usually was 
accompanied by handing over possession to the donee, as there 
was no purpose of enjoying land without being in its possession3. 
In other words, in cases governed by Hindu Law, possession is an 
extremely important ingredient where validity of the gift is to be 
determined. Since TPA was not in force, delivery of possession 
which has been done in the present case has an important bearing. 
In the present case, the admitted fact is that the plaintiffs have 
never questioned the validity of the gift given by their forefathers 
to the defendants. Their entire case, in fact, depends on a valid 
gift of land of which they admit possession was also given along 
with the gift deed in the year 1953 itself. Their case is that, the gift 
has to be revoked now for non-fulfillment of certain conditions. 
Plaintiffs have also, in other words, admitted that the defendants 
are in peaceful possession of this land since the date of gift. 
There is another aspect to the entire case. What are those 
conditions of which a violation is being alleged? The condition is 
 
3 We must note here that both the donor and the donees were Hindus. that the defendants have discontinued to serve the successors of 
the donor i.e. plaintiffs. Can such a condition ever be part of a 
gift? This is the first question; the Trial Court and the Appellate 
Court should have asked. Although Section 127 of TPA permits an 
onerous gift but a gift which is conditioned upon perpetual 
rendering of services without any remuneration would amount to 
a “begar” or forced labour, even slavery and therefore it is not just 
wrong or illegal but even unconstitutional, being violative of 
fundamental rights of the donees. It has to be remembered that 
this so-called rendering of “services”, was to be in perpetuity. It 
has to go on forever. What would this be, if not “begar” or forced 
labour. We must also remember that when the gift deed was 
executed the Constitution of India had already been enforced. 
Article 14 and 21 and more particularly Article 23 prohibits forced 
labour. Hence, the condition as is being read by the plaintiffs 
where not only the donees but their successors were to continue 
giving services to the plaintiffs, that too indefinitely, is nothing 
short of reading forced labour, as a condition. 
But will this make the gift itself void? Our answer would be 
no. In this case, the validity of gift was never ever questioned, 
either by the plaintiffs or by the defendants. Therefore, a 

meaningful and purposive interpretation is required here. The 
only possible way therefore where the donees and their successors 
have continued to be in peaceful possession of the property for 
more than 45 years, is that there was never such a condition of 
rendering continuous services in the gift deed and services here 
meant only the “past services” rendered by the donees to the donor, 
or at best it may include services to be rendered by the donees to 
the original donor Rai Bahadur Randhir Singh, who passed away 
in the late 1950s. This is the only way it can be construed. In other 
words, the gift had no condition of continuation of these services 
till perpetuity as the plaintiffs would like us to read. 
17. We must also remember that Section 127 of TPA, which 
permits onerous gifts, was not in force in present day Haryana 
which was earlier part of Punjab, as TPA was not applicable there. 
Nor can we say that such a condition being based on equity, justice 
& good conscience can be read into the gift deed as a valid 
condition. 
The stipulated condition of “services” and the continuation of 
the rendering of such services has to be read in the context when 
the deed was executed. Thus, services shall be understood only as 
‘past services’ rendered, or at most, the services which had to be 

rendered by the original donees to the original donor during his 
lifetime. 
18. Under such facts and circumstances, we have no doubt in our 
mind that the plaintiffs had absolutely no case. Hence, the 
impugned judgment calls for no interference by us. We accordingly 
dismiss this appeal. 
19. Interim order(s), if any, shall stand vacated. 
20. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 

……...……….………………….J. 
 [SUDHANSHU DHULIA].…...………………………….J. 
[PRASANNA B. VARALE] 
 
New Delhi. 
December 11, 2024.