IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

VELTHEPU SRINIVAS AND OTHERS...APPELLANT(S) 
VERSUS 
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH 
 
(NOW STATE OF TELANGANA) 
AND ANR. 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J. 
1. 
This criminal appeal by appellants (accused 1 to 4) is against 
the concurrent conviction under Section 302 read with Section 34 
and sentence for life imposed by the Trial as well as the Telangana 
High Court. For the reasons to follow, while we confirm the 
judgment and sentence with respect to A-1, A-2 and A-4, the 
conviction and sentence of A-3 is however modified to Section 304 
Part II and sentenced to 10 years imprisonment. The details of the 
crime, trial, decisions of the Courts, followed by our analyses and 
conclusions are as follows. 
2. 
The case of the prosecution is that the accused 1 to 4 
belonging to the same family, and the deceased, come from the 

same village - Janda Venkatpur, Asifabad, Telangana. It is alleged 
that the sister of the deceased and the wife of A-4 were political 
aspirants and they contested the Gram Panchayat elections. In the 
said elections, the sister of the deceased succeeded and the wife of 
A-4 lost and that, unfortunately, led to an animosity between the 
two groups, eventually leading to the murder of the deceased 
which is described as follows. 
3. 
On 15.11.2001, at about 8AM, the deceased was going to 
Luxettipet on some work in an auto-rikshaw. In the same auto-
rikshaw, one Sanga Swamy hruputhi (PW-6) and Smt. 
Chetimala Rajitha (PW-9) were travelling as co-passengers. When 
the auto reached the house of A-4, it is alleged that A-1 stopped 
the auto-rickshaw and dragged the deceased out by pulling his 
legs. At the same time, A-2 joined A-1 and both the accused 
dragged the deceased towards the house of A-4. At that point, it is 
alleged that A-1 to A-4 attacked the deceased with an axe, a sword, 
a stone and a knife, thereby inflicting severe bleeding injuries 
leading to death of the deceased on the spot. 
4. 
The son of the deceased, Kona Kiran Kumar, later examined 
as PW-1, being an eyewitness, proceeded to the police station and 
reported the incident at about 9PM by way of a complaint (Exhibit 

P-1). The Sub-Inspector of Police (PW-17), Luxettipet received the 
complaint and registered an FIR (Exhibit P-32), and took up the 
investigation. He then recorded the statement of PW-1. 
5. 
In view of the gravity of the crime, the Circle Inspector of 
Police (PW-18) took up further investigation and immediately 
proceeded to the village to examine the scene of offence. He found 
the body of the deceased in the front yard of A-4’s house. He 
enabled PW-15 to take photographs of the dead body 
(Exhibits P-21 to 30) and himself drew the sketch of the scene of 
offence (Exhibit P-37). He also conducted an inquest over the body 
of 
the 
deceased 
in 
the 
presence 
of 
PW-10 
and 
PW-12 (panch witnesses). The inquest report was marked as 
Exhibit P-5. He also seized a stick (MO.4), control earth (MO.5), 
blood-stained earth (MO.6), cotton full shirt (MO.7) and a baniyan 
under cover of a panchnama. PW-18 recorded the statements of 
PWs 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 15. The prosecution maintained that PWs 
1, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8 are eyewitnesses to the incident. 
6. 
The Judicial Magistrate First-Class (PW-16) also recorded the 
statements of PWs 1 to 9 under Section 164 of the CrPC. The Post-
mortem over the dead body of the deceased was conducted by Dr 
Victor Dinesh (PW-11) at 3PM on 15.11.2001 at the Government 

Civil Hospital. PW-11, in his report, found 8 incised wounds, 3 
partial amputations and 1 deep lacerated wound. It was his 
opinion that the cause of death was due to cardio-pulmonary 
arrest due to transaction spinal cord at atlanto occipital joint. 
7. 
The Sub-Inspector (PW-17) is said to have apprehended all 
the accused on 23.11.2001 and produced them before PW-18 in 
his office. PW-18 recorded the confessional statement of the 
accused in the presence of PW-13 and PW-14 (panch witnesses). 
In pursuance of the confession, all the accused led him and the 
panch witnesses to the field of one Mr. Appani Gangaiah at 
Laximpur Shivar. There, A-1 recovered and showed an axe, A-2 a 
sword and A-4 a knife which were all hidden behind the bushes in 
the field. PW-18 seized these objects in front of PW-11 to PW-13, 
later came to be marked as Exhibits MOs 1 to 3. PW-18 also 
recovered a lungi belonging to A-1 and one belonging to A-2 
(Exhibit MO’s 9 and 10, respectively). These material objects were 
sent to a Forensic Lab in Hyderabad, the report of which is marked 
as Exhibit P-16. 
8. 
After completion of the above referred investigation, a charge-
sheet was filed on 09.01.2002. The Judicial First-Class Magistrate, 
Luxettipet took cognizance of the offence under Section 302 read 

with Section 34 of IPC, against all the accused. On production of 
the accused, the Magistrate furnished copies of the charge-sheet 
and other connected documents and committed the case to the 
Court of Sessions and the Learned Sessions Judge numbered the 
trial as Sessions Case No. 523 of 2003. After the charges were 
framed, the accused pleaded not guilty and sought trial. 
9. 
At the trial, the prosecution examined 18 witnesses being 
PW-1 to PW-18, and marked 37 documents and 10 Material 
Objects (MO’s). After the closure of evidence, the accused were 
examined under Section 313 CrPC with reference to the 
incriminating material found against them in the evidence of the 
prosecution witnesses, and they denied the same. There are no 
defence witnesses. 
10. The Trial Court, by its elaborate judgment dated 24.02.2005, 
found all four accused guilty for the murder of the deceased and 
convicted them under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the IPC. 
Accordingly, they were sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life 
and to pay a fine of Rs. 500 each, in default, to undergo simple 
imprisonment of one month. All the accused appealed to the High 
Court. 

11. For the completeness of narration, we may indicate that the 
High Court initially acquitted all the accused by its judgment dated 
21.06.2007, but in appeal to this Court, their conviction and 
sentences were set-aside, and the criminal appeal was remanded 
back to the High Court for fresh consideration. It is in this 
background that the order impugned came to be passed by the 
High Court. 
12. After remand, the High Court confirmed the judgment of the 
Trial Court and dismissed the criminal appeals. The Special Leave 
Petition filed by the accused was admitted on 01.08.2022 and this 
is how we have heard Shri Gaurav Agrawal, learned counsel for the 
appellants and Shri Krishan Kumar Singh learned counsel for the 
State and Shri Sirajudeen, learned senior counsel for the 
respondent No. 2. 
13. Findings of the Trial Court: The Trial Court had examined 
the credibility of the Prosecution witness in great detail. According 
to the Trial Court, PWs 1, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8 were eyewitnesses to the 
incident and their testimonies were consistent. Among them, PW-
6’s testimony was a clinching piece of evidence as he was privy to 
the incident from the very beginning. He was subjected to intense 
cross-examination with respect to his residence and other details 

about the incident. Except for minor variations, the Trial Court 
found his testimony unshaken, being consistent and natural. The 
Trial Court found the testimonies PW-1, PW-3, PW-4, PW-7, PW-8 
corroborating the incident of stopping an auto, dragging the 
deceased out, and subsequently assaulting the deceased with 
various weapons. 
14. Collectively, the witnesses reiterated that A-1 stopped the 
auto-rickshaw and pulled the deceased out and A-2 attacking the 
deceased’s hands with a sword. As they reached A-4’s house, A-4 
took the sword from A-2 and struck the deceased on his head. A-
4 also inflicted injuries by a knife. The common account about A-
3 is that he hit the deceased on the head with a stone. Accused 
No. 1 continued the attack and hit the deceased with an axe. 
Largely, these witnesses recounted a consistent narrative of the 
attack, identifying the weapons used and the roles of each 
accused. 
15. Judgment of the High Court: According to the High Court, 
the accounts of PWs 1, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8, who witnessed the incident, 
converge and are consistent with the injuries, weapons and motive 
for the murder of the deceased. The High Court correctly relied on 
the evidence of PW-6 who was in an auto-rickshaw along with the 

deceased on the day of the incident. PW6’s evidence that he 
boarded the auto-rickshaw of PW-5, followed by the deceased and 
Rajitha (PW-9) joining him, was believed by the High Court. 
16. The account of PW6 being corroborated by the evidence of 
PWs 1, 3, 4, 7 and 8, the High Court held that the evidence 
conclusively establishes the guilt of the accused beyond 
reasonable doubt. The High Court also noted the submission 
relating to the contradictions in the Complaint (Ex. P1) and the 
testimonies of PWs 1, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8, specifically relating to the 
acts of assault, however, the High Court came to the conclusion 
that they were minor in nature. 
17. Though the High Court saw that the trial court extensively 
examined the evidence and considered all the submissions, it has 
nevertheless considered the evidence afresh and after a detailed 
examination, arrived at the same conclusion. We have given our 
anxious consideration and have scrutinised the evidence of all the 
eye-witnesses in detail. We are in full agreement with the decision 
of the Trial Court and the High Court. Their analyses and 
conclusions are based on correct appreciation of evidence and law. 
However, there is one aspect which stands out in the above-
referred analyses of the Trial Court and the High Court, and that 

pertains to the conclusion on the culpability of A-3 for murder. We 
will now examine the evidence as against A-3. 
18. Evidence against Accused No.3: To commence with, the 
FIR states that A-3 hit the deceased on the head, thereby causing 
death. The Chargesheet states that A3 used a stone to do the same. 
However, no further details have been provided. Further as we 
examine the testimonies of all the eyewitnesses the following 
picture emerges. PWs 1, 3, 4 and 6 state that the A-3 had used a 
stone to hit the deceased’s head. PW-7 and PW-8 do not speak 
about his role. 
19. PW-1, in his examination-in-chief and cross-examination, 
has respectively stated as follows: 
Chief - “When I was trying to go near the deceased, A-3 
threatened me saying that if I go there he would kill me. 
A-3 hit the deceased with a stone.” 
Cross - “I read Ex. P-1 complaint and it does not show 
that A-1 and A-3 threatened me and other eye witnesses 
to kill if we tried to rescue the deceased” 
 
20. PW-3, in his examination-in-chief and cross-examination, 
has respectively stated as follows: 
Chief - “After hearing the cries of the said Rajitha and 
Swamy I, PW1, Kona Mallesh Akireeddy Ramesh, 
T.Odaiah rushed to the spot. By the time we reached the 
spot the deceased was lying on ground with injuries and 

on seeing us A-3 took a stone and gave threats to us 
saying that he would hit us if we go there.” 
Cross - “It is not true to say that I did not state before 
the police that when land other eye witnesses were 
going near· the place of the incident A-3 armed with a 
stone threatened to kill us. It is not true to say that for 
the first time before this court I am deposing that A-3 
armed with a stone threatened me and other witnesses 
to kill” 
21. P.W. 4, in his examination-in-chief, has stated as follows: 
“A-3 took a stone and hit on the head of the deceased.” 
 
22. P.W. 6, in his examination-in-chief, has stated as follows: 
“A-3 took a stone and hit on the head of the deceased.” 
 
23. A reading of the judgment and order passed by the Trial as 
well as the High Court would indicate that neither the prosecution 
or defence, nor the court, have focussed on the role of A-3 as 
evidenced by the oral and documentary evidence. There is nothing 
to attribute A-3 with the intent to murder the deceased. In fact, 
both the Courts have mechanically drawn an inference against A-
3 under Section 34 of the Act merely based on his presence near 
the scene of offence and his familial relations with the other 
accused. 
24. As per the post-mortem report, the cause of death is “cardio 
pulmonary arrest due to transaction spinal cord at atlanto occipital 

joint”. The atlanto occipital joint is at the back of the neck, which 
is the exact place where A-1 assaulted the deceased with the help 
of an axe. This axe was then taken by A-2 and thereafter, by A-4, 
who also assaulted the deceased. All the eye-witnesses are clear in 
this account. In other words, it was only A-3 who never took the 
axe in his hand. He only used a stone to assault the deceased. 
25. Considering the statements of the eye-witnesses, coupled 
with the post-mortem report, it is not possible to contend that A-3 
would have had the intention to commit the murder of the 
deceased and as such, he cannot be convicted under Section 302 
IPC. 
26. In fact, Victor Dinesh (PW-11), who gave the post-mortem 
report had indicated the injuries as under: 
“1. Incised wound extending from right ear to left cheek 
19 cm long 6 cm deep 2 mm wide grievous sharp 
weapon, Ante mortem. 
2. 
Incised wound on the right eye brow (4cms) simple 
sharp weapon Ante mortem. 
3. 
Incised wound on the left side of fore head about 9 
cms above left eye brow measuring 8 cms sharp 
weapon Ante mortem. 
4. 
Incised wound on left shoulder measuring 4 cm long 
3mm wide. Sharp weapon ante mortem. 

5. 
Incised wound on right should of 8 cm long 1 ½ cm 
wide sharp weapon, ante mortem. 
6. 
5 cm x 6 Incised wound (slice) on the vertex. Sharp 
weapon ante mortem. 
7. 
8 cms long incised wound backs of left wrist, sharp 
weapon ante mortem. 
8. 
12 cms incised wound on the front of left hand, 
sharp weapon, ante mortem. 
9. 
Partial amputation of middle 3 fingers of left hand, 
ante mortem. 
10. Partial amputation of right thumb. Measuring 2 cms 
sharp weapon ante mortem. 
11. Partial amputation of right index finger measuring 3 
cms sharp weapon, ante mortem. 
12. Deep lacerated wound on the back of neck 
measuring 18 cms 7 cms with complete transaction 
of spinal card and Atlanta occipital joint. Blunt 
weapon, ante mortem.” 
27. It is evident from the evidence of PW-11 that the deceased 
suffered 12 injuries, of which 10 are caused by sharp-edged 
weapons. The 11th injury is a partial amputation of the middle 3 
fingers of left hand. The final injury is a lacerated wound on the 
back of neck measuring 18 cms x 7 cms with complete transaction 
of spinal cord and atlanto occipital joint. The Trial Court and the 
High Court have not analysed the evidence as against A-3. They 
have proceeded to convict him along with others under Section 302 
with the aid of Section 34. The cumulative circumstances in which 

A-3 was seen participating in the crime would clearly indicate that 
he had no intention to commit murder of the deceased for two clear 
reasons. Firstly, while every other accused took the axe used by 
A1 initially and contributed to the assault with this weapon, A-3 
did not wield the axe at any point of time. Secondly, A-3 only had 
a stone in his hand, and in fact, some of the witnesses said that 
he merely threatened in case they seek to intervene and prevent 
the assault. Under these circumstances, we hold that A-3 did not 
share a common intention to commit the murder of the deceased. 
Additionally, there is no evidence that A-3 came along with the 
other accused evidencing a common intention. The description of 
the incident is that when the deceased came to the scene of 
occurrence, A-1 dragged him to the house of A-4, and the other 
accused joined A-1. In this context, A-3 picked up a stone to 
assault the deceased. 
28. Even though, A-3 might not have had the common intention 
to commit the murder, nevertheless, his participation in the 
assault and the wielding of the stone certainly makes him culpable 
for the offence that he has committed. While we acquit A-3 of the 
offence under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the IPC, he is 
liable for the offence under 304 Part II IPC. The law on Section 304 

Part II has been succinctly laid down in Camilo Vaz v. State of 
Goa, (2000), where it was held that: 
14. This section is in two parts. If analysed, the section 
provides for two kinds of punishment to two different 
situations: (1) if the act by which death is caused is 
done with the intention of causing death or causing such 
bodily injury as is likely to cause death. Here the 
important ingredient is the “intention”; (2) if the act is 
done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death 
but without any intention to cause death or such bodily 
injury as is likely to cause death. When a person hits 
another with a danda on a vital part of the body with 
such force that the person hit meets his death, 
knowledge has to be imputed to the accused…. 
29. In the past, this Court has considered factors such as lack of 
medical evidence to prove whether the act/injury was individually 
sufficient to cause death1, a single blow on head with a hammer2 
and lack of cogent evidence of the eye-witnesses that the accused 
shared a common intention to commit murder3 as some factors to 
commute a sentence from Section 302 to Section 304 Part II IPC. 
30. Returning back to the facts of the case, there is certainly no 
escape from coming to the conclusion that A-3 should have had 
the knowledge that the use of a stone to hit the head of the 
deceased is likely to cause death. However, as demonstrated 
 
1 Bawa Singh v. State of Punjab, 1993 Supp (2) SCC 754. 
2 Sarup Singh v. State of Haryana, (2009). 
3 Ghana Pradhan & Ors. v. State of Orissa, 1991 Supp (2) SCC 451. before, the evidence is insufficient to deduce a conclusion that he 
shared a common intention with the other accused to commit the 
murder of the deceased. Considering the role that A-3 has played, 
we hold him guilty of the offence under Section 304 Part II IPC. 
31. The perusal of the evidence would reveal that it is not the 
case of the prosecution that A-3 was along with the other accused 
while the deceased was dragged to the house. The deposition would 
reveal that after the other accused assaulted the deceased with 
sword, A-3 came thereafter and assaulted the deceased with stone 
lying there. We, therefore, find that the prosecution has not been 
in a position to establish that A-3 shared the common intention 
with the other accused to cause the murder of the deceased. 
32. For the reasons stated above, we uphold the conviction and 
sentence of A-1, A-2 and A-4 under Section 302 read with Section 
34 IPC and dismiss their against 
the judgment of the High Court of Telangana in Criminal Appeal 
No. 308 of 2005 dated 26.04.2022. We acquit A-3 of the conviction 
and sentence under Section 302 read with Section 34 and convict 
him under Section 304 Part II and sentence him to undergo 
imprisonment for 10 years. To this extent, the appeal of A-3 is 

allowed by altering the conviction under Section 302 to Section 
304 Part II IPC. 
33. Pending applications, if any, are disposed of. 
 
……..……………………………….J. 
 [B.R. Gavai].………….………………………….J. 
 [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha] 
 
New Delhi; 
February 06, 2024